The War "", about the Involvement of Russia in the Eastern Ukraine conflict and the Crimea Contents Editorial 4 Nemtsov's Report on Putin's War in Ukraine.
Eka Meskhrikadze, Tbilisi, Georgia Meerim Oboskanova, Bishkek, Kyrgyz Republic Tamara Vatsadze, Tbilisi, Georgia All authors are responsible for their published texts.
All texts published under a name do not necessarily represent the view of the editors or Advisory Board members.
EUFAJ is committed to European and international integration and to pluralism, different views and a public discussion.
Reprints of certain contributions are free of charge, for others a license fee may have to be negotiated.
No guarantee for unsolicited articles which, however, may remain in our archive.
All contributions are requested in English language; abstracts in other languages are possible.
Scotland/Catalonia, Human Rights in Azerbaijan, Armenia and the Eurasian Economic Union, the Eurasian Union, Vladimir Putin, the future of Ukraine, Ukraine's Maidan events, Istanbul Gezi Park, India and the necessity of future female leaders, EU language policies, Africa, the Caribbean etc.
The blog counts more than 1 4.700 views from 1 37 countries at present.
You can of course also subscribe to the blogs then you will be alerted regularly.
If you ""Like"" the page, you will be alerted via Facebook regularly. ^tas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 3 Editorial Dear readers, this is the first time you see a Special of the European Union Foreign Affairs Journal.
But we think we owe it to the respect for Boris Nemtsov , a Russian opposition personality and former Deputy Prime Minister under President Boris Jeltsin.
As everybody knows, he was shot on a bridge near the Moscow Kremlin on 27th February, 2015.
The "" killer "" who was arrested turned out to have been not present in the theatre, and who did it walks around free, at present.
One has not necessarily to agree to all what he once did and said, in particular when he was Deputy Prime Minister or Minister of Energy etc.
His policy is explained by the system of the outgoing Soviet Union and beginning of a Russian system but here he can be named as one of the architects of market economy reforms.
Eater, he became one of the leading opposition personalities against the present president, who ran and runs the country more and more autocratically.
Boris Nemtsov was a politician who would have coped very well with the European Union in a common tradition of values, of liberal views, respect of human rights and the rule of law.
He was shot just shortly before publishing a report on the Russian involvement in the Ukraine conflict.
His death was useful to keep down opposition activities, who could fear a likewise end of their activities.
But Nemtsov who was always in favour of peaceful relations between Russia andg.
Ukraine, and therefore totally against the Kremlin's policy, had friends who produced the paper in this Special some weeks after his death.
We publish this paper in the Russian original, also for our readers reading Russian, but also in English.
This paper is too interesting, too authentic not to be translated and republished.
We thank our translators they were thrilled by what they translated, too.
And we wish to our readers an interesting reading time, which they will have without a doubt.
After the assassination of the politician, it was completed by his associates.
On the same day, the full text of the study was published a 64-page material, including proofs, published earlier in the media, and Nemtsov’s personal data about Moscow’s intervention into the Ukrainian politics and the presence of the Russian forces in the east of Ukraine.
Nemtsov triumphantly looked at the others, as he did every time he came up with a good idea.
Since the beginning of 2015, Boris had begun to collect materials for the report.
He widely worked with open sources, found people who could share information.
Nemtsov believed that the attempt to stop the war is the real patriotism.
The war with Ukraine is a cynical and mean crime for which our country is paying with the blood of its citizens, the economic crisis and international isolation.
On February 27, he was killed on Bolshoy Moskvoretsky Bridge, next to the Kremlin walls.
Nemtsov’s colleagues, friends and the people who considered the work important, took to complete it.
The contents, handwritten notes, documents everything that he had left, was used in the preparation of the text.
Our task is to tell the truth about the Kremlin's interference in the Ukrainian politics, which led to the war between our nations.
BEEtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 5 Chapter 1.
At the eve of the 2012 presidential elections there appeared likelihood that he would not win in the first round.
Such a scenario could create a risk of a significant weakening of Putin’s position and disruption of his legitimacy.
The election campaign needed maximum mobilization of power resources to ensure Putin's victory in the first round.
However, the key conditions for his victory became the non-admission of the real opponents to the elections who were ready to seriously contend for the presidency, as well as the total administrative control over all the relevant media.
Returning to the presidency, according to the outcomes of the election, Putin took a number of populist decisions in hopes to consolidate his ranking.
In particular, he signed the so-called ""May decrees"" of 2012, which a number of experts considered wasteful and economically unjustified.
In addition, the implementation of the ""May decrees"" stalled, and a year later, Putin publicly criticized the government for the inefficient use of the funds for their realization.
Apparently, the Kremlin was seriously concerned about the negative trend and began to work out fundamentally new ways to strengthen Putin’s position among the electorate.
The scenario the ""return of the Crimea to Russia"" was undoubtedly planned and carefully prepared by the authorities of the Russian Federation in advance.
Even before the invasion of the Crimea, the Russian special security services recruited the Ukrainian army with generals and officers, heads and officials in the law enforcement institutions, who at the crucial moment refused the oath and took the part of the Russian Federation.
The local politicians, separatists and media financed by Moscow were actively supporting Russia's actions.
Also the Crimean business showed loyalty, having received favorable loans from the Russian banks in non-market conditions.
In addition, long-term efforts were taken to weaken the Ukrainian economy and its political system as a whole.
There were overt pressures on the Ukrainian authorities compelling them to engage the Ukraine in all sorts of ""integration"" projects of the Kremlin, limiting the sovereignty of the former Soviet countries.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 6 LIBER The revolution in Kiev and President Viktor Yanukovych’s flight from the country in early 2014 for a while weakened the Ukrainian government and created ideal conditions for decisive actions on the part of the Kremlin for the separation of the Crimea.
With the support of the Russian troops and security services a referendum was organized on the peninsula, which became as a formal ground for its annexation to the Russian Federation.
However, the things did not stop with the Crimea, and soon in the Ukrainian regions of Donetsk and Lugansk there broke out a full-range war.
The armed forces of the Ukraine were countered by the separatists demanding the secession from the Ukraine of the territories under their control and their annexation to the Russian Federation after the Crimea.
As the materials of this report present, an active political, economic, human, as well as direct military support to the separatists was provided by the Russian authorities.
The reasons for Putin actually to unleash the armed conflict on the territory of its neighboring state, suggest two possible interpretations of his actions.
The first interpretation is that the Crimean success convinced the president of the Russian Federation the readiness of the Russian-speaking regions of the Ukraine to become a part of the TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 7 LIBER Russian state.
In fact, the idea was ""gathering of the Russian lands"", and such a task attracted Putin with its historical scale, despite the possible costs.
To substantiate Russia's claim to these lands local separatists were activated, who were supported by militants and political strategists who arrived in the Donbass, from Moscow and other Russian cities.
The created situation motivated Putin to seek a political solution to the crisis, despite the obvious military superiority, and has greatly contributed to the peace talks with the new Ukrainian government.
In this regard, he provoked the military conflict in order to create a favorable negotiating position in the dialogue with the Western countries.
The ceasefire in the Donbass, which the Kremlin is able to guarantee, can become the ground for lifting economic and political sanctions against Russia, which became inevitable after the annexation of the Crimea.
In addition, in the event this scenario is realized, the question on the legitimacy of the annexation of the peninsula to the Russian Federation is removed from the agenda and the Western countries recognize the Crimea as a Russian territory, if not de jure, then de facto.
Having received explicit political dividends inside his country, Putin, at the same time retains significant risks.
Firstly, the Russian authorities have to continue to support the separatists in the Donbass, despite growing political and economic costs.
Refusal of such a support can be perceived as a betrayal of the current supporters of Putin (including those who got combat experience in the east of Ukraine) and is able to trigger a wave of discontent with the president within Russia.
Secondly, the continuation of the confrontation with the West, isolation and sanctions can cause significant damage to the Russian economy.
This creates a risk of social protests which can again undermine the rating of the head of the Russian Federation.
Finally, the weakening of Putin’s position on the world stage and the escalation of the RussianUkrainian conflict pose to the current president of Russia a real threat of criminal prosecution.
The changes in the global political situation can well end for Putin formally charged with war crimes and dock at the International Criminal Court.
HHJJjjTAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 8 Chapter 2.
Lies and propaganda A person who will decide to describe Vladimir Putin’ political career will face an unsolvable problem the Russian president has never had a political career.
Putin’s career is television, and all its phases, starting with the “soak in the toilet"" and “take care of Russia” are nothing more than a sequence of television programs.
Hypertrophied role of television in the communication between the authorities and society was developed in Russia still in the years of Boris Yeltsin's presidency, but it was Putin who managed to build a tele-centered state in which all public institutions from the church to the army are tampered with the relevant television image.
Indicative in this sense is the scandal of spring 2015, when the journalists of RBC found out that the television programs on regular working meetings of Vladimir Putin demonstrated on federal TV channels turned to have been prepared long before the date of their appearance on TV, and where the real Putin was at that time, is simply not known.
It can be assumed that such a practice had begun long before 2015, just until now no one paid attention to it, and no one knows how many more of such prerecorded clips with Putin are stored in the video library of the Kremlin and are waiting their time.
It got to the point that the result of some television stories about the opposition became real criminal cases and arrests.
But after the beginning of the political confrontation in Kiev in late 2013, it became clear that the Russian propaganda, with which the society had faced so far, had been relatively vegetarian.
However, the propagandists themselves did not hide that at the ""peace-time"", they do not act in full capacity.
In the statement of the official Russian media, the resistance in the Ukrainian capital was shown in the way as if the proponents for the European integration were the heirs of the collaborators of the Second World War and the radical nationalists, almost ready to ethnic cleansing.
Mentioning the Ukrainian nationalist organization ""Right Sector"" in the Russian media at some point significantly prevailed over that of Putin's party ""United Russia"" despite the fact that the ""Right Sector"" received less than 2% of the vote at the Ukrainian elections.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 9 LIBER It is worth noting that over the years the Russian propaganda has paid an exceptional attention to the Great Patriotic War , and Vladimir Putin made it a key point in his own ideological system of coordinates.
The state news agency RIA ""Novosti"" in 2005 created a new tradition for the May 9 holiday the mass wearing of St.
The most humane Soviet holiday has become the major national holiday of Putin's Russia a good sign at first sight.
But it also turned out to be purely utilitarian when it came to the conflict with the Ukraine.
The rhetoric of the war years appeared to be projected for the current political news.
The Ukrainian government in the Kremlin propaganda rhetoric became ""Bandera"" and ""Nazi"" and Russia appeared to be engaged in the same case as in 1941-45,e. fight against the Nazis.
The anti-fascist rhetoric used by the official media, has transferred the political crisis into the language of war of annihilation.
In the main news program of the central channel of the country a woman was shown who allegedly saw a six-year-old boy, crucified on the bulletin board by the Ukrainian national guardsmen in Slavyansk, which the separatist army fighters had left.
Moreover, it turned out that the heroine of the story had never even been in Slavyansk.
With the same city is also connected the campaign of harassment against the Russian musician Andrei Makarevich.
He was in Slavyansk after the arrival of the Ukrainian forces there and gave a concert in the neighboring town for locals and refugees.
The supporters of the government were talking about Makarevich as an enemy of Russia and demanded to deprive him of his state awards.
The war in the Ukraine also demonstrated the diversification of the Russian propaganda depending on the audience and the method of information delivery.
Television is the absolute mainstream, and the picture given by it, must be maximally broad and abstract, without further details.
The consumer of the television news is passive, and TV tries not to overload him with unnecessary details.
Girkin, who also participated in the annexation of the Crimea, is also not mentioned in the film “Crime.
Path to Motherland "", where Vladimir Putin for the first time admitted deploying the Russian army on the territory of the Ukrainian peninsula.
But Girkin became a hero to the tabloids and information radio stations,e. for the media resources, the audience of which seeks to obtain information from various sources, and only from the officious media.
This audience will not believe groundless stories about the ""crucified boy"" and requires a more nuanced approach.
BEEtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 10 Therefore correspondents Semen Pegov from LifeNews and Dmitry Steshin and Alexander Kots from ""Komsomolskaya Pravda"" informed their viewers and readers about the things that the Russian TV channels kept silent.
Perhaps, among the federal channels’ transmissions with tabloids and online media, only the program “Vesti Nedeli” on the channel ""Russia1"" could compete with its openness.
Modeled on the basis of the American evening shows, it played a key role in expanding the boundaries of the permissible on the Russian television.
Kiselev’s colleague Vladimir Solovyov, who is a presenter of an analogous show on the same channel, is also trying to meet the level of the ""Vesti Nedeli"" , but traditionally lags behind Kiselev, who is already included in the sanctions list of the West.
Actually, the whole Russian state media is one general atmosphere of hatred, and this already without any quotation marks.
When all this is over, Russia will need a long time to recover, getting rid of the ethical and behavioral standards propaganda of 2014-15.
And he explained how they could have Russian military uniforms, ""Look at the post-Soviet space.
From Anapa we were transferred to Novorossiysk on “trucks”, from where we sailed to Sevastopol on a big landing ship.
As soon as we got off the ship on the ground, we were ordered to take off all the state symbols and insignia of the force.
We were all given green balaclavas, sunglasses, knee pads and elbow pads.
As the main task we were to settle and be ready to perform any assignment.
Soon, our brigade moved to village Perevalnoe, near which we set a camp.
There mostly lived paratroopers from Ulyanovsk about two thousand people.
Such a number was necessary to demonstrate the strength of the Russian troops.
They created fortifications and organized patrols so that, forbid the God, there did not emerge a Maidan here.
On the eve of the referendum we were warned that the alarm would be announced and we were to be ready.
The Defense Minister of the Russian Federation, Sergei Shoigu himself, handed them to the Russian marines, officers from the command of the Black Sea Fleet of the Russian Navy, as well as to military of the Central and Southern Military Districts.
The state lies on the annexation of the Crimea lasted in this way for about a year.
To what extent was it voluntary told the former defense minister of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic, Igor Girkin, at the program ""Polit-Ring"", broadcast by the online channel ""Neyromir TV"", on 22 January, 2015.
It is worth noting that the events described by Girkin took place on 27 February, 2015 immediately after the night from 26 to 27 February the Russian special forces had taken under their control a number of strategic objects in the Crimea, including the parliament building, where at gunpoint, in the absence of Press and statutory live video session, MPs allegedly voted for holding a referendum.
The first high-ranking Russian official to publicly disclose details of the Russian operation in the Crimea, was the ex-commander of the Russian Black Sea Fleet, Admiral Igor Kasatonov.
Here is what he said on 13, March, 2015 in an interview with RIA ""Novosti"", ""The Black Sea Fleet had prepared a springboard, and the officers had known knew what was going on around, where the Ukrainian divisions were, scenarios had been studied on the cards.
That is, the Black Sea Fleet managed its tasks ""polite people"" were delivered, from 27 to 28 of February the Supreme Council of the Crimea was taken, ""said Kasatonov, explaining that the ""polite people"" were the special forces of the army, who were transferred to the Crimea by air and sea.
Almost immediately after the announcements of Admiral Kasatonov, there also appeared Vladimir Putin’s open confessions.
The path to the Motherland "", the display of which took place on the state TV channel ""Russia 1"", the President of the Russian Federation directly admitted that he had personally led the actions of the Russian forces in the Crimea.
He also said that when and under what circumstances they had been ordered to start the annexation.
And, in parting, I will not deny, parting, before everyone had left, I told all my colleagues -there were four of them that the situation in the Ukraine had TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 13 LIBER developed in such a way that we had to start the working on the return of the Crimea to Russia.
That is why I gave orders and instructions to the Ministry of Defense, what to hide, under the guise of strengthening the protection of our military facilities in the Crimea, to transfer there the special division of Main Intelligence Department and Marine Corps, paratroopers.
Not because I did everything there correctly, but because when it is done by the first persons of the country, it is easier for the implementers to work.
The Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America reaffirm their commitment to Ukraine, in accordance with the principles of the CSCE Final Act, to respect the Independence and Sovereignty and the existing borders of Ukraine 14 2.
The Russian military in Eastern Ukraine Shortly after the annexation of the Crimea to Russia, on the territory of Eastern Ukraine there began an armed confrontation between the Ukrainian security forces and separatists who demanded inclusion of the Donetsk and Fugansk regions into the Russian Federation.
The Russian officials consistently deny the fact of participation of the Russian army in combat operations on the territory of the Ukraine.
BEEtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 14 ""There were no Russian military units or military trainers in the south-east of the Ukraine and there are none.
We have never been engaged in the destabilization of the situation in Ukraine and are not engaged with this,"" said, in particular, Russian President Vladimir Putin in an interview with French television channel TF1 on 4 July, 2014.
President's Press Secretary Dmitry Peskov, speaking at a round table in TASS March 31, 2015, said that the Russian side ""strongly denies"" the presence of Russian troops in the conflict zone Ukrainian conflict zone.
However, Russian officials’ words are denied with proofs of the presence of many soldiers and officers of the Russian army on the territory of Eastern Ukraine.
Since June 2014 the armed forces of the Ukraine have taken a successful offensive against the separatists.
The Ukrainians managed to free most towns of Donbass, including Slavyansk and Kramatorsk, and actually encircle Donetsk, completely cut off its communication with Lugansk.
The territory of the self-proclaimed DNI and LC has been reduced by three quarters since the beginning of the hostilities.
This was possible thanks to the arrival arrived massive reinforcements from the Russian Federation, including military equipment and divisions of the regular army.
In the emerged “kettles” along the Russian-Ukrainian border both the Ukrainian and Russian armies have suffered significant losses.
Proofs to the military intervention from the Russian side serve both the statements of the leaders of the separatists, and the evidences collected on the territory of the conflict.
The decisive role of the reinforcements arrived from Russia, also confirmed former Minister of DNI Igor Girkin in an interview with the newspaper ""Tomorrow"" 33.
The version that the Russian soldiers and officers fought in Donbass in the summer of 2014, being on a ""legal holiday"", also actively supported the leader of the DNI, Alexander Zakharchenko.
The version on the ""vacationers"" was also actively spread on the First Channel of the Russian television, where, for example, on 4 September 2014 a story was presented about the funeral of a paratrooper from Kostromsk, Anatoly Travkina, who was killed in the Ukraine.
It is important to note that the military personnel, serving under the contract in the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, is expressly prohibited to be engaged in combat operations during holidays.
Sometime later, the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation tried to deny the presence of the Russian military, including that of the ""vacationers"" on the territory of the Ukrainian conflict.
Such a statement, in particular, was made by the head of the 4th Department of Personnel of the Ministry of Defence, Major General Ruslan Vasilyev on 19 December, 2014.
The Russian paratroopers in armored vehicles managed to advance 20 kilometers forward in the territory of the Ukraine, afterwards were in shelling near in the locality of Zerkalnoe and were blocked by the Ukrainian Military Forces.
The Ukrainian side has released the videos in which the detainees give testimonies.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 16 LIBER The Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation explained the presence of the Russian paratroopers on Ukrainian territory in that they had been lost during the trainings and accidentally crossed the border.
According questioned paratroopers, they had gone to the territory of the Ukraine to take part in the trainings.
Also, during the interrogation the Russian paratroopers stated that before going to the territory of the Ukraine, they had stained the license plates of the combat vehicles.
Responding to the questions of the representatives of the Ukrainian side, the detainees confirmed that they were acting soldiers of the Russian army.
Ivan Aleksandrovich, born in Vologda in 1988, was a soldier of 54096 unit, 6th independent tank brigade; Evgeni Yurevich, born in Kaluga in 1995, was a soldier of 54096 unit, 6 th independent tank brigade; Nikita Genadevich, born in Yaroslavl in 1993, was from 31 st Airborne Assault Brigade of 73612 unit; Evgeni Ashotovich, bom in 1994, was from 73612 unit, 1 st Guards Brigade 57.
According to Khokhlov, before sending the armored vehicles to Donbass, the factory marks on them had been removed, symbolic had been stained out and license plates had been taken away.
Khokhlov confirmed that he had himself participated in the transfer of the prepared equipment to the separatists on the border with the Ukraine.
Khokhlov said that on August 8, he voluntarily left his unit, together with a colleague, Ruslan Garafiev, and arrived in Lugansk region.
Paratrooper Kozlov In September 2014 it became known about the serviceman of the 31st independent guard’s airborne assault brigade, Nikolai Kozlov, who had fought in the Donbass and lost a leg as a result of injury.
About the fate of the young man was publicly talked on the social networks by his uncle, Sergei Kozlov.
According to the military commissariat of Ozersk, 21 -year-old Nikolai Kozlov, an auto mechanic by profession, in June 2013 was in military service in the military unit 73612, 31st independent Airborne Assault Brigade, and since 1 August, 2013 served in the same place on contract.
Kozlov took part in operations on the territory of the Ukraine from the beginning of the confrontation.
In March 2014 he was involved in blocking of the facilities in the Crimea by the Russian military.
It is important to note that the military tasks in the Crimea Russian serviceman Kozlov realized in the uniform of a Ukrainian policeman.
It is proven by a photo posted in the social network ""VKontakte"" in May 2014, by his father.
According to the paratrooper’s uncle, this photo was taken on the corridor of the Crimean Supreme Council, in the blocking of which Kozlov participated, disguised as an employee of Ministry of Interior of the Ukraine.
At the end of the operation, he returned home to Ulyanovsk, was awarded with the medal ""For the return of the Crimea"" and got married.
He was sent to fight in Donbass in August 2014, when the Russian army launched a massive operation to deter the offensive of the Ukrainian military on the positions of the separatists.
European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 18 BERTAS According to his relatives, he realized, inter alia, combat missions to suppress artillery points of the armed forces of the Ukraine.
According to Sergei Kozlov, the squad of his nephew was ambushed when trying to recapture captivated fellow servicemen.
On 24 August the squad fell under shelling of armor-piercing guns, and a shot severed Kozlov’s of his leg.
After that he was transferred across the border, was in hospital in Rostov and was later transferred to Moscow.
Soldiers under the guise of volunteers After the August counteroffensive between the separatists and Russian army units, peace talks were held in Minsk between the President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko, and the President of Russia, Vladimir Putin.
As a result of the consultation, the parties agreed to establish a ceasefire which froze the conflict on the territory of the Ukraine for some time.
Already in January 2015 the Russian military again took an active part in the confrontation with the AFU and provided the offensive of the separatist forces on the strategically important hub of Debaltseve.
This time, before being sent to the war zone, the Russian military servicemen submitted letters of resignation to the commanders.
This, in particular, reported the newspaper ""Kommersant"" on February 19.
The correspondent of the publication managed to interview the four military s of the RF, who confirmed that the command had not hidden the intention to send them to war in the Ukraine.
On the eve of the deployment to the war zone, the soldiers wrote letters of resignation, so that in the event of detainment or death to be identified as volunteers, and not professional soldiers.
In addition, the soldiers said that in contrast to the summer-time intervention of the Russian army, when the military units crossed the border in pillars, this time the transfer was carried out in small groups of three people.
This information became known due to the disclosure of the audio record, with the speech of the deputy head of the military unit, Lieutenant Colonel Vyacheslav Okanev, to the servicemen, which one of the soldiers secretly recorded on tape.
The conversation took place on the eve of TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 19 LIBER sending s from Murmansk to the places where the Russian forces were based, closer to the border with the Ukraine.
I do not exclude that there is an option to move to the Donetsk and Lugansk regions to provide there direct assistance "", explained Lieutenant Colonel Okanev to the military servicemen.
Okanev also explained that because ""war was not officially declared"" there was no guarantee of financial compensations in the event of death or injury of the Russian military servicemen.
In an interview with ""Gazeta.ru,"" on 13 February, 2015, Lieutenant Colonel Vyacheslav Okanev confirmed the authenticity of the record.
The confession of Volunteer Sapozhnikov On 31 March, 2015 were publicized the statements of a participant in the combat actions in Donbass, Dmitry Sapozhnikov, who publicly confirmed the participation of the Russian army in the military conflict.
Sapozhnikov is a citizen of RF and went to fight on territory of the Ukraine as a volunteer.
So, describing the output of his unit from the surrounding near the village of Logvinov, Sapozhnikov points to the help, that came from Russia.
Thanks to them, thanks to the heavy equipment we took Debaltseve said Sapozhnikov.
BEEtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 20 I often had to stay at the headquarters, come, and report some information.
They originate everything together, create together, and we implement, said the gunman.
Testimony of Buryat tankman The fact regarding the presence of the Russian troops on the territory of the Ukraine was also confirmed by another direct participant of combat actions 20-year-old Dorji Batomunkuev, of the 5 th independent tank brigade , military unit number 46108, serial number 200220, military ID 2609999.
He told about his participation in the battles in Donbass to the journalist of ""Novaya Gazeta"", Elena Kostyuchenko, while he was in the burn center at the Donetsk Regional Hospital.
The Tank Brigade of the Russian Army, in which he served, was aimed at fighting against the Ukrainians to preserve the position of the separatists.
The license numbers were stained, there were insignia of the unit on some of the tanks, and these were also removed.
We all knew where we were said Batomunkuev. I had already been ready morally and mentally, what would be in the Ukraine.
Boris Nemtsov’s sources At the beginning of February 2015 citizens, representing the interests of the relatives of Russian soldiers, killed in Donbass, applied to Boris Nemtsov.
They asked for help to get from the Russian Defence Ministry payments to their families.
Referring to the relatives of the soldiers, Nemtsov’s collocutors helped to set the chronology of the Russian troops on the territory of the Ukraine.
European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 21 BERTAS According to them, the Russian soldiers were massively killed in the east of Ukraine in two periods.
The first wave of the coffins went to Russia in the summer of 2014, when the Ukrainian army went on the offensive.
The assault was stopped after the direct intervention of the Russian army units.
Despite the successful counteraction against the Ukrainian units, Russia's armed forces suffered losses.
A significant number of soldiers were killed, in particular, in the battles for the city of Ilovaysk.
This information could not be concealed, and journalists then shed light on the situation.
However, to the surprise of many, an independent investigation was hampered not only by the authorities but also by the families of the killed soldiers.
At the same time they signed on non-disclose of the information under the threat of a criminal prosecution.
The second wave of mass coffins went to Russia in J anuary and early February 2015.
According to our estimates, during this period at least 70 Russian soldiers were killed in eastern Ukraine.
The mass deaths of the Russian soldiers were linked to the escalation of the conflict and the confrontation, in particular near the town of Debaltseve.
Unlike the previous year, this time, before being sent to Donbass, the Russian soldiers were officially dismissed from the armed forces on the demand of the leadership.
Thus, it was planned to conceal the participation of our army in the battles, presenting the military as volunteers.
With the parole of honor of the commanders, the soldiers were assured that in case of injury or death, their relatives would get a compensation comparable to the amounts paid in the summer of 2014.
There was no opportunity to apply for a compensation officially since formally all the dead soldiers had no longer been military servicemen.
At the same time they were afraid to speak publicly because of non-disclosure subscriptions.
At least, the families of the dead soldiers were often told this case as an example and were threatened with criminal prosecution in the event of disclosure of the information about the circumstances of the death of their relative.
Despite the fact that the promised payments have not been made, the families of the Russian soldiers refused to make public statements.
Moreover, the murder of Boris Nemtsov convinced them to give up any claims to the Russian authorities.
The reason is the fear of criminal prosecution and concern for their own lives.
Nobody will even notice, the authors of this report were told by the lawyer who represented the common position of the families of two dead paratroopers.
In many ways the regular units of the Russian army determined the military successes of the separatists in eastern Ukraine.
However, a notable role in the armed forces of ""DNR"" and ""LC"" played the adjunction of the so-called ""volunteers"", too, constantly coming from Russia to the conflict zone.
Russian citizens, who either organized paramilitary groups, or joined already formed units started to go the territory of the Ukraine from the very beginning of the confrontation.
Among such gunmen, there were many former employees of the Russian Special Forces and military personnel, including people with combat experience in hot spots, and with criminal records.
Often these citizens became the key figures in the armed forces of the separatists, such as the former officer of special forces, Igor Girkin , veteran of the ""Chechen war"" Arseny Pavlov as well as Alexander Mozhaev , who was accused of an attempted murder by the prosecutor's office of Krasnodar.
The recruitment, armament, financial support and transfer of the Russian ""volunteers"" to the territory of the Ukraine were mostly organized with the direct participation of the Russian authorities.
According to Zakharchenko’s confession, there were about 3-4 thousand Russian volunteers among the separatists A State Duma deputy, member of the Committee on Defense, Vyacheslav Tetekin, estimated the number of the ""volunteers"", who had taken part and those who were still participating in the combat actions in Donbass, to amount to 30 thousand people.
The same deputy introduced a bill to the State Duma on providing the “volunteers” statuses of participants of combat actions with all relevant benefits.
The process of involving and sending ""volunteers"" to Donbass is organized on the basis of nongovernmental organizations that are loyal to the Kremlin.
In particular, his role in this process, publicly confirmed the head of the Russian Union of Veterans and State Duma deputy from the party ""United Russia"", Franz Klintsevich.
As evidenced by the “volunteers” themselves, the collection points for future fighters are just the military enlistment offices in Russian cities.
According to his testimony, the recruitment of the Russians in the ranks of the ""militia"" of DNI and LC is done in Russian cities through military enlistment offices, veterans and Cossack organizations, which organize a centralized transfer of the fighters to the conflict zone.
The citizens who are willing to go to the territory of the Ukraine voluntarily, are sent in an individual order to Rostov-onDon, where they are offset the cost of the tickets.
Also, in the Rostov region is set the material base and the system of training of the fighter before they are in arms in the ranks of the separatists.
The direction, combat mission and armored vehicles they get just before crossing the border.
The main contingent of ""volunteers"" are former military and police officers,e. people who have experience with weapons.
Money to provide the fighters comes from Russian funds, which are filled with the active support of the Russian authorities.
For comparison, the average salary in Russia, according to the Ministry of Economic Development, in January 2015 amounted to 31. thousand rubles.
The period of their service ""volunteers"" define themselves, but the minimum duration is one month.
Important evidence presented the recruiter of ""volunteers"" from Ekaterinburg, the head of the fund of veterans of Special Forces of Sverdlovsk region, Vladimir Yefimov.
He confirmed that Russian “volunteers” who are involved in combat operations in the Donbass, get money for it.
In fact, it is the realization of the military intervention under the guise of humanitarian supplies.
The same way, now we also put the boys in the cars with humanitarian aid and send them "", said Efimov.
Petersburg states that people were sent to the Donbass from different regions of Russia, and there already in a centralized manner they get equipment and uniforms, ""Some can use their own, if convenient and familiar, but as a rule, all are dressed in army clothing, without any stripes, markings and even the labels of manufacturers.
Currently closed by regional authorities Tomsk TV channel ""TV-2"" showed on December 6, 2014, a story about the transfer of the local squad of ""volunteers"" to war in Lugansk.
The program was made from the departure point of the bus with future LC combatants.
According to the head of the local branch of the organization, Mikhail Kolmakov, such kind of units were sent to the Donbass from different cities of Siberia.
The volunteers of Tomsk were equipped on the money of sponsors whose names the organizers of the transfer prefer not to publicize.
UEEsJtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 25 received material support, and the ""volunteers"" themselves receive monetary compensation for their participation in combat actions.
The current legislation of Russia allows to identify the so-called Russian volunteers in the Donbass as mercenaries.
However, the Russian investigative authorities pursue only those Russian citizens, who are involved in the fighting on the side of the Ukrainian security forces.
The same combatants who joined the ranks of the separatists do not experience any problems with law in Russia.
The President of RF, Vladimir Putin, explained that ""people who do their duty by the call of their heart"", taking part in combat actions cannot be considered as mercenaries Kadyrov’s men A significant role in the armed forces of the separatists has the recruitment, arriving in the territory of the Ukraine from the Chechen Republic of the Russian Federation.
These people identify themselves as supporters of the President of Chechenia, Ramzan Kadyrov, and are often members of the force structures that are under his control.
On December 16, 2014, Ramzan Kadyrov publicly expressed his willingness to go to the conflict zone in the east of Ukraine and personally participated in the fighting.
However, the collected evidence proves that the combatants, trained in his security agencies, take an active part in the clashes in the Donbass.
The first group of Kadyrov’s people, who arrived in the conflict zone, joined the separatist “Vostok” battalion.
Its commander Alexander Khodakovsky confirmed on 1 June 2014 that the Chechens, who come from Russia, in the spring had fought with the Ukrainian troops under his command.
However, evidence proving the presence of the Chechen combatants on the territory of the Ukraine had appeared even before.
As such, on May 26, 2014 a video, made at a rally by the supporters of ""DNR"" in Donetsk, was publicized.
There parked a truck on the square in which TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 26 LIBER there were about two dozen people, mostly of Caucasian appearance, armed with machine guns.
When inquired by the journalist, he confirmed that he was from the Chechen law enforcement agencies.
On May 26 it became known about the first serious losses among the Chechen combatants, fighting on the side of the separatists.
That day the ""DNR"" unit made an assault on the airport of Donetsk, under the control of the Ukrainian forces.
During the fighting two ""Kamaz"" trucks, transporting combatants, were destroyed.
The bomb fell at the bottom of the truck, it rolled, and the front wheel was torn off.
Then there started shooting, we started to pick cars on the road to load the wounded and sent to hospitals,""he said.
The Prime Minister of DNI, Alexander Boroday, said that among the dead of May 26, 33 Russian citizens were identified.
The mayor of Donetsk, Oleksandr Lukyanchenko, added that after the battle at the airport there were 43 wounded taken to hospital, including citizens from the Chechen cities of Grozny and Gudermes.
Another massive replenishment of the Chechen fighters arrived in the Donbass in August 2014, when there started a large-scale operation of the Russian army, which aimed to stop the offensive of the armed forces of the Ukraine on the position of the separatists.
On August 29, 2014 there was publicized a video, shot by one of the Chechen combatants on the Russian-Ukrainian border on the eve of the invasion.
The shot recorded a combatants' ‘dialogue in Chechen language in front of the column of tanks and other armored vehicles.
Allah Akbar! says the gunman at the camera. There are also Chechens, here.
After the publication of that video, Boris Nemtsov sent formal requests to the Russian FSB and the Investigative Committee of the Russian Federation, demanding an investigation on the illegal border crossings by armed men.
On August 30 another video, shot by one of Kadirov’s combatants during the ""cleaning"" of the city of Gorlovka, was published.
The video shows how a group of armed men in full gear go BEEtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 27 down the street and talk in a mixture of Russian and Chechen languages.
After the signing of the peace agreements in Minsk on September 5, 2014 a significant part of Kadyrov's fighters remained in the territory of Donbass, controlled by the separatists.
The evidence of the presence of the armed Chechens in the ranks of the separatists continued to appear on a systematic frequency.
On December 12, 2014 an interview was published with a Chechen militant with the call sign ""Talib"", fighting in the Donbass in the ranks of the separatists, in which he was threatening Ukrainian deputy Igor Moseychuk with death for an insult to Ramzan Kadyrov.
On November 19, 2014, there appeared documentary evidences on the creation of a separate Chechen battalion ""Death"", formed of veterans of Ramzan Kadyrov’s security agencies, in the territory of Donbass.
The special correspondent of the ""Russian reporter"", Marina Akhmedova, published the statements of the commanders of the battalion on the territory of the battalion’s base camp in the Donetsk region.
The soldiers of this battalion, in particular, took part in the battle for the airport in Donetsk and in the city of Ilovaisk.
Among the participants of this battalion, according to its commander’s confession, ""ninety percent were former separatists"" who had fought against the Russian army, but laid down their arms „on amnesty"" and were then recruited into the security forces which are under the control of Ramzan Kadyrov.
He has the rank of major of Russian Interior Ministry, was awarded with the medal ""For Services to the Chechen Republic"" by the decree of Kadyrov in February 2008.
On December 10, 2014 a video was published showing the transfer of the battalion ""North"" in the territory of Donbass.
According to him, up to seventy percent of the militants were from the Special Forces, with most of them having state awards.
According to him, the battalion was based in the city of Krasnodon and provided it with patrols.
The battalion, in particular, took part in the fighting near the towns of Krasnodon and Shastye.
Load-200 The armed conflict in the Donbass increases the number of victims on both sides every day.
In April 2015 the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs documented the death of 6108 people in the conflict zone, and the report notes that the data is ""reserved"" and does not include information about those killed in the exacerbation period of January-February 2015.
From the very beginning of the conflict the Russian authorities were carefully concealing the information about the killed citizens of the Russian Federation on the territory of the Ukraine, and especially the military servicemen of our country, who participated in the fighting.
So, on June 2, 2014, photojournalist Mary Turchenkova published a reportage on the intersection of the Ukrainian-Russian border and a truck marked ""Load-200"", which returned to the homeland the corpses of 31 Russian citizen, who died in May, during the assault of the Donetsk airport.
The Russian citizenship of the dead was confirmed, namely, by the head of the self-proclaimed DNI, Alexander Boroday.
In fact, it was the first documentary evidence of the involvement of Russian citizens in the war in Donbass.
Besides the coffins, Turchenkova managed to fix on a photo several references of the Donetsk regional bureau of forensic medical examination on the death of the Russian citizens whose bodies were transported across the border.
In particular, among the dead was listed Abrosimov Yuri Fedorovich, born in 1982.
Shortly before his death in Donetsk, he had undergone preparation at a training camp in the Rostov region The information about the killed Russian military servicemen in Donbass had long been kept closed.
The military authorities of the Russian Federation stated that the soldiers were dead during the trainings in the Rostov region.
The families of the killed military servicemen were also trying not to draw attention to the case.
As it became known from Boris Nemtsov’s sources, the relatives of the dead soldiers in 2014 received large monetary compensations and also gave subscriptions on nondisclosure.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 29 LIBER The first evidence about the killed Russian military servicemen on the territory of the Ukraine was unveiled by Pskov MP Leo Schlossberg.
The truth was the first message, as evidenced by the graves of Pskov paratroopers Kichatkin Leonid and Alexander Osipov which appeared in Vybuty.
The Defense Minister, Sergei Shoigu, and the commander of the Airborne Troops, Vladimir Shamanov, argue that the 76 th Division was not involved in the fighting on the territory of Ukraine and, accordingly, suffered no combat casualties.
Meanwhile, according to Schlossberg, exactly this division buried the paratroopers.
After the publication of these materials, Schlossberg Leo was attacked, he was severely beaten.
On August 29 it became known about the death of Ulyanovsk paratrooper Nikolai Bushin on the territory of the Ukraine.
Bushin served in military unit 73612, which is permanently stationed in Ulyanovsk.
He was deputy commander of the 4 th squad of the 4 th division of the 31 st independent Guards Airborne Assault Brigade of the Airborne Forces.
It is important to note that on the eve of Bushin’s death, two paratroopers, serving in his division Ruslan Akhmedov and Arseny Ilmitov, were under Ukrainian detention.
More information about the Russian military, killed on the territory of Ukraine Russian troops, managed to gather journalists of RBK81 publication.
Most of the dead were in the five units of the Airborne Forces, constituting the peacekeeping body of the Russian Federation with about 5000 fighters, in total.
The 31st independent Guards Airborne Assault Brigade, stationed in the Ulyanovsk region two were killed Ilnur Kilchinbaev Almyasovo from the village of Almyasovo and Alexander Belozerov from the village of Novaya Mayna.
According to the relatives, they had gone to the teachings in the Rostov region and were killed on August 25.
The 98th Guards Airborne Division, stationed in the Ivanovo and Kostroma regions Sergey Seleznev and Andrei Pilipchuk from the Kostroma region, were killed.
The administration of the Kostroma cemetery stated about the burials of three Kostroma military servicemen, who were killed in the “Ukraine”. 26-year-old Sergei Gerasimov, 32-year-old Alex Kasyanov and 27-year-old Evgeni Kamenev were killed on August 24, 25 and September 3, respectively.
The 76 th Guards Airborne Assault Division, stationed in the Pskov region.
The 7 th Airborne Assault Division Nikolai Sharaborin from Chita was killed in Novorossiysk.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 31 LIBER The 106th Guards Airborne Division, stationed in the Ryazan region a paratrooper, with the surname Maksutov, was killed.
The local media wrote that infantry shooters Vadim Larionov, Konstantin Kuzmin, Marcel Araptanov, Vasili Karavaev, Armen Davoyan, Alexander Voronov were either killed or ""on the border with the Ukraine,"" or during the teachings in the Rostov region.
Newspaper “AiF-Prikamye” reported about the funeral of soldier Vasili Karavayev.
He was brought to the village of Kuva, district Kudymkarsky, on September 5.
A few days before it, there appeared in a social network a message from Nadezhda Otinova, who told, that her cousin, 20-year-old Vasili Karavaev, got a wound during the bombing on August 21 in Donetsk from which he died five days later in a hospital in the Rostov region.
About the victims among the Russian military servicemen in Donbass reported two members of the Council on Civil Society and Human Rights under the Russian President, Ella Polyakova, Sergei Krivenko.
Those were Russian paratroopers who fell in shelling on August 13 near the town of Snezhnoe in the Donetsk region.
On 16 September 2014 Leo Schlossberg sent a deputy's request to the Chief Military Prosecutor's Office of the Russian Federation, in which he raised questions about the fate of the military servicemen of the 76th Pskov Airborne Division.
In his request, Schlossberg names 12 paratroopers, whose deaths and burials are precisely documented, but the reasons and circumstances are not.
Alexander Baranov, Sergei Volkov, Dmitry Ganin, Vasili Gerasimchuk Alexey Karpenko, Tleuzhan Kinibaev Leonid Kichatkin, Anton Korolenko, Alexander Kulikov, Maxim Mezentsev, Alexander Osipov, and Ivan Sokol.
In response, the Chief Military Prosecutor's Office informed Schlossberg, that the circumstances of the death of the military were installed, they had been killed outside the places of permanent deployment, the military prosecutor did not find any violations of the laws, the victims' families receive social assistance, and other requested information, the disclosure of the information for the other requested cases was not possible since they constituted a state secret.
On January 27, 2015 a formal request to the General Prosecutor of the Russian Federation was sent by Boris Nemtsov, himself.
He demanded to check the information about the death of the Russian military servicemen on the territory of the Ukraine.
Exactly a month later, Boris Nemtsov, was killed, and the General Prosecutor's Office has never responded to the politician’s request.
Vladimir Putin’s Military Bargaining Speaking to the reporters on March 4, 2014, Vladimir Putin denied the military involvement of Russia in blocking Ukrainian units on the territory of the peninsula of the Crimea.
According to the President, these actions were carried out solely by the ""local defense forces"" and the uniform of the armed men was similar to that of the Russian one in connection with the fact that it is easily available in shops.
Such a uniform, according to Putin, can be purchased in any military bargaining.
However, the aphorism about the ""Putin’s military bargaining"" continues to be relevant until now due to the fact that since the spring of 2014 there has been mass transportation of Russian weapons and armored vehicle to the east of the Ukraine, which have been heavily used against the Ukrainian security forces.
Today, so-called ""militias of Donbass"" have a wide range of weapons, including tanks and selfpropelled artillery, multiple rocket launchers and diverse small arms.
The Russian officials deny the fact of the supply of military equipment to Donbass.
The leaders of the separatists claim that the weapons and military equipment of the so-called ""militias"" are captured and trapped from the Ukrainian army in the fighting.
The identification of the equipment that goes from the military units of the army of the RF to the armed forces of the separatists, is complicated by the fact that both the Russian and Ukrainian armies use mainly old Soviet weapons and military equipment.
Changing the marking and registration plates just eliminate the opportunity to prove the involvement of the military equipment of the Russian Federation.
But even so, the proofs of the transfer of the Russian weapons to Donbass are more than enough.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 33 LIBER By signing these documents, the representatives of the Russian state actually officially recognized the fact of transportation of military equipment to the territory of the Ukraine.
The matter is that a uniform system of volley fire ""Tornado"" (the letters ""G"", ""S"", ""U"" indicate that the specific modification has a caliber, compatible with MLRS ""Grad"", ""Twister"" and ""Hurricane"") is designed in Russia and has not been delivered to any foreign country.
MLRS ""Tornado-S"", mentioned in the second Minsk Agreement, probably exists only in the form of pilot projects.
And this weapon not only appeared in the hands of the separatists, but it was also mentioned in an international agreement, concluded by Vladimir Putin.
At the same time, the nature of hostilities and their intensity do not allow any other option but to ensure constant ammunition of the “forces of the separatists"" from the territory of Russia.
For example, a single volley of ""Grad"" fires 36 shells, each weighing 56. kilograms.
Generally, one resupply vehicle carries one and a half tons of ammunition.
In the case of intense fighting (as it was in the district of Debaltseve at the beginning of 2015), such ammunition is consumed in a day.
Of this amount, according to the expert, 23 tanks, 56 BMP and BMD, 26 BTR, 19 self-propelled guns, 17 towed guns, 2 MLRS were captured by the separatists from the armed forces of the Ukraine.
Khramchikhin does not exclude that the militants had obtained the rest from Russia, but also does not rule out the version that the equipment could have been ""bought"" by the separatists as a result of corrupt deals with the Ukrainian side.
No matter how it happened, the talk is about a supply of ammunition amounted to a minimum of eighty tanks, a dozen of MLRS, twenty self-propelled artillery.
Even if we accept the hypothesis that the separatists are fighting with the captured equipment and bought the weapons from corrupt Ukrainian military, it is impossible to imagine how in the midst of hostilities caravans of trucks are freely moving back and forth across the front line.
For example, the report denotes TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 34 LIBER to the shots of the shoulder-launched, antitank grenade launcher RPG-7, from the marking of which it is implied that they were produced at the factory named after Degtyarev in Kovrov in 2001.
This latest modernized model of a quite old tank was completed in Russia in 2013 and has never been exported.
In particular, the proof that separatists had under their deployment the tank T-72B3 dates to August 27, 2014, when a video was published in which the Ukrainian military showed a tank T-72B3 which was captured near Ilovaisk and there were documents in it, confirming that it had belonged to the Russian army.
Another indication of the presence of Russian military equipment on the territory of the Ukraine became the video, made in the city of Lugansk, which is under the control of the separatists.
In mid-February 2015, the video registrar stated the movement of the self-propelled anti-aircraft defense missile-gun complex “Pantsir SI” The complex was developed by the Russian military industry and is exported to some countries in the world.
However, apart from Russia, none of the countries that has ZRPK “Pantsir SI” does not border with the Ukraine.
It is quite obvious that this equipment could enter Donbass only through the Russian-Ukrainian border.
Thus, despite the official denials of the Kremlin, the Russian arms go at the disposal of the separatists and are actively used against the Ukrainian army.
Deliveries of arms into the conflict zone cannot be considered anything but a military intervention into the affairs of a neighboring state.
East of the Donetsk region of Ukraine, near the village of Gabrovo, not far from the town of Torez.
European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 35 BEIEtas Separatists’ statements From the very beginning of the military actions in the Donbass, the Russian media regularly reported that the separatists successfully shoot down the planes and helicopters of the Ukrainian army.
In total, from May to July 17, 2014, 4 helicopters (2 and 5 May MI-24, May 29 MI-8, June 24 MI-8) and 3 aircrafts were shot down On July 17, on the day of the catastrophe with the Boeing 777, the state news agencies ITARTASS and RIA ""Novosti"" said that the ""militants"" shot down the aircraft AN-26 near the town of Torez.
In the evening of the same day the Defense Minister of the self-proclaimed DNI, Igor Girkin , stated on the social networks that the ""militias"" had downed a plane Both the militants and the Russian media called the place of the crash (near the city of Torez in the Donetsk region) and the time of the crash which exactly coincides with the place and time of the catastrophe with the Malaysian Boeing 777.
However, in the evening, when the real picture, of what had happened, became clear, these kind of statements were terminated.
Indirectly the guilt of the terrorists for the downed Boeing acknowledged Russia's representative to the UN, Vitaly Churkin.
If they thought that they were shooting down a military jet, it was confusion.
If there was confusion, then it was not an act of terrorism, ""said Churkin.
How the tracks were covered After the downing of the Boeing, the Russian media started to voice one after another different versions of the tragedy.
In fact, the Kremlin propaganda launched a special information operation aimed at creating a kind of ""smoke screen"" around the investigation of the causes of the collapse of the Malaysian aircraft.
The purpose of the special operation, apparently, was to conceal the involvement of the separatists, armed with the Russian anti-aircraft missiles.
Four days after the collapse, the ""First Channel"" of the Russian television announced the version of the General Staff the Boeing was hit by a Ukrainian Su-25.
This hypothesis was dismissed by an expert on the efficiency of aviation complexes, Vadim Lukashevich, ""The Su-25 is a IHIHiHH TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 36 ground-attack plane.
The purpose of this machine is to work close to the ground and give direct support to troops on the battlefield.
Shooting down a plane at an altitude of 11,000 with a Su-25 that's not serious.
According to the creator of the Su-25, the attack plane could attack the Boeing at the height of three four thousand meters but to shoot down the plane flying at the height of 10 thousand 500, SU-25 can't.
Another resonant ""version"" was voiced by a fierce Kremlin propagandist, Mikhail Leontev.
This photo, according to Leontev, confirmed that the Boeing had been shot down by jet fighter MiG-29.
A military aircraft, similar to that of the Su-27, was used in the photo collage while the report of the ""Channel One"" referred to the MiG-29.
In the photo of the ""Channel One"" Donetsk airport is seen, but the Boeing was shot down about 50 kilometers away.
The time shown on the fake collage of the “Channel One” UTC is the Coordinated Universal Time Greenwich Mean Time.
In the photo it shows as a 1:19:47, but, in fact, at this time it was night in the Ukraine.
The Kremlin attempts to influence on the public opinion and confuse the investigation, however, did not prevent the establishment of the real causes of the tragedy.
Investigation The countries that lost their citizens in this tragedy, like nobody else, are interested in establishing the truth and identifying those who are responsible.
In addition to the official investigation into the circumstances of the tragedy, the European public and the media carried out their own independent investigations, collecting evidence and interviewing eyewitnesses.
Relying on the verification of a military TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 37 LIBER expert, the journalists concluded that the passenger plane could by no means have been shot down by a jet fighter.
In March 2015 several research papers were published, showing that the Boeing was hit by a SAM ""Buk"" from the territory controlled by the separatists.
In particular, the journalists of the German TV channels WDR and TCE, as well as newspapers Siiddeutsche Zeitung visited near the town of Snezhnoe the site of the alleged missile launch of the SAM ""Buk Ml"", and interviewed local residents.
Track on Torez The documentary evidence that the Malaysian ""Boeing"" was hit by a ""surface-to-air"" missile, launched from ""Buk"", located on the territory controlled by the separatists in the Donets region, is a photo, taken by a resident of the city of Torez, approximately 3-4 minutes after the launch of the rocket.
The photographs captured the vapor track from the rocket at its earliest start site of the trajectory.
This is supported by the evidence; gathered by the Reuters correspondent from the villagers of Krasniy Okyaber (Red October), above whose heads passed the newly launched missile.
A few hours after the disaster with the ""Boeing"", there appeared a photo on the social networks, taken by one of the locals, with a track of the launched missile.
The photo was subjected to a thorough examination in the community of Investigative Journalists Bellingcat, the conclusions of which indicate its undoubted authenticity.
HUEEtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 38 In particular, the key thesis that was casting doubt on the authenticity of the photo the color of the sky in the image, was dismissed.
The distance between the crash site where a cloud was fixed, and the site where the photographer was located is about 15km, and the distance between the area the photograph zooms into and the crash site is about 20km.
Especially taking into account the fact that the satellite meteorological shooting of this part of Eastern Ukraine showed that that day Donetsk and its suburbs were at the edge of a large cloud front and the weather there could be very changeable.
The Russian journalist Sergei Parkhomenko managed to find the author of the above mentioned photo and get the original photo.
When looking at the jpeg-file , it becomes clear that there are no ""divorces"" and ""blots"" in the photo that could have seemed suspicious to the skeptics.
All this ""garbage"" was compressed from the full-sized files to a format needed to upload photos to Twitter.
In the original, the photo is much brighter than the version which was published on July 17, 2014.
It was “darkened” before it was tweeted so as to make the trail of the smoke more noticeable in the middle of the photo.
I ran to the window and saw that the wind was slowly spreading the trail of the smoke on the horizon.
I grabbed it and ran up the stairs to the roof to take a photo from there.
Then I turned and saw from the other side, in the north (that is, just in the direction of Grabow), a column of thick black and blue smoke.
I thought that the missile had hit into a gas station or a tank with fuel oil.
I got to the other side of the roof to take photos from there where the wires and the antennas would not distract.
If I had known what event appeared in the image, of course, I would have taken more photos.
But about what exactly had happened, I learned only a couple of hours later.
At that time I sent the photos to a friend and he posted them on Twitter.
These are respectively six and ten minutes after the time when “Boeing” MH-17 is officially considered to be crashed.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 39 LIBER Also, the handed photos contain sufficient details so as to undoubtedly connect the location where the photo was taken to the real location.
In the first photo, which represents a wider angle of view, a number of details are easy to distinguish.
The next step in the analysis an attempt to identify these specific details from the ""top view"", that is, in the cadres of satellite imagery.
We have at our disposal quite many of such cadres and they were taken in a very good, detailed resolution and are available, in particular to the users of Google Earth.
Here as Point A is marked the initial position of the author of the photos, denoted by the author himself.
This proves that the author of the photos accurately pinpointed his location.
Thus, it is possible to draw an imaginary ""axis of view"", through which the photographer could see the black smoke, that rose over the alleged starting point and gradually demolished to the right by the wind.
This line , can be drawn a satellite map, from the point of capture through the high electric mast.
It is highly probable, that the installation of ""Buk"", that made the fatal shot, was located in this area.
At the left edge there are clearly visible traces of the maneuvers of some heavy equipment and next to it there is a large piece of charred, black earth, which is already partially plowed.
On March 30, 2015 the International Investigative Group, which consisted of experts of Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, the Netherlands and Ukraine, conducting a criminal-legal investigation on the downed flight MN17 of July 17, 2014, made a statement that the version, that the Boeing was crashed by the missile complex ""Buk"" which came from Russia and was under the control of separatists, was possible.
European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 40 BUEEtas Chapter 9.
In April 2014, Donetsk and Lugansk ""people's republic"" proclaimed its independence and declared its withdrawal from the jurisdiction of the Ukrainian authorities.
In fact, ""DNR"" and ""LC"" are under external control of official Moscow, and the key decisions are dependent on the Russian officials and political strategists.
However, the Kremlin has never recognized the sovereignty of the selfproclaimed republics de jure and still officially considers these territories to be a part of the Ukraine.
After the referendum on the independence of ""DNR"" in May 2014, government institutions were formed in its structures.
A similar position in ""LC"" took another Russian citizen Marat Bashirov, political strategist, working with the Government of the Russian Federation.
Earlier, there had appeared other Russian citizens on the territory of the Ukraine, who had played a key role in the armed resistance of the local authorities in the Donbass.
In particular, a notable fame gained a retired officer of the Russian special forces, Igor Girkin , who had managed to take part in the operation on the annexation of the Crimea to Russia and created an armed unit of separatists in the town of Slavyansk, keeping it under control for a while and repulsing the attacks of the Ukrainian armed forces.
At a time Girkin headed the security service in the investment fund ""Marshal Capital"", owned by Russian businessman Konstantin Malofeev.
At the same time also Alexander Boroday worked for the fund as a consultant.
The law enforcement bodies of the Ukraine consider Malofeeva to be one of the main sponsors of the militants in the east of Ukraine.
Boroday and Girkin arrived in Donbass early in May, after the annexation of the Crimea to the Russian Federation.
However, Boroday did not conceal that he was regularly in Moscow and coordinated his activities on the territory of Ukraine with Russian officials.
On July 18, 2014, the Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the ""DNR"", Denis Pushilin, resigned from his post.
The Vice-speaker of the ""parliament of I II I MM S TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 41 the republic"", Vladimir Makovich, commenting on the resignation of his colleague, confirmed that Pushilin’s statement was written from Moscow.
Personnel reserves for the ""DNR"" and ""LC"" have often served the socio-political projects that were directly associated with the Kremlin.
For example, the post of Deputy Minister of Energy of ""DNR"" was taken by Leonid Simunin, who had previously worked with the pro-Kremlin organization “Mestnye” and appeared in the testimonies of the members of neo-Nazi group Born, which committed a series of resonant murders, considering that they were done with the sanction of the Kremlin.
Also, in government structures of ""LC"" worked political consultant Pavel Karpov, who had previously cooperated with the Administration of the President of RF on the supervision of nationalist organizations.
Important evidence of the role of the Kremlin on the personnel decisions of ""DNR"" and ""LC"" gave Igor Girkin , who held the post of defense minister of the so-called ""Donetsk Republic"" in May-August 2014.
He plainly says that he left the leadership of ""DNI"" as a result of pressure from the Kremlin.
The Kremlin started to pay attention to the political approach, focused on the peace talks, and it required pliable people.
And I did not show any pliability and, therefore, did not meet their requirements.
However, he clarified that in Kremlin the curator on human and political issues in Donbass is the former deputy head of the Administration of the President of RF, Vladislav Surkov.
Imagine how it would look, if I had put my signature on the ""Minsk"" agreements, a native of Moscow.
External control from Moscow, however, is not conducive to restore order in the selfproclaimed republics where flourish corruption and arbitrariness.
If the general information is gathered, it turns out that most part was stolen almost nine out of ten convoys.
And if in Donetsk and Lugansk people got something about a package a month and only to a strictly limited number of people , nothing reached small towns.
Alexei Mozgovoy is in Alchevsk, they did not get anything from the ""humanitarian convoys,"" Pavel Dremov in Pervomaisk also did not get anything I mean, common people and institutions did not receive anything.
The situation is terrible, while there TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 42 LIBER is evidence of the sale of humanitarian aid on the market "", said the coordinator of the Fund for Assistance to the Donbas, Gleb Kornilov.
In addition, there were documented cases of „people's courts"" in “LC” which operate outside even of the controversial but, at least, of some procedural field, in which the courts work officially.
In January 2015 there was further evidence of how in reality is the interaction set between the ""people's republics"" in the east of Ukraine and the Kremlin.
But formally he has another sector, he curates Abkhazia and South Ossetia "", said Danilov.
There is no doubt that Vladislav Surkov plays a key role in the process of external government of the ""People's Republic"", implemented by the Kremlin.
Formally, he is responsible for the questions regarding the cooperation with Abkhazia and South Ossetia, but also, with the fall 2013 appointment of Surkov on the post of the assistant of the president, it became known that also the Ukraine would be in the field of his interests.
The representatives from Surkov’s closest entourage, in particular, were repeatedly seen in Kiev during the revolutionary events on the Maidan.
Moreover, at the anniversary of the Kiev Euromaidan snipers shooting, the head of the Security Service of the Ukraine, Valentyn Nalyvaychenko, directly accused Surkov of the leadership of the operation.
The Kremlin's policy towards the ""DNR"" and ""LC"" is very closed and non-transparent.
However, the facts of direct regulation policies of these allegedly ""independent republics"" cannot be concealed.
In fact, it is about creating a pseudo-state in eastern Ukraine, which is managed from Moscow and is, in fact, a means of pressure on official Kiev.
Important evidence of the involvement of Vladislav Surkov to the decisions within the ""DNR"" and ""LC"" was published by a special correspondent for the publishing house ""Kommersant"", Andrei Kolesnikov, describing the talks in Minsk on Lebruary 12, 2015, attended by Vladimir Putin, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Lrench President Lrancois Hollande and President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko.
The reconciliation of the conditions on the ceasefire in the TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 43 LIBER Donbass lasted all night, while the official representatives of the ""people's republics"" did not participate in them, and were waiting for the outcomes behind the doors.
At the time, it was not still clear where he was going, but it was already evident that the events had started to develop at an ever increasing speed.
And then the president of the Ukraine came out of the negotiations hall... he was very dissatisfied with something.
Alexander Zahkharenko and Igor Plotnitskiy categorically refused to put their signatures under the document.
At 10:40 Vladislav Surkov returned to the Palace alone and went to the second floor, where at that time was Vladimir Putin.
According to the data of ""Kommersant"", Vladimir Putin told his colleagues that it was necessary to explain to Alexander Zakharchenko and Igor Plotnitskiy why they were wrong.
Angela Merkel proposed to explain everything to the leaders of ""DNR"" and ""LC"" with the help of the opening of the EU Council of Ministers in Brussels.
No later than this period the leaders of France and Germany would leave and never come back, and no talks about nothing, anything would be impossible.
Vladimir Putin came out and went back into the meeting room, when before the expiration of the ultimatum remained two minutes.
The humanitarian disaster The intervention of Putin and Russian military forces in the conflict in the eastern part of Ukraine turned a part of the neighboring state in the war zone.
In 2014-2015 Donbass is a place of unpunished murders, hundreds of thousands of refugees, destroyed infrastructure and the collapse of the social systems.
The Ukrainian and Russian authorities, as well as the representatives of the international community, are increasingly characterizing the situation in the Donbass as a humanitarian catastrophe.
European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 44 imiDRl TAS During the fighting in the east of Ukraine from the territory, which is controlled by the separatists, as well as from the front-line cities, numerous local residents were forced to leave.
Many of the refugees have nowhere to return because of the destructions, that the towns and villages in the conflict zone had faced.
Infrastructures, lines of the electricity transmission, local gas and water pipelines are subjected to systematic destruction.
Regularly there are reports of deaths of workers from the repair crews, reconstructing the infrastructure on the territory occupied by the separatists.
The road to a safe place on the territory of Ukraine for refugees is often full of mortal dangers due to the lack of humanitarian corridors.
So, on August 18, 2014 as a result of the shelling of refugee columns by separatists, 15 civilians were killed.
The column under the white flags was exporting refugees from the inhabited communities of Khryashevatoe and Novosvetlovka.
A bombardment from mine-throwers and the system ""Grad"" was made on the vehicles from the territory of the separatists.
Practically, today there have been established numerous checkpoints along almost the entire territory of Donbass.
However, if the checkpoints, established by the Ukrainian military, though with some abuses, but still, are regulated by the legislation of the country, then the analogous fortified positions, set by the separatists, are, in fact, out of the legal field and the integrated command center.
The residents of the inhabited localities, which fell under the control of the separatists, are frequently subjected to violence by militants.
After the liberation of this place from the militants by the Ukrainian security forces, on its territory there were found mass burial places of the local residents, with signs of torture and abuse on their bodies.
Back in the early days of the occupation of Slavyansk and of nearby Horlivka, the body of the local deputy, Vladimir Rybak, was found in the river.
He had been detained from the unit by an officer of the Russian Special Forces, Igor Bezlera, and after the torture and killing, the corpse was thrown into the river.
There are a lot of examples when the separatists detained, tortured and abused civilians, who were not taking part in the armed conflict.
The woman was accused of supporting the Ukrainian authorities, was tied to a pole in the center of Donetsk, was publicly humiliated and beaten.
The separatists in eastern Ukraine are widely using the tactic of firing from densely populated areas and the residential sector.
With the firing points in houses, the separatists provoke shelling on civilians.
For example, on October 1, 2014 on the ""First Channel"" a reportage was released in which a militant from DNI shot from a grenade launcher from the window of a residential multistory house towards the position of the Ukrainian army.
In the next cadre the journalist asked an elderly woman, who was on the stairwell, if she was not scared to live there.
So, on January 13, 2015, the Ukrainian checkpoint at the entrance to the town of Volnovakha was hit from the side of Donetsk.
Under the bombardment fell a bus with civilians, as a result of which 12 people died.
Hunger and dramatic impoverishment of the population of Donbass also become realities.
Sergei K., a volunteer and organizer of free canteens for the poor, who recently had to flee from Donetsk to the liberated territories, 7 people died from hunger in Kirov, 5 in Snezhoy, and 68 in Krasnopartizanskaya in Lugansk region.
Moreover, according to the observations of the locals, the bodies of the dead were transported through the city on sleds because there were no other means of transportation for the dead there.
But the elderly and disabled people , have absolutely no money to buy it.
Unfortunately, the authorities do not care for it, otherwise they would have already organized food rationing.
It is incomprehensible that people are dying of hunger when there the groceries are packed in the stores.
Today I was told that in Donetsk the number of the registered deaths from dystrophy exceeded 20 people.
The leaders of the separatists themselves confess that a notable part of the loads were stolen.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 46 LIBER The prices in the shops on the territory, controlled by the separatists, are significantly higher than those in the Ukrainian regions.
At the same time job places in the Donbass have become significantly fewer.
Some mines work, including illegal ones, as well as the enterprises of the Donetsk oligarch, Rinat Akhmetov.
Most of the businesses have left the territory of the ""DNR"" and ""LC"" to escape from the looting and seizures, and to attract new investments in a war zone is practically impossible.
A serious problem is also the failure of the authorities of the self-proclaimed ""republics"" to provide essential medicines to the people who are under public care.
Despite this, the leadership of ""DNR"" and ""LC"" hinder the evacuation of the disabled people, who suffer because of the lack of medicines.
For example, the administration of ""LC"" thwarted the attempt of the volunteers to take to the territory, controlled by the Ukrainian authorities, the patients of Slavyanoserbsk neuropsychiatric boarding school, which is not provided with medical supplies, and was also subjected to systematic shelling.
In estimating the cost of the military campaign of Putin on the territory of the Ukraine, one should consider two aspects.
First, it is necessary to count how much direct fighting, in which Russia's ""hybrid"" forces are actively involved, and costs in Russia.
This is the direct cost of war, and, obviously, it will not be too high on a state level.
Secondly, it is important to analyze the indirect cost, which is associated with the sanctions imposed on the Russian banks and companies, in response, with the food embargo, imposed by Russia asymmetrically, with the inflation and devaluation, with the fall of the economy.
Direct costs of the militants, the costs of their current maintenance (food, accommodation, medical care and so on), the cost of maintenance and repair of equipment used, in the combat zone, as well as ammunition.
Assuming that the monthly maintenance of the local ""volunteers"" is three to four times cheaper, the cost of their maintenance for 10 months amounts to 25 billion rubles.
In total, the direct costs of the “volunteers” amounts to 46 billion rubles for the 10 months of the war, or 4. billion rubles a month.
European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 47 BERTAS Add to this 15% of the cost on the exploitation, repair and maintenance of military equipment, its transportation from the Russian warehouses another 7 billion rubles.
And this if we assume that all the ammunition used by the separatists, were designed for older types of weapons, were taken from warehouses, and are no longer produced in Russia.
Similarly, suppose that all the military equipment, destructed or damaged in the Donbass will not be restored by any repairs or purchases of additional pieces of military equipment by the Ministry of Defense.
Thus, the direct costs of Russia on the war in the east of Ukraine for 10 months amounted to about 53 billion rubles.
On the one hand, it is not much, considering that the annual expenditures of the federal budget of Russia is 15 billion rubles.
Refugees A direct consequence of the war in the Donbas was the destruction of hundreds of thousands of houses, social facilities and transport infrastructure, industries.
But while the fighting is not over, it is not possible to estimate the scale of the destruction even roughly.
Likewise, it is impossible to say now, what Russia will suffer to recover from the war expenses.
However, any war is also accompanied with the appearance of large numbers of refugees people who cannot live with the constant risk of their lives, for the lives of their children.
There lived about 7 million people in the Lugansk and Donetsk regions of the Ukraine before the war.
The data of the official Ukrainian and Russian authorities on the number of refugees strongly differs.
The UN estimates that about 1 million people left the entire conflict area in the spring of 2015.
The number of refugees has practically ceased to grow since last November.
According to the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the number of refugees leaving for other regions of the Ukraine and also for Russia, is equal almost to 150, that is, to date, we can talk about the presence of about one and a half million Ukrainian refugees in the different regions of Russia.
This means that the maintenance of the Ukrainian refugees costs 12 billion rubles a month to the regional budgets, and since July 2014 this figure amounted to about 80 billion rubles.
Its implementation will bring the standard of living and economic development in the Crimea to the average.
On March 31, 2014, President Putin signed a decree on increasing pensions of the Crimean to the average level.
Prior to the annexation to Russia, the size of their pension was 5504 rubles.
Since mid-2014 the size of the pension has been 10670 rubles in the Crimea and 1 1680 rubles in Sevastopol.
Financing of the Crimean pensions is made at the expense of the Pension Fund of Russia.
As a result of the pension reform in 2013, determining the size of payments to the Russian pensioners is transferred to a point system, that is, individual pensions are now dependent not only on the pension contributions that were made by a pensioner during his tenure, but also on the total number of pensioners, who will receive a pension.
Since the Crimean pensioners made their contributions to the Ukrainian pension system, it is clear that the payment of their pensions will be carried out by reducing the pensions paid to the Russian pensioners.
The government program has a small section on the costs which are to be financed through the so-called extra-budgetary sources.
For example, ""Techpromexport"", a subsidiary of state corporation ""Rostec"", which is headed by a friend of Putin since the Soviet times, Sergei Chemezov, should finance the construction of thermal power plants in the Crimea.
But, of course, it will be done not on charity basis as established by the Russian government, all the investments for the construction of thermal power plants and the related income will be returned at the expense of the allowances for the consumers of the European part of Russia and Ural for energy.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 49 LIBER Inflation The result of the Kremlin's foreign policy was the introduction of western sanctions against Russian officials, businessmen and companies who supported the operation in the Crimea.
It is difficult to estimate the damage of such measures, as a ban on the supply of equipment and components for military production.
But it is obvious that it will deter the production of domestic enterprises, and, consequently, reduce the earnings of the Russians; will lead to the reduction of the quality and technological level of production, which will increase the cost of its operation and will require large expenditures from the budget.
Personal sanctions against Putin's friends led to the freezing of their assets.
Some did it at the expense of administrative redistribution of the market (for example, by the decree of the Governor of St.
Petersburg, G Poltavchenko, the accounts of a number of municipal companies were transferred to the bank ""Russia"", the main shareholder of which is one of Putin's friends on the cooperative “Ozero” , Yuri Kovalchuk.
By decision of the government, the banks which were Putin’s friends and fell under the sanctions, would receive tens of billions of rubles from the National Welfare Fund, although they do not meet the criteria for the selection of banks, approved by the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank of the Russian Federation.
As a result, for the payment of foreign debts, the Russian borrowers had to increase the demand for foreign currency on the domestic market in the autumn of 2014, which led to a precipitous drop in the ruble exchange rate and inflation surge.
However, the acceleration in inflation started earlier, when with the decree of August 6, 2014 Putin banned the import of agricultural products, raw materials and food from the EU, US, Australia, Canada and Norway.
This triggered a reduction in supply in the market and increase in prices.
Russia has the largest reserves of arable land, but our agriculture cannot feed its population.
In 2013, 70% of fruits and berries, 41% beef, 28% pork, 23% of dairy products were imported to the Russian market.
As a result of Putin’s decision already in the third quarter of 2014, in Russia, imports of meat and dairy products fell by 26%, of fish 48% compared to those in 2013.
It shows the inflation rate of the services, non-food products, food products, left, center, right.
According to the estimations of the Bank of Russia, almost 80% of the acceleration was connected with the devaluation of the ruble, and 20% with the ban on food imports.
It is clear that the devaluation of the ruble is not only because of the sanctions, but also the fall in oil prices.
Thus, the cost for the confrontation with the Ukraine for the citizens of the Russian Federation became an additional price increase of 5.5% over the year after the Crimea.
European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 51 ""Putin is a very shrewd man.
Come on, explained in a simple language what was going on the Russian tank soldier from Buryatia, Dorji Batomunkuev, wounded near Debaltseve.
In Russia there are training camps for militants, convoys of tanks move in the direction of the Ukrainian border, separatist leaders agree the actions in the Kremlin.
Putin shakes his head with confidence to the direct questions, Churkin angrily denied all the accusations against the Kremlin at the UN Security Council.
Neither Putin nor his generals had the courage to recognize the fact of the armed aggression against Ukraine.
Fainthearted lies and hypocrisy are portrayed as a great political wisdom.
We will pay for this venture with the lives of our soldiers, the economic crisis and political isolation.
There is no nation in the word closer and more related to the Russian nation than the Ukrainians.
They are our brothers without pathos, and the war between the Russians and Ukrainians in the Donbass cannot be characterized otherwise than fratricidal.
HeMH,OB noOenonocno CMOTpeji Ha Ok'py/KaiOLHnx, KaK oh ncnan Ka>KHbiH pa3, Koraa eMy npnxoflHJia b rojiOBy ynannaa tinea.
CBpana oh 6biJi y6HT Ha BojibmoM MocKBopeipcoM MOCTy, n pa mo y CTeH KpcMJia.aBepuiHTb ncno HeMu,OBa B3anricb ero copaTHHKH, npy3ba h moan, KOTOpbie CHHTajiH 3Ty pa6oi y BaacHoir.
ConepacaHHe, pyxonHCHbie 3aMeTKH, noKyMcm bi — Bee, hto oh ocTaBHJi, 6buio Hcnojib30BaHO npn iiohi'Otobkc TeKCTa.
Hama Banana — paccKa 3 aTb npaBny o BMemaTejibCTBe KpcMJia b yKpaHHCKyio nojiHTHKy, KOTopoe npHBejio k bohhc Meacny HaniHMH naponaMH. npHBejio k Bomie, KOTopyto nano HeMenJieHHO OCTaHOBHTb. rjiaea 1. 3aneM IIvTHHy 3Ta Boiiiia C oceHH 2011 rona pern him BnantiMttpa nyTHHa nanaji 3 aMeTHO CHHacaTbca.
HaxaHyHe npe 3 HneHTCKHx BbiSopoB 2012 rona B 03 HHKJia BcpoamocTb, hto noSmbca noScnbi b nepBOM Type eMy He ynacrca.
PyKOBonHTb CTpaHoir b npHBbiHHOM eMy aBTopHTapHOM CTHJie c no 3 Hu,HH «Hau,HOHajibHoro JiHnepa» CTano 6 bi ropa 3 no cjiO/Kiicc.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 53 LIBER H36HpaicjibnaH xaMnamia noipcSoBajia MaxcHMaabHoil Mo6HJiH3au,HH pecypcoB BJiacTH, hto6bi oSccucMHib IlyTHHy no6eay b nepBOM Type.
BepHyBHiHCb, no HToraM BbiSopoB, b npcBnacmcKOC Kpecjio, nyTHH iipunna pna nonyaHCTCKHx pememiH b naac>xac 3aKpenHTb cboh peimiHr.
K TOMy ace hciiojiiiciihc «MaMcxHx yxa30B» 3a6yxcoBajio, h ciiycia roa nyTHH noaBcpi npaBHicjibciBO nySannHOH xpHTnxe 3a iic3cxthbiioc pacxoaoBaHHe cpeacTB Ha hx peajiH3au,mo.
K aery 2013 roaa ciajio OHCBnano, hto Tpaanu,HOHHbie icxiiojioihm, oScciicwHBaBiHuc noiiyjiapnoci b nymHa Ha npoia>xci[HH nocaeaHHX jici.
Cyaa no BceMy, Kpcvuib Bcepbe3 oSecnoxoHaca HeraTHBHOH TeHaeHu,HeH h nawaa pa6ory Haa upHiinHiiHajibiio hobmmh cnocoSaMH yxpenaeHHa aaexTopaabHbix no3Hu,HH nyTHHa.
Cu,eHapnH «B03Bpaiiici[Ma KpbiMa b cocTaB Pocchh», HecoMHeHHO, 6bia ciuiaunpoBan h 'iniaicjibiio iioaroiOBJicn BJiacraxiH PO 3apaHee.
IlpoaBHJi jioajibnoc'i b h xpbiMCXHH 6n3Hec, noaynaBHiHH BbiroaHbie xpeanTbi ot pocchhcxhx SaiiKOB Ha HepbiHOHHbix ycjiOBHax.
KpoMe Toro, npeanpHHHMajiHCb aoaroBpcMcmibic ycHJiHa no ocaaSaciiHio yxpaHHCXOH sxohomhxh h ee iiohhthwccxoh CHCTeMbi b ucjiom.
Pci yjiapno HanHHajiHCb «ra30Bbie» bohhw, BBoanancb h o i McnajiHCb npoayKTOBbie 3M6apro.
OcyuicciBJiajica HenpHxpbiTbiH HaacHM Ha yxpaHHCxne BJiacTH aaa npHiiy>xacnHa hx x ynacTHio YxpaHHbi bo bccbobmO/Kiibix «HHTerpau,HOHHbix» npoexTax Kpcxuia, orpaHHHHBaiOLt[Hx cyBepeHHTeT Sbibihhx coBeTCxnx pecnySanx.
IlpHCOcaHiiciiHC KpbiMa k Pocchh, aKTHBHO noflflepacaHHoe rocyaapcxBcmiOH nponai anaoH, no3BOJiHJio IlyTHHy pe3KO yKpenHTb coSciBcmiyio nerHTHMHOCTb.
OanaKO KpbiMOM hcjio He orpaHHHHjiocb, h BCKope Ha TeppHTopHH panonoB ^oiichkoh h J lyraHCKOH oSjiacTcii YKpaHHbi Hananacb nojmoucmiaM Borina.
KaK CJieayCT H3 MaicpnajiOB npeaciaBJicmioio jioKJiana, aKTHBHyio nojiHTHHecKyio, 3KOHOMHHecKyio, Ka/ipoByio, a Taicace npfl\iyio BoeHHyio nojmepacKy eenapaTHCTaM OKa3biBajia poccHHCKaa BJiaCTb.
IlepBaa TpaKTOBKa coctoht b tom, hto kpmmckhh ycnex y6cnnji iipcBHHema PO b totobhocth pyccKO»3biHHbix oSjiaciCH YKpaHHbi CTaTb Haci bio poecHHCKoro l ocyaapci Ba.
CnoacHBrnaaca cmyaumi MOTHBHpoBajia IlyTHHa HCKaTb nOJIHTHHeCKHH BbIXO/I H3 KpH3HCa, UCCMOipa Ha OHCBHHIIOC BOeHHOe npCBOCXOaCI BO, h bo mhotom cnocoScTBOBajia MHpHbiM neperoBopaM c hoboh ynpaHHCKOH BJiacTbio.
IIpeKpameHHe oraa b /lonSaccc, KOTopoe ciioeoScii rapaHTHpoBaTb KpeMJib, movkct CTaTb ocHOBaHHeM fljia otmchbi skohomhhcckhx h nonHTHHecKHx caHKn,HH npoTHB Pocchh, KOTopbie CTanH 1 1 c h i6c>k ii bi m m nocne npucocHHiicnmi KpbiMa.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 55 LIBER TaK HJIH HliaWC, pOCCHHCKO-yKpaHHCKHH KOHJIHKT aajICK OT SaBCpUJClIHa.
OTKa3 ot TaKOH noa/jepaocH MoaceT 6biTb Bocupniiai KaK npcaarcjibCTBO HbiHeniHHx ctopohhhkob IlyTHHa h ciiocoSen cnpoBOu,HpoBaTb BOJiHy pe3Koro HeaoBonbCTBa npe3HaeHTOM BHyrpH Pocchh.
Bo-BTopbix, npoflOJiaceHHe KOHpoHTau,HH c 3anaaoM, H30Jiau,H» h caHKu,HH cnoco6Hbi HaHecTH 3HaHHTejibHbiH ymep6 pocchhckoh skohomhkc.to co3aacr phckh coifHajibHbix npoTecTOB, KOTopbie MoryT BHOBb noaopBai b peHTHHr uiaBbi Pep.
HaKOHeu,, oaiaOjicnnc no3Hu,HH IlyTHHa Ha mhpoboh apeHe h 3CKajiau,Ha pocchhckoyKpaHHCKoro KOHtJwiHKTa co3aaior fljia HbiHeuiHero iipc3nacma Pocchh peajibHyio yrpo3y yroaoBHoro npecneaoBaHHa.
H3MeHeHHe nioSaabiiOM hojihthhcckoh CHTyau,HH BnojiHe MoaceT 3aKOHHHTbc» aJia IlyTHHa 0Hu,HajibHbiM oSbhiiciimcm b BoeHHbix npecTynjieHHax h CKaMben noacyaHMbix b M cacaynapoaiioM yrojioBHOM cyac. rjiaea 2.
Jloacb h nponaraHja Hcjiobck, KOTopbiH peiHHT onHcaTb nojiHTHHecKyio xapbepy BjiaaHMHpa IlyTHHa, ctojikiictch c Hepa3peniHMOH upoSjiCMOH — y pocchhckoto npc3nacm a miKoraa He 6bmo hojihthhcckoh K apbepw.
MoacHO TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 56 LIBER npeflnojioacHTb, hto nojioSHaa npaKTHKa Hanajiacb 3aflOJiro 2015 ro#a, npocTO #o chx nop hhkto He oopainaji Ha Hee BHHMaHHa, h hhkto He 3HaeT, CKOJibKO clhc TaKHx 3apaHee 3anHcaHHbix pojihkob c IlyTHHbiM xpanm ca b bmhcotckc Kpexnta h >khct CBoero naca. £o Hanajia 2014 ro#a poecHHCKaa nponaraH^a mhofhm Ka3ajiacb nyflOBHHiHOH. ^oxoahjio T oro, HTO pe3yJIbTaTOM ItCKOTOpbtX TeJieBH3HOHHbIX CIO/KCTOB 06 0nn03HU,HH CTaHOBHJIHCb peajibHbie yrojiOBHbie acjia h apecTbi.
BnpoMCM, caMH npoiiai aiiaHC'i bi He CKpbiBajiH, hto b «MHpHoe BpeMa» ohh paSo'iaior He Ha nojiHyio mo tub.
CaMbiil nejiOBeHHbiH cobctckhh npa3£HHK CTaji maBHbiM Hau,HOHajibHbiM npaaanHKOM nymHCKOH Pocchh — ticjio Ha nepBbiH B3niaa BnojiHe xopomee.
PnTopHKa BoeHHbix JieT OKa3ajiacb cnpoeifHpoBaHa Ha TCKyuiMC nojnrmHecKHe hobocth.
AHTHamHCTCKaa pHTopHKa, Hcnojib3yeMa» 0HLi,HajibHbiMH CMH, nepeBeaa iiojihi hmcckmh KpH3HC Ha a3biK bohhbi Ha yHHHTO)KeHHe.
Bojiee toto, BbiacHHJiocb, hto repoHHa cio>KCTa aance nnKoraa He SbiBana b CnaBaHCKe.
CTOpOHHHKH BJIBCTH 3aTOBOpHJIH 0 MaKapCBHHC KaK 0 Bpare Pocchh h TpeSoBajiH jTH iu HTb ero rocynapcTBcmibix narpaa.
TaKaa ayaHTopna He noBepHT b ronocnoBiibic hctophh o «pacnaTOM ManbHHKe» h ipcSyci 6 ojicc TOHKoro noaxoaa. noaTOMy KoppecnoHaeHTbi LifeNews CeMeH neroB h « Ko m coMonb ckoh npaBabi» ^mhtphh Ctchihh h A neKcaHap Kou, coo6mann cbohm apmcnaM h HHiaiejiavi to, hto 3aManHHBajiH pocchhckhc icJiCKanajibi.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 58 LIBER flo/KajiyH, H3 ncpcaan (jiCAcpajibiibix KaHajiOB c xaSnoHAaMH h oiuiann-CMH no OTKpoBeHHOCTH Moraa 6 bi KOHKypnpoBaTb TOJibKO nporpaMMa «BecTH iicacjih» Ha KaHajie «Poccna1 Co3Aaiinaa no o6pa3u,y aMepnKaHCKnx Bcwcpiinx moy, OHa cwrpajia KJiiowcByio ponb b pacmnpeHHH rpaHnu, AonycTHMoro b pocchhckom 3Hpc.
Koi a a 3 to Bee aaKoimmoi, Pocchh cmc aojii o npHACTCH npHxoAHTb b ce6x, H36aBJiaacb ot 3 thhcckhx h iiOBCAcnMecKHx ciaimapiOB nponaraHAbi 2014-15 rofla. rjiaea 3.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 59 LIBER «Ha KpbiMCKOM nonyocTpoBe Mbi 0Ka3ajiHCb oahhmh h3 nepBbix, 24 (jieBpami , 3 a ABa ahh ao 3Toro Hac noAHmiH no TpeBore b Ka3apMe.
C^opMnpoBajin b OaTajibomiolaKi HMCCKMC rpynnw n OTnpaBHJin Ha caMOJieTax b AHany.
H 3 Anaiibi Ha «KaMa3ax» Hac nepeSpocHJiH b Hobopocchhck, oiKyaa Ha SojibinoM ACcaimiOM KopaOne Mbi OTnjibuiH b CeBacTonojib.
B KancciBC ochobhoh aanami HaM nocTaBHJiH pacnojioacHTbca h 6 biTb roTOBbiMH k BbinojiHeHHio jiioSoi o 3aAaiHta.
BcKope Hama opm aiia nepeexajia b nocejioK IlepeBajibHoe, paAOM c KOTopbiM Mbi pa36HJiH najiaTOHHbiii Jiarepb.
B to ace Bpcvia, Ha Tcppmopmo KpbiMa nanajiH aKTHBHO aaxoAHib namit BoeHHbie.
Ohh C03,uaBaj[H ytcpciuicnna h opraHH30BbiBajiH naTpyjiH, hto 6 bi, He nail Bor, 3ACCb He Hanajiocb Maiiaana.
HaKaHyHe peepeiiAyMa Hac npcAyupcAHJiii, hto oyACT oObaBJicna TpeBora h hcoOxoahmo 6biTb HaroTOBe.
O'l'MCTHM, HTO OnHCaHHbie r HpKHIIblM CoOblTHB npOHCXOflHJIH 27 CBpaj[>l 2015 rofla — cpa3y noaie toto, xax b HOHb c 26 Ha 27 (JieBpaaa pocchhckhm cneu,Ha30M 6 biji b3ht non KOHTpojib p afl cipaicrHMCCKHx oS'bCKiOB b KpbiMy, BKJHonaa Bjiainic napjiaMeHTa, 1 xic non ayjiaxiH aBTOMaTOB, b OTcyTCTBHH npeccbi h npeaycMOipeniioH bukoiiom BH fleoTpaHCJMH,HH laccjianmi, xiciiyi ai bi aKoSbi nporojiocoBajiH 3a npoBejicmie pcc|)epciuiyMa.
To ecTb HepnoMopcKnii c|)jiot co cbohmh Ba/iaiaMii cnpaBHJica — 6buiH flocTaBJieHbi «BeacjiHBbie jiiohh», c 27 Ha 28 CBpajix b3mi BcpxoBiibiii Cobct KpbIMa», 3a»BHJI KacaTOHOB, nOaCHHB, HTO «BOKJIHBbIC J[IOHH» HBJIHJIHCb apMCHCKHM cneu,Ha30M, KOTopbiH aoc i aBJouiCH b KpbiM no B03/iyxy h MopeM. npaKTHHecKH cpa3y noaie lauBJieiiHii an mh pan a KaTacoHOBa noaBHJiocb h OTKpoBeHHoe npH3HaHHe Bjia^HMHpa nyTHHa.
B HHTepBbio ajih jiOKyMcmajibiioro (|iHJib\ia «KpbiM. nyrb Ha PoflHHy», noxa3 KOToporo cocToanca Ha lOcyaapciBcmiOM TejieKaHajie «Pocchh 1"", npe3HHCHT Pep npaMO npH3Hajica, hto jihhho pyKOBOflHJi hchcibhhmh pocchhckhx bohck b K pbiMy.
Mbi iiMKOEiia He 3aHHMajiHCb ^cc ra6Mj[H3auMCM oScxaiiOBKM Ha Y Kparnic h He 3aHHMaeMca 3thm», — 3aaBHJi, b nacTHOCTH, npc3micm PO Bjia^HMHp IlyTHH b HHTepBbio paHu,y3CKOMy TejieKaHajiy TF1 4 rnojia 2014 ro.ua.
IIpecc-ceKpeTapb iipc3nucm a PO ^mhtphh IlecKOB, BbicTynaa Ha KpyrjiOM CTOJie b TACC 31 MapTa 2015 roua, xauBini, hto poecHHCKaa CTopoHa «peuiHTejibHO onpoBepraeT» npHcyrcTBHe pocchhckhx bohck b 30He yKpaHHCKoro KOHcjuiHKTa.
OanaKO cjiOBa pocchhckhx hhhobhhkob onpoBepraioT MHoroHHCJieHHbie CBMucxcjibcxBa npHcyrcTBHa cojiuaT h oHu,epoB pocchhckoh apMHH Ha TeppHTOpHH BOCTOKa YKpaHHbi.
Bepcnio o tom, hto poccHHCKHe cojiflaTbi h oHu,epbi BoeBajiH b ^OH6acce jieTOM 2014 roaa, B3BB «3aKOHHbie OTnycKa», aKTHBHO noaacp>KHBaj[ h jimicp flHP Ajick'canap SaxapnciiKo.
Bepcna 06 «OTnycKHHKax» aKTHBHO pacnpoc'ipanajiacb h Ha IlepBOM Kanajic pocchhckoto tcjicbmaciimh, me, HanpHMep, 4 ccmaSpa 2014 roaa 6biJi noKa3aH cioaceT 0 noxopoHax koctpomckoto necaHTHHKa Anaronim TpaBKHHa, noniSwcro Ha yKpamie.
Ba>KHO OTMeTHTb, HTO BOeHHbIM, lipOXOAHlHHM CJiy>K6y no KOHTpaKTy B BOOpy>KeHHbIX CHJiaX PcD, npaMO 3anpemeHO ynacTBOBaTb b Oocbbix acmctbhxx bo Bpevia omycKa.
Ecjih OTnycx npoBOflHTca 3 a rpaHHiieH, to «HyacHO nojiyimb pa3pemeHHe MHHHCTepcTBa oOopoiibi, CBoero KOMaHnoBaHHa h corjiacoBaHHe c cpCE Pep (comacHO IIpHKa3y MHHHCTepcTBa oSopoHbi PcD ot 3 1 niojia 2006 rona N°250 ,3,03)37.
CnycTa HexoTopoe Bp cm a Mhhhctcpctbo o6opoHbi PcD nbiTajiocb onpoBepraTb npHcyTCTBHe pOCCHHCKHX BOeHHbIX, BKJHOHaa «OTnyCKHHKOB», Ha TeppHTOpHH yKpaHHCKOTO KOHJIHKTa.
CTapuiHH cepacaHT reHepajiOB Ajickccm HHKOJiaeBHH — 3aMecTHTejib KOMaiuiupa biboab; MJiaamnii cepacaHT CaBOCTeeB BjiaaHMHp BanecjiaBOBKH — KOMaiuiup otacjiciihh; cc|ipcmop Mmpoc|)anoB ApTeM BacHJibeBHH — rpaHaTOMeTHHK; paaoBoii PoMaHiieB HBaH HropcBMi; paaoBoii ropauiHH TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 64 LIBER AiiApcR BajicpbCBHn; p»aoboh MeAbnaicoB HBaH BacnjibCBi-m; phaoboh FIoh'iocb Erop BajicpbCBHH; pa,uoBOH Cmhphob CepreM Ajickcccbhh.
Xoxjiob 3a«BMji, hto 8 aBrycTa oh caMOBOJibHO noKHHyji cbok) nacTb bmcctc c cocjiy>KHBu,eM PycjiaHOM r apaMCBbi\i h npH6bui b JlyraiicKyio oSjiacib.
Ilo ero cjiOBaM, ohh 6biJiH HaMepeHbi npHcoe#HHHTbca k BOopyvKcmibiM CHJiaM cenapaTHCTOB b na#c>K#c Ha 6ojiee me#poe, hcm 3apnnaTa pocchhckhx BOcmiocjiy/KauiHx-KompaKiiiHKOB, B03Harpa»c#eHHe.
JeCaHTHHK K03JI0B B cenraSpe 2014 ro#a CTajio h3bcctho o BoeHHOCJiyacameM 31 -oil OT#ejibHOH rBap#eiiCKOH ^ecaHTHO-iHTypMOBOH Spni aabi HHKOJiae Ko3jiobc, KOTopbiii BoeBaji b /(onSaccc h noTepaji Hory b pe3yjibTaTe pancnna.
O cy#b6e napna i [ySjiHMi io paccKa3aji b coifHajibHbix ccrax ero #a#a Cepreii Ko3jiob.
CorjiacHO ziamibiM BoeHHoro KOMHceapnaia 03epcKa, 2 1 -jictiihh HHKOJiaM Ko3jiob, aBTOMexaHHK no eneifHajibHOCTH, no moHa 2013 ro#a npoxo#HJi cpoHHyio BOHHCKyio cjiyacSy b bohckoboh hbcth N°73612 31-h OTHCJibiiOH jiccaimio-inTypMOBoii 6pnra#bi, c 1 aBrycTa 2013 ro#a cjiyacnji TaM ace no KOHTpaKTy.
Ko3jiob npHHHMaji ynacTHe b onepau,H»x Ha TeppHTopHH YKpaHHbi c caMoro nanajia npoTHBOCToaHHa.
B MapTe 2014 ro#a oh ynacTBOBaji b 6jiOKHpoBaHHH pocchhckhmh BO eHHbIMH oS'bCKTOB B KpbIMy.
Ba'/KlIO OTMeTHTb, HTO SoCBbIC 3a#aHH B KpbIMy pOCCHHCKHH BoeHHOCJiy>KamHH Ko3jiob BbinojiHaji b (|iopMC yKpanHCKoro MHJiHu,HOHepa. 3 tom CBHHCTCJ ibCTByeT c|io rorpac|) MH, ony6jiHKOBaHHaa ero oth,om b cou,HajibHOH ceTH «BKoHTaKTe» b Mae 2014 ro#a.
Ilo cjiOBaM #a#H flecaHTHHKa, 3to (Jjoto c^ejiaHO b Kopnflope KpbiMCKoro BepxoBHoro coBeTa, b SjiOKnpoBKe KOToporo Ko3jiob ynacTBOBaji no# bh#om corpyaniiKa MB,Z], YKpaHHbi.
Ilo HToraM onepau,HH oh Bcpnyjica #omoh b YjibaHOBCK, 6bui Harpaac#eH Mcaajibio «3a B03BpameHHe KpbiMa» h aceHHjica.
Ko3jiob npnHHMaji ynacTne b oocbbix hcmctbhhx Ha npoTsaceHHH flByx iichcjib.
Co CJIOB pOHC'IBCmiHKOB, OH BBIIIOJIIHIJI, B HaCTHOCTH, SoCBbIC BanailHH no HOnaBJIClIHIO apTHJIJiepHHCKHX TOHCK BOOpy/KClIlIblX CHJI YKpaHHbl.
Kaic paccKa3aji Ccprcfi Ko3jiob, orpiut ero miCMamniKa nonaji b lacaay, KOi /ia iibn ajica ot6htb njieHHbix cocjiy/KMBHCB. 24 aBrycTa orptut nonaji non oScxpcji OpoHeSoiiHoro opyzpia, h Ko3JiOBy BbiCTpenoM OTopBajio Hory.
Ilocjie oioio oh 6biji nepenpaBJieH ncpc3 rpaHHuy, OKa3ajic» b poctobckom rocmrrajie h no3>Ke nepenpaBJieH b MocKBy.
BoeHHOcjiyacamiie noj bhjom joSpoeojibueB Ilocjie aBrycTOBCKoro koiii piiacTyiuiciimi cenapaTHCTOB h Macicii pocchhckoh apMHH b M nHCKe eocToajiHCb MHpHbie neperoBopw c ynaciHCM iipcBmtcma YKpanHbi neipa IlopoHieHKO h iipc3HHcm a Pocchh BjiajjiiMiipa IlyTHHa.
Ilo HToraM KOHcyjibTan,HH CTopoHaM ynajiocb aoroBopmbcx o npeKpameHHH oraa, hto 3aMopo3HJio kohcJjjihkt Ha TeppHTopHH YKpaHHbi Ha HexoTopoe Bpcxia.
CjicayiOHjan aKTHBHaa c|)a3a Socbwx hchci bhh naiajiacb b KOHH,e 2014 ro.ua.
Koppccnoiuicmy H3flaHH a yaajlOCb B3»Tb HHTepBblO y HCTBCpbIX KOHTpaKTHHKOB apMHH PcD, KOTOpbie noflTBepflHJiH, hto KOMaiuiOBaiiHC eme Ha crauMH 6 ocbom iiohioiobkh He CKpbiBajio HaMepeHHa OTnpaBHTb hx BoeBaTb Ha yKpamiy.
KpoMe Toro, cojuiai bi aanBium, hto b otjimhmc ot jieTHeii HHTepBeHu,HH pocchhckoh apMHH, Kor.ua BoeHHbie Hacra nepeceKajin rpaHHuy KOJiOHHaMH, Ha 3 tot pa3 nepeSpocKa ocymecTBJiajiacb He6ojibiHHMH rpynnaMH no ipn MCJiOBCKa.
A nOMOTaTb MbI flOJDKHbl no BCeM nOHHTHHM», HOHMCpKIiyjl B CBOeM BbICTynJieHHH 0)HHCp.
OkUIICB iaK/KC nOBCHHJI, HTO nocKOJibKy «oHHMaj[bno Botina He o6b»BJieHa», HeT rapaHTHH aeiiC/Kiibix BbinaaT b aiyiac ihScjih hjih pancnna pocchhckhx bociii [OCJ iy/KaniHx.
CanO>KHHKOB XBJIHCTOI ipa>Knai[MI[OM PCp H OllipaBHJICH BoeBaTb Ha Tcppiiopiiio YKpaHHbi b KanecTBe aoSpoBOJibua.
Tax, oiiMCbiBaa bbixoh CBoero noapaaaejiciiHM H3 OKpyaceHHa y cejia JIotbhhobo, CanoacHHKOB yKa3biBaeT Ha noMonjb, npHuiefluiyio H3 Pocchh.
Co CTOpOHbl JIHP 3aXOflHJIH TaHKH H pOCCHHCKHe noapa3aejiciiH>i.to poccHHCKaa apMHH, Sypaibi.
IlOfl XlcSajIbHCBblM CTOHJia 6 yp»TCKaa HaCTb, TaM 6 bIJIH OflHH Sypaibi.
Mhc nacTO npHxoflHJiocb naxoaiTibca nptt inraSc, npHe3>KaTb, /lOKJiaabiBaib KaKyio-io HHopMau,Hio.
Ohh BMecTe Bee oio npnayMbiBaioT, BMecTe coaaaioi , a Mbi BbinojiH»eM», — nonwcpKnyji 6 ocbhk.
IIoKa3aHHg SypflTCKoro TaHKHCTa OaKT npHCyTCTBHa pOCCHHCKHX BOHCK Ha TeppHTopHH YKpaHHbi HOHI BCpaHJI H eme OflHH nciiocpc/iciBCiNibiM ynacTHHK 6ocbmx flencTBHH — 20-JieTHHH ^opjKH BaTOMyHKyeB, KOHTpaKTHHK 5 OTHCJibiiOH TaHKOBOH opuraabi , BOHHCKaa nacTb N° 46108, jiHHHbiii HOMep 200220, BoeHHbiii ohjic'i 2609999.
O cbocm ynacTHH b 6oax b /lon6accc oh paccKa3aji /KypnajitiCTKC «Hoboh ra3eTbi» EjieHe Koc'iiomciiko, iiaxoaacb b ojkotobom u,eHTpe npH flOHdpCOH oSjiaCTHOH U,eHTpajIbHOH KJIHHHHeCKOH 6oJIbHHU,e.
CoSeCeflHHKH HeMU,OBa, co CCblJIKOH Ha pO,UC'I BCm[HKOB COJIflaT, nOMOTJIH BOCCTaHOBHTb XpOHOJIOTHK) BBOaa POCCHHCKHX BOHCK Ha TCppHTOpHIO YKpaHHbl. no hx cjiOBaM, MaccoBO poccHHCKHe coJi^aTbi th6jih Ha BOCTOKe yxpaHHbi b flBa nepnofla. nepBaa BOJiHa rpoOoB nouuia b Pocchk) jictom 2014 roAa, xor^a yxpaHHCKaa apMHa nonuia b HacTynjieHHe.
OAHOBpCMCIIIIO OHH ^aBajIH IIOAIIHCKM 0 Hepa3rjiameHHH no a yrpo30H yrojiOBHoro npccjiCAOBanna.
B otjihhhc ot nponuioro roAa Ha 3tot pa3 poccHHCKHe coJiAaTbi nepeA OTnpaBKOH b /JonOacc oc})Hu,HajibHO yBOJibiiajincb H3 Boopy/Kcmibix chji no i pcOoBaiiHio pyKOBOACTBa.
TaKHM o6pa30M, luianripoBajiocb cKpbiTb ynaci HC iiamcn apMHH b 6 oax, BbiCTaBJiaa BoeHHbix AoSpoBOJibiiaMH. noA necTHoe cjiobo kombhahpob coaAaTaM rapaHTHpoBajin, hto b cjiynae paHeHHa hjih i hOcjih hx poACTBeHHHKaM 6 yAyr ncpcMHCJiciibi KOMneHcau,HH, conocTaBHMbie c tcmh cyMMaMH, KOTopbie BbinjianHBajiHCb jictom 2014 roAa.
Kaic yBepaiOT hctohhhxh HeMit,OBa, rpoMKoe yroaoBHoe aeao npoTHB MiioioaernoH Marcpn CBcniaiibi ^aBbiaoBOH no oSbhiiciihio b rocH3MeHe b i ioj i b3y yicpaHHbi npcaicaoBajio ucjib 3anyraTb Tex pOflCTBeHHHKOB IIOIhSuIHX COJWaT, KOTOpbie ayMBJIH 0 KOHTaKTaX C /KypnajIHC'iaMH. no KpanHen Mepe, ccMbavi nornSmnx cojiaar ncpcaKO npnBoanan 3to acjio b npnMep n yrpoacanH yroaoBHbiM npcaicaoBaiiHCM b caywac pa3rjiameHHa CBcaciiMH 06 oSciOMicjibciBax i hScjih HX pOaCTBeHHHKa.
Bojicc toto, yStiMCTBO Bopuca HeMu,OBa ySeanno hx OTxa3aTbca ot jhoSbix rpcSoBaiiMH k pocchhcxhm BJiacTaM. npHHHHa TOMy — CTpax yronoBHoro npcaicaoBanna h onaceHHa 3a coScTBcmibic >xh3hh.
Hhkto h He 3aMeTHT», — ccjiopMyjnipoBaji aBTopaM aoxaaaa o6myio no3Hu,Hio poacTBcmiHXOB lopncT, upeac raBJHiiouiHH HHTepecbi ccmch aByx norH6uiHx aeeaHTHHKOB. rjiaea 5.
PeryjiapHbie nacTH pocchhckoh apMHH bo mhotom npcaonpcacjiMJin BoeHHbie ycnexH eenapaTHCTOB Ha boctoxc YKpaHHbi.
Oanaxo 3aMeTHyio pojib b Boopy/Kcmibix ctuiax «^HP» h «JIHP» cbirpaao Taxsce iionojnicnHC H3 MHCJia Tax Ha3biBaeMbix «ao6poBOJibucB», iiocioamio npnGbiBaiouicc H3 Pocchh b 30Hy Boopy/xcmioi o xoHtJniHXTa.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 71 LIBER BepSoBKa, Boopyacemie, MaTepnajibHoe oOecneneHHe h nepeSpocKa pocchhckhx «^ o6poBOJibucB» Ha TeppHTopnio YKpaHHbi aawacryio opraHH30BbiBajiHCb npn iiciiocpcaci BcmiOM ynacTHH pocchhckhx BJiacicn.
IIpoii,ecc npHBJieneHHa h OTnpaBKH «ao6poBOJibHCB» b ,fl,on6acc oprantnycrcH Ha 6a3e jioajibHbix KpeMJiio oOujcci Bcmibix opraHH3au,HH, b hbcthocth, cbok) pojib b 3tom npou,ecce nySjiHHHO iioaTBcpaHJi pyKOBoan i cjib PoccHHCKoro C0K)3a BeTepaHOB h acnyi a'i r ocayMbi ot napTHH «EaHiiaa Pocchji» cDpami, Kjihhu,cbhh.
KaK CBtiacTCJibCTByiOT caMH «ao6poBOJibUbi», cSopHbiMH nyHKTaMH aaa Oyayninx Oocbmkob aaiacxyio kbjuiiotcji BoeHKOMaTbi b pocchhckhx ropoaax.
Ilo ero CBHaeTejibCTBy, BcpSoBKa poccnan b paabi «onojiMCiiHa» flHP h JIHP npoH3BoaHTca b Pocchhckhx ropoaax nepea BoeHKOMaTbi, BeTepaHCKne h KaaaMCCKHC opraHH3au,HH, KOTopwe opraHH3yiOT u,eHTpajiH30BaHHbiH 3ae3a Socbhkob b 30Hy KOiijiHKia.
HanpaBJieiiHC, 6ocboc 3aaaHHe h OponcTCxnnKy ohh nojiynaioT HenocpeacTBeHHO nepea iiepeecMCiiHCM rpaHHifw.
J33tas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 72 Bcp6oBUiHKH CTpeMaTca naGnpai b jiiohch cpcanci o B03pacTa.
Baaoioe CBmicrcjibCTBO npcaciaBHJi BcpSoBiunK «ao6poBOJibucB» H3 EKaicpniiSypia, pyKOBoaH'icjib 0 iiaa BeTepaHOB cneu,Ha3a Cbcpujiobckoh o6nacTH Bjia,unMnp EcJihmob.
IIo caoBaM uiaBbi MecTHoro othcjiciihh 3toh opraHH3au,HH MHxaHJia KojiMaKOBa, nonoSnwc oxpH,xw oxnpaBjunoxca Ha ,4,on6acc H3 pa3Hbix l opoaoB Ch6hph.
Cnapa,unjin tomckhx aoSpoBOJibucB Ha ^ciibiH enoHeopoB, HMeHa KOTopbix opraHH3aTopbi OTnpaBKH npcanoHmaiox He aHHIHpOBaXb.
Co6paHHbie CBHflexejibcxBa noa i Bcp/Kaaiox, hxo anaMH i cjibiiaa nacxb pocchhckhx Socbhkob b ^OHS acce 6biJia oxnpaBJieHa Ha xcppmopmo yKpaHHbi opraHH30BaHHO, nponuia cooxBexcxByiomee oSyneHHe h no/iroxoBKy, nojiyHHJia MaxepnajibHoe oSecneneiiHe, h caMH «ao6poBOJibUbi» iiojiynaiox .nenoKiiyio KOMneHcau,Hio 3a ynacxHe b 6ocbwx zichci bhmx.
BnpoMCM, poecHHCKHe CJieacxBcmibie opxaHbi npccjicayiox HCKJHOHHxejibHO xex rpaayjaH Pocchh, Koxopwe ynacxByiox b oocbwx hchctbhhx Ha cxopoHe yKpanHCKHx chjiobhkob.
Tax, b OKxaSpe 2014 i oaa 6biJio B036yameH0 yrojiOBHoe acjio npoxHB acHxejia Mockbw PoMaHa >Kcj[C3i[OBa, KoxopbiH nonojiHHJi yKpaHHCKHH OaxajibOH «A30 b»58.
KajbipoBUbi 3 aMexHyio pojib b BOopyaceHHbix cnjiax cenapaxHcxoB nxpaex iionojineiiHe, iipn 6 wBaiomcc Ha xeppnxopHK) yKpaHHbi H 3 Hchciickoh pecnySjiHKH PO. 3 xh jiioflH HfleHXHHH,HpyK)x cc 6 h b K anecxBe cxopohhhkob npeiH/icma Hem hi PaM 3 aHa Ka^bipoBa h xanaciyio aBjiaioxca BbIXOflH,aMH H3 nOflKOHXpOJIbHbIX eMy CHJIOBbIX cxpyKxyp. 16 fleKaSpa 2014 i oaa PaM3aH Ka^bipoB nySjiHHHO Bbipa3HJi roxoBHoexb noexaxb b 30Hy KOHjiHKxa Ha BoexoKe yKpaHHbi h npHHaxb jiHHHoe ynaciMC b 6 ocbwx uchctbhhx.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 74 LIBER CaM KaabipoB Ha TeppHTopHH YKpaHHbi TaK h He iiohbhjich.
Ozmako coSpamibic CBHHC'icJibciBa /lOKasbiBaioi, hto iiomoTOBJicnnbic b ero CHJiOBbix CTpyKTypax Socbmkh npHHHMaiOT aKTHBHoe ynaciHC b ctojikhobchhbx b /JonSaccc.
Ero kOMamiup Aackcaiuip XoflaKOBCKHH 1 mioiih 2014 rofla noai BepaHJi, hto bcciioh iioh ero nanajiOM c yxp aHHCKHMH bohckumh cpaacajincb HeHeHU,bI, npn6b[BUIMC H3 Pocchh.
BnpoMCM, HOKasaicjibC'i Ba npHcyTCTBHa Ha TeppHTopHH YKpaHHbi BOopyaceHHbix hcmciickhx SoeBHKOB noHBHJiHCb eme HaKaHyHe.
Tax, 26 Maa 2014 ro^a 6bmo oSHapoflOBaHO BH^eo, CHHToe Ha MHTHHre ctopohhhkob «flHP» b floHerpce.
HaM MHHa nonajia nofl flHHme, Hac nepeBepHyao, OTopBaao iiepeaiiHC KOJieca.
Hotom Hanajica oScrpcji, Mbi CTajin jiOBH i b MauiHHbi Ha aopore, 3arpyacaTb Ty^a paHeHbix h OTnpaBJiaTb b 6oabHHn,bi», — paccKa3aji oh. npeMbep-MHHHCTp AHP Ajickcaiuip Bopoaaii 3aaBHJi, hto cpe/m iioi hSlhhx 26 Maa 6buio ono3HaHO 33 rpaamamma Pocchh.
OnepeflHoe MaccoBoe nonojiHeHHe HeneHCKHx Socbhkob npHSbuio b ^OHSacc b aBrycTe 2014 roaa, koraa Hanajiacb MaciHiaSiiaa onepau,Ha pocchhckoh apMHH, HMeBinaa ucjibio ocTaHOBHTb HacTynjieHHe BOopyaceHHbix chji YKpaHHbi Ha no3Hii,HH cenapaTHCTOB. 29 aBrycTa 2014 ro#a 6buio ony6jiHKOBaHO BH^eo, CHaToe oahhm h3 HeneHCKHx Socbhkob Ha poecHHCKO-yKpaHHCKOH rpaHHii,e HaKaHyHe BTopacemia.
Ha kanpax 3aHKCHpoBaH anajioi SoeBHKOB Ha MCMCiiCkOM a3biKe iiepea kojiohhoh TaHKOB h apyi oii 6poiiCTCxiinkn.
HHHiajuiax!», — OTBCHaer MexaHHK-BOflHTeJIb B COJIHU,e3amHTHbIX OHKBX, BblCyHyBHIHHCB H3 JHOKa TaHKa.
OanaKO hh o#hh h 3 opraHOB He aaji nojiHTHKy OTBeTa. 30 aBrycTa oOnapoaoBano Bnaco, Taxace cua ioc o#hhm h3 Ka^bipoBCKHx Oocbmkob bo Bpevia «3anHCTKH» ropoaa TopiiOBKa.
CBMacicJibci Ba npHcyrcTBHa BoopyaceHHbix mcmciihcb b paaax eenapaTHCTOB npOflOJDKajIH I [OH BJIH I bCH C CHCTeMHOH nepHOflHHHOCTbK). 12 jfeKaOpa 2014 ro^a 6 bijio oSHapoflOBaHO HHTepBbio neneHCKoro OoeBmca c no3biBHbiM «TajiH6», BOioiomHM b ^OHSacce b pa^ax eenapaTHCTOB, b xo^e KOToporo oh yrpoacaji CMepTbio yKpaHHCKOMy xiciiyiary Hropio MocennyRy 3a ocKopOaeHHa b aapcc PaM3aHa Ka^bipoBa.
CpeflH ynacTHHKOB stoto Oaiajibona, no npH3HaHHio ero KOMananpoB, «acBHiiocTO npou,eHTOB — ObiBLHHe cenapaTHCTbi», BoeBaBrnne npoTHB pocchhckoh apMHH, ho caoacHBHiHe opyacne «no aMHHCTHH» h nonojtHHBHiHe iiocjic stoto CHJiOBbie CTpyKTypbi, no/tKom pojibitbic PaM3aHy KaabipoBy.
BI]J33tas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 76 10 aexaOpa 2014 roaa oGHapoflOBaHO BH^eo, 3acj)HXCHpoBaBmee nepeaBH^xeHHa OaTaitbOHa «CeBep» Ha TeppHTopHH /JonOacca.
IIo eTO CJIOBaM, Zio CCMHaCCaiH npOU,eHTOB SoeBHKOB — Bbixoanbi H3 cneu,Ha3a, iipHHCM SojibuiHiici BO H3 hhx HMeiOT l Ocyaapci Bcmibic naipaabi.
IIo ero CJIOBaM, orpaa 6a3npycrca b ropoac Kpacnoaon h oSeciiCHHBacT ero naTpyjiHpoBaHHe.
C caMoro iianajia xoHtJtJiHXTa poccnHCKne BJiacTH CTapaTejibHO CKpbiBajiH aamibic o iioi hOuihx H a TeppHTopnn YKpaHHbi rpaaraanax Pep h TeM 6ojiee BOcmiocny/xaiiiHx nauiCH CTpaHbi, KOTopbie npnHHMajiH ynacTHe b oocbbix acftCTBuax.
Tax, 2 mona 2014 roaa (JiOToacypHajiHCT Maprta TypneHXOBa onySaHXOBajia penopTaac o ncpeccMCiiHH yicpaHHCKO-poccHHCKOH rpaHHu,bi ypbi c noMeTKoii «rpy3-200"", xoTopaa B03Bpamajia Ha poaHHy Tena 3 1 rpaacaaHHHa P<J>, noraOmero b Mae npn uiTypMe aoHeifxoro aaponopia.
PoccHHexoe rpaacaaHCTBO iioi hOhihx noaTBcparia, b hbcthocth, pyKOBoamcab caMonpoB03rjiameHHOH flHP Aacxcanap Bopoaafi.
OaxTHnecxH 3 to CTaao nepBbiM aoKyMcmajibiibiM 1 i oar Bcpvxac i 1 h c m ynacTHa i pa/xnan PO b BOHHe b TlonOaccc.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 77 LIBER IIomhmo rpoSoB, TypnemcoBOH ynanocb 3a<f)HKCHpoBaTb Ha oto HecKOJibKO cnpaBOK flOHeifKOTO oSjiaCTHOlO Siopo CyHCSnO-MCHHHHIICKOM 3KCnepTH3bI 0 CMepTH poccuan, TeJia KOTopbix nepeB03HJiH Hcpca rpaHHity.
B nacTHOCTH, cpenn noraSmHx 3HaHHJica A6pocHMOB lOpHH OenopoBHH, 1982 rona po>KfleHHa.a,qoKyMeHTHpoBaHa raSejib h JKnaHOBHna Ceprea EopncoBHHa, 1966 rona poacneHHS, Koiopbiil H3BecTeH kuk HHCTpyKTop Il,eHTpa cneifnajibHoro Ha3HaneHHa OCB Pocchh b OTCTaBKe, BeTepaH bohh b AraHHCTaHe h Hcmiic.
BoeHHbie bjibcth PcD oSbaBJiajin y6mbix cojinax iioi hShihmh Ha yncnnax b Poctobckoh oSjibcih.
IlepBbie CBHHCTCJIbCIBa 0 I[OIh6lHMX Ha TeppHTOpHH YKpaHHbl pOCCHHCKHX BOeHHbIX oSHaponoBaji hckobckhh nenyraT JleB LLDiocSepr.
IlpaBnoH OKa3ajiocb nepBoe coo6meHHe, o hcm CBuncrcjibCTByiOT iiohbhbhjhcch b Bbi6yrax MorHJibi ncKOBCKHx nccam iihkob Jleomina KnHaTKHHa h AjiCKcaunpa OcnnoBa.
Mhhhctp oSopoHbi Ccpi cil IHoray h KOMaiinyiomHH B/(B BnanHMHp IUaMaHOB yraepacnaiOT, hto 76-a nHBH3na He npHHHMajia ynacTHa b 6oeBbix hchctbmhx Ha TeppHTopnn YKpaHHbi h, cooTBeTCTBeHHO, He noHecjia Socbbix noTepb.
BymHH cnyacHJi b bohhcxoh nacTH N°73612, xoTopaa iiocioamio iiHCJiOHupycTCH b YnbaHOBCxe, h 6bui 3aMecTHTeneM KOManniipa 4 BiBoaa 4 poTbi 3 1 -M iBapnciicKoii oracjibiioH nccairmomTypMOBOH opHi aabi B^B. npeanojiO/XH'icjibnaa nara cMcpi n BymHHa — 26 aBrycTa 2014 roaa.
BojibmHHCTBO noraOmHx cjiyacmiH b rurm nacTHx B^B, cociaBJHnomHx MHpoTBopnecxHH xopnyc PO o6mcii HHCJieHHOCTbio 5 tbicxh 6 ohu,ob.
Ilo uamibiM pouHbix, yexajin Ha ywcnna b PocroBCkyio oSjiaci b h noi nSjin 25 aBrycTa. 98 -a iBapacncKaa B03uyHjno-.uccam naa uhbh3hh, unaiounpoBannax b HBaHOBCKOH h Koctpomckoh oSjiacTax — nornSun KOHTpaKTHHKH Ccpi cn Cejie3HeB (noxopoHeH 2 ceHT»6pa bo Bjia^HMHpe) h Anapcn nnununyk H3 Koctpomckoh oSjiacrn.
MecTHbie CMH nncajin o tom, hto moto CT p ejiKH Ba^HM JIapHOHOB, KoHCTaHTHH Ky3bMHH, Mapcejib ApanraHOB, BacHJiHH KapaBaeB, ApMeH /JaBoan, Aackcanup Bopohob noi nSjin jih6o «Ha rpaHHu,e c YKpaHHOH», jih6o bo Bp cm a yncnnn b Poctobckoh oSjiacrn.
Ajicxcaiuip BapaHOB, Ccprcii Bojikob, ^mhtphh r anmi, BacHJiHH repacHMnyx, Ajickcch Kapnemco, TjieyacaH KHHH6aeB, Jleomm KHHaTXHH, Ahtoh KopojieHKO, Ajicxcaiuip KyjiHKOB, MaxcHM Me3emi,eB, Ajicxcaiuip OcnnoB, HBaH Cokoji.
Oh iioipcOoBaji npoBepHTb HiK|)opMauMio o i mScjim Ha TeppHTopHH YxpaHHbi pocchhcxhx BOcmiocjiy>xauiHx.
Pobho ncpc3 Mccau Bopnc HeMH,OB 6biJi y6nT, a r cucpajibiiaa npoxypaTypa Tax h He OTBeTHJia Ha 3anpoc nojiHTHxa. rjiaea 7.
BoeHTopr BjiajHMHpa IlyTHHa Bbiciyiiaa ncpeji /xypnajiHCiaMH 4 MapTa 2014 rojia, Bjia^HMHp IlyTHH onpoBepr ynacTHe BOeHHbIX H3 POCCHH B SjIOXHpOBaHHH yXpaHHCXHX HaCTCH Ha TeppHTOpHH nOJiyOCTpOBa KpbIM. no CHOBaM iipc3Hjicma, 3 th /iciiCTBiia ocymecTBjiajiH mckjiiomhicjibiio «CHJibi mcctiiom caMOo6opoHbi», a opMa Boopy/xcmibix jiiojicm 6bma noxo>xa Ha poccHilcxyio b cb»3h c tcm, hto OHa CBoSoflHO nponaeTca b Mara3HHax.
Cero/pia Tax Ha3biBaeMbie «onojiHemi,bi 71oii6acca» hmciot ihhpoxhh accopTHMcm BOopy>xeHHH, BXJHOHaa TaHXH, caMOxoflHbie apTHJiJiepHHCXHe ycTaHOBXH, cmctcmbi 3ajinoBoro on ia h caMoe pa3HOo6pa3Hoe crpcjiKOBOC opy>XHe.
Pocchhcxhc oHu,HajibHbie jiHu,a TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 81 LIBER OTpHu,aK)T aKT nocTaBOK BoeHHOH TexHHKH b ,H,OH6acc.
HaciriHHKauMH tcxiihkh, KOTopaa nocTynaeT Ha Boopyacemie cenapaTHCTOB H3 naciCH apMHH PcD, ocjiO/Knacica TeM, hto h poccHHCKaa, h yicpaHHCKaa apMHH Hcnojib3yiOT b OCHOBHOM CTapoe COBeTCKOe BOOpy'/KClIHC H BOeHHyiO TeXHHKy.
B to ace BpcxiM xapaKTep Oocbbix uchctbiih h hx hhtchchbhoctb He /loiiycKaior hhoto B apnama, KpoMe iiocroMiinoro o6ccncHCiina «chji cenapaTHCTOB)) oocupniiacaMH c TeppHTopHH Pocchh.
TaKHM o6pa30M, oflHH o6mHH Bee SoenpHnacoB ajih o^Horo 3ajina cocTaBJiaeT 6ojiee 2 tohh.
B cjiynac HHTeHCHBHbix Socbbix hcmctbmh (xax 3to 6biJio b panouc ,H,e6ajibii,eBa b Hanajie 2015 ro^a), TaKoil SoeKOMiuieKT pacxoAyeTca 3a ^eHb.
Oc'iacica onpeacjiH i b, ckojibkhmh TaHKaMH h PC30 pacnonaraioT eenapaTHCTbi.
H3 3Toro KOJiHMcei Ba, no flaHHbiM 3KcnepTa, 23 TaHKa, 56 EMIT n EM,!],, 26 ETP, 19 CAY, 17 6yKcnpyeMbix opy^nn, 2 PC30 fjbijin aaxBaMCiibi cenapaTHCTaMn y BOopy>KeHHbix chji YKpanHbi.
Tla’/KC ecjiH couiacH i bca c THnoTe30H, hto eenapaTHCTbi boioiot Ha Tpoc|)cmiOH TexHHKe h KynnjiH BOOpy’/KClIHC y KOppyMnHpOBaHHbIX yKpaHHCKHX BOeHHbIX, IICB03M0/KII0 iipCHC'iaBH I b, KaK B pa3rap Socbbix xichctbhh KapaBaHbi rpy30BHK0B cboSohiio iicpeaBHi aioica ryua h oSpanto Hepe3 JIHHHK) 4>pOHTa.
HanpHMep, b noKJianc mypnpyiOT BbiCTpejibi k pyMiiOMy npoTHBOTaHKOBOMy rpaHaTOMeTy Pnr-7, H3 MapKHpOBKH KOTOpbIX CJICHyCT, HTO OHH lipOH3BCHCI[b[ Ha laBOHC HMeHH ^CITHpCBa b KoBpoBe b 2001 rofly.
CooSmaeTca Taicace, hto b pyKH yKpaHHCKHX BoeHHbix nonaji pyHHoil oraeMeT MPO-A, ocnaiHcmibiii icp m o6op h m cc k h m SoenpmiacoM (rpaimoii oSbCMiioio B3pbiBa). 3to poecHHCKoe opy>KHe iiHKorna He npoaaBajiocb npyiHM rocyzjapcTBaM. ,H,OKa3aHO npHcyrcTBHe b ^OH6acce TaHKOB T-72E3 — 3to nocjieflHaa MOflepHH3HpoBaHHaa MO^ejib flOBOJibHO CTaporo TaHKa 6bma 3aBepmeHa b Pocchh b 2013-om h HHKor#a He iiociaBJiajiacb Ha TKCiiopr.
B cepcaunc f|)CBpaj ih 2015 i oaa BHacopcrncipaiop 3ac])MKCMpoBaj[ Ha yjiHu,e OSopohhoh ncpc,UBH/KCi[MC caMOxoAHoro 3eHHTHoro paKeTHO-nymeHHoro KOMnjieKca «riaHu,Hpb-Cl"". ^aHHBIH KOMnJieKC HBJIHCTCH pa3pa6oTKOH pOCCHHCKOH BOeHHOH npOMBIHIJieHHOCTH H 3KCIIOpiHpyC'ICH B HeKOTOpbie CTpaHBI MHpa.
CoBepmeHHO oneBHAHO, hto 3Ta TexHHKa Moraa nocTynHTb b floHSacc TOJibKO nepe3 pocchhckoyKpaHHCKyio rpaHHu,y.
IIoCTaBKH B 0 Opy>KeHHH B 30Hy KOI lJ[ HK'i a IICB03M0/KII0 paccMaTpHBaTb mianc, xax BoeHHoe BMemaTejibCTBO b ACJia coccahcio l Ocyaapci Ba. rjiaea 8.
TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 84 LIBER 17 Hiojia, b fleHb Kai aci pobi Eohht 777, rocyaapcTBcmibic HiK|K)pMai cm c i Ba HTAP-TACC h PHA «Hobocth» 3BMBHJIH, hto «oi[OJiMcnubi» c6hjih caMOJieT AH-26 b paiionc ropoaa Tope3.
H SoeBHKH, h poccHHCKHe CMH Ha3biBaiOT MecTO ero KpymeHHa (paiiOH ropoaa Tope3 TIoiicukoh oSjiacxH) h Bp cm a nancm-ia caMOJieTa , KOTopbie tohho coBna/taior c MecTOM n BpeMeHeM KaTacTpobi Majia3HHCKoro Eohht 777.
Omiako k Bcicpy, kor.ua pcajibiiaa KapTHHa cjiyHHBineroca iipoacnac'ica, nouoSiibic aaaBJicnna upckpamaiOTca.
EcJIH 3TO 6bIJI KOI rcjiya, 3TO He 6biJi aKT TeppopH3Ma», — cica3aji Hypkiin.
KaK 3aMeTajiH cjiejbi nocjie i hScjih Eohht poccHHCKHe CMH iianajiH 03ByHHBaTb ojmy 3a apyi oii pa3JiHHHbie BepcHH cjiyHHBuieHca iparcaHH. no cym, kpcMJiCBCkaa nponaraH.ua uajia CTapT HHopMau,HOHHOH cneifoneparuiH, HanpaBJieHHoii Ha couuaimc CBoero poua «ubimoboh 3aBecbi» BOKpyr paccjicuoBaima npHHHH KpymeHHa Majia3HHCKoro caMOJieTa.
H,ejibio cneu,onepaH,HH, cyua no BceMy, ciajio coKpbiTHe npHHacTHOCTH k Tpareumi eenapaTHCTOB, BOopyaceHHbix pocchhckhm 3 chhth o -p axeTHbiM komiijickxom.
L Icpe3 neTbipe ana nocjie KpymeHHa «nepBbiil KaHaji» poccHHCKoro TejiCBnucnna 03ByHHJi BepcHio r cimrra6a, hto Eohht obiji c6ht ynpamiCKHM mTypMOBHKOM CY-25.
B icoaaaace 6bmo Hcnoab30BaHO oto Boemioro caMoaeTa, noxoacero Ha Cy-27, a b peiiop ia’/KC «nepBoro KaHaaa» ynoMHHaeTca MhF-29.
Ha (]xno «nepBoro KaHaaa» bhhcii aaponop i HoncuKa, a EoHHr 6bia c6ht npHMepHO b 50 KHaoMeTpax ot Hero.
BpeMa, yKa3aHHoe Ha noa^eJibiiOM Koaaaace «nepBoro KaHaaa» — UTC — oio BceMHpHO CKOopawiHpoBamioe BpeMa — BpeMa no rpHHBHHy.
PaccJiejoeaHHe CTpaHbi, noTepaBnine cbohx i paacaan b otoh 'iparcanH, kuk hhkto apyron, 3aHHTepecoBaHbi b ycTaHOBaeHHH hcthhm h onpeacjiciiHH bhhobhmx.
B hbcthocth, /xypnajiHCTbi HeMeifXHx TenexaHajiOB WDR h TBK, a Taxxce ra3eTbi SiidDeutsche Zeitung noSbiBajin 6 jih 3 ropo.ua Cnoxnoc, b MecTe npcunojiaracMoro 3anycxa paxeTbi 3PK «Eyx Ml"", h onpocnjin MecTHbix /khicjich.
Cjieji Haj Tope3QM HoKyMcmajibiibiM 1 i our Bcp vktic i 1 m c m toto, hto Majia3HHCXHH «Bohht» c6ht paxeTOH KJiacca «3CMJ[a-B03ayx», aaiiyuicmiOH c ycTaHOBKH «ByK», pacnojiO/XcmiOM Ha TeppHTOpHH, noAKOHTpojibHOH cenapaTHCTaM b TIoiichoh oSjiacTH, hbjihctch (JiOTOCbeMxa, cucjiannaa xcHTejieM ropo.ua Tope3 npH6jiH3HTejibHO ncpea 3-4 MHHyrbi nocjie 3anycxa paxeTbi.
Ha OTorpaHax 3anenaTJieH HHBepcHOHHbiH cjicu ot paxeTbi Ha caMOM paHHeM, CTapTOBOM ynacTKe ee TpaexTopHH. ^aHHbiH cjicji, onncbiBaeMbiH xax «ctoji6 HbiMa», bhucjih miioi hc MecTHbie >xhtcjih.to noflTBepxyiaeTca CBnucrcjibCTBaMH, coSpamibiMH KoppccnoHucmoM arenrcTBa Reuters y /Khicjich nocejiKa Kpacnbiiu OxTxSpb, nan rojiOBaMH KOTopbix nponuia iojibko hto uanyuiennau paxcra.
Hcpca Hecxojibxo nacoB nocjie Kaiacipobi «BoHHra» b coifHajibHbix ccthx noaBHJiacb Ha co cjichom ot 3anycxa paxeTbi aBTopcTBa ojinoro H3 MecTHbix /khicjich.
P occHHCKOMy acypHajiHCTy Cepreio IlapxoMeHKO yaajiocb iiairtH aBTopa BbnncynoManyroro oto h nojiyHHTb ot Hero opnrHHaji CHHMKa.
Becb 3tot «Mycop» nojiyHHJica npi-i cacaran nojiHopa3MepHbix opMaTa, HeoSxoanMoro fljia OTorpaHH 3aicaHKH b TBHTTep.
B opniHiiajic (Jdoto ropa3ao CBeTJiee Toro Bapnama, KOTopbiH 6biJi onySjiHKOBaH 17 rnojia 2014 roaa.
CxBaran ee h SpocHJicn no jiccthhhc Ha icpbimy, hto6m cna i b orryaa. lUejiKiiyji b nepBbin pa3.
IIotom iiOBepnyjica h yBHacji c apyrofi CTopoHbi, Ha ceBepe (to ecTb, Kaic pa3 b nanpaBJiciiHH TpaSoBa) ctojio rycToro Hcpno-CHnero abiMa.
I1ojic3 Ha apyryio CTopoHy KpbirnH, hto6bi cna i b orryaa, rac He MemaiOT npoBoaa h aHTeHHbi.
CjicayiouiHH mar aHajiH3a — nonbiTKa ono3HaTb 3 th xapaKTepHbie ncrajiH Ha «Bimc CBepxy», to ecTb Ha Kaapax cnyTHHKOBOH cbcmkh.
Tbkhx KaapoB b HameM pacnopaaceHHH aoBOJibiio mhoto, h ohh cacjiaiibi b OMCiib xopouieM, noapoSnoM pa3pemeHHH h jrocryi 1 1 1 bi, b hbcthocth, noj[b30Bai cj[aM nporpaMMbi Google Earth.
TaKaa noti-inna yno6na mi a paaMcmcima paKcmoM ycTaHOBKHi npavio c flopora MMCC'iea cbC3a Hepe3 HemnpoKyK), ho rycTyio Jieconojiocy, Koropaa cKpbiBaeT none ot nocTopoHHHx rna3.
UHEEtas European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 89 rjiaea 9.
IIpH 3TOM WpHflHHeCKH KpeMJIb TaK h He npH3Haji cyBepeHHTeT caMonpoB03rjiameHHbix pecnyOjiHK h no-npe>KHeMy oHu,HajibHO CHHTaeT HX TeppHTOpHK) laCTbiO YKpaHHbi.
AHajIOTHHHyK) flOJDKHOCTb B «JIHP» 3aHHJl flpyTOH pOCCHHCKHH rpa>Kaai[Hi[ — MapaT EawnpoB, nojiHTTexHOJior, co'i pyaiwMaBWHH c npaBwrejibCTBOM Pep.
PaHee Ha TeppwropHH YKpaHHbi noaBHJiHCb h apyiTtc poecHHCKHe rpaacaaHe, cbirpaBrnne KwoneByio pojib b opraHH3au,HH Boopy/Kcmioi o conpoTHBjieHHa mcctiiom BJiacTH b /JonSaccc.
B nacTHOCTH, wupoKyio H3BecTHOCTb npHoOpea OTCTaBHOH oHu,ep pocchhckhx cncucjiy/KO Hropb r npKHH , KOTopbiil ycneji noynacTBOBaTb b onepau,HH no npHCoeaHiicnMio KpbiMa k P<t> h coaaaji BOopyaceHHbiH eenapaTHCTOB b l opoae CnaBaHCK, ncKOiopoc Bpevia yaepjKHBaa ero non KOHTpojieM h orSMBaa ai aKH yKpaHHCKHx chjiobhkob.
Bopoaaii h r hpkhh 3HaKOMbi He nepBbiH roa. b CBoe Bpcwa r npKnn B03rjiaBJuui aiy>K6y 6e3onacHOCTH b HHBecTHH,HOHHOM onae «Mapmaji-KanHTaji», npnnanJiOKawcM poecHHCKOMy 6H3HecMeHy KoHCTaHTHHy MajioCCBy.
IIpaBOOxpaHHTejibHbie opraHbi YKpaHHbi CHHTaioT Manoc|)ecBa oahhm h 3 ocHOBHbix enoHeopoB SoeBHKOB Ha BOCTOKe YKpaHHbi.
TaioKe naBno 3Haio h yBaacaio noMomHHKa npewnema BnaancaaBa CypKOBa, KOTopbiil Bceraa OKa3biBaeT «,fl,HP» cepbe3Hyio noaaepacKy.
Bmi,e-cnHKep «peeny6jiHKaHCKoro TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 90 LIBER napjiaMeHTa» Bjiuahmhp MaxoBHH, xoMMemripya OTCTaBKy xojijicih, iioatbcpahji, mto 3aaBjici[HC riyniHJiHHbiM 6biJio naiiHcano m Mockbbi.
HanpHMep, nocT 3aMMHHHCTpa 3HepreTHKH «flHP» 3aHan JIcohha CnMyHHH, paHee paOoTaBHiHH c npoxpeMJieBCXofi opraHH3au,HeH «MecTHbie» h h ryp npo bub in h ii b noxa3aHHax ynacTHHXOB HeoHau,HCTCKOH rpyniiHpoBKH BOPH, coBepniHBniHx pan pe30HaHCHbix ySnHCTB h CMHiaBiunx, hto 3to ACJiacrca c caHXu,HH Kpcvnia.
Oh npa\io roBopHT, hto yrneji H3 pyxoBOACTBa «^HP» b pe3yjibTaTe AaBJicnna Kpcvnia.
B Kpeivuie BOcropacecTBOBajia nonHTHHecxaa jihiihh, opHcm npoBannaa Ha MHpHbie neperoBopbi, h AJia ototo TpeSoBajincb jiioah croBopnHBbie.
A a HHxaxoil ctobophhbocth He npoaBJiaji h noTOMy hx ipcSoBaiiHaM He eooTBeTCTBOBaji.
Bot h 6biji Bbiny/KACii ocTaBHTb cboh nocT», — aaaBHJi r npKHH b aHBape 2015 i oaa.
BHeuiHee ynpaBJiciinc H3 Mocxbbi, OAHaxo, He ciiocoOciByei naBCACiiHio nopa^xa Ha TeppHTopHH caMonpoB03raameHHbix pecnySjiHX, me npou,BeTaiOT xoppynu,Ha h npoH3BOJi. «flHP» h «JIHP» coTpacaiOT xpynHbie CKaiinajibi, CBa3aHHbie c pacnpcACJiciiHCvi ryMaHHTapHOH iiomolhh h3 Pocchh.
AjICKCCH M03T0B0H TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 91 LIBER CHflHT B AjIHCBCKC, OHH HHHeTO He HOJiyHHJIH OT «ryMaHHTapHbIX KOHBOeB», IlaBeJI /JpCMOB B IlepBOMaHCKe io/KC iimhci o He nojiynaji — a HMeio b BHfly, He nojiynajiH npocTbie jiiohh h ynpe>KfleHHa.
CniyauHa yacacHaa, npn 3 tom ecTb CBHacicJibC'i Ba npo/iaacH ryMaHHTapHOH noMOHjH Ha pbiHKax», — paccKa3aji Koop^HHaTop cPoHfla noMomn flcmSaccy TiieS Kophhjiob.
KpoMe Toro, b «JIHP» 3a<f)HKCHpoBaHbi cjiynan «iiapo,mib[x cynoB», KOTopbie acHC i Byio i BHe — flaace cnopHoro — ho xoTb Kaicoro-To npou,eccyajibHoro nojia, b kotopom paSoTaiOT cyflbi 0Hu,HajibHbie.
A bc/ib op\iaj[bno y Hero /ipyioil ceKTop, oh KypnpyeT A6xa3Hio h lO/Kiiyio OceTHK)», — roBopHT ^aHHJiOB. 3to Bbic'i yiuicnHC 3anHcaHO Ha bh/ico h onySanKOBano.
OopMajibHO oh OTBCHaeT 3 a Bonpocbi co'ipyaiiHMeci Ba c AOxaincil h IO)khoh Occrneil, ho eme npn Ha3HaneHHH oceHbio 2013 ro#a CypKOBa Ha nocT noMomranca npe3H^eHTa CTajio H3BecTHO, hto b xpyr ero HHTepecoB Boil/ter h YKpanna.
IlpcacraBHrcjiCH OjiHacailmero OKpyaceHHa CypKOBa, b nacTHOCTH, nco/inoKparno bh/icjih b Khcbc bo Bpevia peBOjnoifHOHHbix coOmthh Ha Mail/tane.
KpeMJieBCKaa nojiHTHKa b othohichkh «/lHP» h «JIHP» Kpailne 3aKpbiTa h Henpo3paHHa.
OflHaKO aKTbi npaMoro peryjinpoBaHHa hojihthkh 3thx hkoObi «He3aBHCHMbix pecny6jiHK» CKpbITb IICB03M0/KII0.
OaKTHHCCKH peHb H/ICT O C03#aHHH Ha BOCTOKe YKpaHHbi nccB/torocy/iaprcB, ynpaBjiseMbix H3 MocKBbi h no cym xBjnnoinnxoi MexaHH3MOM /taBJicnnn Ha 0HH,HajIbHbIH Khcb.
CoraacoBaHHe ycjiOBHH npcKpauicnHa oi na b floHSacce upononacanocb bcio noMb, npn 3tom oi|)Hu,HanbHO npcac raBH icjiH «napo,mibix pecny6nHK» b hhx He ynacTBOBanH, oao-uiaa HToroB 3 a HBcpbio.
KpOMe Bcero nponero, nomiHcaHHe motjio 03HanaTb h hx nojiHTHHecKyio (na h He TOJibKO nojiHTHHecKyio) CMepTb.
Ty/ia ace ncpc3 HeKOTopoe BpcMa noflHajiHCb h Opancya Onnaiui, h AHrena MepkCJib.
IIo Tiai 1 1 r biM «1>», BnanHMHp IlyTHH CKa3an KOJineraM, hto nano oObacHHTb Anckcaiuipy Saxapnciiko h Hropio IlnoTHHiiKOMy, iioncMy ohh HenpaBbi.
He no3ace ototo cpoxa nmicpbi cppaHu,HH h TepMaHHH yeuyT h Oonbuie nnkoi na He Bcpiiy i ca, h HHKaKHe neperoBopbi hh 0 hcm 6ynyi HeB03MoacHbi.
BnaunMnp nyTHH Bbirnen h CHOBa Bornen b neperoBopHyio, korna no hctchciihh cpoxa ynbTHMaTyMa ocraBaniicb hbc MHHyTbi.
Mhoihm h 3 6e>KeHu,eB yace iiCKyaa B03Bpaixiaxbc« H3-3a pa3pymeHHH, KOTopbiMH noABcpnincb l opoaa h C eJia B 30He KOHJIHKTa.
TaK, 18 aBrycTa 2014 b pe3yabTaTe oScxpcjia kojiohhbi 6eaceHii,eB co CTopoHbi cenapaTHCTOB iioi hSjio 15 MHpHbix /khicjich.
KojiOHHa noA ScjibiMH (jmaraMH BbiB03HJia ScaccnucB h3 HacejieHHbix nyHKTOB XpameBaToe h HoBOCBcniOBKa.
IIpaKTHHecKH Ha bcch TeppHTOpHH ,fl,on6acca ceroAHa ycraiiOBJiciibi MHoronHCJieHHbie SjlOKIIOCTbl.
Ilocjie ocboSoacaciihh ototo HacejieHHoro nyHKTa ot 6ocbhkob yKpaHHCKHMH CHJIOBHKaMH, Ha CTO TeppHTOpHH 6bIJIO o6liapyaCCIIO MaCCOBOe 3aXOpOHeHHe MecTHbix /Kh i cjich co cjieAaMH nbiTOK h H3A6BaTejibCTB Ha Teaax.
Eme b nepBbie ahh 3axBaTa CaaBaHCKa h paciiojiO/KCiniOH HenoAaJieKy f opjiobkh b peKe 6biJi o6napyaccii Tpyn Meemoro ACiiyraia TAS European Union Foreign Affairs Journal Special Edition May, 2015 www.eufaj.eu , eufaj @ libertas-institut.com 94 LIBER Bjia^HMHpa PbiOaxa.
Ero 3aaepacajiH oocbhkh h3 orpaaa oc|)nucpa pocchhcxhx cneii;cnyac6 Hropa Ee3Jiepa, a nocne nbiTOX h yOnHCTBa BbiOpocHJiH Tpyn b penxy.
HeMajio npHMepoB, xoraa cenapaTHCTbi 3aaepacHBaaH, noasepraJiH nbiTKaM h MaacBaicJibc i BaM rpaacaaHCXHX jihh,, He npHHHMaBniHx ynacTHe b BOopyacemiOM koik|)J[mktc.
CenapaTHCTbi Ha BOCTOxe YicpaHHbi imipoxo npiiMCinuoT TaxTHxy BeacniiH oraa H3 rycTOHacejieHHbix paiiOHOB h acHJioro cexTopa.
Pacnojiaraa oraeBbie tohkh b acnjibix aoMax, cenapaTHCTbi npoBOifHpyiOT oroHb no mhphwm /Khicjihm.
CBiiacTCJibciBa noaoSiibix ^eiiCTBHH iioaBJiHJiHCb b atjmpe poccHiicxoro TejieBHfleHHa.
Tax, 13 aHBapa 2015 roaa 6bia oOcipcjiaii yxpanHCXHH OaoxnocT Ha BbC3ae b ropoa BojmoBaxa co CTopoHbi /JoncuKa.
Ccpreft K., Boaomcp h opraHH3aTop oeciuiaiiibix ctohobbix aaa oeanbix, HeaaBHO Bbiiiy/xacmibiii 6oxaib H3 HoncrtKa Ha ocBoOo/xacinibie TeppHTopnH, cooSmrta, hio b Khpobcxom ot roaoaa yMepan 7 neaoBex, b CHeacHOM — 5, a b KpacHonapTH3aHCxe JlyraHCXOH oOaacTii — 68 hcjiobck. flpriHCM, no naSjnoaciiHMM MecTHbix, reaa yMepuinx iiepcBoaai no ropoay Ha canax, noTOMy h i o apyroro cpeacTBa ana ncpeMcmcniia MepTBeifOB TaM HeT. y MepiHHX OT aHCTpOHH 00p\1HHI0T, XaX yMepiHHX OT ccpacmioi o npHCTyna.
YMy HenocTHacHMO, mo moan yMHpaiOT ot roaoaa npn naSrnbix npoBH3neH Mara3HHax.
CaMH Jinacpbi cenapaTHCTOB npH3HaiOT, hio anaMHicjibiiaH Hacib rpy30B pa3BopoBbiBaeTca.
HanpnMep, H3BecTHbiH KOMaH^Hp OOCBMKOB ApceHHH IlaBJIOB 3BHBHJI B CBpajie 2015 roaa, hto npn pacnpcacjiciiMH ryMaHHTapHOH iiomolhh «ypoBeHb BopoBCTBa 3auiKajiHBaeT». «ryMaHHTapHbie kohboh HpucaacaiOT, ho lyMaiiniapnaH noMOujb He aoxoflHT», — noflnepKHyji oh.
IJ,eHbi b Mara3HHax Ha TeppHTopHH, noaKom pojibiiofi eenapaTHCTaM, 3aMeTHO Bbirne, hcm b yKpaHHCKHx oOjiac'iax.
PaOo'iaioi HexoTopbie rnaxTbi, BKjnonaa HejierajibHbie, a Taxace npcanp nan-ia jioncuKoro OJiHiapxa PnHaTa AxMeTOBa.
K ou,eHKe ctohmocth bocmiioh KaMnaHHH IlyTHHa Ha TeppHTopHH YKpaHHbi HyacHO noaxoaHTb c aeyx ctopoh.
Bo-nepBbix, iico6xo.hh mo nocwraTb, ckojibko cioai Pocchh H enocpeacTBeHHO Oocbbic aeHCTBHa, b KOTopbix aKTHBHO ynacTByioT poccHHCKne «i H6pHaiibic» BoilcKa 3to 6yaeT npaMaa u,eHa BOHHbi, h, OHCBHano, OHa 6yacT He cjihihkom BCJiHKa b MacniTaSax l ocyaapci Ba.
Bo-BTopwx, BaacHO npoaHajiH3HpoBaTb KOCBeHHyio u,eHy, KOTopaa CBaaana c BBeaeHHbiMH npoTHB pOCCHHCKHX OailKOB H KOMnaHHH CaHKU,H3MH, C lipOHOBOJIbCTBCmiblM 3M6apTO, aCCHMeTpHHHO BBeaeHHbiM b OTBeT Pocchch, c HiK|ai[>iuHCH h aeBajibBaii,HeH, c naaeHHeM bkohomhkh.
H i oi o — 46 Mapa.pySncM 3a 10 Mecau,eB bohhbi hjih 4,6 Mapa. pySaeii b Mecau, npaMbix pacxoaoB Ha «ao6poBoabHCB». floSaBHM k 3TOMy 15% pacxoflOB Ha ab'ciuiyaiauHio, peMOHT, oScayacHBaHHe bociiiiom TexHHKH, Ha ee TpaHcnopTHpoBicy c pocchhckhx CKaaaoB — clhc 7 MHaanapaoB pySacii.
C OHHOH CTOpOHbl, 3 TO He TaK MHOTO, CCJIH yHHTbiBaTb, hto lOHOBbic pacxoflbi cacpaj[biioio Sioaarcia Pocchh cociaBJiaioi 15 TpHjniHOHOB pySacii.
Ho noxa 6oeBbie hchctbmh He OKOimciibi ou,eHHTb aaace npHMepHO Macixn aS 3thx pa3pymeHHH He npcaciaBJiacica bobmo’/Kiibim.
Ilo jiamibiM YnpaBjieHHa OOH no KOopannannH ryMaHHTapHbix BonpocoB, whcjio 6c>KcnncB, yc3/KaiouiHx b jipyiTtc pernoHbi YKpaHHbi n b Pocchio, npnMepHO paBHbi MC/K'ay co6oii 150, to ecTb k iiacroaiHCMy BpeMemi MO>Kno roBopnTb o najiHMHH npnMepHO iioJiyMHJuiHona yKpanHCKnx SoKCiincB b pa3Hbix pernoHax Poccnn.
Ee peajiH3au,H a iiobbojiht jiobccth ypoBeHb acH3HH Haceaemia h pa3BHTHa skohomhkh b KpbiMy ^0 cpeAHepoecHHCKoro.
B npaBHTejibCTBeHHOH nporpaMMe ecTb ncSojibinaa Haci b pacxoaoB, xoTopwe /ioji/Kiibi 6biTb npoHHaHCHpoBaHbi 3 a cm ex Tax Ha3biBaeMbix BncOioaaccxiibix hctohhhkob.
Tax, HanpHMep, «TexnpoM3xcnopT», floneproia KOMiianna rocxopnopau,HH «PocTex», xoTopyio B03rjiaBJiaeT jrpyi IlyTHHa clhc c cobctcxhx BpeMeH CepreM Mcmc30b, aojiacua npoHHaHCHpoBaTb CTpoHTejibCTBO TenjiOBbix 3JiexTpocTaHu,HH b KpbiMy.
Ho, pa3yMeeTca, caejiano 3to Synex He b nopauxe OjiaroTBopmcjibiiocTH — Bee HHBecTHu,HH Ha CTpoHTejibCTBO 3THX T3C H COOTBCTC I ByiOLHHH £0X0# 6y,HyX B03BpaUiCIIb[ 3a CHC'I yCTaHOBJieHHOH npaBHTejibCTBOM Pocchh hjui iioipcSmcjiCH EBponeHexoH hucth Pocchh h Ypajia naaSaBKn 3a MOHJHOCTb.
CyMMa 3THX IIJia'I C/XCH COCTaBHT OXOJIO 20 MHJIJIHapaOB pySjICH b im KHdlJlHUHA Pe3yjibTaTOM BHeuiHeH hojihthxh KpeMna CTajio bbchciihc aanamibix caHXu,HH b OTHomeHHH poecHHCXHx hhhobhhxob, 6H3HecMeHOB h xoMnaHHH, no,zwepacaBmHX onepaiimo B KpbiMy.
CjiO/Xiio ou,eHHTb ymep6 tbxhx Mep, xax, HanpHMep, 3anpeT Ha nocTaBxy o6opyn;oBaHHa h KOMiuieKiyiOLHHx njia BoeHHoro npoH3BOflCTBa.
B pe3yjibTaTe fljia BbinnaTbi BHeniHHx flOJiroB pocchhckhm 3acMLUHKa\i npHnuiocb noBbimaTb cnpoc Ha HHOCTpaHHyto BajnoTy Ha BHyrpeHHeM pbiHKe oceHbio 2014 i oaa, hto npHBejio k oSBajibiiOMy iiaaciiHio Kypca py6jia h CKanKy mik])jhihmh.
Pocchb oSjiaaac'i KpynHeHiHHMH 3anacaMH iiJioaopoanbix 3CMCJib, ho Harne cejibCKoe X03BHCTB0 He MoaceT HaKopMHTb CBoe HacejieHHe.
B 2013 rofly noTpeSHTejibCKaa hhiJijihiihh b Pocchh cocTaBHJia 6,5%. 3a 12 Mecau,eB c MOMeHTa npHeoeflHHeHHa KpbiMa OHa ycKopnaacb #o 17%, chh3hb Ha 11,5% #oxoflbi h cSepeaceHHa poccnaH. no ou,eHKe BaHKa Pocchh, non™ 80% 3Toro ycKopeHna CBimHO c XlCBajibBauHCH py6jia, a 20% — c 3anpeTOM Ha HMnopT upoHOBOJibCTBiia.
Floim no, hto Ha XlCBajibBauHio py6aa iiobjihmjih He TOJibKO caHKu,HH, ho h iiaaciinc u,eH Ha ncc|nb.
Ha TeppHTopHH Pocchh ^eHCTByiOT i pciinpoBOMiibic Jiarepa fljia 6ocbhkob, b CTopoHy yKpanHCKOH rpaHHu,bi ABHacyrca cocTaBbi c TaHKaMH, Jimicpbi cenapaTHCTOB coraacyiOT achctbmh b Kpeivuie.
Ho Bpoae KaK h He BOioeM. nyTHH Ha npaMbie Bonpocw yBepeHHO MOTaeT tojioboh, HypKHH b CoB6e3e OOH raeBHO OTpHu,aeT Bee oSbuiiciimh b aupcc KpeMJia.
Hh nyTHHy, hh ero reHepajiaM TaK h He xBamjio MyacecTBa npH3HaTb c|iaKi BoemiOH arpeccHH npoTHB YKpaHHbi.
MaaouyniHoe BpaHbe h jiHii,eMepHe npciioanoca ica KaK BCJiiiKaa nojiHTHHecKaa viyapoci TpycjiHBaa h no^Jiaa BOHHa, paaBaaaimaa nyTHHbiM, xtoporo oSoHAcrca HauieM CTpaHe.
HeT b MHpe 6onee 6 jih3koto h poanoro AJia poccuan napoaa, hcm yKpammu. to Harnn opai bcn — 6e3 bchkoio nacjioca, h BOHHy MeacAy poccnanaMn h yKpaHHii,aMH b ^OHSacce i[CB03MO/Kno xapaKTepH30BaTb miawc KaK 6paToy6HHCTBeHHyio.
H CfleJiaTb 3TO CMOaceT TOJIbKO eaM pOCCHHCKHH HapOA. ^aBaii i c ocTaHOBHM 3Ty BOHHy BMecTe.
You can send all orders directly to verlag@Jibertas-institut.com, or go to every bookshop (print versions only), or you can go also to Amazon for print or electronic versions.
