This article evaluates whether these claims hold any weight under international law.
In addition the general trends in contemporary Russian approaches to international law are outlined and their effects on its foreign policy are examined.
Russia’s subsequent actions in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in the course of 2014 – 2016 amounted to military aggression against Ukraine, illegal occupation of part of its territory, killings of civilian population, and tortures perpetrated on soldiers of the Ukrainian Armed Forces and volunteers.
The recent developments in different parts of the world serve as evidence of the global consequences of the afore-mentioned events, which could lead to the collapse of the international legal order.
Thus, should the international community fail to stop the military aggression of the Russian Federation against Ukraine, restore the previous status quo, make Russia pay for the harm it has inflicted, and hold the perpetrators of crimes to accountability, the global community of states may experience grave consequences.
At the same time, the efforts of Ukraine and other states, as well as those of the EU and international organisations, can be successful only when the international community comes together, not only to rebut Russia’s claims with respect to Crimea and Ukraine, but also to hold Russia accountable for its approaches to legal interactions with other states.
This article critically analyses the legal arguments put forward by the Russian scholar­ ship concerning the annexation of Crimea and attempts to assess their validity.
The relevant Russian legal doctrine includes works by N Abdullayev, Ye.
Kopytkova, V Kryazhkov, V Lazyer, K Sazonova, L Tarasova, V Tolstykh, V Tomsinov, and others.
During the course of this examination the article naturally examines relevant writings of foreign scholars as well.
Russia’s claim that the use force against Ukraine was a necessary measure to defend Russian nationals and compatriots The fact that the Russian Armed Forces were used in February – March 2014 has long ceased to be denied.
In addition to the clear evidence, it has been confirmed by some Russian officials.
As for the protection of the nationals abroad as a form of permissible self-defence, there are five main conditions that must be met in order to deploy force in the territory of another state.
These conditions have been coined and are advocated by some international and Russian scholars and commentators.
At the same time, the Council of Europe, the OSCE and the EU have consistently argued that the Russian allegations are false.
It was actually the Russian “green men”, the Russian-controlled “self-defence” forces, and the self-proclaimed Crimean government that committed gross violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the peninsula, namely the right to life, security, liberty, inviolability of person and property, etc.
These and many other violations in this field have been reported by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights.
It is also impossible to assert the absence of other peaceful means to resolve the conflict in order to claim the necessity to employ the last-resort option, which is self-defence.
There had been no civil strife in the Crimean Peninsula triggering the necessity for Russia to use force.
Russia had not made any attempts to “find a solution” while diplomacy was still available as an effective and practicable tool to resolve the crisis.
Moreover, the Russian Federation was implementing the military occupation of the Crimean Pen­insula and preparing its annexation simultaneously with the civil protests in Kyiv and other cities of Ukraine.
It had been an undercover operation (Russians constantly talked about the “self-defence forces of Crimea”) until V Putin acknowledged the use of force post factum in mid-April 2014.
These circumstances confirm that Russia’s second argument is, based on the facts, legally and factually deficient.
Another necessary condition to justify the legal use of force is that an operation be of a humanitarian nature with the aim of rescuing citizens as the only purpose and goal of a military operation.
The inconsistency between Russia’s actions and the nature and goals of such a “humanitarian operation”, as proclaimed by Russia, is self-evident.
Nor can Russia’s occupation and annexation of the Crimean part of Ukrainian territory in 2014 be regarded as a proportional or adequate measure.
In the first place, as has been pointed out, it did not involve the protection of citizens’ rights.
As far as the time limit is concerned, the occupation of the peninsula continued right up until Russia’s annexation of Crimea, which is permanent.
In addition such methods as the seizure of Ukrainian military premises, warships and infrastructure, the persecution of pro-Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar activists etc., can hardly be labelled a proportional and adequate measure.
While international law requires that all the above-mentioned conditions be met in order to justify the use of force in a situation such as the one at hand, Russia’s actions did not meet a single one of them.
International law knows no such concept as the armed protection of compatriots, Russia includes the entire multi-ethnic population of Crimea (“Krymchane” ) as “compatriots”; while under international law one can only refer to nationals of a state.
The case of Crimea does not create legal grounds to apply R2P – there was no imminent risk of genocide, crimes against humanity, or ethnic cleansing in Crimea.
Russia’s actions contradict the R2P concept as defined by the UN,18 as Russia failed to initiate a non-coercive and non-violent response to the alleged violations of human rights, whereby preventive measures consisting of diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful means are primarily applied.
The Russian response also contradicts the key elements of the R2P concept – the possibility to apply force only when all other options (including sanctions and investigations against the perpetrators) have been exhausted and only following a decision of the UN Security Council in accordance with Chapter VII of the UN Charter.
Hence, analysis of the February – March 2014 events in Crimea confirms that the Russian Federation did not have any legal grounds to rely on any of the abovementioned concepts concerning protection of citizens abroad.
Moreover, “the use of force to protect compatriots” rhetoric employed by the Russian senior officials is not even developed in international law.
Russia’s characterization of its use of force as a lawful response to a request by the legitimate leaders of Ukraine and Crimea for assistance The Russian Federation has repeatedly claimed that V Yanukovych and the self-proclaimed leaders of Crimea requested an armed intervention.
Chaos and anarchy reign in the country, and people’s lives, safety and human rights are under threat, particularly in the south-east and in Crimea.
With the influence of Western countries, open acts of terror and violence are being perpetrated and people are being persecuted on political and linguistic grounds.
I, therefore, appeal to the President of Russia, V Putin, to use the armed forces of the Russian Federation to restore law and order, peace and stability and to protect the people of Ukraine.
However, we cannot remain indifferent if we see that they are being persecuted, destroyed and humiliated.
It should be noted that, in his interview for the Russian film “Crimea.
The Way Home”, Putin acknowledged that he had decided to conduct the military operation to “return Crimea” back to Russia and gave the necessary orders to the military and security forces on 22 February 2014.22 It is obvious that these orders were being executed from 22 February through 9 March, the date of his interview.
Firstly, in accor­ dance with the Constitution of Ukraine, the President of Ukraine has no authority to appeal for the deployment of foreign armed forces (Art. contains an exhaustive list of his powers).23 Secondly, at the time of his request Yanukovych had already been removed from the office; the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine adopted a decision to hold early presidential elections on 23 February 2014, and O Turchynov was assigned the duties of the President.
Subsequently, Yanukovych was not recognised as President of Ukraine by the state itself nor by foreign states and international organisations.
It is important to note that the Russian Federation, by negotiating with a new Ukrainian government and maintaining diplomatic and other relations, itself recognized its legitimacy and, therefore, the legitimacy of the removal of Yanukovych (the initial statements about a “military takeover” were not supported by the 20 Путин получил просьбу Януковича об использовании ВС РФ на Украине [Putin received Yanukovych’s request to use force in Ukraine], РИА Новости, 4 April 2014.
Moreover, later Russia recognized newly-elected President P Poroshenko.
S Aksyonov had no legal grounds to hold the post of the head of the Crimean government.
In accordance with Art. of the Law of Ukraine “On the Council of Ministers of the ARC” of 2011, the Verkhovna Rada of the ARC appoints the head of government in Crimea upon the consent of the President of Ukraine.
Neither the Council of Ministers nor any other organ of Crimea had the authority to appeal to foreign states with a request to use force in the peninsula.
Thirdly, there was no legal basis for the use of foreign military forces on the territory of Ukraine.
Grant, it is useful to look into the content of the invitation to intervene.
In the case at hand, a foreign state was invited to oust the military and law enforcement agencies of Ukraine, with the temporal or geographical scope of its action being unidentified.
Moreover, the two states did not have any previously established cooperation mechanisms providing for such actions.
Other foreign commentators are also convinced that neither Yanukovych nor Aksyonov had the right to invite Russia to use force in Ukraine.
Russia’s use of force in the peninsula to carry out the military operation to “return Crimea”, which was acknowledged by the Russian senior officials and illustrated by many facts on the ground, is in contradiction with fundamental principles of international law.
The actual actions by the Russian Federation can only be qualified as an armed attack and aggression against Ukraine in light of Art. of the UN Charter, other provisions of the Charter, and the provisions of the General Assembly Resolution 3314 , with its attached Definition of Aggression.
Most impor25 Прем’єр Криму перепідпорядкував собі силові структури і попросив допомоги у Путіна , Лівий берег, 1 March 2014.
Nevertheless the firing of weapons is only one of the acts of aggression under international law, indicated in particular in the UNGA resolution as well as the Rome Statute.
It is difficult to decide which, among a multi­ tude of acts and actions, to choose to demonstrate that Russia engaged in the abovementioned acts of aggression, not to mention that in fact the use of firepower did take place.
Where have you seen an intervention without a single shot fired?], ТСН, 18 March 2014.
Russian troops fire ‘warning shots’ at Crimea airbase, The Telegraph, 4 March 2014; Crimea: Shots fired at military base in Simferopol, BBC News, 18 March 2014.
The invitations as such are at odds with the constitutional law of Ukraine and the relevant concepts of international law.
In fact, the Russian Federation has committed an armed attack, which is an act of aggression against Ukraine.
The majority of scholars deny a general right to secede,40 which is borne out by the practice., 42 V Nanda emphasises “the uncertainty of the status of secession, which is neither permitted nor prohibited in international law”, noting that the International Court of Justice has not shed light on the issue.
In general, secession is regarded as an exception which can be recognised as lawful only under extraordinary circumstances.
In this context, Russia, in its turn, has been consistent in advocating the sanctity of the principle of the territorial integrity of states.
It should be noted that there is a difference between “people” as an entity on one hand, and “indigenous people” or a “minority” as entities on the other hand.
The difference lies in the fact of the dominant position in the existing state and numerical superiority as characteristics of a “people”, which characteristics are not required for an “indigenous people” or “minority”.50 Consequently, a “people” is entitled to both internal and external self-determination, whereas an indigenous people and/or minority – only to internal self-determination, that is self-determination within an existing state.
Russians, including those in Crimea, are a national minority in Ukraine.
Under international law, an ethnic group is not entitled to self-determination in the form of secession (the UN Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities was unambiguous on this), and the existing state practice on this issue is also straightforward.
The same approach applies to the representatives of other ethnic groups (e.g.
One may also come across the term “population of Crimea”.60 The above facts give ground to assume that the Russian side suffers from the absence of a clear-cut legal stance and it is not agreed upon which community has a genuine right to secession in the Crimean case.
On the other hand, foreign scholars rest on the position that there is no “people of Crimea” who are entitled to secession.
The criterion of the exhaustion of all possible remedies for internal self-determination is becoming more important in the decolonisation era.
There is an undisputed exception found in the rules of international law (coined in the Declaration of Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation Among States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations of 1970 and the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of 1993) and in the established practice; namely that a people who suffers under colonial rule or is subject to alien subjugation, domination or exploitation, may exercise external self-determination.
Other “people” in principle realize their right to self-determination within an existing state.
Crimea is known for having a special status, under the Ukrainian Constitution and laws, among the other administrative and territorial units of Ukraine.
It is an autonomous republic with specific issues being under its authority.
In general, the broad autonomy of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea within Ukraine is completely in line with the international legal approach of internal self-determination.
Therefore any statements that internal possibilities for self-determination had been exhausted can only be groundless.
The secession cannot be justified by the circumstances of the change of government in Ukraine, which according to Russia allegedly “violat the equality and selfdetermination of peoples with regard to the Crimeans”,71 for the simple reason that the rules laid out in Ukraine’s Constitution, providing for the broad autonomy of Crimea, were neither abrogated nor violated, and the population of the peninsula has been represented by its respective members of the Parliament of Ukraine , elected in Crimean precincts applying the proportional system.
In addition, the events in the peninsula had an extremely negative impact on international peace and security, and no general procedural requirements nor human rights were observed during the referendum.
Although secession is not per se prohibited by international law, the general standpoint is that a foreign state’s interference with this process is illegal in any event, because it is not in compliance with two fundamental principles of international law – the principle of territorial integrity and the inviolability of borders.
This opinion is expressed, for example, in the works by T Franck,73 G Abi-Saab,74 C Walter,75 and J Crawford.
According to the EU Declaration of Guidelines on the Recognition of New States in Eastern Europe and in the Former Soviet Union of 1991, a common position on the process of recognition requires, inter alia, respect for the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the commitments subscribed to in the Final Act of Helsinki and in the Charter of Paris; and respect for the inviolability of all frontiers, which can only be changed by peaceful means and by common agreement.
In the Crimean peninsula in February – March 2014 not only was there foreign interference with the process of self-determination, but effective and overall control over the events on the part of Russia.
A Bayefsky , Self-Determination in International Law: Quebec and Lessons Learned, Kluwer Law International, The Hague – London – Boston: 2000, 83.
M Kohen , Secession: International Law Perspectives, Cambridge Uni­versity Press, Cambridge: 2006.
Self-Determination, Secession, and the Crimean Crisis, in: C Walter, A von Ungern-Sternberg, K Abushov , Self-Determination and Secession in International Law, Oxford Uni­ versity Press, Oxford: 2014, 303.
It must be noted that prior to its occupation of Crimea, Russia had consistently maintained the opposite position,80 not only in respect of Kosovo in 2009-2010 but also following the collapse of the USSR, in particular in the context of the Chechen Republic, Tatarstan, and the Republic of Altai.
The Russian Constitution prohibits secession of the federal constituents, which was subsequently clarified by the Russian Constitutional Court.
Hence Russia denies the right to secession to the constituents 79 Cf.g.
Walter, supra note 75, 306; T Christakis, Self-Determination, Territorial Integrity and Fait Accompli in the Case of Crimea, 75 Zeitschrift für ausländisches öffentliches Recht und Völkerrecht 75 , 92; Delahunty, supra note 31.
The inconsistency of the external self-determination of Crimea with international law is accepted by the European Union, the G7, the Council of Europe, the OSCE and other intergovernmental organisations and institutions.
Most importantly, the international community as a whole takes such a stand (cf.
M Bothe notes that most international law scholars agree on the fact that Russia annexed Crimea, and in this respect international law sticks to the maxim ex iniuria ius non oritur (“law does not arise from injustice”).96 Hence, under international law secession is only lawful under specific conditions.
The analysis of the compliance of the “self-determination of the people of Crimea” with international law leads to the conclusion that there has been no holder of any right to self-determination (a people entitled to secede from Ukraine in accordance with rules of international law), and that there were possibilities for “internal self-determination”, which makes the events in Crimea contrary to international law even if the widest list of criteria for the lawfulness of secession were applied.
The legality of Crimea’s “self-determination” is also excluded by the fact of the engagement of Russia’s armed forces in support of the organisation of the “referendum” and other unveiled Russian actions directed toward the annexation of Crimea.
S Tierney , Nationalism and Globalisation: New Settings, New Challenges, Hart, Oxford: 2015, 32.
Russian Territory, Occupied Territory or What?, 53 Military Law & Law of War Review 99 , 101.
There was a spate of killings, mass violence, abductions, attacks on journalists and human rights activists, politically motivated imprisonments, egregious incidents with racist motives (including anti-Russian and anti-Semite), committed upon instructions or with the tacit approval of the Kyiv authorities.
Moreover, a group of people supposedly controlled by the illegal authorities of Kyiv attempted to overthrow the legal government of Crimea.
The authorities in Kyiv do not represent the Ukrainian people as a whole, especially the population of Crimea; they do not exercise effective control over the territory and do not maintain law and order.
On 18 March the Republic concluded a treaty with Russia and was included in its territory.
V Tomsinov adds, “he coup d’état that took place in Kyiv on 22 February 2014 brought to power pro-Western radicals.
Firstly, the above-referred positions are in a direct contradiction with Russia’s own position with respect to Kosovo.
Secondly, the allegations of violence against the 97 Правовые обоснования позиции России…, supra note 57, 1.
It should be noted that by exercising effective control over the peninsula the Russian Federation had ample opportunities to collect the necessary evidence.
In this context it is worth emphasising the findings contained in the PACE Resolution concerning the Crimean issue dated 9 April 2014, finding no imminent threats to the rights of the ethnic Russian minority in the country, including, or especially, in Crimea.
For example, Y Aleksandrova refers to the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada in the Quebec secession case and draws parallels with the situation in Crimea.
She indicates that “the natural right of citizens ‘to freely pursue their future’ emerges exactly in the moment of forced exclusion by the government and its disregard of the opinion of the majority of the people – the holder of national sovereignty.
Fourthly, almost all branches of the government were cleansed at all levels, resulting in a situation whereby key offices were occupied by the representatives of political forces embroiled in the coup.
In accordance with Art. of Ukraine’s Constitution, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine is the sole legislative body and represents the people of Ukraine as a whole.
Neither sporadic initiations of criminal prosecutions of random MPs, nor skirmishes in the parliament, nor individual withdrawals from a faction can be interpreted as signifying an absence of “opportunities to participate in the conduct of public affairs at all levels” with respect to the population of this or that region.
Using this logic, such “absence of opportunities” takes place with regard to the residents of all regions after every parliamentary election should the majority of the relevant population vote for party members who are suspected of committing offences or involved in similar activities.
Once again, using this logic each new cabinet would bring about the aforementioned “absence of opportunities” of the population of this or that administrative unit of a state.
Fourthly, according to the above-mentioned logic the possibilities of internal self-determination within one state were not exhausted at all, while the autonomous status of Crimea meant that no “steps to bring about a public consensus (a referendum, early parliamentary elections, convening a national representative assembly)” were needed.
The right to decide on changes within its territory is within the domain of internal jurisdiction and is an attribute of internal sovereignty – one of the key criteria of statehood.
Therefore there are no factual and legal reasons to claim that Crimea’s secession accords with either international or national law.
Time and time again attempts were made to deprive Russians of their historical memory, even of their language and to subject them to forced assimilation.0 Russia’s actions aimed at incorporating the Crimea based on the claim that the peninsula “is historically Russian land” violate numerous acts of the most respected international organisations , as well as the rules of international law guaranteeing territorial integrity, inviolability of borders, and equality and self-determination of peoples.
In its Resolution 68/262 of 27 March 2014 the UNGA noted that Ukraine did not authorize the referendum in Crimea and underscored that the referendum had no validity and could not form the basis for any alteration of the status of the ARC or of the city of Sevastopol.
Any arguments that Russia’s recognition of Crimea as a part of Ukraine was subject to specific conditions are legally untenable, and the claims about the “forced assimilation”, “direct infringement of rights”, and “deprivation of historical memory” are not truthful and are not supported by any evidence.
Many of the assertions contained in President Putin’s “Speech on Crimea” have been successfully challenged by respected international institutions.
The issues mentioned were not raised in the conclusion of any of the key bilateral treaties, including especially the 1991 Agreement Establishing the Commonwealth of Independent States.
International law does not recognize historical or ethnic ties as giving grounds to claims over territory simply based on the historical right to title (e.g. that this territory used to be Russian at some point in history) and a shared national background with the inhabitants of the territory.
Nonetheless, a propos “historical claims” it is advisable to examine the historical background.
The earliest mentions of the inhabitation of the Crimean Peninsula are dated in the 12th century BC, while Russia annexed the peninsula in the late 18th century, which manifestly demonstrates that for 3,000 years Crimea was not related to Russia.
The peninsula was inhabited by numerous Greek states and the Scythian state, Pontus; it was controlled by Rome, Byzantium, Genoa, the Khazar state, and the Crimean Khanate, which subsequently became a vassal of the Ottoman Empire.
Therefore, while Crimea used to be a part of an empire, it was not a part of Russia.
In 1941–1944 Crimea was occupied by Nazi Germany and Romania.2 Tragic events prefaced the 1954 developments.
In May 1944, around 200,000 Crimean Tatars and 25,000 Bulgarians, Greeks, Armenians, and other ethnic groups were barbarously deported by the Soviet authorities to the Central Asian regions of the USSR.113 The deportation was carried out under extremely harsh conditions and resulted in numerous deaths, both due to the killing of those who tried to oppose the deportation and starvation and diseases on the way to the destinations or following the resettlement.
The meeting was attended by such members of the CC Presidium as N Khrushchev, K Voroshilov, N Bulganin, L Kaganovich, A Mikoyan, M Saburov, and P Pervukhin.
The Presidium comprised 27 people, therefore, there was no quorum, and the remaining 14 people were simply absent”125 – are simply untrue.
Its Supreme Council was unanimous in excluding the Crimean region from the list of its constituent regions.
Pursuant to Art. of the Constitution of the RSFSR, the SC was the highest authori­ty of the Republic at the time.
Therefore, any allegations of procedural violations or irregularities are groundless.
Note that until 1991 referendums had not been held in the USSR and their legal framework was not generally described in the 1937 Constitution of the RSFSR, except for a mention in Art. that the Presidium of the SC could hold referendums.
Secondly, a propos Sevastopol (Russian authors emphasise that it was not transferred to Ukraine and had a republican subordination), its status was explained by the better supply of goods to inhabitants and the direct administration of enterprises and institutions within the city.
In practice, legislation of the Union was supplemented by legislation of the respective Soviet republic.
Therefore, the legislation of the Ukrainian SSR was applied in Sevastopol.
Thirdly, the true reasons underlying the 1954 decision should also be pointed out.
The 1944 deportation resulted in an acute agricultural and economic crisis in the pen­ insula and thus contributed to the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine.
This fostering of this economic recovery already in the first decade following the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine constitutes a weighty proof of the Ukrainian people’s contribution to the post-war renaissance of the peninsula.
This move was aimed at showing the political unity of Ukraine and Russia.
The legislation of the Russian Federation does not empower its authorities to determine whether the transfer of the peninsula in 1954 was in accordance with the Constitution and legislation of the Soviet Union, nor to act upon any such determination.
The same concerns the arguments on the constitutionality of Soviet authorities’ decrees presented by senior officials of the Russian Federation and scholars.
It goes without saying that such evaluations have no legal consequences.
These treaties, together with a number of other instruments (including the treaties on the deployment of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Ukraine)134 were based upon the principle of the territorial integrity of Ukraine and the inviolability of its borders, presuming Crimea to be a part of the territory of Ukraine.
Russia has never challenged the status of Crimea before any international institution.
The texts of Russian-Ukrainian agreements between 1990–2003 clearly refute V Putin’s allegation that Crimea was recognised as Ukrainian territory subject to Russia’s consent to the delimitation of borders.
Even some provocative decisions by the Russian State Duma, adopted in 1992– 1996,136 were based on an acknowledgement that Crimea was Ukrainian.
The ratification of the Treaty of Friendship by the Russian parliament rendered any claims to the peninsula baseless, and they were recognized as such by even the fiercest nationalists among the members of the Duma.
The statement that “Crimea was in essence peacefully annexed by Ukraine”, made by A Kapustin and other Russians, is an oxymoron.
According to international law, an annexation means the forced acquisition of territory and it cannot by definition be peaceful.
Besides, they disregard the legal meaning of the principles of the territorial integrity of states, inviolability of borders, equality and self-determination of peoples, as well as Russia’s explicit recognition of Ukraine’s sovereignty over Crimea.
Hence the claims that the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine in 1954 contradicted the constitutional laws of the USSR, as well as the statements on Russia’s historical rights, have no legal basis.
The assertions that Russia recognised the Crimean part of Ukraine upon certain conditions are simply not true, neither factually or legally.
In addition to shaping favourable public opinion in Russia and trying to do so abroad, their activities may also be focused on preparation for possible litigation and honing future arguments to bring forward in a dispute or a criminal trial before competent international bodies.
It should be noted that despite their multitudinous volume, the Russian scholarly arguments suffer from an international law background problem.
This general conclusion may be equally applied to any point they may raise.
As far as specific arguments are concerned, we should stress, first of all, that Russia’s use of force against Ukraine in Crimea in 2014 meets none of the legal requirements for the lawful use of force contained in international law.
The references to the requests by V Yanukovych and S Aksyonov are equally flawed.
In light of the UN Charter, the UNGA resolution on “Definition of Aggression” and the Rome Statute of the ICC, Russia’s actions can only be qualified as an armed attack and act of aggression against Ukraine.
The events in Crimea between February – April 2014 do not fulfil any conditions for lawful self-determination in the form of secession.
With the assistance of the Crimean authorities, controlled by the Russian military and security forces, the Russian Federation committed an act of aggression against Ukraine, and in accordance with the qualification of such actions in international law, illegally occupied and annexed the territory of a another sovereign state.
The assertions that Ukraine had been exercising “peaceful annexation” of the Crimea since 1991 are groundless from the standpoint of international law because annexation cannot, by definition, be peaceful.
In addition, such a practice would be contrary to international law principles on territorial integrity and the inviolability of borders.
Russia is obliged to respect the status of Crimea as an integral part of Ukraine.
The contributions of Russian international law scholars reflect the political character of their publications.
This can be partly explained by their research objective – to prove the legality of Russia’s seizure of Crimea by any means, against all odds.
This explains why the representatives of the Russian doctrine have failed to conduct an in-depth study of the February-April 2014 events in light of relevant international legal principles and rules.
They also misinterpret, misrepresent or distort legal norms, and resort to subsidiary sources for the determination of rules even though there are relevant primary sources of international law.
Russia has consistently disregarded the fundamental principles of international law governing the relations between the two states during the entire post-Soviet period.
Russian senior officials have consistently advocated this position, even during the course of the annexation in February 2014.
This is why the entire situation serves as an example of an ex-post facto justification.
The undercover nature of the military operation aimed at the annexation of the peninsula helps to explain this characteristic of the arguments.
The Russian doctrine substantiates the statements of the authorities and replicates them.
Another peculiarity of the Russian doctrine is the absence of any critical analysis of the politicians’ statements.
Thus, the Russian official and doctrinal stance throughout the course of 2014–2016 reflects an international legal nihilism.
Not only does it undermine Russia’s international standing , but it also creates new and major threats and challenges for international law and the international order.
Such threats have become even more acute in connection with Russia’s use of force in Syria, which was partially caused by the weak international community response to its aggression against Ukraine.
