Manafort's lawyers are asked to reduce his sentence, which can be awarded for work in favor of Ukrainian politicians.
The United States government demands from the RF immediate release of captive Ukrainian seamen, the director of the agency of the Ministry of Defense of the United States McKeighy.
In Europe, the true purpose of Russia's construction of the Kerch Bridge was called.
Manufacturers of ammunition and small arms in Russia suffer losses due to sanctions.
Lukashenka made an unpleasant statement to Ukraine about seizing the Crimea.
Lukashenko made an unpleasant statement to Ukraine about seizing the Crimea.
The composition of the court in the case of Savchenko-Ruban was determined.
The United States is interested in continuing negotiations with Russia regarding the restoration of the Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity when Russia is ready for a serious talk.
As Volker notes, the United States is further interested in negotiating with Russia regarding the restoration of the Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity, primarily in the Donbas area.
As of today, Russia has expressed no interest in resolving this issue, but the United States hopes it will happen someday.
He also predicts that the humanitarian situation in the region will improve, and the territorial integrity of Ukraine will be restored only when Russia starts a serious talk about ending its aggression in the east of Ukraine.
Volker promised that the United States will support Ukraine until it happens.
He also stresses that the United States will never recognize the annexation of Crimea, supporting the recent statement of Mike Pompeo, the United States Secretary of State.
Last November, Kurt Volker announced his plan to meet Vladislav Surkov, the aide to Russia's president, sometime in December.
However, this meeting was canceled after the Russian military attacked the Ukrainian Navy ships and captured 24 Ukrainian sailors.
He later said that the resumption of this meeting depended on whether the captured sailors would be set free.
The next week, Virginia judge plans to punish Paul Manafort on charges of financial and tax fraud.
During a lawsuit in Virginia, Manafort was accused of sending money from Ukrainian oligarchs Viktor Yanukovych and Opposition Bloc abroad to avoid taxation and then resorting to bank fraud to maintain a luxurious lifestyle, in particular, trying to obtain bank loans in a fraudulent manner after the patrons of the political technologist in Ukraine lost power after the Revolution of Goodwill.
In a note filed by a Virginia judge, lawyers call punishment offered by public prosecutors ""manifestly inappropriate"" for bankruptcy and tax fraud offenses committed by a political technologist.
Manafort's lawyers point out that the health of their client has deteriorated, he has suffered significant financial and reputational losses.
For the 69-year-old Manafort, the sentence of prosecution offered by the prosecutor may become livelier.
On February 15, when Paul Manaforth was present during the trial, he was disorientated.
According to the indictment, Donald Trump Manafort, the ex-head of the election headquarters in the period from 2006 to 2017, received $ 30 million for counseling pro-Russian politicians in Ukraine.
In mid-September 2018, Manafort agreed to an agreement with Muller on a so-called political affair.
On August 21, the jury judged Manafort guilty of eight of the 18 charges.
This was stated by director of the Agency for Missing Persons in Conflicts of the United States Department of Defense, Kelly McKeighy, during a meeting with the Minister of Veterans Affairs Irina Fris in the Pentagon.
During the meeting, they discussed the directions of the Agency's activity, writes censor.NET, referring to the press service of the Ukrainian department.
In particular, about the work of the laboratory for the identification of the remains of missing bodies, communication with the families of servicemen, information and education activities.
Separately, they have stayed on international cooperation and attracted higher education institutions for such activities, as well as innovations in the field of research and analysis.
At present, 73 Ukrainian military servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, 14 representatives of the National Guard and 5 borderguards are considered to be missing, and in 2018 the Parliament passed the Law"" On the Legal Status of Missing Persons.
She also announced the opening of the Humanitarian Training Center in Dnipro, February 18, which is intended to increase the level of personnel qualification and inter-agency coordination of all services involved in this process.
It is about employees who carry out forensic medical examination, national police, as well as representatives of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
The Director of the United States Department of Defense Agency for Missing Persons during Conflicts assured that they were ready to advise Ukraine on the establishment of this center and expressed hope for further cooperation.
Recall that on November 25, the Navy of the Armed Forces of Ukraine reported that the Russian Federation's border ships committed aggressive actions against Ukrainian ships that were carrying out a planned transition from the port of Odessa to the port of Mariupol of the Azov Sea.
In particular, the Russian border ship ""Don"" carried a ram of the Ukrainian raiding tug, which damaged the main engine of the ship, lining and liner fencing, and also lost the life raft.
The Navy of the Armed Forces of Ukraine emphasizes that the intention to implement the transition was warned in advance and acted within the framework of international law.
As a result of illegal actions of Russian security forces, three ships of the Ukrainian Navy were captured and 24 Ukrainian servicemen captured.
The Russian-controlled Russian court of the occupied Simferopol has chosen a precautionary measure for 24 sailors in custody until January 25, 2019.
On November 26, the Verkhovna Rada voted for the introduction of a military state for 30 days in Vinnytsya, Donetsk, Zaporozhye, Lugansk, Mykolaiv, Odesa, Sumy, Kharkiv, Kherson and Chernihiv regions, as well as the internal waters of the Azov-Kerch water area.
The decision to introduce a martial law was taken in connection with the act of aggression against Ukraine in the Kerch Strait.
Consequently, they will remain under arrest at least until the end of April.
Gerasimov said that this is ""a fundamentally new strategy"", to which the United States plans to attract the protest potential of the ""fifth column"" to destabilize the situation in Russia.
Also, the Pentagon allegedly can use high-precision weapons to strike at the most important sites in the country.
According to the general, the United States and their allies determined the aggressive vector of their foreign policy.
Their goal is to eliminate the statehood of unwanted countries, undermine the sovereignty, and change the legitimately elected bodies of state power.
Gerasimov added that one of the ""victims"" of this United States policy is Ukraine.
Recall, February 12, the State Duma of Russia in the first reading, supported the bill on ""sovereign Internet"", which involves the autonomous work of the Russian segment of the Internet.
Subsequently, The Washington Post reported that the United States blocked the Russian ""troll factory"" from accessing the internet during the Congressional elections.
In the city of Kosice, Slovakia, a summit of the Bucharest Nine was held, during which a declaration was adopted on concerns about Russia's actions in the Donbass and in the waters of the Azov and Black Seas.
All this, the leaders of the states, demand from NATO a more coherent and strategic approach.
Poland, Romania, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Hungary, Slovakia, Czech Republic and Bulgaria.
In November 2015, at a summit in Bucharest, these states signed a joint declaration declaring united efforts to provide, where necessary, a ""strong, credible, balanced, military presence"" of NATO in the region.
Recall, as previously reported by the ""Apostrophe"", Russia initially sought to block the Sea of ​​Azov when the Kerch Bridge was built.
Sanctions imposed in 2014 on Russia for aggression against Ukraine led to the fact that manufacturers of small arms and ammunition in the Russian Federation lost about 50 billion rubles. revenue.
It is reported that before the sanctions, about 80% of Russian products went to the markets of the United States and European countries, where civilian weapons are allowed.
In 2013, Russian media claimed that with the permission of the Pentagon, American companies bought hundreds of millions of Russian ammunition cartridges per year.
Rifle ammunition in the Russian Federation produce Tula, Barnaul, Novosibirsk, Ulyanovsk, Klimovsk and Amur cartridge factories.
According to the General Directorate of State Control and Licensing and Permissive Work of the Russian Guard, as of February 2019, more than 4. million gun owners are registered in Russia.
After the imposition of sanctions, Russian manufacturers of rifle ammunition lost an average of about 10 billion rubles. revenue per year.
Accordingly, since 2014, total losses amounted to about 50 billion rubles.
According to RBC, the United States began to replenish the ""patronized hunger"" with ammunition from China and Bulgaria.
Nevertheless, it is noted in the publication, the products of Russian ammunition factories are still represented in the United States, since there are still loopholes that allow legally supplying cartridges to the American market.
The Kalashnikov Concern, which was on the United States sanctions list on July 16, 2014, and on the EU sanctions list on September 12, 2014, was forced to suspend many of its product contracts on the American market.
Ukrainian soldier women have conquered the hearts of NATO headquarters staff, earning endless ovations.
President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko made an unpleasant statement to the Ukrainians through the annexation of Crimea by Russia.
And before the Soviets, I was surrounded by Western and Ukrainian journalists and tortured me, whose Crimea is Russian or Ukrainian.
It was a completely unexpected answer for them. , which is that if it's your dying, fight for this piece of land, ""Lukashenko said.
This will be news in the evening, and in the morning, they will forget, no words will be said.
Lukashenko called for ""to look further and deeper in these matters"" and to try ""at least in this case"" to understand him.
I signed one document yesterday, but today I am climbing and start shouting.
Although I always say to the Americans and the West I really had to speak for Russia's support,"" he explained.
He assured that in the talks with Russian President Vladimir Putin they ""decided"" this position, and the phrase ""unity at the presidents level"", said earlier, was a joke.
At the same time, Lukashenka added that if we talk about the principle of equality, why the Russians do not say, for example, to join Russia in Belarus, and not vice versa.
On March 1, 2019, the Solomyansky District Court of Kiev received criminal proceedings against Nadezhda Savchenko and Volodymyr Ruban.
The same day, the Rada revoked the immunity , as well as gave permission to detain and arrest the deputy Nadezhda Savchenko.
In addition, Savchenko complained to the representatives of the ombudsman on video surveillance in the cell.
According to the Prosecutor General's Office, Savchenko was a partner of Vladimir Ruban, detained on March 8 at the KPVV ""Mayorskie"" during an attempt to transport large quantities of weapons from the territory of the Donetsk region under the control of the Russian occupation administration.
On March 9, Pechersk district court of Kiev arrested Vladimir Ruban without a right to a pledge.
Ruban is suspected of illicit handling of weapons and preparing for terrorist attacks, including armed attacks on statesmen and political leaders, including President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko, Interior Minister Arsen Avakov, former Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk and NSDC Secretary Oleksandr Turchynov.
