The Ukraine crisis is arguably of a different order of concern, since it has invoked the participation, in one sense or another, of the United States, the European Union and Russia, each of which possesses abundant nuclear weapons capacity.
Drawing from a broader work that monitors mainstream and alternative media, the study identiﬁes 10 key narratives that together forge the battleﬁeld for information warfare between nuclear powers and, with particular respect to mainstream, Western media coverage, the problematic beliefs, assumptions and presumptions that these media invite their audiences to ingest.
Competing Narratives of the Ukraine Crisis 2014–2015 My overriding interest is in the understanding of contemporary Western propaganda as it has unfolded since 2001, and the associated role of mainstream Western news media.
There is an equally imperative task to examine the characteristics of non-Western propaganda, including that of Russia and of pro-Russian media anywhere, but my main focus here is on Western and Western media propaganda.
I shall explore this theme in relation to the Ukraine crisis in the period 2013–2015.
My more general purpose, in follow-up to earlier investigations of the propaganda of pretexts for war is to argue the importance of reducing news consumer dependency on mainstream for-proﬁt corporate and State media, and enhancing the countervailing inﬂuence of alternative news sources that have a demonstrable good-faith track record and capability in the provision of information and opinion, and whose revenues often derive from subscription, nonproﬁt, foundation and other such sources.
Analysis of media content ﬂows between the BRICS economies is in its infancy.
The issue of ﬂow may be less signiﬁcant than the ways in which the contents of international communications represent, reinforce or resist phenomena of imperialism or neoimperialism (through processes such as indexing , framing and counter-framing ) and the implications for the future of international relations.
The one-sidedness of corporate mainstream Western media coverage behind ofﬁcial Washington pronouncements speaks not to the alleged media pluralism lauded by celebrants of digital and social media expansion but to a much older narrative of complicity with the propaganda aims of imperial power.
Such synchronicity reinforces trends that have been widely observed, including in Western mainstream media coverage of the invasion and occupation of Afghanistan in 2001, invasion and occupation of Iraq in 2003, the disputed 2009 elections in Iran, claims that Iran’s nuclear energy program constitutes a dangerous nuclear weapons threat, and Westernsupported destabilization of Libya and of Syria from 2011.
In my broader work, I identify at least 10 principal plots to the Ukraine crisis, each attached either to a single episode or phase of the crisis, operating as a lightning rod for information warfare.
I examine the divergent narrative interpretations of such episodes or phases, between those largely espoused by the Kiev regime and its United States and EU allies and their respective media, on the one hand, and those espoused by Russia, many Russian media and by many critical, alternative media in the West, on the other.
I focus particularly on Western media and what we can learn from these about the nature of Western conﬂict propaganda and the beliefs and presumptions that these invite of audiences amidst the exposure of hypocrisies and contradictions that propaganda so often entails.
I work inductively from a range of texts that represent the clash of discourses between mainstream Western media accounts, on the one hand, and competing accounts that come principally from Western alternative media and companion sources that pay sustained attention to the perspectives of ethnic Russians in Ukraine , on the other.
Such a clash inevitably tends towards the destabilization of the hegemonic Western discourse, not in the sense that it entitles an analyst to declare what is “true” or “false,” but in the sense of being able to detect the play of ideology amidst apparent contradiction, paradox and hypocrisy.
Signiﬁcance of the International Monetary Fund as source of ﬁnancial aid.
The West and Western media considered that Russia forcibly seized Crimea and assisted local ethnic Russian thugs in the Donbass to establish separatist ﬁefdoms in Luhansk and Donetsk.
Russian and alternative Western media, by contrast, maintained that Crimeans, following long-established historical preference, overwhelmingly voted for annexation by Russia.
Russia strategically maintained a cool distance between itself and separatist movements in Eastern Ukraine, other than responding to urgent humanitarian need and protecting ethnic Russian populations from the worst of fascist cruelties, but seeking a political, federalist solution to grant a strong measure of autonomy to the peoples of the Donbass region while preserving it as a component of Ukraine.
I will identify what appear to be the principal propaganda intentions of Washington, the European Union and NATO, and how these intentions were conveyed through Western mainstream media.
Discussing movements within Ukraine that are opposed to Kiev authorities, I generally refer to them as “separatist,” although some would be better described as federalist or pluralist, seeking not independence from Ukraine but a more equitable and UKRAINE, MAINSTREAM MEDIA AND CONFLICT PROPAGANDA 1019 autonomous status within it.
While many may be ethnic Russians who regard Russian as their ﬁrst or predominant language, this in itself does not necessarily signify that they are pro-Russia or anti-Ukraine.
Crimea, Odessa and Eastern Ukraine Crimea When, at the beginning, it looked as though the coup attempt might fail, mainstream Western media had speculated how Kiev could break off the western part of Ukraine as a separate political entity.
The journalists alleged Russian intimidation, military occupation and electoral manipulation ahead of the referendum on March 16.
In various reports, the Times and other Western media suggested that Russia had “invaded” Crimea, without clarifying that Moscow already had some 16,000 troops stationed in Crimea under an agreement with Ukraine that allowed Russia to maintain up to 25,000 troops to protect its historic naval base at Sevastopol.
A much more negative expert account is offered, it is true, by Greta Uehling whose perspective is particularly inﬂuenced by her studies of the Crimean Tatars.
Uehling claims, without sourcing, that Russian troops were used to “help take over” the Supreme Council, installing proRussian Prime Minister Sergei Aksyono whom she asserts had criminal ties (though it is disputed; Speigel ﬁrst reported maﬁa connections but based on German intelligence documents; cf.
Vladimir Putin was quite open at the time, two weeks before the referendum, that the Russian troops present in the Crimea would help prevent Crimea being taken over by the coup regime of Ukraine against the wishes of the Crimean people.
This claimed that conservative Russian oligarch Konstantin V Malofeev had advised the Kremlin in advance of the collapse of the Yanukovych government in February 2014 that the government would likely fall and that Russia should exploit the ensuing chaos to annex the Crimea and South-Eastern Ukraine, making use of the European Union’s own rules on self-determination.
The report offered no evidence of such a memo, nor evidence that it had been applied for policy purposes.
Its existence was denied by both the Kremlin spokesman and by Malofeev.
There should have been no cause for surprise at the evidence of a strong pro-Russian tendency in Crimea, where Russia’s presence dates back to the early 1700s.
The province had previously formed part of Crimean Khanata of the Tatars, sometimes said by Tatars today to have been one of the strongest and most independent powers of Eastern Europe even though it had been absorbed within the Ottoman Empire.
Many of these ethnic Russians had long resented Soviet Premier Krushchev’s somewhat arbitrary transfer of their region to Ukraine in 1954.
A pro-Russian separatist movement had been strong in the early years of Ukrainian independence.
In a 2008 survey by the Razumkov Center, 73 percent of those Crimeans who had made up their minds backed the secession of Crimea and Ukraine with a view to joining with Russia.
In the events of March 2014, the Crimean government organized a referendum in which citizens chose between staying in the Ukraine but with greater autonomy or joining with Russia.
An independent and balanced scholarly expert on Russian and European politics, Richard Sakwa, concludes, nonetheless, that it is reasonable to assume that even in perfect conditions a majority in Crimea would have voted for union with Russia and that in Sevastopol the favorable vote would have been overwhelming.
Large sections of Ukrainian military, security service and police forces switched their allegiance to the separatists and then to Russia.
The autonomous RADA of the Crimea had historically been at odds with the Kiev government.
One strong practical reason for loyalty to Russia was that Russian pensions were three times higher than Ukrainian, and that Ukrainian pensions were in the process of being slashed as the Ukrainian government conceded to IMF demands.
It paid particular attention to relevant events around the time of the fall of the Soviet Union.
In January 1991, before Ukraine’s independence in August of that year, the government of Crimea had held a referendum on Crimean autonomy.
In March, 87 percent of Crimean voters voted to stay in the Soviet Union which they anticipated would allow them far greater independence than incorporation within Ukraine.
But the newly independent government of Ukraine, once in power, stopped this referendum from taking place, even though it had been requested by 246,000 of Crimea’s 2. million people.
Moscow, which had done nothing to prevent Ukraine from declaring its own independence, did not protest Ukraine’s refusal to allow a referendum vote.
Russia’s President Yeltsin had indicated that Russia would not let republics with large Russian populations secede from the newly emerging states of the former Soviet Union, but he then backed down.
When signatures for a referendum were being collected in 1992, Ukraine offered more autonomy for Crimea.
This vote was reversed the following day amidst threats of bloodshed and direct presidential rule from Ukraine, and the carrot of greater autonomy.
Ukraine declared the May 5 vote unconstitutional and plans for a referendum were canceled.
Although Soviet President Khrushchev had reassigned Crimea to the Ukraine in 1954, Crimea had been part of Russia since the 1700s.
Khrushchev’s gift did not include Sevastopol, site of Russia’s Black Sea ﬂeet.
When Ukraine became independent following the collapse of the Soviet Union, territories that had previously been Russian but then appended to Ukraine by Soviet rulers were retained by Ukraine, under Washington pressure.
For example, while secession may have been unconstitutional with respect to the constitution in force up to February 2014, that constitution was rendered null and void by the February 2014 coup.
Procedurally, the 1954 1022 OLIVER BOYD-BARRETT transfer of Crimea was not correct.
But if constitutional behavior had broken down in Kiev there was no reason to preserve it in Crimea.
In addition, the West had created numerous precedents that in a less partisan environment would have required their support for the Crimean declaration,g.
Western support for Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence from Serbia in 2008, which was declared without ﬁrst staging a referendum.
They averted comparisons between Russian action in Crimea and Western support for separatism elsewhere.
In 1999, as we have seen, NATO had fought a war against what remained of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, with the goal of militarily occupying Kosovo province and prying Kosovo away from Yugoslavia.
By contrast, in their coverage of Ukraine, the word “unelected” was rarely attributed to the interim Kiev rulers, and the word “coup” was almost always used in quotes.
Ukraine blocked water supplies in 2014, claiming that consumers had not paid their debts.
Eighty-two percent of Crimean electricity also came from Ukrainian plants.
There were issues as to which country Crimean enterprises should pay taxes and implications for their vulnerability to United States and EU sanctions.
The infrastructural re-integration of Crimea would be a lengthy process, with cultural and political challenges, including an increasingly intolerant attitude towards dissenting journalistic and other dissident or potentially dissident voices—albeit arguably on a par with Kiev’s attitudes to dissent against the coup regime.
Walker had omitted mention of Russia’s two major concerns, namely Western hypocrisy over Crimea and the threat posed to Russia by NATO expansionism.
In place of talking about Russia’s legitimate concerns about NATO bases encircling Russia, Walker quoted United States diplomats to invent something called “Eurasianism,” an alleged Russian ambition, for which there was no corroborating evidence, to take over Europe, using Ukraine as the launch-pad.
Protestors distrusted the appointment of billionaire “oligarchs” as regional administrators.
They rightly worried that a harsh austerity plan would likely accompany the IMF “aid” that would now replace the less onerous loans previously offered by Moscow.
Veteran investigative reporter Robert Parry told Aaron Woronczuk on Real News Network that at face value the photos—provided courtesy of the United States government—apparently showed ﬁghters who had allegedly been in Russia and who were now present in Eastern Ukraine.
It began to look as though the “newspaper of record” had not engaged in the most elementary fact-checking of material handed to it by the Kiev regime and the United States State Department before plastering its alleged ‘evidence’ on its front page.
Either the Times editors rammed through the piece and its blurry photos without any independent examination, or the editors did check the story, saw it was a grotesque falsiﬁcation, and published it anyway.
In either case, the Times functioned not as a legitimate journalistic outlet, but as a propaganda agency of the state.
Investigating the 12 Company of the People’s Militia, Chivers and Sneider found what appeared only to be Ukrainians, even if many had afﬁnities, family connections and other ties to Russia.
The Ukrainians had many different views as to what might constitute a good outcome to the conﬂict.
Weaponry in evidence appeared not to be the sophisticated Russian equipment that one would expect if Russia had been actively intervening, but was well-worn and dated.
This involved fascist pro-Kiev paramilitaries from outside of Odessa who had formed units of the National Guard.
His men were recruited to undertake the dirty work that regular Ukrainian military would not do.
Many of their victims were forced to ﬂee into the Trade Unions building which was then attacked by grenades and set on ﬁre while their attackers sang nationalist songs and shouted “Burn Colorado, burn” the soubriquet for the protestors as “Colorado” beetles, a reference to their ﬂag.
The lack of commiseration, empathy, or compassion in relation to the death of “Colorados” in Odessa, “jokes” on the blood of Russian babies on a school charity fair, the openly Russophobe art exhibition titled “Kill a Coloardo” that took place in Kiev in December— those are not accidental events.
In an otherwise anti-Russian speech in June 2015, United States Ambassador to the United Nations Samantha Power actually criticized the post-coup regime—noting that investigations into serious crimes such as the violence in the Maidan and in Odessa [where scores of ethnic Russians were burned alive] have been sluggish, opaque, and marred by serious errors—suggesting not only a lack of competence, but also a lack of will to hold the perpetrators accountable.
Unlike Crimea and the Donbass, and despite the high proportion of ethnic Russians among its citizens, Odessa remained under the control of Kiev.
In June 2015, Ukraine President Poroshenko appointed to the governorship of Odessa the ex-president of Georgia, Mikheil Saakashvili.
Saakashvili, a UKRAINE, MAINSTREAM MEDIA AND CONFLICT PROPAGANDA 1025 neo-conservative who had dragged his country unsuccessfully into war with Russia in 2008, was wanted in his home country for human rights abuses and abuse of government funds.
Yet other papers, including the Washington Post and the Financial Times, saw no evidence of this.
Donbass The Crimean referendum was followed on May 11 by referenda in provinces of Eastern Ukraine, although ultimately Russia discouraged cries for the annexation of these provinces with Russia (where Sakwa argues the prevailing sentiment was in favor of greater autonomy within Ukraine, not separatism nor annexation) and despite Russian pressure for these to be postponed.
In fact, Russia had good reason to tread very carefully with respect to the Donbass.
In Donetsk, protesters had proclaimed the Donetsk People’s Republic on April 7 and a Luhansk People’s Republic was formed on April 27.
A month later, on May 24, the two entities established a union known as the Novorossiya Republic.
The West now supported the deployment of an “army against their own population,” argued Escobar , the very action used by NATO as pretexts for interventions in Libya and Syria but apparently quite acceptable in Ukraine.
Richard Sakwa considers that the ferocity of the Kiev reaction reﬂected a long-standing prejudice in Western Ukraine that those who lived in the Donbass region were not “real Ukrainians” but were Russians who had been sent in the 1930s, ﬁrstly to replace those who had died under Stalin’s collectivization program and secondly to industrialize Ukraine.
His analysis suggests that the votes for independence were to be seen not as bids to leave Ukraine (since separatist aspirations were not supported by the majority here as they had been in Crimea) but as claims for a more pluralist, federalist Ukraine.
Yet these circumstances were scarcely less dire than the Western-induced post-Gadhaﬁ elections in Libya in 2012 which Western sources and mainstream media naturally applauded as a ﬁne display of democracy.
This was shortly after pro-Russian separatists in Luhansk, the easternmost region of Ukraine bordering Russia, shot down a government military transport, killing all 40 soldiers and 9 crew members.
When a missile hit the regional administration building in early June, United States mainstream media dutifully reported the Kiev government’s version of events as fact, namely that the anti-Kiev forces had blown up their own headquarters, just as several weeks earlier Kiev had claimed that the anti-Kiev forces in Odessa had set themselves on ﬁre.
Kiev forces had also bombed hospitals, kindergartens, and residential areas.
None of this had been condemned by Washington, which had been so eager in 2003 to berate Saddam Hussein for having purportedly used poison gas on his own people.
In July, Human Rights Watch directly reported war crimes against civilians.
Early in July, amid “a virtual blackout in the American media” , and following weeks of artillery bombardment, Ukrainian regime forces retook the cities of Slavyansk and Kramatorsk, which occupied strategic positions along roads from Western Ukraine to Donetsk.
They then marched on the major cities of South-Eastern Ukraine, Donetsk and Luhansk.
Ukrainian National Security and Defense Council spokesman Andrei Lysenko made clear that Kiev did not intend to take any prisoners among opposition UKRAINE, MAINSTREAM MEDIA AND CONFLICT PROPAGANDA 1027 ﬁghters and dismissed any possibility of creating a corridor that would allow Donetsk People’s Republic forces to leave the region.
According to UN High Commission on Refugees ﬁgures, as of June 27, 2014, 110,000 people had ﬂed to Russia and 54,000 had been internally displaced within Ukraine.
Many attacks failed to distinguish between civilians and combatants, as was evident in the use of weaponry not designed for areas where precision was required.
Human Rights Watch ﬁndings indicated that a large majority of attacks on the city were carried out by Ukrainian government forces, while the insurgents were responsible for far fewer and targeted government positions on the outskirts of Luhansk.
This gave rise to rumors of a mooted anti-Poroshenko coup by outraged Nazi nationalists.
By the end of October, elections in the eastern oblasts of Donetsk and Luhansk created the ﬁrst parliament of the Donetsk People’s Republic.
The republic would serve as the de facto autonomous region, and also the potential government if it were to secede outright.
In this paper, I focus on some of the understandings about Russia, Ukraine and the West that the propagandists—the Western powers whose voices, values and preferences are privileged by Western media—hope will prevail among members of the public.
Through close reading as illustrated by my treatment of Western coverage of events in Crimea, Odessa and Donbass, I identify preferred understandings—the desired propaganda beliefs—by reference to their principal topics.
I do not have sufﬁcient space to incorporate all of the propaganda themes that emerge from examination of this particular narrative, and some of those that I have selected also relate to other narratives.
I have attempted to formulate 1028 OLIVER BOYD-BARRETT these themes as emergent principles of propaganda as these apply to particular topics, as follows.
Attack by an Army Against its Own People If a regime that is favored by the West deploys its army against its own people, as happened when the authorities of Kiev attacked and ravaged the separatist movements of the Donbass, then that is perfectly excusable and is also a pretext for Western aid to that regime against regime opponents.
If the regime is not favored by the West, as in the case of Saddam Hussein’s Iraq, Muammar Gadhaﬁ’s Libya or Bashar al-Assad’s Syria, then evidence of such deployment, whether real or fabricated, is an acceptable pretext for Western humanitarian intervention and democracy promotion whose purpose is regime-change.
Context In covering the ofﬁcial claims of Western governments as to their policies towards countries that have been targeted for cooption into the NATO security sphere, such as post-coup Ukraine, including condemnation of Russian “aggression” and support for democracy, Western media need not consider as relevant the long-standing weaknesses of these countries and the contribution to them of the excesses and non-democratic instincts of their oligarch classes.
Nor need they consider as relevant to Western motivations the loot for Western corporations that are consequent on IMF and other Western loans, involving as these typically do the privatization of infrastructure, shipping and rail, and the legalization of market access for foreign interests in traditional and GMO agribusiness and other spheres.
Democracy A state that has acquired power by a Western-supported coup, is largely run by oligarchs and whose democracy is based on political parties that are afﬁliated with the interests of different oligarchs should be supported by Western powers so long as it can exhibit the trappings of modern democracy such as regular elections, diversity of choice, etc.
A state that has many oligarchs but whose power nonetheless is contested by a strong executive within a democratic, multi-party framework cannot be regarded as an acceptably functioning democracy when Western powers do not like the interests that it represents or advances.
Evidence Events whose status as initially reported by Western media as somewhat uncertain and needing qualiﬁcation become indisputable “facts” by dint of mere repetition and the slow simplifying conversion from ambiguity to certainty.
Likewise claims that Russia had invaded or was about to invade—the distinction seemed less important over time— Ukraine and that the separatists or independents in Eastern Ukraine were simply proxies for Russia.
Fascism Dependence by a Western-supported coup regime on fascist forces backed by corrupt oligarchs—forces whose activities are not subject to control by the political and military mainstream, that are often criminal, and that have links with and support from radical Islamist movements—is not a source of signiﬁcant concern for Western governments or media.
By contrast, alleged criminal links of political and military leaders of resistance to a Westernsupport coup regime, as in the Donbass, are widely trumpeted as “evidence” of insincerity, corruption and inefﬁcacy, and the entire separatist movement is smeared with frequently contestable claims of its dependence on Russian support and assistance.
Humanitarian Support Actions taken to provide humanitarian support for the victims of an aggression committed by a party that enjoys the support of Western powers is inherently suspicious, treated as some form of military action in humanitarian disguise.
This was the case with Western reaction to Russia’s preparations of aid convoys for desperate peoples in the Donbass.
Invasions An invasion may be said to have occurred even if the country’s troops were already and legitimately present in a region of the “invaded” country , a substantial majority of whose voting population expressed its fear of aggression from its “own” government—the coup regime in Kiev—and their desire to be taken under Russian protection.
Once such an “invasion” has occurred (regardless of how weak the claim or how uninvestigated the actual circumstances), the cry of “invasion,” pending or otherwise, can then be levied against the country in question whenever that country does anything, or perhaps nothing at all, that the Western powers do not like, so that the country in question continues to be viliﬁed and its leaders demonized.
Secession When a region of an established country wishes to secede from that country, and the leadership of that region enjoys Western favor, then Western powers and their mainstream media will be supportive of secession.
This was evident in mainstream contemplation of what might happen if the February 2104 coup failed and Kiev broke off Western Ukraine from the rest.
It was evident in Western support for Kosovo’s assertion of independence from Serbia.
Because the leadership of Crimea and the Donbass regions did not enjoy Western favor, their respective bids for secession were condemned.
If a region seeks to secede from a coup-installed regime that has the backing of Western powers, even when the regime threatens to criminalize that region’s language and makes evident its disdain for the ethnicity of a large proportion of the region’s population, its aspirations for autonomy are unworthy.
They are deemed even less worthy if the region seeks to annex with a major neighboring power with which it is afﬁliated ethnically and culturally.
Western support for such a region is permissible when the region in question has the support of Western powers and when the country from which it secedes is disliked by Western powers, in which case not even a referendum for secession is deemed necessary.
Suffering The sufferings of a people which is attacked by a power allied to Western interests attract more attention, are more likely to be ennobled, than the sufferings of people who are attacked by a power that is not allied to Western interests.
In this second case, suffering need not invoke intense sympathy, nor be covered in detail, because such people have brought their suffering upon themselves through unwise choice of leaders or alliance.
Similarly, killings and assassinations of ﬁgures who are opponents of regimes that the West does not like, such as Boris Nemtsov, are automatically to be cast as noble ﬁghters of the good cause.
Killings and assassinations of ﬁgures who are opponents of regimes that the West likes, such as the dozens killed among opponents to the coup regime of Kiev following February 2014, require little or no attention or sympathy.
Conclusion In this paper, I have identiﬁed leading press frames and discourses of the Ukraine crisis and its associated conﬂicts between the Kiev authorities and the authorities of separatist movements within Ukraine, Russia, the United States and the European Union.
The paper dwells mainly on one UKRAINE, MAINSTREAM MEDIA AND CONFLICT PROPAGANDA 1031 of the 10 frames identiﬁed and analyzed in my broader work.
Guided by my own close reading of press and alternative media sources, I have determined the principal arguments, presumptions and intentions of propaganda as these reﬂect the interests of Western powers and the forms by which they are conveyed through Western mainstream media.
These considerations help demonstrate the propaganda-of-pretext that suffuses Western media accounts of conﬂicts in which their own countries are engaged or may have incited.
It counsels the universal importance for news consumers to attend to a much broader diversity of knowledgeable viewpoints than are typically provided by institutions whose business models and political alliances do not permit them to move beyond a very limited range of discourse.
UKRAINE, MAINSTREAM MEDIA AND CONFLICT PROPAGANDA 1033 Parry, Robert.14c.
