On February 27, 2014, Russian troops in unmarked green uniforms, the so-called “green men” or “polite people”, as the Russians called them, entered Crimea.
As a result of the Russian invasion, Crimea became “Russian”, while in two regions of Eastern Ukraine, Donbass and Lugansk, currently controlled by Russian-controlled war lords, the so-called “hybrid war” is still going on.
The life and safety of people, especially in the southeast and in the Crimea, is under threat.
Under the influence of Western countries, open terror and violence are carried out.
In this connection, I appeal to Russian President Vladimir Putin with a request to use the armed forces of the Russian Federation to restore law, peace, law and order, stability, and protection of the Ukrainian population.
At the emergency Council meeting, Churkin furiously defended the then ongoing Russian military invasion into Ukraine.
According to Churkin, in reality a wave of violence swept across the Western and Central parts of Ukraine, which he claimed was well known to American diplomats.
We made preparations to pick him up in Donetsk by the ways of land, sea, and from the air.
Recently, in January 2017, the UN Secretariat officially provided the Ukrainian government with a copy of the letter after the Ukrainian General Prosecutor’s Office started collecting materials for indicting Yanukovych of treason.
On January 19, Yanukovych confirmed again that he, in fact, wrote that letter.
The Russian official version was that his death was caused by a heart attack.
Some Russian and Ukrainian journalists speculated that Churkin, possibly, died after an emotional telephone conversation with President Putin about Yanukovych’s letter, because of the emotional pressure in connection with the letter.
I did not ask for troops to invade Ukraine, this was not so, there was no letter to Russian President Vladimir Putin about that.
It was not a letter, but a plea to stop gangs of illegally invading bandits who, not being subordinated to any authority, began killing people in the Donbass Region.
It may have been emotional, but I was looking for ways to protect people.
Yanukovych told journalists that he lived in Rostov-on-Don in Russia, but it is widely known that he spends msot of his time in a big dacha in Sochi.
A complete denial by Russian officials of any knowledge of Yanukovych’s 2014 letter followed.
The President’s Administration is a unique apparatus in Russia that “is ensuring the activities of the President of the Russian Federation and exercising control over the execution of decisions of the President”, something like Putin’s personal government.
On March 14, 2017, at a briefing in Kiev, Ukraine’s Prosecutor General Yuri Lutsenko announced the filing of pre-trial investigation materials in a charge of treason against ex-President Viktor Yanukovych.
According to Lutsenko, the fugitive Ukrainian ex-President, who is currently hiding in Russia, in writing asked the Kremlin to commit aggression against Ukraine.
Lutsenko added that more than 50 witnesses, photos, video materials, material evidence and documents proving Yanukovych’s guilt have been presented during the pre-trial investigation.
Yanukovych’s lawyers denied the existence of Yanukovych’s letter and claimed that their client’s rights were violated during the pre-trial investigation.
I recall that when Mikhail Lesin died in the city of Washington, there were also official reports about a heart attack.
As an investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation showed, it turned out that he died of numerous injuries, apparently, inflicted on himself, which is still unclear, or during a fight.
In the last paragraph Venediktov refers to the strange death of Mikhail Lesin on November 5, 2015, in Washington in a Dupont Circle hotel.
From 2011-2013, Lesin lived in Beverly Hills, California, and created a corporation to buy expensive homes.
Then he was back to Russia, where he headed the Gazprom-Media, the state controlled media giant.
Lesin died of blunt-force injuries to his head, and not of a heart attack, as the Russian mass media had announced.
However, all circumstances of the death are so suspicious that it’s hard to believe that Lesin was not killed.
On November 8, 2016, on Election Day, Sergei Kirov, a 63-year-old employee of the Russian Consulate, was found outside the Russian Consulate.
Russian consular staff told the BBC that Lesin had died of “a heart attack” This death remains a mystery.
Shocked and unbalanced by the terrible failure of the operation “Our Trump”, Vladimir Tavrichesky is preparing a new large-scale adventure.
According to Piontkovsky, Putin’s order on February 18, 2017 to consider legitimate the documents issued by the war lords of the Donbass and Lugansk Region, are indicators of the Kremlin’s new plans to announce “Lugandoniya” to be the only legitimate Ukraine.
At the moment, it’s hard to say if Piontkovsky is correct in his prediction but it’s clear that the denial of the Yanukovych letter signals a new effort to whitewash his actions and Russia’s involvement and perhaps a new effort to resolve the Ukrainian situation.
