Petro is a volunteer of the Maidan self defense unit and guards the entrance to his Sotnia tent in Kiev’s center.
He has been there since December and came from a small town in western Ukraine.
He will stay there until the new legitimate government will be elected on May 25.
Billboard with a picture of Putin as Hitler and the words “Get out of Ukraine,” on the road from Mykolaiv to Kherson.
Deniz and Lena stand with a pro-­‐separatist “civil self-­‐defense” group of local people.
They were unarmed and kept vigil by the administrative building in Yenakiieve, the birthplace of ousted president Viktor Yanukovych.
The people complained that they work here for the prosperity of the rest of Ukraine and the factory does not even install filters, forcing them to breath polluted air.
They complained that official documents are in Ukrainian, that the crime situation is out of control and that gangsters interfere in politics.
It was removed from the Dniepropetrovsk Main Square, along with the sculpture of Lenin, by protesters.
The director of the local historical museum will keep it in the warehouse.
She collects items from the Maidan Revolution in the hopes of having a future exhibition.
Since protests started in December 2013, around 20 statues of Lenin were removed from cities across west and central Ukraine.
Soviet-­era cable car operates over the Dnieper River in Dniepropetrovsk.
Dnepropetrovsk is in central Ukraine and is the fourth largest city and the main industrial center of the country.
Pro-­Russia separatists failed to take control of some administrative buildings.
Ihor Kolomoyskyi , oligarch and current Governor of Dnipropetrovsk announced a $10,000 reward for exposing pro-­Russian separatists.
I talked about it with my parents and other family members; they reacted normally and supported my choice.
Aleksander Kostiushko was among the dozen soldiers from the 79th Paratroopers Brigade who died on the border with Russia after Ukrainians were allegedly attacked from both sides; by rebels and from Russian territory.
The brigade is comprised of some professional soldiers but most were either drafted from the reserves or came as a volunteers.
The Ukrainian army is a mixture of conscripts, a relatively small amount of professional soldiers and a considerable number of volunteer battalions which were formed after the war started.
On Sept., 2014, the Ukrainian government signed a ceasefire with the rebels and Russia.
Some 3,000 people are dead, although unofficial numbers are much higher.
About 260,000 people were displaced as of Sept., although the United Nations believes this is a very conservative estimate.
I met Shura by the Dutch Embassy in Kiev the day after Malaysian Flight MH17 was shot down over Donbas.
She introduced herself as a Ukrainian patriot and is of mixed Ukrainian, Russian and Tatar origins.
They saw my tattoo and said they would cut my arm off -­‐ because the Berkut who beat us was at Maidan against us.
After that, we were loaded in an Ural army truck and taken to Sevastopol to the Russian army base.
The FSB was interrogating us, but luckily we were set free because friends and other people got involved in our release.
But they were threatening me, saying they were going to take me to Russia, to the Khabarovsk army prison for women.
Two gypsy sisters Ruslana and Milana taking the evening stroll along the Dnieper River.
When asked if they study they laughed and said that they finished their education already.
I just came from Donetsk and Slavyansk, and Dniepropetrovsk with people strolling along the river seems like it is in a different , safer country without checkpoints and armed people.
A few days earlier, a gypsy family was attacked by armed and masked man in Slavyansk , a separatist stronghold.
Here in Dniepropetrovsk, in central Ukraine, the girls said they are fine, nobody bothers them.
School kids took part in a survival skills competition, organized by local pro‐Ukrainian Cossacks.
Now, they help police guard administrative offices agains possible attacks by pro-­‐Russian separatists.
The first person shot and killed during the Kiev protest was a man from the Dniepropetrovsk region.
In Ukraine, there are two orthodox churches -­‐ the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyiv Patriarchate and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate.
The day after Easter Sunday, a rebel check point in Slavyansk was attacked over night, allegedly by pro-­‐ Ukrainian forces.
Pro­‐Russian protesters, who seized some administrative buildings and declared the People's Republic of Donetsk on April 7, 2014, stand in front of the occupied Regional Administration Building.
Gyorgg Lakatos with his son Sebastain on a beach in Cherkasy by the Kremenchuk Reservoir on the Dnieper River, July 2014.
He comes to visit his son in Cherkasy, where he lives with his grandmother while both parents work in Italy.
Cement wave breakers block the road from Novoazovsk, in expectation of a separatist push any day.
Before the war the road was packed with cars traveling between Russia and Ukraine.
At the end of August separatists backed by Russia took control over the port of Novoazovsk, opening up a new front in the war.
Three soldiers from the Donbas Battalion prepare for a reconnaissance trip.
The Couch Battalion are people who fight the war at home in Kiev from behind their computer on Facebook, he explained.
His family came to Ukraine in 1989 when many Ethnic Russians left Kazakhstan.
A Russian citizen from a mixed Ukrainian-­‐Russian family, he grew up in Ukraine, later lived in Russia and retuned to Ukraine.
For three years, he had problems getting Ukrainian citizenship, which prevented him from getting work and settling down.
She often plays in a suitcase her mother and grandmother brought with them while leaving Donetsk.
Stanislav, Yaroslava’s father, divorced her mother but to help his daughter he set them up in a private hotel The owner of the hotel, on the outskirts of Lvov, helps IDPs free of charge.
When the war came near that city in September, they went to Lvov, where Stansilav was already leaving.
Each day a group of about 70 people prayed by Constitution Square for the unity of Ukraine and for peace.
When one priest tried to protest he was beaten, another was kidnapped a few days later.
When rebels took control of the city they declared that the dominant religion is the Russian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate.
Galasiuk said this year she will not go to Crimea to vacation, but to Odessa instead, as a protest against the Crimean occupation.
She has a Russian boyfriend, who she says is ashamed of what his country did in Ukraine.
Right Sector is not registered with any official structure of Ukrainain government yet Right Sector Fighters served on the front line as volunteers.
Father Vladimir, of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Kyiv Patriarchate, baptizes the first child ever in his Church, which is just about to begin construction.
With independent country there should be an independent church,” he said.
We have services in Ukrainian language while Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Moscow Patriarchate uses Old Church Slavonic.
It’s a symbol which is holy for anyone who considers himself Ukrainian.
Olga Antonovna Onoprenko and husband Grigorij Yegorovich, a retired couple from Cherkasy.
Ukrainian flag painted on the column that once supported a sculpture of Vladimir Lenin, which was taken down by pro-­Maidan activists.
In April 2014, pro-­Maidan activists chased away a small group of pro-‐Russian protesters and set up checkpoints on the city outskirts, which checked suspicious cars entering Mykolaiv.
Tatarikova Irina prays for the safety of her husband who is about to go back to the front as a professional soldier.
She came here to pray every day when he was on the front line for the half of the year.
He returned in September just in time for their wedding three days later.
He was contract soldier, a sergeant in the second year of his fiveyear contract when he was wounded on August 16 during a shelling at Luzhansk Airport.
Their bodies covered him He has a spinal injury and undergoes rehabilitation so he can walk again.
Kids from the “Club of Youth Peacekeepers “ , from Kamianets-­‐ Podilskyi in west Ukraine, came to Kiev to attend a youth camp.
The camp is located on the Khortica Island Cultural Reserve and is one of the largest islands on the Dnieper river.
Dniepropetrovsk residents pay respect at a service for the fallen Unnamed Soldiers held in the city center.
This was a mass funeral for 21 unidentified Ukrainian solders, who were killed in the area of an anti-terrorist operation.
Before the burial experts collected DNA samples for further identification.
It was destroyed on July 3, 2014, at 8:15 in the morning during the battle for Slavyansk.
Nina thought her daughter would be safer with her, because the house was next to a large communal heating plant, but it ended up being a target.
Up to 25 people died in the house and many survivors have no place to live.
Leonid Bibik dressed as a ousted president Victor Yanukovich, poses for photographs with people visiting Mezhygorie, the private residence of the former president, which was taken over by protesters.
He was wounded on February 18 when he drove a van into the Berkut and was shot at.
Now he works in Mezhygorie and the money he earns posing for photos goes towards maintenace of the place.
My story explores the division of Ukraine, using the Dnieper river as my guide.
I document how the mixed ethnic and historical legacies of Ukraine brought people into their present realities.
It was a continuation of the work I did in Crimea in 2008 about a place being neither really proUkrainian nor pro-Russian.
While working in various parts of the country, from Kiev to Donetsk and along the river I asked people many questions, including, what it means to be Ukrainian , if the Dnieper River is a border or the main artery of the country and why there is a war in the East.
I will revisit people and places I photographed to see how their life’s has changed within a year, beginning with the Maidan revolution and full scale war in Donbas to the shaky cease fire which is now in place.
She was a stylist from Crimea living in Kiev, who became a Maidan activist.
Now she helps other IDPs and the Army, and considers joining the Volunteer Battalion and fighting, if necessary.
Now, dressed in a costume of ousted president Victor Yanukovich, he poses for photographs with Ukrainians visiting the private residence of the former president, taken over during the protests.
In my story, the Dnieper River is a symbolic line of reference that serves as a metaphor for the present split in the country.
Making the Dnieper the line of reference for my story allows me to talk about the most important issues in a wider political, historical and geographical context, which is so absent from the stories I see about Ukraine.
The river is a major symbol of Ukrainian statehood that unites extensive areas on both its banks.
Lands on the right bank have commonly been considered the heartland of ethnic Ukrainian territory,while the left bank has identified as Russian.
Today’s eastern and western Ukraine even have different versions of recent Soviet history.
The lingua franca of eastern Ukraine is Russian while in the western part of the country it is Ukrainian.
However, in public spaces, including TV political talk-shows, people mixed both languages while speaking to each other, as if there was no division at all.
My goal is to cover as many perspectives as possible across a country divided between Western and Russian sympathies and connections.
I came to understand how that state of affairs affected not only individuals, but the entire society.
Poland, and my own family, have had a very troubled history with Ukraine, yet it is Poland which is Ukraine’s strongest supporter today.
While relations between Ukraine and Poland serve as an example of a noteasy but nevertheless possible reconciliation, Ukraine’s other neighbor, Russia, practices an opposite strategy, which is to keep people apart by supporting war, divisions and hatred.
I strongly believe that what Ukraine needs now more than anything is reconciliation among its own citizens.
The country’s internal split was deepened by the armed conflict in Donbas and it is being fueled by propaganda that creates new historical narratives.
With my work I am trying to reconstruct a common narrative where opposing sides can understand each other’s motivations.
Photography is an excellent tool to discuss complicated and painful topics in societies which have been affected by political turmoil.
It is a non-aggressive medium, which does not create definitive statements, but rather allows people to start open discussions and listen and look at each other without pre-conceptions.
Ultimately, I would like to exhibit my work in cities across Ukraine in an effort to create a common platform of understanding.
My work will hopefully provide residents of different regions an opportunity to see themselves in the context of belonging to one shared country they share rather than one that is split by local differences.
Despite the war and its aftermath, Ukraine was never more united as a nation and there is still a huge space left for dialogue and forgiveness.
There were many stories done about the war in Donbas but not many long-term documentary stories done about the entire country.
First, the Maidan Revolution in Kiev, then Crimea and the war there, dominated the narrative in the news.
Now, Ukraine has faded away from the news all together – at a time when fundamental changes are taking shape within Ukrainian society and the geopolitical map of the whole post-Soviet space is being redrawn.
I am a self-taught freelance photographer based in Tbilisi, Georgia for the last 10 years.
Since 2010, I have started to explore a new topic dedicated to women, sexuality and gender issues in the former Soviet space.I began my career in 1999 in Poland, where I’m from, reporting for the daily newspaper, Gazeta Wyborcza.
A year later, I started freelancing because it’s important for me to be able to choose my own stories and to tell them the way I think is best.
I go on assignments to shoot news stories, but I equally focus my energy on personal documentary work , and if needed self-assign the stories I personaly care for.
