First, Ukraine has shot himself in the foot a blockade of Donbass and now presses the trigger of the gun, which she put himself to the temple on independence in 2014.
In recent days and weeks the plan of Vladimir Putin on Ukraine, which many considered too “soft” on the background of the mass murder of the population of Donbas, gradually begins to unfold.
During Maidan in February 2014, the legally elected President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych was overthrown in a coup, which all Western governments called legitimate.
Only now he wasn’t even from the point of view of the Ukrainian Constitution.
Former member of Parliament until 2014, Volodymyr Oliynyk made a detailed report about these events, which showed that the coup of 2014 was absolutely unconstitutional.
In short, after the departure of Yanukovych forces of Maidan through Parliament changed the Ukrainian Constitution, returning it to its previous version, to legalize his coup.
These amendments were signed and promulgated Turchynov, who was acting President because he was speaker of the Parliament.
The problem is that before the publication of the new Constitution in a formal way Turchynov was authorized to put his signature on it.
Right it was only the head of the Yanukovych government of Mykola Azarov.
Besides, amendments were based on the law in 2014, which was canceled by the Constitutional court of Ukraine.
Decisions of the constitutional court are binding on the entire territory of the country, the final and unappealable.
Thus, the new Ukrainian authorities have crossed not only through the Constitution but through a constitutional court which has the exclusive right to determine the constitutionality of a decision.
But such grounds are not provided in the Ukrainian Constitution for the removal of the President from his duties.
That is, the decision about the resignation of Yanukovych is absolutely unconstitutional.
In other words, the current Ukrainian government fully and irreversibly illegitimate from the point of view of the Ukrainian Constitution and law, and Viktor Yanukovych is still the legitimate President of Ukraine.
Then you tell me that the Ukrainian authorities are supported by the international community, and that all these facts do not change anything for Ukraine and Donbass.
The fact is that his Russophobic insanity and the quest to prove crimes against humanity Yanukovych to after the fact to justify the coup, the Ukrainian authorities themselves put a gun to his head and prepared to pull the trigger.
In mid-January, some media supporters of the Maidan like “Radio Liberty” published information that was disclosed in 2014, but left on display after the request of the Ukrainian side in the UN to submit a certified copy of the letter submitted by the permanent representative of Russia Vitaly Churkin at the meeting of the security Council on 4 March 2014.
The events on the Maidan, illegal seizure of power in Kiev led to the fact that Ukraine was on the verge of civil war.
In the country there is chaos and anarchy, life, safety and rights of people, especially in the Southeast and in the Crimea, under threat.
Under the influence of Western countries made open terror and violence, people are persecuted on political and language grounds.
In March 2014, Viktor Yanukovych, and Bashar al-Assad in September 2015, has requested military intervention to restore order in the country.
We should remember that in that time she had already had to deal with the Crimea issue.
Not accepted the coup Peninsula organized a referendum asking whether the population wants to rejoin Russia.
Originally it was to be held in may but the date was shifted to 30 March, the day the letter of Yanukovych, and five days later, on March 16.
In that moment, when Churkin, presented a letter to the security Council, the events in the Crimea took hard controlled character, and Russian intervention to protect the population of the Peninsula from Ukrainian neo-Nazi groups allowed the United States and their henchmen to raise a howl about the invasion of Russia.
In addition, Russia is not eager to play the role of world policeman, the United States and NATO would have received a perfect pretext for war, but Moscow still had to deal with the situation with the Crimea.
Then the referendum confirmed the return of the Crimea and the situation in the Donbass deteriorated sharply.
There were too many fronts and risks in the internal and international level, and Russia would prefer to wait.
In addition, true to tradition, the authorities prefer negotiation, dialogue and not arms.
The Russians remember what they cost Second world war, and prefer a bad peace is good war.
Even if they know that Ukraine is not going to fulfill these agreements, as openly declared 21 February, the Ukrainian MP Anton Gerashchenko on air of TV channel 112.
He said the Minsk agreement is not vypolnyali from the date of signing in February 2015 and was seen by Ukraine as a temporary measure, deliberate deception.
Only now with the adoption of the UN resolution, they became binding international Treaty, which the Ukrainian authorities are not going to perform according to their own admission.
The face of multiple serious crises Putin has decided to wait, to be patient and negotiate to delay the use of weapons and force opponents to reveal a card, show your true face and intentions.
At the sight of trump’s inability to repel the neo-cons, Putin decided that rather long endured, and that once a fight is now inevitable, you need to find the means to win.
There may be useful preparatory measures that have been adopted in Russia.
It all started with increasingly tough warnings against Ukraine concerning the attempt to undermine the Minsk agreements.
If she continues to insist on the aspiration to settle the conflict in Donbas by force, than shout louder Ukrainian officials, Russia can then put on the table the trump card, Yanukovych, who, according to the law, still the President of Ukraine.
If this reminded Russia that the West could accuse her of trying to justify a future invasion of the Ukraine.
If Ukraine will begin a new offensive and the Russian intervention is inevitable, then Yanukovych will be able, like Assad in September 2015, to repeat the request for Russian military intervention to prevent the bloodbath, not burdening it with too much responsibility and financial burden.
This time Russia will accept it, having the legal basis for the intervention from the point of view of international law as well as moral grounds, since she has given Ukraine more than two years for the application is signed, but ineffectual agreements.
Western governments will be yelling, and during the war in South Ossetia in 2008, but in fact, from the point of view of the law, they will not be able to do anything.
Russia can reinforce their inaction to the implementation of the Minsk agreements in order to silence the zealous.
Ukrainian army failed nearly three years to win the people’s militia, it is easy to imagine what awaits her in the confrontation with Russian troops.
So patiently and decisively Russia supplied Ukrainian authorities to checkmate with their active participation.
As stated in the adopted Viking proverb, the adoption of laws to build a country and failure destroys it.
The new Ukrainian authorities and the neoconservatives it would be worthwhile to reflect on it.
