Some three months after victory in Europe, development of these weapons was completed and they were immediately used against Japan to shorten the Pacific War and prevent the large numbers of casualties anticipated in the planned invasion of the Japanese home islands.
In the aftermath of Japan’s subsequent surrender, they were viewed as instruments of warfighting that enabled the United States to safely downsize its overseas military presence in the face of the Soviet Union’s superior conventional might that threatened the free nations of Western Europe.
After the Soviet Union conducted its first nuclear test in 1949, an unconstrained bilateral arms race began, and the arsenals of the United States and Soviet Union eventually rose to the dizzying height of some thirty thousand and forty thousand weapons, respectively.
As the arsenals grew, their purpose evolved to emphasize deterring war, rather than fighting war, and both sides became locked in a mutual assured deterrence relationship.
But it was also clear that there were pressures to maintain an arsenal well beyond the needs of assuring a devastating retaliation.
In any event, with the end of the Cold War and demise of the Soviet Union, the perceived importance of nuclear weapons diminished greatly in the United States.
Although Russia depended even more on nuclear weapons as its conventional capabilities atrophied, it faced grave economic difficulties in maintaining its huge inherited nuclear arsenal.
As a result, the arsenals of both the United States and Russia were significantly reduced.
When the war on terrorism took center stage a decade later, in the United States all things nuclear became secondary considerations in national security strategy.
As we enter the fourth decade of the post–Cold War era, national security is once again focusing on peer and near-peer competitors and nuclear weapons are regaining their previous Cold War position at the foundation of national security strategy.
While perceptions of nuclear threats are rising, current circumstances and the Cold War differ in many, many dimensions.
So rather than simply reverting to Cold War thinking, it is timely to review the necessary and proper roles of nuclear weapons as we look ahead over the coming decades.
Their role in deterring nuclear strikes by other nuclear states is well-plowed ground, although there remain serious differences regarding the arsenal size and composition, as well as elements of associated nuclear doctrine, necessary to underwrite deterrence.
By contrast, what is far less understood is the role of nuclear weapons in crisis initiation, progression, and outcome.
Our research program is designed to fill this important intellectual gap by challenging the continued relevance of Cold War thinking in several critical dimensions.
In particular, we question continued applicability of quantitative research—based on Cold War crises—that emphasizes the correlation of superiority in the nuclear balance with favorable crisis outcomes.
We have been partially motivated by the work of Matthew Kroenig, who in an important analysis of Cold War nuclear crises concludes that viii THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY APPLIED PHYSICS LABORATORY the side with the larger nuclear arsenal is more likely to achieve its objectives in a crisis.
However, we are unconvinced that his findings apply to the current era.
In addition, there is great uncertainty in estimates of the probability of “winning” a crisis.
In our first publication under this research program, we demonstrate methods for appropriately quantifying such uncertainty and presenting it in a manner accessible to policy makers.
Further statistical analyses are planned for post–Cold War nuclear crises, which are arguably better indicators of the roles of nuclear weapons now and in the future.
We recognize that because there have been only a handful of these crises, statistical analyses will have large uncertainties in results.
However, our perspective is that this is not a reason to abandon such analyses.
Large uncertainties reflect the reality of our limited understanding of nuclear crises.
To complement our statistical analyses, we are conducting case studies of post–Cold War nuclear crises.
In contrast to historical statistical analyses, case studies provide a richness of context and detail that, in the ideal, can establish causal linkages between nuclear weapons and crisis outcomes.
This paper, which addresses the role of nuclear weapons in the Crimean crisis, represents our first such study.
While nuclear weapons do not directly figure into much of this chronology, it provides the necessary foundation for understanding the crisis and the episodes in which nuclear weapons did play a clear role.
The appendix focuses on coding the variables that are often invoked in the academic literature to describe crises and is intended to support future statistical analyses.
Other planned case studies will address the crisis involving the North Korean nuclear weapons program, the Doklam Plateau crisis between India and China, and the series of India–Pakistan crises over Kashmir.
Finally, we are concerned that brinkmanship has been unreasonably dominant in attempts to explain the broad variety of behaviors exhibited in nuclear crisis.
We will assess the ability and limitations of this theory to contribute to our understanding of post–Cold War nuclear crises and investigate alternative theories that might better explain behaviors and outcomes in nuclear crises.
We will try to answer the question of whether it makes sense to try to develop an overarching theory of behavior in nuclear crises or, alternatively, to develop a set of complementary theories whose applicability depends on crisis characteristics.
All this work is motivated by the belief that a more complete understanding of the roles of nuclear weapons— that includes both crisis management as well as deterrence—will lead to wiser decisions regarding nuclear capabilities development and deployment, arms control policy, crisis management, and myriad other aspects of national security strategy.
Despite explicit nuclear posturing, the episode in Crimea is often overlooked as a nuclear crisis, being instead considered a crisis between Russia and Ukraine.
But when analyzed as a confrontation between Russia and the United States, the invasion of Crimea points to notable implications for the nuclear balance, resolve, and crisis management.
Ukraine’s removal of Yanukovych from office saw Russia take immediate military action to invade and occupy the Crimean Peninsula.
In response, the United States sought to maintain Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
The crisis held a grave importance for Russia, which viewed it less as a fight against Ukraine and more as a confrontation with the West over ground that held deep military, national, cultural, and symbolic significance.
Russia’s military gains on the ground were maintained throughout the crisis under its threats to use nuclear weapons or deploy nuclear weapons to the peninsula.
Meanwhile, despite public disagreement among United States policy and military leaders, the United States’ responses remained diplomatic and economic.
Nuclear weapons played a recurring role in the progression and outcome of the crisis in Crimea.
Ukraine’s disarmament in exchange for national security guarantees in the 1990s meant that, even if nuclear weapons were never invoked by actors during the crisis itself, the crisis would nevertheless carry implications for future disarmament and nonproliferation efforts.
Vladimir Putin claimed to have considered a nuclear alert at the outset of the crisis, and on the day of the Crimean referendum to leave Ukraine, Russia televised a thinly veiled nuclear threat against the United States.
Russia’s military actions and maneuvers before the referendum sought to deter intervention against the invasion of Crimea.
After the referendum, Russia escalated military actions on the peninsula and leveraged nuclear threats to solidify the new status quo on the ground.
These threats and posturing continued into 2015, parallel to another crisis in Donbass.
The United States was the primary target of Russian nuclear posturing during this period.
While it is not clear that the United States would have sought to intervene if Russia had not drawn nuclear red lines, it is evident that Russia did not accept US nonintervention as a given and took steps to deter intervention through both public and private channels.
The nonstrategic element of the Russian arsenal carried a special significance due to Russia’s standing military doctrine at the time and the development of Russian strategies inflating the role of nonstrategic nuclear weapons in otherwise conventional confrontations.
The dual-use nature of Russia’s weapons associated with the nonstrategic nuclear arsenal played an exacerbating role in nuclear posturing during the crisis, provoking tense public exchanges around the possible deployment of nuclear forces into occupied Crimea.
Combined with direct threats to use nuclear force against any attempt to return Crimea to Ukraine, vagueness around the presence of nuclear arms escalated tensions.
Finally, Russia’s standing doctrine allowing for nuclear first use was an important contribution to the plausibility of Russian threats.
In-depth case analysis of Russia’s invasion of Crimea and the ensuing crisis demonstrates how several variables played instrumental roles in the progression and outcome, carrying implications for the nature x THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY APPLIED PHYSICS LABORATORY of confrontation between nuclear powers.
While the United States had overall nuclear superiority, this did not translate into greater resolve or victory.
The deterrent potential of this nonstrategic nuclear superiority was buttressed by a military doctrine for first use in response to conventional force, demonstrated through nuclear exercises and leveraged during the course of the crisis through nuclear threats, allusions, and the movement of dual-use weapons on the Crimean Peninsula.
These findings suggest that the academic community should consider nonstrategic nuclear balance and the perceived plausibility of first-use threats in addition to overall arsenal balance in future studies of nuclear crises.
Finally, for the policy community, the crisis in Crimea suggests that Russia will be willing to brandish its nonstrategic nuclear weapons in combination with its first-use policy to deter the United States in future crises.
While Crimea might not have been viewed as a vital national interest to the United States, were this a NATO nation, that calculation would likely have been different.
Future strategy development, war games, and national security exercises should account for Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear arsenal and how it is leveraged to threaten and intimidate the United States and its allies.
The United States needs a strategic approach to deterring aggressive Russian revisionist actions in the future, and that approach needs to account for the threat of nonstrategic nuclear weapons.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  1 Introduction reinforce the findings of Frankel, Scouras, and Ullrich, who in 2017 emphasized the impact of nonIn early 2014, the Russian Federation responded to strategic asymmetry and the importance of “access the culminating Euromaidan movement in Ukraine to proportionate rungs on the escalatory ladder.” by invading, occupying, and annexing Crimea.
They concluded that Russia’s reliance on its “modActing without markings and accompanied by ernized nonstrategic nuclear weapons arsenal, with official denials from the Kremlin, Russian forces its large numerical advantage over NATO and lowisolated and occupied Ukrainian political and yield, high-accuracy, and other attractive warfightmilitary sites on the peninsula.
Russia’s actions ing characteristics, is central to its national security sparked a crisis much larger than that in Ukraine, strategy.
These weapons, along with Russia’s post– with United States leaders considering military responses, Cold War nuclear doctrine . . . presage a challengincluding “increasing military exercises, forward ing future for the United States and NATO.”2 deploying additional military equipment and personnel, and increasing naval, air, and Finally, the appendix includes a coding and ground presence,”1 all amid aggressive nuclear discussion of variables to support future statisposturing from Moscow.
Viewing Ukraine as a tical analyses, including a close examination of stage for its confrontation with the United States the publicly available data on the nuclear balance, and Europe, Russia, in addition to the invasion, and presents assumptions that address inherent advanced nuclear messaging and threats meant to ambiguities. deter any intervention on behalf of Ukraine.
Thus, while Ukraine was, at the time of the crisis, Coding the Crisis no longer a nuclear weapons state, nuclear arms The International Crisis Behavior project nevertheless played an important role in the crisis. maintains the data set of record for the analysis of This case study examines the context and historical international crises.
This analysis deviates from background of the crisis, presents a chronology of the coding of the ICB data in two ways.
First, events and actions within the crisis, and examines the United States is considered to be an actor what nuclear weapons characteristics played a in the crisis, making it a nuclear crisis between role in the crisis.
In contrast, the ICB data codes with the Kievan Rus, and the conversion of much of the staggered invasion of Ukraine as a single crisis the Slavic world to Orthodox Christianity began in , beginning with the removal Crimea.
After that time, the territory that would of Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych on later become Ukraine was persistently contested February 22, 2014, and ending with the ejection of and divided among competing imperial powers Ukrainian forces from Debaltseve on February 18, until the western regions of Ukraine held by Poland 2015.
The importance of Ukrainian agriculture invasion of Crimea and that of Donbass in Russian meant that the country enjoyed relatively lenient policy statements7 and Western responses8 merits treatment under the USSR system before the ascent considering the two as separate, albeit concurrent, of Joseph Stalin.
While this creates overlap and interaction collectivization, grain quotas, Russification, and between escalating violence in Donbass and the persecution, culminating in a devastating famine latter part of the Crimea crisis, the post-annexation and the deaths of between three and ten million Ukrainians.
Conquered by the Russian “Russia’s International Assertiveness,” 39; Trenin, “Russia’s Empire in 1774, the Crimean Peninsula was later a Spheres of Interest, Not Influence”; and AOWG, Ambiguous Threats, Phase 2, 9.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  3 vital bulwark against the coalition of Great Britain, and Ukraine, stressing the unity of Ukrainians France, Sardinia, and Turkey during the Crimean and Russians.
This history informed Russia’s percepchev and Soviet power brokers in the UkSSR.17 tion that Crimea was a critical buffer against foreign De-Stalinization under Khrushchev also saw some powers and that losing the peninsula would underrevival of Ukrainian national identity and language, mine Russia’s status as a great power. followed by another cycle of Russification under Leonid Brezhnev.
Throughout World War II, Ukrainian nationalist political organizations and insurgent forces purUnder Mikhail Gorbachev’s liberalized policies sued Ukrainian independence from the USSR, with of glasnost and perestroika (restrucsome factions working with Germany while others turing), reduced censorship meant residents of fought against both the Nazi and Red armies. the UkSSR could reconnect with Ukrainian diasStalin did not consider Ukraine an indispensable pora abroad and opposition political materials part of Russia during the war, at one point authocould be published.
The 1986 disaster at the Cherrizing an offer of Ukraine to the German forces in nobyl Nuclear Power Plant in northern Ukraine exchange for the safety of Russia itself.
Industrialization was accelerated, the Soviet system collapsed in Poland, Hungary, Ukrainian nationalists were deported, and millions and Czechoslovakia, Ukraine declared sovereignty of ethnic Russians came to the UkSSR from across from the USSR on July 16, 1990,21 followed a year the USSR to rebuild and industrialize the country, later by a declaration of complete independence on causing long-standing demographic shifts in the August 24, 1991.22 Ukrainian population.
Ukrainian independence sparked a series of critIndustrialization saw the USSR become an ical diplomatic developments and negotiations important center for the Soviet arms industry and, between the young burgeoning country and the in turn, Soviet politics.
Ukraine did not, however, have operational domestic political pressure on Boris Yeltsin against control of the weapons, which were dependent on concessions.
Driven nuclear weapons for dismantling in Russia, Ukraine by global anxiety around stability and the level of felt it was denied its fair share of the significant control over tactical nuclear arms scattered across financial compensation Russia received from the the former Soviet Union, Ukraine relinquished United States in exchange for the weapons-grade control of all the roughly three thousand inherited uranium extracted from the weapons.
Russian politactical nuclear weapons by May 1992.24 While the ticians’ expressions of territorial claims over parts remaining strategic nuclear arsenal was of signifof Ukraine also exacerbated diplomatic tensions icant concern to the international community, and prolonged negotiations for Ukraine’s strathe Crimean Peninsula and the city of Sevastopol tegic arsenal.
Godsberg, and Garbose, “Ukraine Special Weapons”; Arbman 27 and Thornton, Russia’s Tactical Nuclear Weapons, 18; and Gardner, Crimea, Global Rivalry, 48.
The Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol declare independence from Ukraine and adopt a integrity or political independence of Ukraine.”32 new constitution.
Nevertheless, negotiations Another peculiar element of the Russo-Ukrainian on the final status of Crimea and Sevastopol would negotiations over Crimea was how Russia situpersist for several more years.
The Crimea issue was ated the city of Sevastopol as a separate issue to be finally settled in 1997 under two Russo-Ukrainian resolved.
This Westward drift included all its remaining nuclear weapons and its accession the pursuit of formal ties with NATO and the EU— to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear in both cases, hopes of eventual membership would Weapons as a non-nuclear-weapon state, be hindered by endemic corruption.
In the most controversial presidential election between pro-Western Viktor action, Yanukovych and his party extended Russia’s Yushchenko and Viktor Yanukovych, who favored soon-to-expire lease of the port in Sevastopol to closer ties to Moscow, brought the controversy to 2042 in exchange for energy discounts, sparking a boiling point.
From 2007 to late 2009, Ukraine Euromaidan was subjected to a series of energy disputes, financial panics, and gas shortages.
This period was also Culminating years of growing economic integration characterized by a more threatening and militarily among post-Soviet Eurasian states, Russia, Belarus, aggressive Russia.
At a NATO summit in Bucharest, and Kazakhstan signed a compact in November 2011 Putin warned that if Ukraine joined the alliance, it that laid the groundwork for the Eurasian Economic would risk losing Crimea and eastern Ukraine.
Union , announcing hopes of full estabLater that year, in August 2008, Russia invaded lishment Georgia, another prospective NATO member by 2015.
Russia succeeded in president Dmitry Medvedev, Vladimir Putin (then securing separatist regions of Georgia, creating a prime minister) took an active role in promoting frozen conflict and effectively curtailing the prosthe EAEU.39 Putin lifted up Eurasian integration pect of NATO membership.
Notably, the Black as a flagship initiative of his third term as presiSea Fleet based in Sevastopol, Crimea, particident starting in 2012, with plans for the EAEU and pated in the conflict, demonstrating its criticality associated institutions to serve as geopolitical and to Russia’s efforts to maintain power and influence economic counterweights against EU influence. in the region.
Nevertheless, the Ukrainian government of presiWhile Russia and Ukraine struck an oil transit dent Yanukovych persisted in pursuing an assocideal to end the energy disputes,38 earlier austerity ation agreement with the EU, only seeking measures the Yushchenko government had imposed observer status in the EAEU.41 By 2013, Yanukovych to manage the economic damage were widely unpophad consolidated significant political and economic ular, contributing to Yanukovych’s electoral victory power, having prosecuted political rivals42 and built in 2010.
The Yanukovych administration withdrew a powerful oligarchic network around himself.
MAY Russia declares that gifting of Crimea to Ukraine was illegitimate.
Using carrots and sticks, Russia targets countries seeking an Association Agreement with the EU; SEP explicitly threatens Ukraine at Yalta.
Ukraine announces it will not sign the AA to “ensure the national security of Ukraine,” 2013 NOV 21 sparking beginning of the Euromaidan protests.
Although Ukraine surrendered its inherited nuclear weapons and received formal security assurances, its peace with Russia was progressively threatened after the USSR collapsed.
Ukraine sought to balance Russian ties with Western economic integration— viewed by Moscow as a violation of its sphere of influence and a threat to EAEU success.
Threats and measures against Ukraine led Yanukovych to reject EU association, triggering Euromaidan and his removal from office.
The living Russia, however, viewed the AA as a threat to its standard will decline dramatically . . . there core interests—not only did it undermine the will be chaos.
Russia is the German president Angela Merkel and Lithuanian main creditor of Ukraine.
Only with cuspresident Dalia Grybauskaite, and in a video he was toms union with Russia can Ukraine baloverheard saying, “I’d like you to listen to me.
During the earliest days of Euromaidan leading up Despite Moscow’s aid to Ukraine, Euromaidan to the Vilnius summit and into January 2014, EU grew through January and February. officials and national leaders expressed support for the protests, warned against any violent suppresThe goals of the United States, meanwhile, were sion, and praised the growth of pro-EU sentiment the end of violent suppression of protesters, the in Ukraine, including hopes that Yanukovych facilitation of new elections, and the resumption would reverse his decision.
Speaking at a news conference, President Kyiv’s Independence Square, which served as the epicenter for Obama said he had “urged the military in Ukraine protests.
Invasion and multiparty technical government that can . . . adopt Annexation of Crimea reforms necessary for free and fair elections next year,” and called for the respect of basic human Leading up to Russia’s decision to invade Crimea, freedoms, saying “the people obviously have a very while the attention of the world was fixed on Kyiv, different view and vision for their country.”57 there was a series of escalating political signals and threats concerning the fate of the peninsula should Russia’s primary goal through the Euromaidan the Yanukovych regime be removed.
These took crisis was to preserve and stabilize the rule of the the form of political pressure and official actions client Yanukovych regime, while also incentivizing of Russian officials, actions and demonstrations of the regime to stay the course in reorientation Russian nongovernmental organizations toward Russia.
On the same day as President in Crimea, and the mobilization of armed opposiObama’s sanctions and statements against the tion and paramilitary groups.
In partner, and we will use all our influence to help response to Euromaidan, the Supreme Council this country live calmly and in peace.”58 expressed its support for the Yanukovych government, urging him to declare a state of emergency, The next day, on February 20, Russian prime and pro-Russian groups staged rallies in Simferminister Medvedev stated that Moscow could only opol supporting Ukrainian entry into the Eurasian cooperate fully with Ukraine if its leadership was in Customs Union.
However, Crimean support for “good shape” and that Russia would not hand over Russia was not unanimous.
The moment it became clear that the Yanukovych government As Euromaidan progressed, signals and measures would not survive Euromaidan was when Russia around Crimea increased.
These included public initiated the invasion and occupation of Ukraine on discussion of separatism and secession by local the Crimean Peninsula and the nuclear crisis began.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  11 officials and Russian television broadcasts, meetForces and six Mi-8 helicopters were airlifted into ings between local and Russian officials, the distriAnapa near Crimea, and additional strategic airlift bution of Russian passports, the spread of claims Il-76 aircraft were redeployed to the city.
Russian that a new government in Kyiv would threaten armored personnel carriers also moved out from ethnic-Russian populations and restrict use of the base into the city, and pro-Russian protests in the Russian language (some Russian NGOs even Sevastopol asserted that they had elected a new citing the threat of “genocide”), the mobilization of city leader—Russian citizen Aleksei Chaly.
Russian “self-defense units” and Cossacks to patrol streets members of parliament later arrived to offer Russian and erect checkpoints, and official deliberation citizenship and passports, promising that should and actions of local officials toward separatism and Crimea ask to join Russia, it would be addressed appeals to Russia. swiftly.
On February 25, the Black Sea Fleet was put on alert, Russian troops arrived in the Crimean city Although Russia clearly made preparations for a of Yalta, and Gazprom announced it might increase potential invasion and annexation, its decision to gas prices for Ukraine. invade Crimea was directly responsive to the fall of the Yanukovych government.
Moscow and said that, should Yanukovych fall, Under armed occupation, the Crimean regional Crimea would be prepared “to join Russia.”65 government was dissolved and reformed and passed a measure approving a referendum on the On February 22, the same day Yanukovych was status of Crimea seeking greater autonomy from officially removed from office, Spetsnaz of the Main Ukraine.
The ports in Sevastopol were blockaded, Intelligence Directorate were sent to Crimea with Ukrainian Navy and Coast Guard vessels to secure strategic Russian facilities.
Russian fighter jets were put on Russia announced new embargoes against food from Ukraine, but the military apparatus was also put in motion.
Later that night, unmarked special operJohn Kerry also condemned Russia’s “incrediators surrounded Belbek air base, and convoys of ble act of aggression” and threatened sanctions on Russian transport and attack helicopters moved March 2, saying, “You just don’t in the 21st century into Ukrainian airspace over Crimea the next behave in 19th century fashion by invading another morning.
Ashton added, “The unity, sovereignty and territorial On February 28, in response to these developintegrity of Ukraine must be respected at all times ments, President Obama issued a statement saying and by all sides.
Any violation of these principles is the United States was “deeply concerned by reports unacceptable.
Mixed Use of Military and Civilians Ukrainian side of the Kerch Strait, and in Feodosiya peninsula, and armed Russian troops took up posts besieged a Ukrainian base and blockaded the port outside Ukrainian bases in Sevastopol and Simferwith a Russian warship.
The influx of Russian military hardware into forces and vehicles traveled from Sevastopol to the peninsula continued with the arrival of ten Simferopol, and Russian forces posted guards at combat helicopters and ten strategic lift aircraft. the gates of a Ukrainian army base in Perevalne.
Russia denied day, telling reporters it justified the movement of the reports, and the Russian envoy to the United Russian forces into the peninsula.
On March 6, Nations claimed that Yanukovych (at the the Supreme Council of Crimea, under new time still recognized by Russia as president of Ukraine) asked Putin in writing for the use of force 73 “Yanukovych ‘Asked Russia for Troops’ ”; “US, Britain, EU in Ukraine.
Violence between demonstrators in members of the body being barred from entering Crimea continued leading up to the referendum, to participate in the vote.
Russian lawmakers talks between Kerry and Lavrov two days prior responded to the vote with promises to receive ended in a stalemate, and on the eve of the vote Crimea if the peninsula voted to leave in the referRussia vetoed a draft resolution at the UN Security endum, as Russian military hardware continued Council that would have declared the referendum to flow into the region and the first public cereinvalid.
Ukrainian forces also continued, including the The day after the referendum, Russia recognized mixed use of soldiers and civilians armed Crimea as a sovereign state, and Crimean officials with sticks and clubs to set up machine gun posts issued an appeal to be admitted into the Russian along a Ukrainian army landing strip in Saki,78 and Federation with the status of a republic.
An initial the last military airstrip on the peninsula was under reunification treaty was signed the next day on Russian control soon after, on March 9.
Soldiers and demonstrators then stormed day, Russian forces crossed into portions of mainUkrainian military bases across Crimea, including land Ukraine adjacent to Crimea to set up mineUkraine’s naval headquarters in Sevastopol, killing fields across the narrow corridor connecting the an officer and arresting a Ukrainian admiral. peninsula to the mainland.
Ukrainian anti-aircraft Ukraine authorized soldiers to use their weapons forces in Yevpatoria were surrounded and ordered defensively in response but later announced the to surrender or face attack,79 and Russian troops withdrawal of its troops from the peninsula and captured a missile depot in Chornomorske. the country’s withdrawal from the Commonwealth The Supreme Council of Crimea declared the peninof Independent States.
At this juncture in the sula’s independence from Ukraine on March 11, crisis, EU Parliament president Martin Schulz as the Russian Foreign Ministry pointed to the described war as “a genuine possibility,” saying that secession of Kosovo from Serbia as legitimizing “something has changed” and that “some people precedent for the impending referendum.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  15 2014 Russia appears to begin preparations to invade Crimea.
Yanukovych, having fled Ukraine to Russia, is removed 22 22 from office.
Supreme Council of Crimea occupied, dissolved, and reformed to pass measure approving referendum.
Ukrainian forces in Crimea are besieged and given United States announces it will not send a delegation to the ultimatum to denounce Ukraine and swear loyalty to 3 3 Paralympics in Sochi. new Crimean government.
Russia vetoes UN Security Council resolution that would 15 declare referendum invalid.
Russian soldiers and armed civilians storm Ukrainian 19 19 Ukrainian troops begin withdrawal from Crimea. military bases in Crimea; Ukrainian admiral is killed.
APR United States House leaders write open letter urging Obama to take 2 assertive action in support of Ukraine.
Russia progressively changed the situation on the ground in Crimea without major interruption.
It immobilized Ukrainian forces leading up to the referendum, after which Russian actions against remaining Ukrainian forces became violent.
At times the international community lagged in conclusively identifying forces seizing Crimean facilities, so Russian action does not assume assured knowledge and attribution at the time.
Invasion and Annexation Time Line 16 THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY APPLIED PHYSICS LABORATORY Resolution the peninsula as a new region ,88 this analysis does not consider that effort to be an On March 21, Putin signed the annexation of Crimea objective of the initial invasion of Crimea, which into Russian law.
The seizure of all Ukrainian miliwas responsive to the removal of Viktor Yanutary installations on the peninsula concluded over kovych.
In summary, Russia emerged from the the next two days as Russian forces massed along crisis in Crimea as the victor.
Finally, the last Ukrainian military personnel were ordered off the Ukraine, the EU, and the United States, on the peninsula on March 24.84 On March 31, soon after a other hand, once faced with the invasion of Crimea, brief removal of some Russian forces from the border sought to de-escalate tensions and avoid an armed region of Rostov at the urging of the United States, conflict while ensuring the territorial integrity Russia initiated the invasion of the Donbass region of Ukraine through negotiations and sanctions. of eastern Ukraine.
However, the annexation and The negotiations and sanctions failed to maintain removal of Ukrainian forces was not the end of the Ukraine’s territorial integrity or de-escalate the Crimea crisis.
As recounted in the analysis below, crisis—Russia secured de facto military and there followed a series of nuclear posturing and administrative control of Ukraine’s Crimean threats explicitly concerning Crimea, and, despite Peninsula, and armed conflict would nevertheless being concurrent with the invasion of Donbass, the come to be imposed on Ukraine in Donbass. crisis in Crimea was treated as separate from that in Donbass in high-level negotiations.
The prosexchange for international guarantees of territorial pect of Ukrainian integration into NATO also did integrity that were nevertheless violated.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  17 Peninsula.
The evaluation and analysis of the Crimea crisis Speaking in an interview for a state-sponsored below will first present a detailed examination 2015 documentary celebrating the annexation, of what roles nuclear weapons played in the Putin identified the morning of February 23, 2014, progression and outcome of the crisis, followed by as the moment when he gave the order for deputies an assessment of which characteristics of nuclear to plan the annexation of Crimea.
Putin’s account, his concerns of a Western military With reference to the progression of facts on the intervention led him to consider putting Russia’s ground, the nuclear elements of the crisis are here nuclear weapons on alert that morning.
While he presented in a separate but chronological narrative eventually decided against the alert as unnecessary, to more clearly isolate and analyze the roles of Putin said he was prepared to confront “the worst nuclear weapons in the crisis.
Now that function has been abandoned held a large, preplanned three-day nuclear exercise by President Obama and because of that Russia that reportedly included ten thousand soldiers, invaded Crimea.”105 thirty military units, and one thousand pieces of Russia continued to invoke its nuclear arsenal after equipment.1 the annexation of Crimea.
While it is important Ukraine also made allusions to nuclear weapons to note that references to nuclear weapons after in the midst of the invasion in mid-March, days April 6 overlap with the parallel crisis in eastern before the referendum.
Most notably, acting Ukraine,106 many of the invocations made explicit president of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov wrote a reference to Crimea.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  19 exercises typically included the participation of that triggered a Russian response.
At a July 9 press Putin noted that the Russian exercises had been conference, when asked about Heletey’s comments, announced as early as November 2013.112 The Lavrov responded by saying, “If it comes to Russian nuclear exercise in March was also previaggression against Russian territory, which Crimea ously scheduled.
USSTRATCOM’s Global LightThe following month, Putin escalated the nuclear ning 14 took place with little fanfare—just one rhetoric during a late August speech at a political short press release—and no live test launches youth camp.
Russia’s exercise, on the other hand, for the ouster of Yanukovych and separately said, was heavily publicized and commanded by Putin Russia is far from being involved in any himself; he was televised during the exercise alonglarge-scale conflicts.
We don’t want that and side “the presidents of Armenia, Belarus, Kyrgyzdon’t plan on it.
Thank God, I think no one is thinking in response to Ukrainian officials’ comments about of unleashing a large-scale conflict with retaking Crimea.
Blaming America’s “hostile” attitude toward waters were statements by Mikhail Ulyanov, head Russia, Putin expressed hope that Western leaders of the Foreign Ministry’s arms control department, would realize “the carelessness of attempts to who said, “I don’t know if there are nuclear weapons blackmail Russia,” given “the threat of a fall-out there now.
According to a press report by the Times, Commander Europe United States General Philip the threats were made in a high-level meeting in Breedlove announced to the press in November Germany between Russian generals—briefed by that Russia “moved forces that are capable of being Lavrov and speaking with Putin’s approval—and nuclear” to the peninsula.
The original argued that the Russian Federation has the right to impetus for the meeting was the recently increased deploy nuclear weapons to the peninsula, saying, NATO force presence in the Baltic states of Estonia, “Now Crimea has become part of a state which Latvia, and Lithuania.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  21 more forceful, warning concerned the Crimean between Ulyanov and Ukrainian foreign minister Peninsula specifically.
In Andrius Kubilius expressed fears that Putin “could this case, the international community will try not a global war but perhaps a small nuclear need to react most decisively.4 war” in the Baltics.1 Official statements concerning the possible deployNuclear Weapon Characteristics ment of nuclear weapons to Crimea persisted into mid-2015, beginning with a joint statement Russia leveraged nuclear threats and posturing of the NATO-Ukraine Commission.
Published in after the Crimean referendum to deter intervenMay, the statement broadly addressed the ongoing tion against the invasion and solidify the new crisis in eastern Ukraine but also dedicated a parastatus quo on the ground.
This reportedly led to Russian Soviet states into NATO, assessments of Russian Foreign Ministry official Mikhail Ulyanov once exercises revealed comparatively limited convenagain expressing Russia’s right to station nuclear tional capabilities.
This conventional asymmetry forces on the peninsula, sparking a back-and-forth and growing tension led Russia to greater depen130 dence on nonstrategic nuclear weapons.
Russia-1 host Kiselyov implies nuclear threat against MAR 11 Acting Ukrainian president publishes op-ed citing 16 guarantees made in exchange for nuclear disarmament and the United States.
Russia holds large three-day nuclear exercise. notes implications of invasion for nonproliferation.
JUN Lavrov alludes to Russian military doctrine reserving the 9 JUL right to nuclear use.
NOV 12 SACEUR announces that Russia had “moved forces that are Lavrov insists that Russia has the right to station nuclear capable of being nuclear” into Crimea. weapons in Crimea.
Russian nuclear posturing began on the day of the Crimean independence referendum.
Putin and Lavrov alluded to Russia’s nuclear strength and prospective first use, after which public statements shifted to the possible presence of nuclear weapons in Crimea.
In the public record, Russia’s most direct and high-profile communication of a nuclear red line in Crimea took place at an April 2015 meeting in Germany between Russian generals and unnamed former United States national security officials.
Nuclear Weapons in the Crisis Time Line The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  23 As observed by Thomas C Moore, “Russian nuclear the crisis, serving to validate comments on nuclear signaling is a pervasive element of Russian policy, first use and the movement of dual-use weapons. and while this signaling is meant to convey strength, has two objectives.
Starting with the March 3 debate and concern among United States military and politannouncement that there would be no presidenical leaders.
Although Russia had already held tial delegation to the 2014 Paralympics in Sochi,143 similar platforms at installations in Crimea for the actions then escalated through two rounds of some time, the ambiguity combined with Russian economic sanctions targeting key Russian figures statements on nuclear use heightened tensions and institutions involved in the invasion144 and around nonstrategic nuclear arms during the crisis the congressional debate of bills condemning the in “tit-for-tat action-reaction posturing, whether developments.
Although the United States would intended or not.”138 later offer military aid to Ukraine in response to Finally, the nature of Russia’s standing military Russia’s subsequent invasion of eastern Ukraine, doctrine at the time of the crisis was a factor the only other American action solely responsive to directly referenced by Russian political leadership the annexation of Crimea was the United States Department in public comments alluding to the use of nuclear of Energy’s suspension of cooperation projects with force.
In an extended interview concerning ties .148 his foreign policies, President Obama implied a belief that, because Ukraine is a more central Statements of United States senators and press reports on national interest to Russia than the United States, government officials’ comments indicate that Russia will always have more resolve in any the United States was surprised by the invasion, competition for escalatory dominance.
Ambiguity around about whether this is Russian troops coming across dual-use weapons platforms being moved to the the border or Russian troops moving around the peninsula, alongside official statements suggesting installations in Crimea.”151 the possible placement of nuclear arms in Crimea, likewise served to reinforce Russia’s nuclear However, an intelligence failure does not fully messaging.
While the United States had overall account for the pronounced restraint of United States actions, nuclear superiority , this did not which was as much a conscious policy decision translate into greater resolve or victory.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  25 Nuclear Crisis Outcomes,” Matthew Kroenig Finally, the way in which Russia brandished its concludes that “states that enjoy nuclear supenonstrategic nuclear arsenal and first-use policy riority over their opponents are more likely to during the crisis in Crimea should inform the prevail in nuclear crises,” arguing “that nuclear policy community of how Russia might seek to crises are competitions in risk taking, but that intimidate and deter the United States in future nuclear superior states are willing to run greater crises.
In Crimea, the United States did not risks than their nuclear inferior counterparts.”156 escalate in response to Russian nuclear posturing, Kroenig also affirmed the impact of political stakes appearing to determine that the United States objective in and proximity on crisis outcomes but found that the crisis was not vital enough to merit military the gravity of the crisis did not appear to influengagement or overt nuclear posturing in response. ence crisis outcomes.
Closer examination of Knowing that the United States did not intend to the crisis in Crimea confirms some of Kroenig’s intervene militarily, United States figures at the table during findings but challenges others.
Russia possessed the crisis did not consider nuclear red lines drawn greater proximity and higher political stakes in the by Russia to be viable threats.
But it appears that outcome than the United States, and the gravity Russia did not take United States nonintervention as a given, of the crisis was far greater for Russia as well (see brandishing nuclear weapons with an aim to deter the appendix)—all of which contributed to Russia’s the United States.
But Russia did not possess nuclear responses would likely be more urgent and the superiority over the United States.
Russia did, threat of tactical nuclear use considered a more however, possess a significantly larger nonstraplausible Russian response to United States conventional tegic nuclear arsenal, as well as a standing doctrine force.
Future United States strategy development, war games, for the first use of nuclear weapons in response to and national security exercises should account for conventional force—an arsenal and doctrine that Russia’s nonstrategic nuclear arsenal and how it is played an outsized and repeated role in the crisis. leveraged to threaten and intimidate the United States and its allies.
The United States needs a strategic approach So while the state with overall nuclear superiority to deterring aggressive Russian revisionist actions did not achieve its objectives in the crisis, the in the future, and that approach needs to account state with nonstrategic nuclear superiority, higher for the threat of nonstrategic nuclear weapons. stakes in the outcome of the crisis, the proximity and conventional capability to seize the initiative to invade, and standing first-use doctrine to buttress threats of nuclear use prevailed.
These findings imply that the academic community should consider the nonstrategic nuclear balance and the perceived plausibility of first-use threats in addition to overall arsenal balance in future studies of nuclear crises for their impacts on resolve and outcomes in a crisis.
Because of the persistence of Russia’s de facto control over the Crimean Peninsula with minimal resistance and no military action by the United States (despite deliberations), the outcome is coded as a win for the Russian Federation—which achieved its objective of ensuring control over the peninsula—and a loss for the United States—which failed to achieve its objective of preserving the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Control variables are detailed below as appropriate, including extensive discussion of the Nuclear Ratio and Superiority variables, as the available data presents challenging questions that require assumptions for coding.
Minuteman III Launches from Vandenberg The nature of the available data on the nuclear balance between Russia and the United States creates a certain level of ambiguity around which actor truly held nuclear superiority during the invasion of Crimea.
When using the data for an analysis of the nuclear crisis around Crimea, several assumptions are necessary to code the values for the Nuclear Ratio and Superiority variables.
When the assumptions detailed below are accepted as valid, one is able to code the Superiority variable as tipping slightly in the favor of the United States over the Russian Federation, with a Nuclear Ratio of 0.52 and 0.47, respectively.
Nevertheless, due to apparent discrepancies in how nuclear armaments have been counted through the years, the number of arms allows for the possibility that the Russian Federation had nuclear superiority in 2014.
Taken at face value, the 2014 worldwide deployments report shows a Russian superiority with 8,000 warheads , noting that “approximately 4,300 of the Russian warheads are operational or in military custody.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  29 In later years, however, the nuclear balance was portrayed differently in this data.
The total inventory, on the other hand, “counts warheads in the military stockpile as well as retired, but still intact, warheads awaiting dismantlement,”164 implying that this category of warhead should be excluded from arsenal counts.
While the NRDC data only covers 1945–2002, its structure appears to be consistent with later approaches in the worldwide deployments reports that exclude certain categories of warheads from the total arsenal count.
In fact, the NRDC data appears not only to exclude such warheads from much of its data but also to treat such data inconsistently between the United States and Soviet Union/Russian Federation.
First, “nuclear arsenal size” as assessed by Kroenig is more consistent with the worldwide deployments report definition of Military Stockpile than Total Inventory, meaning the exclusion of retired warheads awaiting dismantlement.
Second, it suggests that warheads “in reserve status” are not treated consistently across the historical data.
If retired warheads are counted in state arsenals for 2014, then the Russian Federation has nuclear superiority.
However, if retired warheads are not counted, then the United States has superiority.
Additionally, the NRDC method of excluding reserve warheads for Russia, but not the United States, would significantly impact the Nuclear Ratio variable, if not superiority.
Author commentary accompanying the 2014 worldwide deployments report data casts doubt on the accuracy of the count of retired Russian warheads because of scant public information and potentially obfuscating nuclear storage practices.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  31 information and inconsistent counting methods.
Because of the near US–Russian parity in 2014 and the large number of ostensibly retired Russian weapons , such an obfuscation could change which actor is coded as possessing nuclear superiority.
By 2014, Russia had more nonstrategic nuclear weapons than the United States.
Control Variables Gravity As defined by the ICB, the Gravity variable “identifies the object of gravest threat at any time during the crisis, as perceived by the principal decision makers of the crisis actor,” coding the most severe value threatened throughout the course of the crisis.2 Gravity of crisis was significantly greater for Russia than for the United States.
While the more substantial economic threat was the Ukraine’s pre-crisis movement away from EAEU and toward the EU, there are significant Russian industries, ports, and tourism on the Crimean Peninsula.
Russia stood to lose a major military installation should it fail to secure control of the peninsula.
Threat perceptions in Russia see overlap between regime stability at home and political instability in other former Soviet states.
Pro-democracy movements in bordering states are seen as a direct threat to the Kremlin through contamination.
Removal of Yanukovych prompted fears of popular protest efforts for regime change in Russia.
While the crisis posed no direct threat to any recognized Russian territory, Russia has at times contested the status of the peninsula since the collapse of the Soviet Union— disputes that were revived in the midst of Ukrainian Westward drift.
In addition, the possibility of losing the long-term lease on the Port of Sevastopol could be considered a rough equivalent to a small territorial threat.
The removal of Yanukovych constituted major blowback and a decisive loss of Russian influence in Ukraine.
The United States likewise stood to lose influence if it failed to preserve Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
While it is possible that these threats were not realistic or perceived, their prominence in domestic and international justification for initiating the crisis cannot be ignored.
As genocide is included in the definition of the variable, it is included here with the note that this might have been a propaganda narrative.
Proximity This binary variable measures which country is closer to the geographic location of the crisis.
The Crimea crisis occurred in Ukraine and along Russia’s southwestern border.
Therefore, the crisis was more proximate to the Russian Federation than to the United States.
Population Studies on nuclear crises often assume that “states with larger populations are better able to absorb a nuclear attack and, therefore, may push harder in a crisis,” making a measure of a state’s total population necessary.
While Correlates of War only reflects data through 2012,186 because the control variable is expressed as a binary, exact population estimates for 2014 are not necessary for this analysis.
According to Polity IV’s Democratic—Autocratic scale, the United States is a “Full Democracy” while Russia is an “Open Autocracy” .189 Despite Russia being an autocratic regime, it appears Putin nevertheless went to great lengths to secure popular domestic support for the invasion of Ukraine.
Second Strike The Second Strike variable concerns whether or not the actors possess forces able to assure a nuclear response after absorbing an initial strike .190 Both Russia and the United States have second-strike capability.
Security The Security variable controls for the possibility of states with underlying, long-standing disputes that may be less likely to prevail in crises.
This is done by averaging the number of crises the country experiences each year.
When considering the crisis in Crimea, the United States did not use any force, while Russian forces participated in what can be coded as 2, minor clashes.
Brecher, Michael, Jonathan Wilkenfeld, Kyle Beardsley, Patrick James, and David Quinn.
S 2124 Support for the Sovereignty, Integrity, Democracy, and Economic Stability of Ukraine Act of 2014, As reported by the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations on March 12, 2014.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  39 D’Anieri, Paul.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  41 Higgins, Andrew, and Steven Lee Myers.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  43 Lake, Eli, and Christopher Dickey.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  47 Tayler, Jeffrey.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  49 Woolf, Christopher.
The Russian Invasion of the Crimean Peninsula, 2014–2015  51 Acknowledgments Thank you to James Scouras for leading the overall analytic investigation of contemporary nuclear crises and dynamics, as well as teammates Robert Leonhard, Stephen Phillips, and Mareena Snowden for their collaboration and feedback on preliminary drafts and findings.
Thanks to Christine Fox, Erin Hahn, and Patrick Jockisch for their thorough reviews and thoughtful insights.
Finally, a special thanks to Catherine Peacock, Erin Richardson, and Candece Seling for their editorial and artistic support.
He holds a master’s degree in statecraft and national security affairs and a bachelor’s degree in political science.
