KYIV, Ukraine — On Tuesday, Russia’s ongoing conflict against Ukraine flared up once again.
Rather, the latest escalation was evidenced by the completion of a bridge across the Kerch Strait connecting the Crimean Peninsula with mainland Russia.
Russian President Vladimir Putin, true to form, got behind the wheel of a big-rig truck on Tuesday and lead a convoy across the newly opened Kerch Strait bridge.
As a result, in 2014, the United States and the European Union levied economic sanctions on Moscow.
This week, Moscow touted the new bridge as proof that Russian rule over Crimea is permanent.
In a flurry of official statements put out Tuesday, the U.S., EU, and Ukraine roundly condemned the Kerch Strait bridge, calling it a further violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty.
Those 10 countries are Afghanistan, Bolivia, Cuba, Kyrgyzstan, Nicaragua, North Korea, Sudan, Syria, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe.
To that end, Ukraine and its Western partners swiftly protested Tuesday’s opening of the Kerch Strait bridge.
Minister for Europe Sir Alan Duncan said in a statement on the opening of the Kerch Strait bridge.
This constitutes another violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity by Russia,” the European Union said in a Tuesday statement.
There, after more than four years of constant combat, Ukrainian forces remain engaged in a low-intensity, static war against a combined force of about 35,000 pro-Russian separatists, foreign mercenaries, and Russian regulars.
On Tuesday, combined Russian-separatist forces fired mortars at the Ukrainian government-controlled village of Novhorodske in eastern Ukraine.
That day, the Ukrainian military reported one soldier killed in action, and two others had been wounded.
On Thursday, the Ukrainian military said combined Russian-separatist forces had attacked Ukrainian positions 66 times in the preceding 24 hours, including with mortars and Grad multiple-launch rocket systems.
Also, on Thursday, combined Russian-separatist forces shelled an elementary school in the town of Svitlodarsk on the Ukrainian government-controlled side of the front lines.
The relief of Crimea-related sanctions will only occur after Russia returns control of the territory to Ukraine, officials say.
Thus, this week’s volley of diplomatic jabs underscores what will likely be the status quo for the time being — a war of words fought through the media.
