Russian President Vladimir Putin has stated that Russia will “do everything to defend” the rights of believers in Ukraine.
His words, coming almost five years after Moscow began ‘defending’ the rights of Russians and Russian-believers in both Crimea and Donbas, felt more like a threat than a promise.
This supposed ‘Russian world’, according to both Putin and Kirill, includes Ukraine, Belarus and Moldova.
The Kremlin and the Moscow Patriarchate reacted very angrily to the decision of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople to support an autocephalous Orthodox Church in Ukraine.
Putin immediately called a meeting of his Security Council and, a few days later, the Russian Orthodox Church announced it was severing relations with the Church in Constantinople.
Although it claimed to take no side in the conflict in Donbas, this was clearly not the case, with members of the Church seen blessing prominent militants such as former Russian military intelligence officer Igor Girkin and Igor Plotnitsky.
Sitting next to the notorious Russian Orthodox ‘priest’ Vsevolod Chaplin last year, Girkin asserted that his personal guard had been made up of monks and priests from the Svyatohorsk Lavra.
The 2015 study ‘When God becomes the weapon’ provides considerable evidence of religious persecution by militants in Donbas, as well as the role played both by Russia and armed criminal ‘Orthodox crusaders’ in crimes against humanity in the region.
The emergence of a united Ukrainian Church will seriously diminish Russia’s political and cultural influence on Ukraine.
Since the Church under the Moscow Patriarchate until quite recently had the largest number of parishes of any Church in Ukraine, the fact that many have already decided to join the Ukrainian Orthodox Church will also deal an economic blow to the Moscow Patriarchate.
Small wonder that both the Kremlin and Kirill have condemned what they refer to as ‘political developments’ in Ukraine.
During the event on 31 January, Putin spoke of the close “brotherly inter-church links” which have alleged served to develop equal relations between Russia and many foreign countries.
He expressed regret that Constantinople should have been “drawn in” to what he claims is about a struggle for power.
Putin, a former KGB officer, addressing Kirill, believed to have been a KGB agent for many years and other Church leaders, condemned what he claimed was “blatant interference in church life” in Ukraine.
His words were clearly not intended to refer to occupied Crimea where over 30 Crimean Muslims have faced persecution for their faith, nor the prison sentence awaited in Russia on 6 February against Dennis Kristensen, the first of many Jehovah’s Witnesses who are imprisoned on ‘extremism’ charges in Russia.
No, Russia “reserves the right to defend” believers in mainland Ukraine, where there is no evidence that they need to be defended.
Nothing to warrant the dire claims from Russian leaders and the state-controlled media about bloody conflict, mass persecution, etc.
The same claims have been constantly made about the conflict in Donbas.
There was no evidence of persecution or imminent bloodshed in either part of Ukraine to back such claims.
