USING SOCIAL MOVEMENT THEORY TO DETECT EARLY SIGNS OF SUBVERSIVE THREATS by Fredrik Wegersjoe June 2018 Thesis Advisor: Sean F Everton Co-Advisor: Doowan Lee Approved for public release.
USING SOCIAL MOVEMENT THEORY TO DETECT EARLY SIGNS OF SUBVERSIVE THREATS 6.
ABSTRACT Although well-established indicators make it possible to predict hostile conventional military actions, few such indicators exist to help defense planners anticipate the onset of subversive activities by foreign adversaries.
Western societies have often been targeted by adversaries who exploit environmental aspects of the gray zone to subvert the democratic process and influence decision making.
The use of non-state actors and social mobilization as well as non-military tactics, such as political, psychological, and information strategies, have frequently escalated to crises due to lack of situational awareness.
This research provides a brief overview of the gray-zone literature, social movement theories , and social network analysis/social media exploitation to show how these theories and methods can enhance our understanding of current crises.
Based on case studies of Ukraine and Estonia, this research uses SMT to conceptualize, examine, and identify early indicators of Russian subversive actions by carefully analyzing how gray-zone conflicts emerge.
SUBJECT TERMS gray zone, Russia, subversion, social movement theory, non-state actor, early indicators, proxy warfare, Ukraine, human domain, social mobilization 18.
In the 21st century, however, Western societies have often been targeted by adversaries who exploit environmental aspects of the gray zone to subvert the democratic process and influence decision making.
Sean F Everton and Professor Doowan Lee, for their mentorship and support during my work on this thesis but also for their encouragement throughout their classes.
It has been a privilege to get to know them and learn from their experience.
I must also thank friends and fellow students at NPS who have given me different views and shared experiences during our classes and discussions.
Finally, Elin, Valter, and Edvard, you are the ones who have made this possible.
INTRODUCTION Unconventional warfare, which exploits the gray zone, is nothing new, though it has evolved to reflect the complexity of shifting global conditions.
In the 21st century external actors have often targeted Western societies using nonmilitary tactics and political, psychological, and information strategies that take advantage of environmental aspects of the gray zone to subvert the democratic process and influence decision making in those societies.
Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the subsequent conflict between Russia and Ukraine are only two of the current conflicts that have evolved from a grayzone perspective where an external actor, through subversive actions, has tried to achieve its objectives.
Given Russia’s continued struggle to regain its superpower status despite its lack of a modern military, it has been forced to leverage some kind of relative power over former Soviet Socialist Republics of strategic or economic interest.
Russia’s use of nonstate actors and social mobilization to facilitate subversion in these recent conflicts highlights the significance of relationships, cooperation, and human interaction, rather than conventional military methods, at all levels ranging from the tactical to the strategic.
As illustrated by Russia’s campaign in Crimea, dominating the human domain before conflicts arise is crucial.
Within conflicts, the mobilization of existing social networks has become a decisive factor, and the human domain, therefore, demands increased attention from any nation seeking to develop or adapt its strategy to deter an adversary intent on subversion.
Thus, learning about social movements and resistance networks and their growth can help militaries enhance their situational awareness and force readiness in the gray zone.
There are well-established indicators for anticipating hostile conventional military actions, and for identifying which indicators play a crucial role in national security defense.
Unfortunately, few indicators can help defense planners anticipate the onset of subversive activities influenced by foreign adversarial forces.
Decision makers struggle to understand subversive warfare and lack good analytic indicators for recognizing subversive events in progress.
Despite the increasing significance of gray-zone threats, analysts still fail to develop and systematically examine comparable warning indicators.
Today, a mismatch exists between analyzing military movements and operations, and analyzing subversive operations in the gray zone.
PURPOSE AND SCOPE The purpose of this thesis is to conceptualize, develop, and examine early indicators and warnings for Russian subversive actions by carefully analyzing how grayzone conflicts emerge.
Russia’s aggression in Ukraine serves as a model of Russia’s conduct in pre-conflict operations.
Russia’s strategy in Ukraine highlights the importance of identifying indicators of hostile intent in the period before overt conflict occurs, not only to repress such conflicts, but also to thwart an adversary’s efforts to influence decision makers.
The scope of this thesis is limited to the conflicts in Ukraine, since these conflicts are well documented and represent observable patterns in Russia’s current warfare.
These findings from the Ukraine case study are then applied to Estonia to assess whether the indicators apply to other cases of Russian destabilization efforts.
RESEARCH QUESTION The research question that I attempt to answer in this thesis is as follows.
These are all, in one way or another, theories and methods to examine historical conflicts, but more important, they contribute to greater understanding and knowledge of current crises and conflicts.
In this chapter, I first review the literature about gray-zone threats and the challenges these present to society and the armed forces.
Thereafter, I examine the theories of social movements and revolution and I review how these theories shed light on the conceptual early indicators of subversion in the gray zone.
Finally, I discuss the SNA and SME literature as potential methods of establishing grayzone indicators.
Nations are entering a period when they must be able to meet the adversary in an environment “characterized by intense political, economic, informational, and military competition,” which some scholars define as the gray zone.
The definition of the gray zone is widely discussed, and in this thesis, I will not try to develop another definition.
Instead, I try to incorporate the gray zone’s environmental aspects that are critical for mitigating subversive actions.
Phillip Lohaus argues that recent attempts to define the gray zone have lacked precision, which has hindered nations’ ability to develop appropriate responses.
Of importance, then, is the context and environment that the gray zone implies.
It is the people and its surroundings that are the focus, to influence them in the different areas where they participate, such as in diplomatic, societal, economic, and informational areas.
An Operational Framework for Using Special Operations Forces in the Space between War and Peace,” Special Operations Journal 2, no. : 3.
This definition of gray zone implies that the gray zone demands a deeper understanding of the human domain than was required during the historical battles fought between two nations in an overt war.
Some even go so far as to argue that “the human domain is one of the most critical and challenging aspects” of modern and future conflicts.
The importance of mapping the human domain is explained by the assumption that if we have maps, we can more easily analyze where the areas for influence are great, but also where to analyze for further indicators.
Social movement theory seeks to explain the environment within crisis through a human dimension focus and how social networks evolve.
To analyze the environment for indicators, one must know how the society looks when it is politically stable, or one must understand characteristics in a society that are crucial for influence operations, to be able to analyze for indicators.
One should look for indicators within the areas where successful resistance networks have grown.
Derek Raymond stresses the importance of analyzing a society’s human dynamics, and he examines the key principles of SMT and the conditions that are needed for a successful information operation.
Organizational Innovation and Adaptation in the 21st Century,” in Beyond Convergence, ed.
A Socially Unconventional Strategy” (master’s thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 2015), 26.
The definition of resistance movements is wide-ranging, depends on the context and can be either an opposition party or an underground network.
This argument is reinforced by Christopher Fussell and Lee, who argue that smaller states and nonstate actors utili z e networks to countervail the superiority of big nations.
These are important arguments that provide the baseline in this thesis for analyzing the human domain.
Nevertheless, to find indicators of subversion, we must understand what is normal and then analyze changes in the environment, or more specifically, changes that indicate that someone has tried to influence the environment.
Kevin A Horrigan and Matthew J Piosa stress the use of SNA and SMT to better understand the human domain to enhance decision making and to assess the potential of actors to influence areas where operations will be conducted.
SNA can be used as a tool to investigate the connections within movements, and to identify the actors or groups vital to the movements or networks.
SME is used to explain how information and the discourse within certain areas develops, geographically but also within networks.
Applying Social Network Analysis to an Unconventional Warfare Framework,” From the CORE: Common Operational Research Environment Newsletter A : 8. 5 different methods to analyze them is crucial for understanding how dark networks operate.
Within a network, SNA can help identify brokers who could be crucial for influencing the network, and also find people who interact between different networks.
Whether it is for disseminating information or for gathering supporters, finding individuals who act as brokers between social groups is a key factor in influencing operations.
This is also important for decision makers in our society because it is these brokers who could be working for an adversary.
By using SNA, it is possible to find people who could be engaged in Information Operations , and also to observe changes within a network.
SME supports military planners in viewing differences in the social media sphere such as the growth of certain topics or a certain aggressive style when people discuss these topics.
SME can be skewed, however, because it is most applicable to youth and well-off areas where the information environment is well developed.
The main criticism of SNA is that it does not gather the necessary data easily.
The specific data includes not only race, age, and gender, but relationships between people, like kinship.
Moreover, Nancy Roberts and Sean Everton state in their article, “Strategies for Combating Dark Networks,” SNA should not be the only approach when drafting one’s strategy but should work as a complement to other critical elements in the decision-making process.
Furthermore, the SNA method and its result must be modeled for every different network since no single interpretation exists for each measure.
Data depends on context and the way it is gathered, among other things.
Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, February 13,2017). 6 important part of the process.
The data should be compared and contrasted to data from other networks and also within its own network to get insights.
I argue that there are indicators, such as ties to foreign institutions and organizations, in the network environment that can reveal an adversary working subversively by conducting information operations trying to influence the main player within the gray zone—the people.
These information operations can influence both the civilian population and also politicians and military leaders.
SNA is a complement to traditional intelligence analysis that covers the characteristic environment specific to the gray zone.
I argue that we must use this tool to exploit “friendly” organizations in a Phase Zero environment to find our adversary, to highlight a structure of previously unknown associations, and to enhance understanding of the human domain and its social structure as a tool in military decision making.
SNA is a valuable tool for decision makers to refine their analysis so they recognize the enemy within this concept and stop him.
The schools of thought that I have just discussed all contribute to a higher understanding and explanation of crises.
What is missing in these discussions, however, is the use of these theories and tools to understand and find the adversaries’ subversive operations in Phase Zero.
This thesis uses the tools and theories, not only to increase understanding and knowledge about the environment for enhancing planning and preparation, but also to identify indicators in the gray zone for recognizing an adversary making subversive efforts, in order to apply appropriate mitigation measures and to stop an adversary before a crisis occurs.
By doing this, we can enhance our understanding, reinforce our decisions, and act proactively.
METHODOLOGY This thesis attempts to create a model that highlights indicators and eventually can anticipate the onset of gray-zone crises.
The inductive process involves making many observations of phenomena in the real world and finding powerful statements about how things work in order to create a model.
Moreover, the importance of relational data and the impact of information operations will apply.
Russia’s hybrid warfare doctrine relies heavily on leveraging and exploiting nonmilitary means and the use of subversive information operations.
These typically flow through personal or organizational relations, and the use of traditional and social media outlets is common.
Relational data capture relations between actors such as people, organizations, and others, and play a greater role in this study compared to attribute data, which are nonrelational characteristics data.
Using the inductive approach, I carefully reconstruct what has happened in Ukraine, reflecting on theories of social movements and resistance networks to lay out the baseline for environmental conditions and mechanisms that are essential for subversive operations.
Then I use an in-depth case study of Ukraine and combine prior cases of Russian subversion with SMT and theories of Irregular Warfare to illuminate theoretical indicators that will be a foundation for analysis.
Using SNA and SME as tools together with the conceptual indicators gleaned from the theories will help to create a model for analyzing society and derive established indicators.
Conceptually, this study draws from SMT and IW, together with methods like SNA and SME, to examine and compare relationships in a contested environment.
Ukraine functions as a role model for 18 Peter Sohlberg and Britt-Marie Sohlberg, Kunskapens former, Vetenskapsteori och forskningsmetod , 17.
The current conflict not only reveals information about Russia but also how the environment reacts to Russian influence.
The research process then centers on SNA and SME as methods to apply to the relevant phenomena that will ultimately reveal indicators for subversive actions.
The technology at the Naval Postgraduate School’s Common Operational Research Environment Lab supports mapping out the human networks that are identified as significant for the evolution of the crisis.
The challenges faced in this environment are many; therefore, it is important that boundaries are placed on the research.
Often social media accounts are deleted, and social networks are always changing.
This forces us to pay attention to where, when, and what the data we find online tells us, and to cross-check significant information with different sources that have both high reliability but also high validity.
Moreover, the data I use is collected from open sources, which sometimes needs translation due to the use of a language other than English.
This is always going to be a concern when working with data in another language, but by using reliable translation software, this should be minimized.
Moreover, as the central focus of the study is a current event within an everchanging environment, the research needs to establish a frame for the environment to be able to evaluate the changes that occur and infer what that might indicate.
This frame evolves by implementing this in-depth case study to create a specific narrative for the different stages of the crisis.
The intent of the research is to provide the decision maker with both a method and a list of the relevant indicators of subversion that occur in the society.
This can provide better situational awareness, but most importantly, can increase readiness to disrupt subversive actions.
SOCIAL MOVEMENT THEORY AND SUBVERSION In recent years, Russia appears to have shifted to the use of various solutions besides overt war with armed forces to achieve its objectives.
In particular, it has used subversive operations as part of this strategy.
Because SMT describes resistance emergent among people, it is well suited to frame domains in the society that should be in focus.
By applying SMT, one may derive theoretical indicators for subversive operations.
I first offer an introduction to SMT and describe how the context applies to the emergence of movements.
Second, using SMT, I derive areas of interest regarding UW strategy and subversion.
Third, from those areas, I conceptualize the conditions associated with the early actions of a subversive actor.
Finally, I offer a conclusion about the importance of understanding social movements or unarmed resistance as key early indications of crisis and subversion.
In this light, I offer that SMT can potentially enhance decision makers’ and national leaders’ understanding of the environment where subversion is taking place.
This study uses SMT as a unifying framework for different scholars of emergent movements.
I begin by briefly and critically discussing three major models within SMT, the classical model, the resource mobili z ation model, and the political process model.
Nonetheless, it does not explain how individual grievances evolve to collective movements.
In other words, this approach might be useful when explaining why people join a movement but not how movements continue and grow over time.
Another perspective in SMT is the resource mobilization model that emphasizes the significance of the involvement of the elites to explain social movements.
It posits that resources are crucial and contain variables that translate individual grievances into organized resistance.
Instead of analyzing movements as irrational outbursts, it emphasizes the organized structured mechanisms of mobilization that provide strategic resources that are crucial for a movement’s sustained action.
Proponents of this theory argue that many movements have not emerged from highly organized and structured masses and that outside support and resources have not been beneficial to the 23 Sidney Tarrow, Power in Movement , 4.
This approach might be useful when analyzing the organizational factors and the linkages within but lacks the explanation of a movement’s outer environment.
Another perspective used to explain and analyze the environment for conditions that pave the way for social movements is the political process model.
The political process model argues that a social movement is a political rather than a psychological phenomenon.
This means that a life cycle of political processes could be translated into social insurgency.
It also highlights that a social movement should be understood as a longitudinal process from its emergence to its decline.
The advantage of using this model compared to the others is that it covers the whole process of the movement rather than specific phases.
Furthermore, the political process model highlights how ordinary people have the potential to mobilize to challenge the incumbent.
The political process relies on the assumption that social movements develop in the interaction between different interest groups and the political changes they want to see.
This study uses the political process model because it aligns with the strategy of subversion.
As laid out in an article in a Russian military journal by General Valery Gerasimov, chief of the general staff of the Russian Federation, Russia’s military doctrine reflects the kind of warfare that has developed throughout the world.
Gerasimov argues that political, economic, informational, humanitarian, and other nonmilitary measures, together with revolutionary protests, attempt to undermine the legitimacy of a target country’s political leadership.
Thus, McAdam’s political process model highlights the type of disruptive factors that external actors may want to exploit in order to undermine the legitimacy of the local political process.
Conditions, Mechanisms, and Effects,” where he describes the use of political groups, religious figures, and elections as conditions that can be exploited for disruptive actions.
These authors all emphasize the use of an outside actor taking advantage of instability in the environment to influence the political legitimacy.
Using the political process model explained by McAdam will let us highlight the indicators of subversion in a UW environment.
The Political Process Model"" 4 The broad socioeconomic processes are preconditions in society that let the other factors emerge, such as pressure through economic and diplomatic measures.
Those social processes undermine the current political structure but also create the preconditions for a sense of inequality or other strains within society that people want to change.
From these preconditions in the socioeconomic environment, the political process model identifies three factors that are crucial for a movement to emerge.
Political Opportunity This is explained as openings in the political environment.
It could also be described as the access to the political domain and 34 Me Adam, 51.
This happens when there is a change of allies and opponents, and the stability of the current ruling actors is questioned, which indicates a change in capacity.
In everyday life, there is relative power in society where the leading authorities have the majority of power, most often due to democratic rules and processes or as an authoritarian decision process.
These rules make it hard for opponents to change society in a way they want.
One can interpret every change in the structure of the political society as a push for political opportunity.
This can be an event that changes and undermines the stability of the leading elite or the whole system itself, a change in status quo.
Elections are a typical event when a political opportunity may arise and current leaders may be questioned.
Political opportunities reduce the relative power between the leading elite and its opponents, and the change in relative power makes it harder to repress an opponent.
Indigenous Organizational Strength To be able to mobilize, the political process model argues that one needs already existing organizations from which one can recruit and also develop opportunities in the political sphere.
The political opposition within a country creates a network that in turn can create the seeds of opportunity.
However, one still needs a network, community, or group in that structure to organize and link people together.
Already existing organizations work as a recruitment base from which one can save time by recruiting blocs of people who are already an organized group.
Organizations can cooperate for the same purpose or important question that they want to solve, even if they have other, different objectives.
Moreover, the indigenous organizations create a network with an already existing communication network and experienced leaders.
The indigenous organizations give the capacity to leverage grievance through their already existing communication network, leadership, members to recruit from, and incentives.
It does not matter how much strain or grievance is within the society if no mechanism to organize people exists.
McAdam argues that it is essential that the networks or groups are already in place and that these function as fertile ground for emphasizing incentives to resistance.
This implies that so many people must perceive political opportunities that it seems manageable to change their situation and that the structure or tools to change it are there as already existing organizations.
It does not matter if isolated people perceive that they are unjustly treated; they must have a mass of people to be able to change their situation and believe in it.
This mass of people makes them believe that change is doable and that they are not alone and have strong personal links to others.
Leaders at a strategic level can achieve a greater efficacy determined by how they frame their narrative.
Through framing, they have a measure to control and to influence activists, which encourages recruitment and gains media attention.
Analyzing these domains through the lens of the political process may help to achieve specific characteristics and mechanisms indicating subversive actions.
CHARACTERISTICS AND MECHANISMS FOR SUBVERSION Subversive operations try to disrupt the current environment within a country to achieve one’s strategic goals.
By analyzing these domains, one can derive mechanisms that can indicate externally disruptive movements.
The Road from Theory to Domains Political -The political environment in democratic nations is conducive to making a change or influencing internal decisions, also known as political subversion.
The goal for subversion is to create an unstable environment and conditions essential to influence decision making or to delegitimize the governing authorities.
However, by influencing a democratic tool such as elections to the parliament, one can achieve a more legitimate outcome.
These outcomes or results from the elections are harder to criticize or delegitimize due to the democratic process followed, even though they were influenced by an external actor.
Other mechanisms that create political opportunities are major political realignments, changes in the current party structure, splinter groups, defectors, and existing parties that divide into several factions.
This is most common in the time frame of elections but also sometimes when nations are in crisis.
Economic SMT states that economic downturns enhance movement emergence by leveraging human feelings—individual grievances.
Economic downturns can create pressure on current authorities to mobilize and motivate people for a change.
This area can either generate a mobilization but also amplify the resistance.
Income inequality, unemployment, and other similar factors are sources of systemic strain.
The use of economic measures creates a permissive environment and puts pressure on existing political authority to influence its population.
The energy sector also uses its power factor by overtly closing off the energy supply to coerce decision makers to choose energy suppliers as partners.
It is also an area where resistance networks most often find their resources.
Social The social domain is where the emergence of a movement can grow and people find like-minded supporters of the movement.
It is in this domain that the movement has its foundation for mobilizing people.
This structure is essential to coordinating information and actions across the society.
The emergence of new socialpolitical movements or minority movements to establish an organizational platform are ways to disturb the current political environment.
Yet SMT emphasizes the use of already existing networks or groups where there is already an established structure with leadership and members.
Indigenous organizations give the capacity for grievance but also a platform for recruiting.
In the existing groups or organizations, there is already a common purpose or goal they share that can either reinforce or connect groups to each other.
Informational In this domain, strategic communication can be used to build a counter-narrative to the current political one.
One way to do this is to create a narrative that describes a specific minority group of people as victimized and exposed to unjust treatment by the current leadership.
Creating a narrative about how some people are mistreated or how bad the West is, or disseminating information that is pro-Russian, among others, are tools to increase grievances and establish a sense of aggression.
Broadly, one finds the use of media to create a narrative and shape the information environment in the society to prepare for a decision in which Russia has an interest.
The informational part can gain popular support, and by that, can legitimize Russian actions.
CONCLUSIONS ABOUT SOCIAL MOVEMENT THEORY In this chapter, I have emphasized the importance of understanding social movements and unarmed resistance as key early indications of crisis and subversion.
Within those domains, one can identify general mechanisms and characteristics that externally disruptive movements might use to gain power within society.
Events such as major political realignments, oppositional parties and splinter groups, or an existing party’s split into several factions are examples of how political opportunities arise.
Economic factors, such as investments in key industries, but more specifically energy and media agencies, are other mechanisms used to influence decisions.
Moreover, economic downturns put pressure on current authorities but also help create incentives for those who want to challenge the ruling government.
Though it focuses on already existing organizations to recruit people, at the same time, the social domain may reveal creation of political opportunity.
Finally, the ideological approach tries to gather individual grievances to collective actions through presenting incentives or creating psychological strain.
The use of media like the internet and television to disseminate messages and to build a narrative is essential.
In the next chapter, these factors are applied to the Ukraine crisis to analyze events in order to derive indicators of potential subversive operations.
CASE STUDY OF UKRAINE Russia’s use of subversion to reach its strategic objectives is well documented in the literature.
Nevertheless, although Russia’s objectives are obvious and the analyses of the military operations that have disrupted Ukrainian sovereignty are many, few have studied early indicators of the crisis.
Russia’s annexation of Crimea, which surprised many nations, 46 highlights the importance of identifying indicators of hostile intent in order to repress such operations, but also to restrain Russia’s intention to influence decision makers, also known as subversive actions.
Leveraging subversive operations using the human domain has become a key factor.
Valery Gerasimov, the chief of the Russian General Staff, stated that the Arab Spring presents an example of war in the 21st century and that the use of political, economic, informational, social, and other nonmilitary means has increased the utility of the human domain and the potential of social movements.
Gerasimov’s statements imply that resistance mobilization is a tool for subversion that Russia uses to achieve its objectives.
This is reinforced by the Russian Federation military doctrine, which states that one of the main internal military risks for Russia is subversive information activities targeting the population.
First, I highlight earlier research done in that area and then briefly summarize the historical context to enhance understanding of the political and social environment in Ukraine.
Dividing the events according to those domains makes the different characteristics and mechanisms important for subversive indicators more apparent.
Beginning with the political domain and a brief historical backdrop to the political environment contributes to a better understanding of how this framework can be utilized to influence decision making.
More specifically, I study how the other domains—economic, social, and informational—seize the opportunity presented by political instability.
Finally, I provide a conclusion about findings in the different domains of established subversive indicators, which might support analysts and decision makers in a contested environment.
PREVIOUS RESEARCH AND HISTORICAL BACKDROP After gaining its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, Ukraine has struggled through several crises such as the Orange Revolution and Euromaidan related to its huge neighbor in the east, Russia.
They highlight the military aspect of the Ukrainian crisis but lack the analyses of how its political, economic, and social aspects influenced the society and decision makers through subversion prior to the annexation.
In this chapter, I analyze events prior the annexation in early 2014 to reveal indicators of Russian subversion.
National Defence Academy of Latvia, Center for Security and Strategic Research Military focus January 2014 and forward 51 Jane’s, and other credible sources and databases where I surveyed the analysis.
The Critical Role of Information Operations and Special Operations” Small Wars Journal Focus on information operations Overview (no specific events or times) pre-2014.
CSIS Center for Strategic and International Studies A good analysis but misses the social part of emergent movements.
Christopher S Chivvis, 2017, Understanding Russian “Hybrid Warfare And What Can Be Done about It.
HISTORICAL CONTEXT Russia regards Ukraine as a country in which it has enduring interests.
Ukraine’s biggest minority is Russian, and Ukraine’s geographical position makes it strategically important, especially as a buffer zone between Russia and the West.
This is partly why Russians see the expansion of the West as a threat to their interests and consider every increasing linkage from Ukraine to the European Union as a decrease in Russian influence.
This has been used both as a carrot and a stick to influence decision making in favor of Russia.
Furthermore, while the EU tries to promote democracy and deepen economic and political cooperation, Russia tries to counter the overtures using traditional and nontraditional tools of state power to pressure and influence Ukraine.
The use of business affiliates and the energy sector, and its policy of supporting and protecting the rights of Russians living abroad, alias its compatriot policy, are only some of the ways it seeks to influence Ukraine through means other than the use of military force.
Historically, Russia has had a low level of institutional ties with Ukraine and instead used its connections to pro-Russian elites, but this has changed.
Moreover, Russia also tries to gain influence through its compatriot policy, which focuses on ethnic Russians and Russian speakers.
Millions of Russians and Russian-speaking people live in Ukraine and will continue to do so.
Russia will always defend their interests using political, diplomatic and legal means.
This is the guarantee of Ukraine’s state stability and territorial integrity.
Its interests in Ukraine rest on many factors, some of which are shared by the EU and the West.
Geographically, Ukraine is the largest country on the European continent with a population of about 44 million people.
Not only is the Russian Black Sea fleet stationed in Crimea, but also the gas pipeline from the Russian gas company Gazprom to Europe passes through Ukraine.
Ukraine has a long history with Russia, and some people see Ukraine as the heart of Orthodox Church history.
About 17 percent of Ukraine’s population is Russian-speaking, most of them in Eastern Ukraine, and the Russian media outlets are widespread, giving the Russian government a tool to leverage its own narrative.
What is just discussed and outlined in this section partly explains Russia’s interests but also concludes Russia’s prerequisites for influencing.
What follows is a theoretical analysis of Ukrainian society through the different domains derived from SMT where Russian events are the focus.
THE POLITICAL DOMAIN Ukraine gained its independence in 1991, and the political system and the ruling government were relatively young.
The political parties evolved from different subgroups with dissident interests via political parties with strong ties to business affiliates, to developed and stable parties after the Orange Revolution and Euromaidan.
Despite many changes through the years in alliances and party configurations, however, the established politicians have remained the same.
From 1994 to 2005, then-President Kuchma drove Ukraine closer to the EU while little protest from Russia was heard.
The pro-democracy protest in 2004, the Orange Revolution, turned the EU and its leaders towards Ukraine and the interest in cooperation evolved.
The Orange Revolution and other pro-Westem influences, however, did not fulfill the pledges to the Ukrainian people.
The people had not seen any major changes and were tired of the corrupt political system.
In Russia, the Orange Revolution was seen as an operation conducted by the West to undermine Russia’s influence in Ukraine.
The Orange Revolution created an environment of instability and struggle between its backers and the opposition.
Despite the Western-friendly revolution, the EU did not show any greater interest in drawing Ukraine further into the EU, and at the same time it was careful not to push its agenda too hard, in order to avoid conflict with Russia.
Before 2005, the EU did not engage in any domestic change in the Ukraine political landscape.
The Ukraine-European Union Action Plan was the first step to connecting these two parts.
The Action Plan was a plan to integrate Ukraine more to the EU and fulfil the demands of a member state.
However, there were no clear incentives for Ukraine to actually fulfill these obligations, and Ukrainian citizens did not see any greater changes in the society.
This created a political vacuum where everyone tried to leverage their agenda to attract other parties to form a coalition.
Unfortunately, this setting was doomed to fail due to struggles between President Yushchenko and the coalition.
The NATO discussions were still ongoing, though some people, mostly in the eastern part of Ukraine, thought that membership would constrain them from meeting their relatives, many of whom still lived in Russia.
This situation was later utilized by the Russian government through its compatriot policy.
Nevertheless, Yanukovych did not follow the agreement and began to violate its terms.
He became anti-EU and stated that Europe and NATO should not be an option.
The president Viktor Yushenko, Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych, and the chairman of the parliament, Oleksandr Moroz, decided to dissolve the parliament.
This forced them to conduct a new parliamentary election in September 2007.
Further events highlighted the competition for influence in Ukraine between the EU and Russia.
These agreements were a clear increase in the battle for influence and were intended to persuade Ukraine to distance itself from Russia.
DCFTA and BRK-CU were not compatible with each other, which laid out a clear competition between the EU and Russia for Ukraine.
This situation was a clear incentive for both the EU and Russia to take advantage of the relatively unstable situation in Ukraine, an outcome to the emerged from the blurred leadership within Ukraine government.
The international financial crisis of 2007-2009 had a significant impact on the 2010 presidential election.
Viktor Yanukovych’s focus on business-friendly policies, stability measures, and pro-Russian orientation aligned with what the Ukrainian population supported at that time.
The common economic interests, family connections between countries, and a shared history were three main reasons important for the population’s decision in the election.
Milestone in EU-Russia Relations-Not Just for Ukraine,” Danube 5, no. : 22.
The people thought that the Orange Revolution leaders had failed to deliver on their promises and therefore turned against them.
The focus changed slowly towards Russia, and Ukraine’s progress towards integration with the EU halted.
Yanukovych started to adapt proRussian policies and moved away from NATO interests.
Yanukovych renewed Russia’s lease of the Black Sea naval base in Sevastopol for 25 years and created laws that determined Ukraine’s nonaligned status.
Furthermore, in October 2010, Yanukovych and the constitutional court erased the limits on presidential power, such as naming government ministers, which was a part of a deal that ended the Orange Revolution protests in 2004.
Challenges, Progress and Potential,” European Foreign Affairs Review 16 : 259.
He began to target people that have been active during the Orange Revolution and charged them for different criminal acts.
Two of those were Yulia Tymoshenko, a former prime minister, and Yuriy Lutsenko, a former minister of internal affairs with close ties to Tymoshenko, who were charged with abuse of state funds.
Tymoshenko has been an active voice for Western focus and the work against corruption and was Yanukovych’s main opponent in the presidential election in 2010.
This drew great criticism from both the opposition in Ukraine and international observers.
In 2011, Yanukovych took some small steps to counter his critics and hoped by those actions to strengthen relations with the EU and placate the oppositional factions.
In March, ex-president Leonid Kuchma, former president of Ukraine, was charged with involvement in journalist Georgiy Gongadze’s death.
Gongadze was a critical reporter of Kuchma’s presidency and was murdered in 2000.
Kuchma was suspected pretty early, but he could never be charged at that time.
In April, the main suspects in Gongadze’s killing, Olexiy Pukach and two other police officers, are said to have confessed and were sent to jail.
Further on, the parliamentary election was held in October 2012 and had a debatable outcome.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe observers, the United States, and the EU were skeptical.
The party United Opposition-Batkivschyna, UDAR, Svoboda, and Our Ukraine did not agree to this.
Just before signing in November 2013, the government abandoned further discussions with the EU and instead signed another agreement with Russia.
The Russian agreement concerned the Custom Union with Russia, lower gas prices, and a decrease in a loan that Ukraine had.
The abandonment of the AA in November 2013 shifted the focus toward Russia and ignited massive civil unrest (known as Euromaidan because the protests began in Maidan Square in Kiev), which resulted in the death of several protesters and excessive violence from the police to constrain the protest.
In February 2014, President Yanukovych fled to Russia and abandoned the country.
This was the beginning of the end of several-months-long unrest against corruption and people tired of abandoned promises.
The Ukrainian political environment in its historical context is almost a road map for what SMT explains as political opportunities.
The election system has changed throughout time, and different rules and regulations regarding political parties and coalitions have been introduced.
The institutional environment has changed depending on who the president is, and the power has shifted between the president and the parliament.
Due to weak ideology, and sometimes to corruption, the loyalty of leading politicians is quite often questioned.
Poroshenko has floated between being allied to both pro-Russian and pro-Westem parties.
THE ECONOMIC DOMAIN Despite gaining its independence in 1991, Ukraine’s economic ties to Russia are significant.
Due to income inequalities, unemployment, and other considerations, Russia’s use of economic mechanisms as tools for influence has been obvious.
Gazprom is Russia’s largest gas company and provides many parts of Europe with gas; its main gas pipeline to Europe goes through Ukraine.
In 2006, Russia demonstrated its use of Gazprom as a power tool to influence decision makers in Ukraine.
Russia argued that Ukraine kept some gas for its own consumption and that the price Ukraine paid was too low.
By turning off the natural gas that it provided to Ukraine and other parts of Europe, Russia highlighted the necessity of good relationships with Russia.
This seems to be an outcome of the Orange Revolution and enforced a new agreement that was set in January 2005 for another five-year period.
In April 2008, Gazprom sbyt Ukraine, a subsidiary to Gazprom, was registered in Ukraine.
This increased Russian influence in Ukraine’s general economic sphere but also demonstrated a more direct influence over the Ukrainian government.
In January 2009, however, another dispute between Ukraine and Gazprom occurred over unpaid bills, which allowed the Russians to cut off the gas for many areas, mostly in Ukraine.
Russia had kept raising the gas prices over several years when it peaked in 2009 at $230 per 1,000 cubic meters.
The increase of the gas price and the level it reached was not what was disturbing because the price Ukraine had paid was still lower than the world price.
More disturbing was how Russia introduced the price increase and the disruption of gas production in the middle of the winter that signaled some kind of will to influence Ukraine decision making.
In one week, however, the gas was turned on again since a new 10-year agreement was signed between Russia and Ukraine.
Furthermore, in the summer of 2013, the AA with the EU was published, and Russia now had the opportunity to read it.
The agreement clearly stated that Ukraine would no longer be able to maintain the same relationships with Russia as it had earlier.
Therefore, Russia became more engaged in the discussions about the AA and undertook a coercive stance to deter the Ukrainian government from continuing to pursue these proWestern actions.
The Russian policy targeted President Yanukovych and his political decisions by exercising influence in the economic sector, more specifically in import and export between the two countries.
Russia’s restrictive trade measures were a big loss for the companies and industry and were aimed at forcing Ukraine to cancel its dialogue with the EU and instead join the Moscow-led Customs Union.
All these measures taken by Russia in the economic domain created an unstable environment where grievances and polarization among the citizens increased.
This, in turn, was leveraged against the ruling government in order to influence decisions in Russia’s favor.
Most often, the economic domain boosts the social conditions through organizations and corporations linked to Russia, which were developed to disseminate the Russian narrative.
In summary, the economic domain reinforces Russia’s influence potential among the population partly through its media outlets but also through its compatriot policy.
THE SOCIAL DOMAIN Utilizing the Russian population as a “power tool” is nothing new and is very tangible in areas where Russia has interests; this is also known as the compatriot policy} 01 It is a tool used by Russia to legitimize its involvement in other countries’ businesses and to build incentives for becoming involved in those countries’ political process.
The concept of the compatriot policy is to influence both Russians abroad but also people within Russia to gain support for Russia’s activities.
The policy also works as a threat to foreign governments that Russia will interfere if they do not take care of the Russian people.
In 2007, the creation of the Russkiy Mir Foundation was decreed by the Russian president.
Russkiy Mir is linked to the Federal Agency for the Commonwealth of Independent States, Compatriots Living Abroad, and International Humanitarian Cooperation— 99 House of Lords European Union Committee.
In October 2013, Russkiy Mir announced that they would open three new Russian centers in Ukraine.
These centers create a platform for disseminating pro-Russian information and give the Russian government a legal, geographical base to engage domestically.
Today, Ukraine has 11 Russian centers, compared to the United States, which has two, where Russkiy Mir disseminates its messages.
Since 2009, the Rossotrudnichestvo and the Russkiy Mir have coordinated their activities and aggregated their objectives.
This has both strengthened Russkiy Mir and also given the Russian government the opportunity to work through its network and physical locations.
These organizations build the narrative primarily about Russian culture but more specifically the Russian language.
In July 2012, a law was passed that strengthened the Russian language in Ukraine.
The law stated that Russian should get a regional language status, and many feared that this would divide the country even more.
Yanukovych and his allies argued that this was a way to get closer to the EU and to follow the rules of human rights in Ukraine.
Due to the relatively large protests, this law has been used many times to depict Ukrainians as Nazis because they do not accept Russian as a second language.
Therefore, Russian media outlets will be able to smear the current leadership.
Russian Soft Power and Non-Military Influence in the Baltic States , 40.
Between 2012 and 2013, it received about $8 million from the Russian government.
The foundation is responsible for Human Rights centers, and in 2013, there were about 10,000 beneficiaries, three times more than the previous year.
These beneficiaries are not official and can be anyone promoting or supporting Russian interests, such as politicians or other influential persons.
Victor Medvedchuk is a former Ukrainian politician with considerable influence in current Ukrainian political decision making.
His work in the Kuchma administration from 2002 to 2005 and his many interests in the business sector make him a person with many engagements but also many opportunities to influence people in his areas of interest.
Moreover, Medvedchuk has strong connections to the Russian government in general, but more specifically to Putin himself.
In 2012, Medvedchuk established the Ukrainian Choice, a nongovernmental organization , as a reaction to Ukraine’s pro-Westem approach.
Furthermore, it emphasizes the importance of self-determination in decisions like what language to use, the government’s not interfering in personal decisions, self-government, and free choice of territory.
Ukrainian Choice strongly opposed the EU agreement DCFTA (Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area) and broadcasted what the damage would be if Ukraine signed it.
In 2013, Medvedchuk also established the Eurasian Forum in Kiev, partnering with the Russian Youth Public Council, which emphasized the same message.
Another NGO is the Russian Orthodox Church, which is working to reunite the Russian world.
The church has a Russian-centric approach, working through affiliated NGOs, various publications, and charity groups, to spread its political issues—mainly criticisms of the EU and NATO membership.
The church cooperates with other religious groups abroad that are affiliated in certain ways to the Moscow Patriarchate.
In 2013, the Russian Orthodox Church’s own international organization, Day of Baptism of Rus (Den Kreshchenia Rus), which was created in 2007, launched open-air concerts in ten cities across Ukraine.
They both have significant funding and have been very active since 2013.
The Night Wolves have close cooperation with Putin, who is a member of the gang, and in 2011 and 2012, they held their annual meetings in Crimea.
Another organization, the Russian Cossack Network, had a summer camp in Crimea in 2013 that taught young people typical military skills, such as shooting and fighting.
Both these organizations had huge funding and close ties to the Russian government.
THE INFORMATIONAL DOMAIN Strategic communication used to build a counter-narrative can be used, in turn, to victimize minority groups or to describe them as exposed to an unfair situation in the country where they live.
A narrative describing how a Russian minority is mistreated, dissemination of information that is pro-Russia, and emphasizing how bad the West is, among other things, is meant to increase grievances and incite people to protest against the ruling elite.
The ideological factors are mainly disseminated and reinforced by the Russian World concept—Russkiy Mir, cultural centers, media projects, and other pro-Russian organizations.
These are organizations, most often funded by the Russian government, which makes it difficult for Ukrainian media companies to get the same impact with less support.
As an example, in July 2010, a Kiev court decided to cancel the allocation of frequencies for two privately owned TV channels, which, according to Ukrainian media experts, were two channels that provided independent news.
This also happened in the same period as Ukrainian Security Service head Valery Khoroshkovsky applied for new frequencies to his rival media company, Inter Media Group.
Valery Khoroshkovsky is well known for his close ties and his co-ownership of media companies with pro-Russian people.
Furthermore, in February 2013, the Russian government released a policy document emphasizing the importance of building a positive narrative of Russia abroad.
The document strengthened Russia’s compatriot policy but also highlighted the use of media and other information channels as a tool to disseminate its pro-Russian narrative.
CONCLUSIONS ABOUT THE CRISIS IN UKRAINE Influencing people means influencing those who make decisions.
This chapter analyzed how this is applied by Russia when trying to achieve its interests abroad.
The use of SMT complements the currently available analysis of Russia’s actions by having a population-centric approach.
The four areas derived from the political process model through UW explain crucial areas where one also should look for indicators of subversive actions.
SMT can be used to analyze episodes of contentious collective actions and therefore is a usable tool to study changes in society and actions taken for influencing people.
The categories of how to collect and analyze the human environment were mentioned earlier.
Furthermore, working through NGOs and in the fog of compatriots and using economic influence, mainly through the energy sector , are Russia’s way of subverting Ukraine’s political environment and Ukrainian society as a whole.
In the political environment, where many people may have access, one can see that Ukraine has had a lot of political instability and struggle in the society, which emphasizes political opportunities.
It is a relatively unstable political environment where existing parties have divided into several factions or splinter groups.
The emergence of culture centers and other NGOs is Russia’s way of maintaining influence without picking up arms.
The complexity of this crisis, but also crises in general, highlights the importance of cooperation between agencies and NGOs to better resist attempts at subversion but also to detect it earlier.
SOCIAL NETWORK ANALYSIS OF UKRAINE This chapter’s purpose is to analyze Ukraine prior to the annexation of Crimea and examine how different networks evolved.
Moreover, using SNA to highlight changes in the Ukraine crisis may be useful for anticipating and highlighting subversive actions and may contribute to the understanding of specific indicators in the different domains.
Finally, this case study will analyze how Russia might use its state power tools working beside and through NGOs.
First, it details and describes the network data—its sources, its boundaries, and the relationships and attributes coded—and presents sociograms of the networks.
Next, an exploratory analysis of the network looks at the interactions between Russia and Ukraine and their sub-state actors, beginning in January 2012 and ending January 2016.
Finally, it investigates whether there were any significant changes in the network during the Ukraine crisis and how the network evolved, if at all.
DATA DESCRIPTION AND NETWORK BOUNDARIES After careful consideration of the pros and cons of each method to boundary identification, I settled upon a nominalist strategy coupled with a positive and negative communications event definitional focus.
Nevertheless, knowing that the goal was to specify the boundaries of the network accurately, I decided I would most likely succeed using a hybrid approach.
The data is derived monthly from the Integrated Crisis Early Warning System dataset.
These events are essentially quadruples, consisting of a source actor, event type , target actor, and date.
The Goldstein score is a value measuring the level of conflict or cooperation in an event, with -10 being the most conflictual and 10 being the most cooperative.
This time period and range were selected to allow for two years of data on either side of the annexation of Crimea by Russia.
ORA’s Measure Over Time feature helps identify trends that otherwise may go unnoticed, and its Social Network Change Detection function can identify “statistically significant” periods of network change, as well as compare and contrast Russia and Ukraine.
SNCD support analysts identify periods in which a single measure of centralization has a significant increase or decrease that is not explainable by random fluctuations in the data.
Total degree centrality is a measure of the number of ties a node has to its neighbors.
The degree centrality value can be directional; that is, in-degree for ties going into the node, and out-degree for ties going out from the node, and the total degree centrality value is a summary of both.
Actors or organizations who are linked to many others assumes having access to their ideas, beliefs, and opinions and therefore are assumed to have a high influence potential.
Those people are identified by the degree centrality in the specific social network.
The higher values in this metric are equal to more connections to other actors in that specific network.
The closeness centrality value describes the path distance between nodes in a specific network.
It measures the path distance between each node and may indicate that the node with a high closeness value (i.e., is close to many other nodes) can disseminate information quickly but also is reached by information fast, too.
This measurement counts the numbers of ties each node has but weights them by its neighbor’s centrality score.
That is, a node’s eigenvector centrality is calculated by its ties to other nodes and their centrality scores.
The eigenvector centrality assesses connections to other nodes with high centrality scores higher than nodes that are more on the periphery.
It assumes that if a node has a neighbor with high centrality scores it may have high potential influencing that neighbor.
It equals the ratio of actual ties over the total possible number of ties in a network.
A pair of actors is considered to be unconnected if they cannot reach one another either directly or indirectly.
A brokerage position within a network indicates that this node may have high influence potential but also that it could be a source of gathering information since the information between two networks most often needs to go through this brokerage.
The optimal number of subgroups generally uses modularity as a measure of fit.
INITIAL ANALYSIS I first analyzed the network from January 2012 through January 2016.
This allowed me to identify trends and shifts in the overall structure of the network.
Next, I identified specific points in time that seemed interesting, points in time where metrics, such as the density of the network, had shifted dramatically.
This allowed me to narrow the range of January 2012-January 2016 to August 2013-April 2014.
By narrowing the range, I identified a specific period with the most interesting network-level and nodelevel events shifts, the highest change in total density of the network.
Sociograms of Russia’s influence operations in Eastern Europe network relationships were coded and then visualized.
Network centralization measures the difference between the mostcentral nodes and the rest of the network.
High values indicate that few nodes are very highly connected, and most have very few ties.
In contrast, low values indicate that many nodes are highly connected, and most have many ties.
There was a total degree centralization of 0.247 in August 2013 and 0.120 in April 2014, indicating that the nodes became much more highly connected with many more ties in April 2014.
These dates coincide with the change in relationships between Russia and Ukraine during the Ukraine crisis and the annexation of Crimea.
Based on the initial analysis, this study identified the standard centralization measures and network density, as the most interesting network-level measures warranting further investigation.
This study also investigates standard centrality measures (degree, closeness, eigenvector, and betweenness) and brokerage positions at the node level.
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS This section will chronologically describe and visualize the different analyses and their results.
Throughout that period, a total of 49 different networks among these actors where identified.
Sixteen networks were in the beginning time period, 17 in the middle, and 16 in the end.
Analysis was conducted for both positive and negative network interactions between Ukrainian-to-Ukrainian, Ukrainianto-Russian, and Russian-to-Russian actors.
Diameter January 2012-January 2016 11.605 30 Positive Interactions Network Avg.
Positive Interactions Total Degree Closeness Eigenvector Betweenness 0.205 0.060 0.594 0.225 2.
Briefly put, SNCD allows for real-time analysis and can potentially alert analysts as to whether and when a sudden change has occurred in a network, and when compared with other sources of Human Intelligence , may explain possible causes for specific events.
Significant changes are determined to occur 49 when a particular measure varies from a baseline at a rater greater than a predetermined threshold.
As identified by the measure charts, network density, network centralization, and their corresponding social network change detection , each provides evidence that August 2013 and April 2014 are two of the most important periods—periods with the greatest shifts in value.
ORA’s output can be confusing because it graphs both significant increases and decreases of a particular metric with lines that rise from the baseline.
Similarly, the green line indicates increases in network fragmentation, while the yellow line tracks decreases.
Looking at the figure, the red, blue, and green lines all cross the threshold (indicated by the red horizontal line), suggesting that significant changes did occur.
The next step is to determine the time at which each change began to occur in order to identify what factors may have led to the significant changes.
With SNCD, the time at which a significant change is deemed to have begun to occur is the point where the line leaves the baseline and begins to rise.
Specifically, in August 2012, Russia stopped all imports from Ukraine to Russia.
This resulted in President Yanukovych’s resignation in February 2014, when a temporary government was established.
On March 18, Russian President Putin signed a law that implied annexation of Crimea.
As noted earlier, Newman Groups is an algorithm that detects subgroups within networks by comparing the pattern of ties between actors to a random network of the same size and density.
If the level of interconnectedness between some actors is greater than one would expect strictly from random interactions, then it is seen as evidence that it a subgroup within the network.
The groups that Newman’s algorithm identifies make visual sense in the manner that the Newman group exhibits less community structure.
Blue ties indicate positive interactions, and red ties indicate negative interactions.
One can also derive a negative tie between Ukraine business and Russian government, which can be explained by the import embargo.
These visualizations highlight that there is a similar pattern between positive and negative interactions.
The majority of ties are reciprocal except for a few, and there are both negative and positive ties between the same actors.
However, the overall weight of the negative ties is much higher than the positive ties, revealing a conflicted environment.
August 2013 Interactions There were 15 total nodes, fewer isolates, identified for the period of August 2013.
Analysis was conducted for network Agent x Agent Negative ties, for network Agent x Agent Positive ties, and for individual nodes.
Ukraine’s relatively high score in eigenvector centrality is explained to its tie to Russia, which is a highly centralized actor with many ties to other actors.
The closeness centrality scores, which are quite even between the top five actors in both table five and six, reveal that it is a highly connected network where every actor has a relatively high potential to disseminate information.
Negative Interactions Ranking Degree Closeness Eigenvector Betweenness 1 RUSGOV UKRPTY RUSGOV RUSGOV 2 RUSCVL RUSGOV RUSCVL UKRGOV 3 UKRGOV RUSJUD RUSREB RUSCVL 4 RUSOPP UKRGOV RUSBUS RUSJUD 5 RUSBUS RUSMED RUSOPP RUSPTY Since the negative and positive networks do not differ significantly in scores, these tables look similar, and the analysis confirms only the first more broad analysis of 2012-2016.
Russia’s dominance in eigenvector centrality indicate a more negative dissemination of information than Ukraine’s relatively positive.
Interactions 1 UKRGOV 2 RUSGOV 3 UKRCVL 4 RUSCVL 5 5-way tie for fifth place 59 These tables describe what one might expect regarding the Russian and the Ukrainian governments as central actors, especially due to degree centrality.
Remarkably, though, these are the top-ranked actors in eigenvector centrality.
These are, except for the Ukrainian government, only Ukrainian sub-state actors such as the opposition, business affiliates, private sector, and civilian organizations.
As mentioned earlier in this study, the eigenvector measures eventual influence capability, and in this case may be actors vulnerable to Russian influence operations.
These visualizations describe both the Ukraine and Russian governments as central actors throughout several measurements.
Analyzing the top actors according to eigenvector and brokerage potential, however, one can derive, especially by looking at the positive ties, that sub-state actors play a significant role.
The top-ranked actors in the brokerage measurement are civilian actors and private organizations that might have an indirect influence potential. d.
During this time, there was a network centralization—total degree of 0.700.
This represented a major shift in the total number of interactions, both positive and negative; the network appears to be much denser, and apparent brokerage roles have disappeared.
This analysis highlights the balance between positive and negative interactions, showing why this network can be described as conflictual.
The Ukrainian government is assigned to the same network/cluster as the majority of the Russian nodes, which may be explained by the negative interactions with the Russian actors.
Moreover, this analysis also reveals a path of exclusively positive ties between Ukrainian business, Ukrainian opposition, Russian rebels, and Russian business affiliates. e.
The networks are much denser, and there are no well-defined subgroups as in August 2013.
The Russian and Ukraine governments do still hold a central position, but now the other actors have many more interactions than before.
There is an increase of both positive and negative ties, but it is difficult to derive any specific conclusions from that.
Remarkable, however, is the increase of interactions, both positive and negative, and the increase of actors, or more specifically, a lack of isolates.
This time frame highlights an event where Russia violates Ukraine’s sovereignty.
In that situation, one may expect the opposite, that is, a decrease of interactions due to hostility.
April 2014 Interactions Eighteen total nodes, less isolates, were identified for the April 2014 period.
Analysis was conducted for network Agent x Agent Negative ties, network Agent x Agent Positive ties, and individual nodes.
Compared to the August 2013, the closeness centrality score is about sixteen times higher and emphasize a network where actors are more close to each other.
This implies that each actor has more potential to disseminate information.
Also, the betweenness centrality scores reveal that Russian civilian actors may have a better brokerage potential in 2014 due to higher scores, similar to the Russian and Ukrainian governmental organizations.
Interactions 1 RUSGOV 2 UKRGOV 3 RUSCVL 4 UKRCVL 5 4-way tie for fifth place In these tables, one can observe that the Ukrainian and Russian governments still hold the top positions.
The differences in these tables are the changes in actors, especially within the eigenvector centrality.
The eigenvector centrality’s top-ranked actors are now 65 Russian actors, meaning that Russia now might have more capacity for indirect influence.
One can also derive the shift in the presence of different rebel groups that might have more interests within the society at this time.
Moreover, from these tables, one can observe an increase in Ukrainian education affiliates within the brokerage position.
The measurements overall have increased in value, but the positive interactions have decreased.
The distribution of the tables is, other than for minor changes, the same as it was in August except for the rise in nongovernmental organizations’ measurement values, indicating more indirect influence.
Hybrid networks, such as this network, often include relations that create trust, competition, and dependencies among members that traditional metrics, such as centrality measures, cannot capture.
In covert network analysis, analysis of complex networks often requires disaggregation into smaller components that allow each relationship type to better understand the meaning and the structure of network ties.
This chapter has tried to analyze how the environment evolves through a crisis but also how Russia might use its state power tools to influence other countries.
The purpose was to highlight changes in the Ukraine crisis that might be useful to adapt for other countries to anticipate Russia’s subversion.
Validating general conclusions from this study may be difficult when this is only a single case study from a single dataset.
Nonetheless, this study reveals a significant change between August 2013 and April 2014, which most likely is explained 66 by the rise of the civil unrest and the evolution of the crisis.
The ties have changed from being clustered into two significant groups of Russian and Ukrainian actors to a network with low centrality but higher density.
One should expect stability and cooperation throughout a crisis within a country when influenced by a foreign adversary.
This study highlights the increase of interactions within the network, which might indicate cooperation.
However, one may expect a decrease in cooperation between actors in Ukraine and Russia’s counterpart due to hostilities, but this seems not to be the case.
This is why this might indicate some kind of will to influence different actors within the exposed country, in this case, Russia influencing Ukraine.
This relative instability can create opportunities that favor either part that aims to subvert the legal authorities.
The interactions between NGOs are clear and their ranks in the measurements related to indirect influence, such as brokerage potential and eigenvector centrality, are high.
Nevertheless, influencing people means influencing those who make decisions.
This study collected and analyzed data from the human environment according to the categories by Lee and Fussell, by “mapping key conditions of insurgency development, pathways of interaction, and nodes of influence,” and revealed that one can build a good roadmap for crafting strategies to counter subversion.
Furthermore, this study revealed Russia’s preferred methods to subvert the Ukrainian political environment and Ukrainian society as a whole were by working through NGOs and in the fog of compatriots and by using economic influence.
The role of indirect influence is even more important today when the use of social media and other information channels rapidly disseminate information, for example, the use of unauthorized military violence, such as the Eastern Ukraine 2014.
The network of April 2014 highlights the importance of cooperation between different agencies within one’s country to be able to alert decision makers when changes in network structure occurs but also to be able to prevent destabilization of the country.
CASE STUDY OF ESTONIA One of Russia’s main objectives is to weaken the unity of the international system of Western-friendly countries, more specifically the EU and NATO, which are its greatest threat.
Estonia, which shares a border with Russia and is a member of both the EU and NATO, is no exception.
With its geographical location between the Baltic Sea and Russia, it has definitely a place in Russia’s sphere of interests, also known as its “buffer” zone.
Since Estonia lacks any significant natural resources or other assets essential for Russia, however, Russia can be more aggressive in its subversive operations aimed to disrupt the society and dissolve the political process.
Subversive actions are a key to success for Russia due to Estonia’s membership in NATO, and the membership initially excluded Russia’s use of conventional armed forces.
NATO membership protects Estonia through the deterrence factor, which may be the biggest difference compared to Ukraine.
Even though the differences between Estonia and Ukraine are many, the two countries share striking similarities of Russian involvement within their respective societies, especially within the four SMT-derived domains—political, social, informational, and economical.
By using derived indicators from the Ukraine case study, one may see similar patterns within Estonia.
First, I briefly summarize the historical perspective to enhance the environmental understanding but also to enhance understanding of the different sectors of the society.
Secondly, I analyze chronologically the domains derived from the political process model to highlight similarities and differences between the events that occurred in Ukraine.
Finally, I present conclusions drawn from the findings and a comparison of the indicators achieved from the Ukraine case study to either dismiss or confirm indicators of Russia’s subversive operations.
HISTORICAL BACKDROP Along with many other Eastern European countries after World War II, Estonia was forced to adopt the Russian way of life.
Traditions, culture, and rules, but also the Russian language, were imposed.
Russian architecture was also imposed on structures such as official government buildings and military installations.
Similar to Ukraine, Estonia gained its independence in 1991 with the collapse of the Soviet Union.
It became a member of both the EU and NATO in 2004, along with the other Baltic states, Latvia and Lithuania.
Estonia is a rather small country, bordering Russia to the east and Baltic Sea to the west.
Its population is about 1. million, about 70 percent of whom are Estonians, 25 percent Russians, and 5 percent other ethnic groups.
The Russian population in Estonia is proportionally larger than in Ukraine where the Russians are only about 17 percent of the population.
Only 50 percent of the Russians in Estonia have Estonian citizenship, a critical condition used by Russia when creating a narrative that Estonia does not take care of its Russians and therefore they should demand Russia’s support and involvement.
Estonia’s development since its independence has been far greater than its southern allies, Latvia and Lithuania.
It ranks high in categories such as education and press freedom and has had a steep development curve within the technology sector.
THE POLITICAL DOMAIN Despite Estonia’s well-developed technological industry and its membership in NATO, its political system lacks stability and experienced leaders.
An Examination of Russian Compatriot Policy in Estonia; A Report of the CSIS Europe Program (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic & International Studies, 2011), 1.
Sometimes there are ties between political organizations and business affiliates where the funding of different parties is blurred, opening the door for political opportunities.
Unfortunately, the relatively large Russian minority has not been given the chance to receive Estonian citizenship.
More specifically, the leader of the party, through his connections to Russian sponsors, had been able to build a Russian Orthodox church in an area of Tallin where most of the Russian people are situated.
Another church was built funded by an Estonian-Russian businessman in an area heavily populated by Russians and in a town where governmental control was low.
These events clearly point out the Russian government’s use of the Russian population in general, but through the church more specifically, to gain control and influence.
Leveraging a very large number of Russian people against local politics is an effective tool in the subversion toolbox.
In 2011, Russian involvement within the political environment continued.
Russian Influence in the Baltic States (London: Chatham House, 2012), 2.
That media agency has its office in Moscow and does not have any local offices or other connections within Estonia, but announced this information just days before the election.
The actions of this media agency, with no direct connections to Estonia, and its interest in an Estonian party leader are hard to explain other than to indirectly influence the political environment to create conditions favorable to Russian interests.
THE ECONOMIC DOMAIN Compared to Ukraine and the other Baltic states, Estonia is less dependent on the Russian energy sector.
Yet, historical remnants and old infrastructure still keep Estonia in the grip of Russian organizations.
That said, they are not fully independent, especially not regarding the natural gas sector.
The huge Russian energy company Gazprom plays a significant role in Estonia, as it did in Ukraine.
Gazprom uses economic factors to gain control over certain areas in the society trying to influence decision makers and makes a statement if governments and their decision makers do not align with Russian interests.
In May 2007, Russian oil dealers stopped using the port of Tallinn and instead used their port in St.
The economic impact on those business affiliates that used to work with the Russian exports was devastating, which influenced decision makers not only at the local level but also at the regional level.
The largest oil company that used to export oil through Tallinn was owned by Gazprom.
This embargo happened at the same time as a protest against Estonia’s decision to move a Russian statue located in Tallinn.
Overall, Russia’s and Estonia’s trading market has had a positive development since Estonia’s independence.
First, no trade agreement with equal rights and obligations exists between the two countries.
Also, Russia refuses to recognize the Estonian health and safety certificates from Estonian producers and approves certificates only from their own organizations.
THE SOCIAL DOMAIN The history of the Soviet Union’s occupation of Estonia and the outcome of World War II divides the majority of Estonians’ and Russians’ perspectives on Russia either as liberators from the Nazis or as an occupying force.
This was obvious in 2007 when a Soviet monument was moved from the city center of Tallinn to a cemetery outside the city.
It was a bronze statue supposed to remind the Estonian people about the Soviet occupation.
Many Estonians saw the statue as a reminder of the Russian influence in the society and did not subscribe to the story it told, but many Russians felt that they had been insulted and that the Estonian society had minimized the importance of the historical Russian involvement.
A frigid diplomatic relationship between Estonia and Russia emerged from this event.
What followed, except for the diplomatic complications, were economic constraints, a cyberattack apparently originating from Russia, and an information operation trying to discredit Estonia and its decision makers.
Within the social domain, SMT emphasizes the importance of already existing organizations.
These organizations are coordinated through coordination councils manned from the Russian embassy in order to collect NGOs and affiliates that support Russian objectives or otherwise promote the Russian way of living.
In 2008, Russkiy Mir established a language center located in the middle of Tallinn.
In 2009, Russkiy Mir merged their organizational objectives with those of the Russian Federal Agency responsible for the compatriot policy, Rossotrudnichestvo.
This defined its ties to Russia and created a platform for Russia to influence the narrative.
The effort against Russian influences in Estonian society has been an ongoing process.
One major issue among decision makers is about what the official language spoken in Estonia should be and difficulties with integrating the Russian population into the society.
To justify Russia’s interference within the decision-making processes of other countries, neutral NGOs, funded by the Kremlin, are used to create a narrative and report human rights crimes.
Two of those are the Legal Information Centers for Human Rights and the Russian School in Estonia.
Through these organizations, Russia can decide what kind of narrative should be broadcast and can use these sources later on to argue that the information came from an independent third party.
The organization Russian Schooling, founded in 2010, was exactly such an organization.
It was seen as a response to the strict policy against the Russian language and promoted the Russian way of life and culture.
In June 2010, the organization Mir bez Natsizma (World Without Nazism ) was founded in Kiev.
Their leadership consists of people who used to be members of Nochnoi Dozor and has strong ties to the Russian government.
Night Watch was the leading organization in the unrest following the movement of the bronze statue.
World without Nazism is described as one of the most influential NGOs defending Russia’s interests abroad.
It had its founding meeting in Tallinn and seems to belong to the same network as World Without Nazism.
The Nazi topic is often used when trying to discredit leaders or decision makers by accusing them of being Nazis or having connections to Nazi organizations.
Quite often, these organizations compare how Russians abroad are treated by the societies they live in to Nazi-like treatment.
In 2008, Galina Sapozhnikova, a journalist for the Russian newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda, and Igor Teterin, an Estonian entrepreneur, founded a media club called Impressum, which has been accused of promoting anti-Estonian propaganda and at the same time glorifying Russia.
In December 2011, it held a meeting where the guests could sign a petition against a political reform conducted by the Estonian government at that time.
In 2009, the club Format-A3 was created in Crimea, which is pretty similar to Impressum, with the same guest speakers and speaking points.
In September 2010, the media club expanded into Ukraine but under another name, Skovoroda Club, in Kiev.
Its founder was Dmitry Kiselyov, who became the director of Rossiya Segodnya, the new media agency created by Putin in 2013 by merging RIA Novosti and the radio station Golos Rossi.
The Historical Memory Foundation, founded in 2008, claims it conducts research on and analyzes historical events in Russia and its eastern neighbors.
The foundation seems to pay more attention to the resistance movements in the Baltic states and Ukraine, and tries to create a narrative in which the participants in resistance movements were selfish and cruel at that time.
In 2010, the foundation created a database containing the names of victims of the armed resistance in the Baltic states, Ukraine, and Belarus.
Another historically focused organization is the Baltic Research Center.
They argue that different assessments of historical events are the greatest obstacle for deeper relationships.
Their interests are also in the transit, environmental, and energy sectors, and they want to facilitate the exchange of students between universities.
These are all programs that already exist in the Council of Baltic Sea States where Russia is already a member; thus, this can only be described as Russia’s use of soft power to feed its own narrative.
For Russia to be able to spread its information and influence societies, it requires a credible spokesperson.
One of the organizations was the Tallinn-based Legal Information Center for Human Rights , which in 2014 organized a conference in Tallinn.
The conference focused on a narrative that painted Estonia just as the Russian strategy desired, as a divided society that violates the human rights of the Russian-speaking people.
The Fund for the Legal Protection and Support of Russian Federation Compatriots Living Abroad and its members are supporters of the annexation of Crimea, and the organization very often supports court cases related to people linked to Russian special services.
It was a project that disseminated information through all the Baltic countries.
The project was funded by Rossiya Segodnya , also active in Ukraine, which was established in 2013 as the Russian state information agency.
The Baltnews project targeted the Russianspeaking population abroad and was coordinated by employees of Rossiya Segodnya, which also managed and coordinated what was broadcast and when programs were broadcast.
Sputnik was developed and funded by the same organization as the Baltnews, Russia Today , which broadcast in about 34 different languages.
In 2014, Sputnik advertised to recruit journalists in Estonia in order to broaden its coverage of Russian news in Estonia.
The network of both Sputnik and Russia Today are closely linked to organizations and people active in Russian compatriot policy and also has ties to other Russian governmental organizations in the Kremlin.
No clear evidence pointed to a specific country, but much evidence indicated involvement of Russian individuals through their IP addresses.
Then, in 2010, the bronze statue lost its value as a tool to leverage propaganda and conflicts for Russia.
Russia had to find another event to engage when disseminating its narrative of Russia as a deliverer of salvation.
Russia tried to build a message that all opposition to Soviet occupation was an act of Nazism.
These events were covered by an unusually high number of Russian journalists describing the event as an attempt to change the historical case and as Nazi rallies sponsored by the Estonian government.
Russia continued to build its narrative that the Soviet Union was the liberator and that the resistance from the current Estonian government is an example of pro-Nazism.
In 2011, Russia’s accusations of Estonia as a promoter of neo-Nazism and crimes against human rights continued.
The media-club Impressum organized a public meeting covering the tense relationship between Russia and Estonia, and media continued to cover people who questioned the history as it is told today and instead wanted to derive a more Russian-friendly approach.
The use of youth organizations is leveraged both domestically in Russia as an influence tool but also abroad where it wants to disseminate its agenda.
In May 2013, a youth organization, Young Word, organized a conference in Estonia that emphasized military characteristics such as courage and bravery.
It was supported by the Russian embassy in Estonia and the Estonian Orthodox church.
Moreover, every year a Russian youth camp named Soyuz, dedicated to the memory of the Russian Empire and its victory in World War II is held in Russia by the Rossotrudnichestvo and an association called The Courage of the Fatherland.
It has a military and athletic theme, and participants are invited from Russia, the Commonwealth of Independent States , and the Baltic states.
In order for the compatriot policy to be successful, Russia needs either to segregate people or make them feel segregated and undermine the integration process by trying to make them dependent on Russia.
Russia justifies its interference in other countries’ politics and internal affairs by leaning on its compatriot policy.
They speak about human rights and argue that Russia has a responsibility to protect its people abroad when they engage in different events in other countries.
For example, the Fund for the Legal Protection and Support of Russian Federation Compatriots Living Abroad, founded in 2012, was established in Estonia to support and finance pro-Russian organizations in order for them to work toward Russia’s foreign policy objectives.
The fund supported the participation of World Without Nazism’s activists in OSCE conferences and also for WWN to be able to organize its General Assembly in Strasbourg.
The WWN has an annual seminar to remember that the Red Army conquered Tallinn.
By building this network, Russia can implement its information operations through legal organizations in other countries under the flag of compatriot policy.
An example is the Legal Information Center for Human Rights in Estonia, developed in 2012 by Alexey Semyonov, who is a member of Coordination Council of Russian Compatriots.
Moreover, the media is a significant tool when framing different narratives.
In early spring 2010, a film crew from the Russian TV channel 5 came to Estonia to document the life of Russians living there.
It was told to create a story of a creative society with engaged people, but when broadcast, it turned out to be the opposite.
ETV+ is a Russian-language TV channel broadcasting Russian news from an Estonian perspective.
All these information operations clearly aim at creating an environment that is unfavorable to the Russian people in Estonia or at least designed to create a feeling of being mistreated.
This both creates incentives for people to rise up and protest but also frames the narrative to gather masses of people.
Russia’s compatriot policy tries to connect the Russian-speaking population living abroad, more specifically in Russia’s areas of interest, with foreign policy objectives—as it is in Estonia.
By uniting the Russian-speaking people under Russian authorities and leadership, such as the Government Commission on Compatriots Living Abroad, the Russian Foreign Ministry, and Russian embassies, Russia can more easily distribute information and use Russianspeaking people as a tool when meddling in other states’ political decision making.
Using this kind of soft power makes it more difficult for governments to target a specific area that is an obvious threat to them.
The Russian national agency, Rossotrudnichestvo, which was founded in 2008 by the Russian government, was in 2013 defined as a department in the Russian Federation, whose main tasks are developing and running Russia’s foreign policy.
Rossotrudnichestvo is responsible for the compatriot policy but more specifically for assisting the development of humanitarian cooperation and other support based on the compatriot strategy.
Konstantin Kosachev, director of the Rossotrudnichestvo, emphasized the importance of independent organizations of Russians abroad to show why a closer cooperation with Russian businessmen should be established.
This forced the local Coordination Council of Russian Compatriots to change in 2013 by dividing into several sectors, where one had an economic focus with the goal of finding both Russian and local businessmen ready to support the compatriot policy.
In September 2016, representatives from the Legal Information Center for Human Rights and the Russian School in Estonia participated in an event organized by the OSCE covering subjects like human rights and integration.
The Fund for the Legal Protection and Support of Russian Federation Compatriots Living Abroad paid for these organizations’ participation.
The message these organizations spread was about the violation of language rights and that Russians without Estonian citizenship created a heavy burden for the Estonian society.
The message was designed to thwart a sense of belonging among Russians in Estonian society.
In September 2011, a campaign symbolized by a white ribbon was launched to support Russian schools that did not want to be taught the Estonian language.
The campaign was supported by Night Watch, which also organized a couple of demonstrations.
By analyzing the participants and the organizers, however, one could observe that there were almost no students or parents protesting and that the connection to the Russian government was clear.
Another way of gaining influence is to give money to political parties in foreign countries or to offer lucrative positions in companies to former politicians.
These companies are often owned by or closely related to the Russian government.
Other Russian government foundations and media companies support different nonprofit organizations, including Estonian nonprofits.
Finally, in 2016 NATO decided to pre-position battlegroups in the Baltic states.
This created an aggressive propaganda reaction from Russia, both in the media and in political messaging.
In Estonia, a handful of extremist activities spreading anti-NATO messages emerged but to no great effect in Estonian society.
A similar event occurred in 2016 when Russia delegated a skinhead from St.
When arriving at the event, he had clothes that revealed neo-Nazi symbols.
This was captured by the Kremlin-controlled media, which broadcast this as the social problem in Estonian society.
Fortunately, the Estonian Internal Secret Service had control over this and highlighted the event to discredit the attempt.
Konstantin Zatulin, blacklisted in Ukraine from 2006 to 2008, tried to become a politician, representing the Russian-speaking people.
His campaign was covered by the Russian TV channel Tsargrad, owned by Konstantin Malofeyev.
Malofeyev, who is on the EU’s sanctions list, is a wealthy Russian businessman with strong connections to Putin.
CONCLUSIONS ABOUT RUSSIAN INTERFERENCE IN ESTONIA The similarities to Ukraine are obvious and Russian interference is sometimes even more apparent in Estonia.
It could be because of stronger control at the governmental level but also because Russia may have a stronger posture in Estonia than in Ukraine.
Russia’s operations in Estonia aim to influence society in such a way that society becomes diverse and lack unity.
Russia utilizes the depth of the divided ethnic society, and the success of the compatriot policy is striking.
The events in the different domains are highly influenced by dissemination of pro-Russian narratives, and the use of both existing but also newly created organizations on a sub-state level is common.
Different organizations and institutes, registered as research institutions, are platforms used to build credibility in the dissemination of information within the Russian strategy.
Defending the rights of Russian-speaking people has been used as a pretext for Russia before to intervene in internal affairs, such as in Ukraine.
Information operations enable the Russian government to divide and rule different states in order to influence public opinion and discredit the democratic process.
Furthermore, information operations are designed to make the Russian way of life more attractive.
By using its compatriot policy, which aims to segregate ethnic Russians from the society in Estonia and to defame Estonia’s social and political leadership, Russia creates an unfavorable situation by generating mistrust.
The events described in this chapter hinder other countries, but especially Estonia, from establishing closer ties to the West.
The cultural centers are their foundations and serve as a tool to disperse Russian influence in a legal way and to depict Russia as the only alternative.
Finally, support of political dissidents and funding of their activities, often through surrogates, is a tool for causing tensions within a state.
The resulting tensions create political opportunities for Russia to utilize, not necessarily today but maybe tomorrow, when international pressure has become too great for the Russian government to handle.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION In general, Western countries promote democratic society as a role model for other countries to follow.
The democratic process works as a mechanism for the average citizen to engage in decision making and thereby influence their situation in life, most often by elections or other processes where the will of the people plays a significant role.
This makes the decisions made by the democratic instrument difficult to question and even harder to overrule.
It is the will of the people in a democratic structure that is promoted as the key ingredient in a functioning, equal, and fair society.
Unfortunately, the democratic process has lately been Western societies’ most vulnerable domain.
Its attempted comeback as a superpower has proved to be more difficult than expected for Russia.
Strong alliances and other agreements between Russia’s antagonists and Russia’s lack of a modern military compounds this challenge.
This has forced Russia to find other ways to compete in the world arena.
Its lack of deterrence power forces Russia to leverage some kind of relative power to influence foreign countries and their decision making, most often to prevent countries from strengthening their relationships with Western alliances and the United States.
Working through legal institutions like cultural centers and volunteer organizations, Russia creates a platform for further operations to undermine governments and political systems.
From these platforms, Russia builds networks within the society and uses the human domain and the potential of social movements.
Unfortunately, most Western countries are unprepared for this and lack methods and knowledge about how to confront these operations.
Understanding and anticipating the changing tactics are crucial to preventing Russia from influencing the democratic process in general and the political decision-making process more specifically.
This thesis research concludes that one can use SMTs to frame areas of interest in societies where subversive actions may take place and to identify indicators of such actions.
One can see Russian engagements especially within organizations on a sub-state actor level.
It identifies Russian governmental organizations working through proxy organizations, such as nongovernmental organizations.
Furthermore, the research emphasizes the importance of cooperation between agencies and NGOs not only to better resist attempts of subversion but also to detect them earlier.
The solution seems to be close cooperation between NGOs and their governmental counterparts and strong alliances.
It seems to be even more important for small state actors because they lack the deterrence aura that follows a larger country with bigger armed forces.
Althaus, Scott, Joseph Bajjalieh, John F Carter, Buddy Peyton, and Dan A Shalmon.
National Defence Academy of Latvia, Center for Security and Strategic Research, 2014.
Boschee, Elizabeth, Jennifer Lautenschlager, Sean O’Brien, Steve Shellman, James Starz, and Michael Ward.
An Examination of Russian Compatriot Policy in Estonia; A Report of the CSIS Europe Program.
Conley, Heather A., James Mina, Ruslan Stefanov, and Martin Vladimirov.
In Beyond Convergence , edited by Hilary Matfess and Michael Miklaucic.9-389.
Applying Social Network Analysis to an Unconventional Warfare Framework,” From the CORE: Common Operational Research Environment Newsletter 4 (June 2014): 8.
Kofman, Michael, Katya Migacheva, Brian Nichiporuk, Andrew Radin, Olesya Tkacheva, and Jenny Oberholtzer.
Parliamentary Elections, 28 October 2012; OSCE/OD1HR Election Obserx’ation Mission Final Report.
Executive Order on Establishing a Foundation for Supporting and Protecting the Rights of Compatriots Living Abroad.
Snow, David, Robert Benford, Holly McCammon, Lyndi Hewitt, and Scott Fitzgerald.
Votel, Joseph L., Charles T Cleveland, Charles T Connett, and Will Irwin.
