Two years after the previous elections for the Ukrainian Parliament, a new election campaign is underway.
The vote will take place on October 26 under the most difficult conditions the independent state has ever faced.
It is worth recalling that the previous parliament, elected in 2012, will bear little resemblance to the future one.
Another—Svoboda—is no longer the chief representative of the radical right, while Fatherland has been undermined by deep internal divisions.
In this sense therefore, the parliament will represent something quite new.
But some seven million potential voters in the east are unlikely or unwilling to take part, meaning that the election is essentially about the views of those who live in central, western, and southern Ukraine.
In terms of the regions of Ukraine, more than one-third of those polled in the east and 22.9% of those in the south responded that they did not intend to take part in the elections.
In the West support was almost evenly divided between Solidarity and the Radicals, whereas in the Center, support for the former was double that of the latter.
In late August, Solidarity, which had failed to achieve much influence in past elections, became known as the Petro Poroshenko Bloc.
In this way it identified itself with a popular president who had achieved a resounding victory in the May 2014 presidential elections.
The name change was announced by the former Minister of Interior Yuri Lutsenko, who had served a prison sentence under the Yanukovych presidency, and has taken on the role of party chairman.
On September 13, Prime Minister Arsenii Yatsenyuk’s newly created Popular Front declared that it would oppose the Poroshenko Bloc, following its withdrawal from the Fatherland , reportedly because of disagreements with Yulia Tymoshenko.
Alongside Yatsenyuk will stand the Speaker of the Parliament Oleksandr Turchynov, who took over as Acting President of Ukraine following the departure of former president Viktor Yanukovych last February.
Also included in the party’s ranks are Interior Minister Arsen Avakov and journalist Tatiana Chornovil, his current Advisor.
Finally, the Ukrainian Democratic Alliance , headed by the new Kyiv Mayor Vitalii Klychko, announced that it would take part in the elections jointly with the Poroshenko Bloc, thus repeating a practice followed in the earlier presidential elections when Klychko opted not to oppose Poroshenko and to settle for the mayoral role in the capital city.
On September 14, the Poroshenko Bloc announced that it already had a full slate of candidates on a list that seemed to include both competent and unlikely personalities.
It included the three Baloha brothers in Zakarpatska —Ihor Palytsya, the governor of Odesa region, the controversial former Minister of Justice Roman Zvarych who in 2005 lied about his qualifications, the former Chairman of the National Bank Stepan Kubiv, the executive-director of the conference ‘Yalta European Strategy ” platform associated with the Viktor Pinchuk Foundation, Ivanna Klympush-Tsintsadze, and the president’s son Oleksii, who is running in a riding in Vynnytsya Oblast.
Clearly the president is financially well-backed for the campaign and running high in the standings.
It may also serve to create a new divide between the “Euromaidan” parties.
What that rift signifies is that a likely comprehensive victory of the presidential forces may be followed by a more serious power struggle in which the Radicals and the Popular Front may find common cause.
First, it may depend on the long-term results of the September 5 battle of Ilovaisk, which marked the intrusion of regular Russian army units into the Ukrainian conflict, as well a decisive turn in the war.
Clearly Yatsenyuk will not entertain either option, and at the recent YES conference, he took a much more uncompromising position when he declared that the goal of Putin was the “elimination” of Ukraine.
Valeria Hontareva, Chairperson of the National Bank of Ukraine, estimates that over this year, the GDP will decline by as much as 10%, much higher than original forecasts, and that the ratio of debt to GDP may rise to 73% by next year, compared to 43% in 2013.
Added to the costs of war, thousands of refugees, and the direct impact of the conflict on East Ukrainian industry, one can anticipate acrimonious and bitter debates in the new Parliament.
In the short term at least it will bolster the position of Poroshenko and increase the credibility of the new Ukrainian leadership among the public.
Yet with the division of the Euromaidan forces, it will face before long two serious dilemmas.
First, if too many concessions are made to the Russians, there will be potential for the formation of a more radical bloc of deputies, including both Yatsenyuk’s forces and those of the Radical right , raising the possibility of a new Euromaidan.
And second, there is the question of accommodating the southern and eastern regions that were unhappy with Euromaidan and feel unrepresented in the current leadership.
Much of this electorate opposes a Russian invasion or separation; but it needs to be convinced why it should show allegiance to Kyiv.
Lastly there is the sinister presence of Vladimir Putin and his obdurate and Gromyko-like Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov , who have at times seemed to favor Poroshenko over other opponents during the conflict and who seek to expand Russia’s influence over Ukraine by any means.
At the minimum, for any kind of rapprochement with a government run by Poroshenko’s forces, they will demand a neutral Ukraine that commits itself neither to NATO nor the European Union, meaning in effect a Ukraine that falls firmly in the Russian sphere of influence.
No Ukrainian leader is likely to survive such concessions; but likewise none can avoid the question of how to counter Russia or deal with its president.
In this respect, the “defection” of Yatsenyuk, one of the ablest politicians in the Rada, is a serious blow, though not one that will have a serious impact on the Poroshenko Bloc’s chances of victory.
