TITLE AND SUBTITLE Russia’s ’Ambiguous Warfare’ and Implications for the United States Marine Corps 5a.
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME AND ADDRESS CNA Analysis & Solutions,3003 Washington Boulevard,Arlington,VA,22201 8.
Phases of Russia’s ambiguous warfare 5 CNA This page intentionally left blank.
CNA Introduction It has been just over a year since “little green men”—strongly suspected to be Russian Federation soldiers—surged into Crimea and drove out all elements and symbols of Ukrainian authority.
Peace now prevails on the Crimean peninsula under Russian control, but as of this writing, war still rages in Ukraine’s eastern region of Donbass, where Russian-backed separatists wielding Russian weapons, driving Russian tanks, and reportedly fighting alongside unacknowledged Russian troops wage war against the Ukrainian military.
In annexing the Crimean peninsula and supporting instability in Ukraine’s eastern provinces, the Russian Federation and its armed forces have used so-called “ambiguous warfare” to great tactical and operational effect.
This brand of warfare involves rapidly generating highly trained and disciplined forces who enter the battle space out of uniform and, in coordination with local supporters, utilize psychological operations, intimidation, and bribery to undermine resistance.
W hi le it is unlikely that United States Marines will directly confront Russian Federation forces in the near future, other nations and non-state actors who are potential United States adversaries are closely observing Russia’s use of ambiguous warfare and will likely modify their own strategy and tactics as a result.
Therefore, it behooves the United States Marine Corps to understand the lessons from Crimea and Ukraine and how other adversaries might militarily adapt as a result of Russia’s success.
This paper presents a summary of that discussion, which was held under the Chatham House rule of non-attribution to encourage a candid exchange of views.
Generally speaking, the term applies in situations in which a state or non-state belligerent actor deploys troops and proxies in a deceptive and confusing manner—with the intent of achieving political and military effects while obscuring the belligerent’s direct participation.
Russia’s actions in Crimea and Ukraine clearly align with this concept, though numerous participants pointed out that it is not a new concept for Russia.
In his now-seminal article, General Gerasimov urged the academy to study and engage in the formulation of new doctrine and tactics to win the wars of the 21 st century.
Experts in our discussion agreed that the “Gerasimov Doctrine” evolved out of necessity, driven by Russian vulnerability rather than strength.
The revised Russian Military Doctrine signed by President Vladimir Putin in December 2014 identifies NATO and NATO enlargement as a fundamental threat to the Russian homeland.
Anticipating that the Russian Federation’s largely conscript forces would not prevail against NATO in conventional combat, Gerasimov advocates the use of a modern version of partisan warfare that targets an adversary’s weaknesses and avoids direct, overt confrontations.
Additionally, Gerasimov proposes a correlation of non-military to military measures of 4 to 1.
His non-military measures include efforts to shape the political, economic, and social landscapes of the adversary state through subversion, espionage, and propaganda, potentially in combination with cyberattacks.
Grounded in maskirovka, the Soviet doctrine of denial and deception, this new employment of ambiguous warfare keeps opponents wondering and hesitating by resolutely denying Russian involvement while working through as many agents as possible.
In Ukraine, for example, third-party deniable agents included pro-Russian loyalists and local paramilitary commanders, as well as gangsters who spotted an opportunity for profit and power.
One of the experts in our discussion described Russia’s application of Gerasimov’s concepts as proceeding through six main phases.
In the first phase, Russia uses ethnic Russian populations in target states as a “fifth column,” fomenting protests and resistance to the country’s government.
These actions have the potential to generate backlash and discrimination against ethnic Russians by the government and majority populations, which in turn can escalate the situation in the target country.
In essence, Russia can activate a self-reinforcing mechanism to generate conflict.
In the second phase, Russia uses economic warfare and diplomatic/political pressure to intimidate, coerce, punish, and undermine governments in target states as a 4 CNA means of further weakening them.
In the third phase, Russia infiltrates ambiguous military and security personnel into the target country, and activates cri min al and other networks to further foment unrest and ignite open conflict.
In the fourth phase, Russia’s military engages in a campaign to isolate government positions, seize key terrain, and destroy the defense and security apparatus of the target country.
In the fifth phase, Russia conducts information operations to deny involvement and seed doubt and discord in the minds of other foreign governments as to what is occurring and how they might respond.
In the sixth and final phase, Russia consolidates its gains in the target country, takes actions to de-escalate the conflict and reduce tensions, and installs a government amenable to Russian influence.
Another expert commented that credible escalation do min ance is a key to making this form of warfare work—Russia has been adept at maintaining a carefully calibrated balance between low-intensity, ambiguous actions and credible, highintensity threats.
As participants at our event made clear, Russia’s military has put Gerasimov’s ideas to good practice in Crimea and Ukraine, though its overwhelming success in Crimea has not been entirely mirrored in events to date in eastern Ukraine.
Russia’s armed forces At our event, one expert who has studied the Russian military extensively commented that nuclear weapons still play a central role in Russia’s strategic thinking.
They allow Russia to maintain a credible deterrent against Western action, as well as to put forth a significant threat as part of its fourth phase of ambiguous warfare.
Russia also still maintains a sizeable military force with a sizeable reserve.
That said, Russia's military is spread thin over the longest land border of any single country.
As participants in our event discussed, Russia’s military is aligned into different military districts.
The Western District is the one concerned with Ukraine, and it has a large share of Russia’s air force and air defense assets arrayed against possible NATO air threats from the West.
The Southern District contains forces in a high state of readiness, and the Eastern District contains forces arrayed to protect the largely unpopulated eastern flank of Russia against potential threats from China.
The result of this posture is that Russia’s military has limited ability to mass forces in any one direction without leaving gaps in the nation’s defense elsewhere.
From a resource perspective alone, the over-stretched nature of the Russian armed forces makes ambiguous warfare an attractive option because this approach does not require the higher resource demands of a sustained conventional campaign.
Rather, it thinks about its forces as primarily geared toward “fighting power” or “political impact,” and it uses organizational constructs that place fighting power in support of forces for political impact.
One of Russia’s 7 CNA major forces for political impact is the Spetsnaz, which one expert discussed in more detail.
The Spetsnaz Given the covert nature of ambiguous warfare, Russia’s special forces—the Spetsnaz—have played a significant role in Russia’s operations in Crimea and Ukraine.
Historically, the Spetsnaz were mostly concerned with deep reconnaissance, nuclear missions, and disrupting adversary command and control structures in the context of large-scale conventional warfare.
In more recent years, they have gone through a painful but ultimately successful adaptation process to fight “small wars” more effectively.
Historically, the Russian military lacked a doctrinal base for small wars, which led to significant challenges in Afghanistan and Chechnya.
But in the wake of the latter operations, the military began to purposely evolve the Spetsnaz to have a more deliberate role in small wars.
The Sochi Olympics—and the threats of terrorism that accompanied them—were used to justify a major expansion of the Spetsnaz, and all of the Spetsnaz units were brought up to full strength.
One expert said that the Spetsnaz are best thought of as political instruments, vice military units.
Additionally, the GRU is a risk-taking organization that routinely works with unorthodox agents and engages in unorthodox operations.
While the GRU employs private sector individuals, warlords, mercenaries, and organized crime syndicates in its conduct of ambiguous warfare, the Spetsnaz are perhaps its most important actor and will continue to be so going forward.
All that said, our participants pointed out that, contrary to popular belief, not all Spetsnaz are ""Tier 1” operators.
One expert described the Spetsnaz as being akin to the United States Army Rangers—light infantry intervention forces.
The Crimea operation Russia’s Crimea operation in late February 2014, apparently long planned as a military option, went relatively smoothly.
Simultaneously, information warfare techniques were applied to persuade Ukrainian forces to switch sides.
Ultimately, Russia’s operations in Crimea were very successful, resulting in the annexation of key terrain for the Russian military at very low cost.
Certainly, these operations surprised the West and have served as a wake-up call regarding Russia’s future intentions in the region.
Donbass In April 2014, a pro-Russian insurgency erupted in the Donbass coal-mining region in southeastern Ukraine and quickly increased in speed and intensity.
Advised by Russian GRU officers, an odd collection of deniable agents—foreign “volunteers” and paid mercenaries, radical Russian nationalists, local mobsters, former members of the disbanded Ukrainian “Berkut” special police, and others—took control of government institutions and key infrastructure in Luhansk and Donetsk, and proclaimed them independent people’s republics.
Despite the many factors favoring Moscow’s designs on the Donbass, the operation did not go exactly as the experts in our event believe it was planned.
The Russians found less support for the separatist agenda in the Donbass than they had expected.
The deniable agents who were first handed power in the “Luhansk and Donetsk Republics” were harsh, erratic administrators who often alienated the local population.
Military coordination among the separatists was poor, and they used sophisticated Russian-supplied equipment recklessly, as seen in the shoot-down of Malaysian Flight MH-17.
Donbass residents able to escape the fighting have done so, by either going to Russia or moving to safer areas in Ukraine.
Russian forces were able to move back and forth across the border at will, frequently under the cover of white-painted “humanitarian” convoys.
In August 2014, the Ukrainian military re-grouped and began to close in on the separatist strongholds in the Donbass.
Sixty-five towns and villages were retaken, and it looked as though the military endgame was approaching.
At that point, the Russians were forced to 10 CNA take on clearly visible roles to prevent the defeat of the self-proclaimed republics.
All the while, Moscow continued to deny Russian military presence in eastern Ukraine and to employ an unrelenting media campaign to reinforce the narrative that the Russian-speaking population in Ukraine needed to be rescued from right-wing “fascist” extre mi sts and chaos.
Representatives of Ukraine, the Russian Federation, the Donetsk People’s Republic, and the Luhansk People's Republic signed a protocol known as Minsk I It failed.
A second ceasefire agreement, negotiated under OSCE auspices at Minsk in February 2015 and known as Minsk II, is currently in place in eastern Ukraine.
But the ceasefire is imperfectly observed; Ukraine remains unable to control its border with Russia, and Russian resupply of the separatists continues.
Some analysts are predicting further escalation of tensions in the coming months as prelude to a renewed Russia-backed push to create a land bridge between the Russian border and Crimea.
Others believe that Russia does not have the wherewithal to expand the conflict zone substantially but will continue to engage in low-intensity conflict in the Donbass region.
Russian separatists have engaged in abductions, torture, assassinations, massed killings, rapes, and execution of prisoners—while videotaping and putting much of these activities on the internet.
There is a direct, observable correlation between these convoys and increases in separatist activity.
Russia has observed that the latter do not fight as well and suffer disproportionate casualties, so it is using a host of contract and irregular forces as its ground maneuver units instead.
Reactive armor defeats most single-warhead infantry-fired anti-tank weapons.
In combination with target acquisition capabilities provided by remotely piloted vehicles, such munitions have caused 85 percent of all casualties in Ukraine and have proven their ability to reduce battalion-size units to combat ineffectiveness in a single strike.
Russian ambiguous warfare requires fertile soil Russian-sponsored operations have been more successful where they have had support from large ethnic Russian populations, and have fallen short where these conditions do not exist.
Its operations in Ukraine were planned and prepared well in advance, and Moscow may have similar plans for former Soviet states.
But Russia’s lack of traditional state power should not be equated to a lack of serious threat.
Ukraine had underfunded its military since the end of Cold War, failed to modernize its forces, and constantly hobbled its own efforts by tolerating corruption.
Steps taken to eliminate conscription had a negative impact on morale and military effectiveness.
Further, potential target states should foster collaboration, cooperation, and connectivity between and within their military forces and their security services, as well as with military and security forces of stronger states such as the United States.
States at risk of Russian aggression should work to better integrate Russian minorities.
These populations are a clear entry point for Moscow into the internal affairs of neighboring states.
Russia’s overall aim, explained one European expert, is to replace the current Western-dominated world order with one in which great powers divide the world into internationally recognized spheres of influence.
The Baltic States The three small Baltic Republics, formerly part of the Soviet Union and home to sizable populations of Russian speakers, are potential next targets.
Russian aggression against the Baltics, should it come, would likely take the form of ambiguous, destabilizing operations in order to avoid triggering NATO’s Article V, which views an attack on one NATO state as an attack on all.
Indeed, sowing doubt about Western resolve to defend the Baltic States contributes to Moscow’s goal of undermining the NATO Alliance.
When the Baltic Republics joined NATO, they were encouraged to develop niche military specialties rather than worry about territorial defense, which was thought unnecessary.
The national armed forces of Lithuania, for example, currently have no mandate to intervene in internal affairs; that is the responsibility of the police and the Ministry 13 CNA of Interior.
These civilian forces would be the first to respond to an influx of the “little green men” who suddenly appeared in Crimea in 2014.
Lithuania is now seeking to develop a more comprehensive defense plan coordinating all national bodies of executive power.
In January 2015, the Lithuanian Ministry of Defense released a pamphlet titled “How to act in extreme situations or instances of war,” intended to instruct Lithuanians on how to survive foreign occupation and organize nonviolent resistance.
Black Sea region Russian seizure of the Crimea and continuing military operations in eastern Ukraine have changed the strategic balance in the Black Sea region.
With Moscow’s military presence no longer constrained by former legal agreements with Ukraine, it can fully utilize Crimea as a platform for power projection.
The Russian Air Force has gained access to former Ukrainian air bases in the peninsula.
Russian media reported that the Ministry of Defense plans to deploy to Crimea in 2016 ten Tupolev 22M3 bombers.
An ambitious modernization program underway for the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol, will add six new frigates, six new submarines, several smaller naval vessels, and possibly a Mistral amphibious assault ship if and when it is delivered to the Russians by the French shipyard.
Enhanced anti-ship and anti-aircraft capabilities of the fleet and other military units in Crimea will create a strong line of defense for the Russian homeland.
Russia’s air defense systems in Crimea reach nearly half of the Black Sea, and its surface attack systems reach almost all of the Black Sea area.
Historically, a Russian military build-up of this size on the northern shore of the Black Sea would be of great concern to Turkey.
However, the prospect of RussianTurkish collaboration on energy may prove a critical factor in mitigating Turkish concerns.
Vladimir Putin recently announced that he would abandon the plan to build the South Stream pipeline for Russian gas under the Black Sea to Bulgaria and would instead redirect the pipeline construction to link with existing Turkish systems.
One of the experts at our event observed that Russian companies are investing in shipping companies and port facilities on the Turkish Black Sea coast.
These commercial ventures are useful for intelligence gathering and could also be entry points for Russian forces should the need arise.
All four countries are on the receiving end of active Russian influence operations.
Bulgaria, heavily dependent on Russia for energy supplies and maintenance of its military equipment, was subject to intense pressure to go forward with its long-planned role as the entry point for the South Stream gas 14 CNA pipeline, but Washington and Brussels prevailed.
The latter two enclaves just signed strategic agreements giving Russia formal control over their foreign and security affairs.
Transnistria, South Ossetia, and Abkhazia are also focal points for Russia-linked organized crime in the region.
One expert noted that the melding of local gangsters with Russian-backed forces has led to a metastasizing of organized crime in eastern Ukraine, and suggested that we can anticipate further strengthening and utilization of criminal networks around the Black Sea littoral region.
Implications for the United States Marine Corps With an understanding of Russia’s use of ambiguous warfare in Crimea and Ukraine, participants discussed the implications for the Marine Corps.
Our event was designed to raise more questions than it answered, and this goal was certainly realized over the course of our discussion.
As participants noted, the events in Crimea and Ukraine have a number of implications for the Marine Corps.
Additionally, Marines should look at actions in other theaters (e.g., China’s use of coast guard and fishery vessels in the South China Sea) through the lens of ambiguous warfare, in order to understand how other potential adversaries might adapt Gerasimov’s concepts for their own use.
Return to high-intensity conflict The ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine has shown that, while ambiguous, this type of warfare can be highly kinetic and extremely intense.
Fighting in the information environment Moscow has displayed its ability to launch covert and overt information operations on a mass scale, thereby messaging to global, regional, and local audiences.
In particular, participants saw Russia’s use of population shaping measures in the pre-hostilities phase (to include leveraging Russian-speaking populations in target countries); its use of a melange of ambiguous actors—to include special forces, militias, and criminal elements, along with resupply missions disguised as humanitarian assistance convoys; and its deliberate use of disinformation and misinformation pertaining to events on the ground, as being particularly effective components of Russia’s ambiguous warfare strategy.
Thinking more broadly, participants saw these elements of Russia’s strategy and tactics as being generalizable to other regions of the world and employable by other potential adversaries of the United States, to include China and Iran.
In discussing the implications of Russia’s ambiguous warfare to the Marine Corps, participants felt that the “ambiguousness” of Russia’s approach is mostly at the strategic level.
At the tactical level, the actions of Russia’s panoply of forces are no less ambiguous than what Marines have faced from insurgents in Iraq and Afghanistan.
As such, participants felt that the basic principles of Marine Corps warfighting remain valid in this kind of environment.
However, participants also noted that the situation in Ukraine w hi le ambiguous in attribution still amounts to state-sponsored warfare, with a high intensity battlefield that looks significantly different than what Marines have faced in Iraq or Afghanistan.
Answering this question is perhaps the best way for the Marine Corps to prepare for the employment of ambiguous warfare by other potential adversaries in the future.
