The Senate met at 1:02m. and was called to order by the Chief Justice of the United States.
Almighty God, our rock of ages, be omnipresent during this impeachment trial, providing our Senators with the assuring awareness of Your powerful involvement.
May they strive to have a clear conscience in whatever they do for You and country.
May our Senators not permit fatigue or cynicism to jeopardize friendships that have existed for years.
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the United States of America, and to the RepubSenate THURSDAY, JANUARY 23, 2020 lic for which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
If there is no objection, the Journal of proceedings of the trial are approved to date.
All persons are commanded to keep silence, on pain of imprisonment, while the Senate of the United States is sitting for the trial of the articles of impeachment exhibited by the House of Representatives against Donald John Trump, President of the United States.
Mr Chief Justice, it is my understanding the schedule today will be similar to yesterday’s proceedings.
We will plan to take short breaks every 2 or 3 hours and will accommodate a 30-minute recess for dinner, assuming that is needed.
Pursuant to the provisions of S Res.3, the managers of the House of Representatives have 16 hours and 42 minutes remaining to make the presentation of their case.
The Presiding Officer recognizes Mr Manager SCHIFF to continue the presentation of the case for the House of Representatives.
Mr Chief Justice, I thank you, and I thank the Senators for 2 now very long days.
We are greatly appreciative of Chief Justice, knowing that, prior to your arrival in the Chamber each day, you have a lot of work at the Court, necessitating our beginning in the afternoon and going into the evening.
I also want to, again, take this opportunity to thank the Senators for their long and considerable attention over the course of the last 2 days.
Iam not sure the Chief Justice is fully aware of just how rare it is, how extraordinary it is, for the House Members to be able to command the attention of Senators sitting silently for hours—or even for minutes, for that matter.
Of course, it doesn’t hurt that the morning starts out every day with the Sergeant at Arms warning you that, if you don’t, you will be imprisoned.
It is our hope that, when the trial concludes and you have heard us and you have heard the President’s counsel over a series of long days, that you don’t choose imprisonment instead of anything further.
Two days ago we made the case for documents and for witnesses in the trial.
Yesterday we walked through the chronology, the factual chronology, at some length.
Today we will go through article I, the constitutional underpinnings of abuse of power, and apply the facts of the President’s scheme to the law and Constitution.
Of necessity, there will be some repetition of information ® This “bullet” symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
S487 S488 from yesterday’s chronology, want to explain the reason for it.
You have now heard hundreds of hours of deposition and live testimony from the House condensed into an abbreviated narrative of the facts.
We will now show you these facts and many others and how they are interwoven.
Tomorrow we will conclude the presentation of the facts and law on article I, and we will begin and complete the same on article II, the President’s unconstitutional obstruction of Congress.
The President’s counsel will then have 3 days to make their presentations, and then you will have 16 hours to ask questions.
Then you will actually get to hear from the witnesses yourself, and then you will get to see the documents yourself—or so we hope, and so do the American people.
After their testimony and after we have had closing arguments, then it will be in your hands.
Good morning, Mr Chief Justice, Senators, my fellow House managers, and counsel for the President.
The Articles of Impeachment against President Trump rank among the most serious charges ever brought against a President.
As our recital of the facts indicated, the articles are overwhelmand I ingly supported by the evidence amassed by the House, notwithstanding the President’s complete stonewalling, his attempt to block all witnesses and all documents from the United States Congress.
The first Article of Impeachment charges the President with abuse of power.
President Trump used the powers of his office to solicit a foreign nation to interfere in our elections for his own personal benefit.
Note that the active solicitation itself—just the ask—constitutes an abuse of power, but President Trump went further.
In order to secure his favor from Ukraine, he withheld two official acts of immense value.
First, he withheld the release of $391 million in vital military assistance appropriated by Congress on a bipartisan basis, which Ukraine needed to fight Russian aggression.
Second, President Trump withheld a _ long-sought-after White House meeting which would confirm to the world that America stands behind Ukraine in its ongoing struggle.
It captures the worst fears of our Founders and the Framers of the Constitution.
Since President George Washington took office in 1789, no President has abused his power in this way.
No President has ever CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE used his office to compel a foreign nation to help him cheat in our elections.
Prior Presidents would be shocked to the core by such conduct, and rightly so.
Now, because President Trump has largely failed to convince the country that his conduct was remotely acceptable, he has adopted a fallback position.
He argues that even if we disapprove of his misconduct, we cannot remove him for it.
It confirms that this President sees no limits on his power or on his ability to use his public office for private gain.
Of course, the President also believes that he can use his power to cover up his crimes.
That leads me to the second article of impeachment, which charges that the President categorically, indiscriminately, and unlawfully obstructed our inquiry, the congressional inquiry, into his conduct.
Taken together, the articles and the evidence conclusively establish that President Trump has placed his own personal political interests first.
He has placed them above our national security, above our free and fair elections, and above our system of checks and balances.
I just want to stress that if this—if what we’re talking about is not impeachable, then nothing is impeachable.
This is precisely the misconduct that the Framers created a constitution, including impeachment, to protect against.
All of the legal experts who testified before the House Judiciary Committee—those invited by the Democrats and those invited by the Republicans—all agreed that the conduct we have charged constitutes high crimes and misdemeanors.
Professor Jonathan Turley, called by the Republicans as a witness, agreed that the articles charge an offense that is impeachable.
None of that record can be seriously disputed, and none of it will be disputed.
We can predict what the President’s lawyers will say in the next few days.
You will hear complaints about the process in the House and the motives of the managers.
You will hear that this all comes down to a phone call that was perfect—as if you had not just seen evidence of a months-long, government-wide effort to extort a foreign government.
Indeed, if the President had any exculpatory witnesses—even a single one—he would be demanding their appearance here, instead of urging you not to permit additional witnesses to testify.
First, we will examine the law of impeachable offenses, with a focus on abuse of power.
They will demonstrate that the President has unquestionably committed the high crimes and misdemeanors outlined in the first Article of Impeachment.
Once those presentations are concluded, we will take the same approach to demonstrating President Trump’s obstruction of Congress—the second Article of Impeachment.
Then we will review the facts, and then we will apply the law to the facts, proving that President Trump is guilty of the second Article of Impeachment as well.
With that roadmap to guide us, I will begin by walking through the law of abuse of power.
The Framers believed that any one of these offenses, standing alone, justified removal from office.
Professor Noah Feldman of Harvard Law School explained this well before the House Judiciary Committee.
Here is his explanation of why the Framers created the impeachment power.
The Framers provided for the impeachment of the President because they feared that the President might abuse the power of his office for personal benefit, to corrupt the electoral process and ensure his reelection, or to subvert the national security of the United States.
That is where we have the strongest possible case for removing a President from office.
We will show that President Trump abused his power when he used his office to solicit and pressure Ukraine to meddle in our elections for his personal gain.
We will show that he betrayed vital national interests—specifically, our national security—by withholding diplomatic support and military aid from Ukraine, even as it faced armed Russian aggression.
President Trump’s intent was to corrupt our elections to his personal, political benefit.
He put his personal interest in retaining power above free and fair elections—and above the principle that Americans must govern themselves, without interference from abroad.
Article I thus charges a high crime and misdemeanor that blends abuse of power, betrayal of the Nation, and corruption in elections into a single unforgivable scheme.
That is why this President must be removed from office, especially before he continues his effort to corrupt our next election.
The charges set forth in the first Article of Impeachment are firmly grounded in the Constitution of the United States.
Simply stated, impeachment is the Constitution’s final answer to a President who mistakes himself for a King.
The Framers had risked their freedom, and their lives, to escape monarchy.
Together, they resolved to build a nation committed to democracy and the rule of law—a beacon to the world at an age of aristocracy.
We would choose our leaders and hold them accountable for how they exercised power on our behalf.
In writing our Constitution, the Framers recognized that we needed a Chief Executive who could lead the Nation with efficiency, energy, and dispatch.
So they created a powerful Presidency and vested it with immense public trust.
They knew that Republics cannot flourish—and that people cannot live free—under a corrupt leader.
They foresaw that a President faithful only to himself would endanger every American.
So the Framers built guardrails to ensure that the American people would remain free and to ensure that out-ofcontrol Presidents would not destroy everything they sought to build.
They divided the powers of the Federal Government across’ three branches.
They required the President to swear an oath to faithfully execute the laws.
To the Framers, the concept of faithful execution was profoundly important.
It prohibited the President from exercising power in bad faith or with corrupt intent, and thus ensured that CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE the President would put the American people first, not himself.
This minority feared vesting any branch of government with the power to remove a President from office.
But that view was decisively rejected at the Constitutional Convention.
Convening in the shadow of rebellion and revolution, the Framers would not deny the Nation an escape from Presidents who deemed themselves above the law.
Unlike in Britain, the President would answer personally—to Congress and thus to the Nation—for any serious wrongdoing.
As careful students of history, the Framers knew that threats to democracy can take many forms.
In describing the kind of leader who might menace the Nation, Alexander Hamilton offered an especially striking portrait.
Mr SCHIFF read this portrait in his introductory remarks and it bears repetition.
Known to have scoffed in private at the principles of liberty—-when such a man is seen to mount the hobby horse of popularity—to join in the cry of danger to liberty—to take every opportunity of embarrassing the General Government & bringing it under suspicion—to flatter and fall in with all the non sense of the zealots of the day— It may justly be suspected that his object is to throw things into confusion that he may ride the storm and direct the whirlwind.
Given the many threats they had to anticipate, the Framers considered extremely broad grounds for removing Presidents.
For example, they debated setting the bar at maladministration, to allow removal for run-of-the-mill policy disagreements between Congress and the President.
They also considered very narrow grounds, strictly limiting impeachment to treason and bribery.
They did not want Presidents removed for ordinary political or policy disagreements, but they intended impeachments to reach the full spectrum of Presidential misconduct that might threaten the Constitution, and they intended our Constitution to endure for the ages.
In England, the standard was understood to capture offenses against the constitutional system itself.
From 1876 to 1787, the House of Commons impeached officials on a few general grounds—mainly consisting of abuse of power, betrayal of national security and foreign policy, corruption, treason, bribery, and disregarding the powers of Parliament.
The phrase ‘‘high Crimes and Misdemeanors’”’ thus covered offenses against the Nation itself—in other words, crimes against the British Constitution.
As scholars were shown, the same understanding prevailed on this side of the Atlantic.
In the colonial period and under newly ratified State constitutions, most impeachments targeted abuse of power, betrayal of the revolutionary cause, corruption, treason, and bribery.
History thus teaches that ‘‘high Crimes and Misdemeanors’’ referred mainly to acts committed by officials using their power or privileges, that inflicted grave harm on society.
Such great and dangerous offenses included treason, bribery, abuse of power, betrayal of the Nation, and corruption of office.
Officials who abused, abandoned, or sought to benefit personally from their public trust—and who threatened the rule of law if left in power—faced impeachment and removal.
Abuse, betrayal, corruption—this is exactly the understanding that the Framers incorporated into the Constitution.
As the Framers created a formidable Chief Executive, they made clear that impeachment is justified for serious abuse of power.
Time and again, Americans who wrote and ratified the Constitution confirmed that Presidents may be impeached for abusing the power entrusted to them.
S490 To the Framers’ generation, moreover, abuse of power was a well-understood offense.
The first occurred when someone exercised power in ways far beyond what the law allowed—or in ways that destroyed checks on their own authority.
The second occurred when an official exercised power to obtain an improper personal benefit, while ignoring or injuring the national interest.
The generation that rebelled against George III knew what absolute power looked like.
Most significantly, they placed the President under the law, not above it.
That means the President may exercise only the powers vested in him by the Constitution.
A President who egregiously refuses to follow these restrictions, by engaging in wrongful conduct, may be subjected to impeachment for abuse of power.
Two American impeachment inquiries have involved claims that a President grossly violated the Constitution’s separation of powers.
The first was in 1868, when the House impeached President Andrew Johnson, who had succeeded Abraham Lincoln after his assassination at Ford’s Theatre.
In firing the Secretary of War, President Johnson allegedly violated the Tenure of Office Act, which restricted the President’s power to remove Cabinet members during the term of the President who had appointed them.
The House of Representatives approved articles charging it with conduct forbidden by law.
This was partly because there was a strong argument that the Tenure of Office Act, which President Johnson was charged with violating, was itself unconstitutional—a position the Supreme Court later accepted.
Of course, historians have also noted that a key Senator appears to have changed his vote at the last minute in exchange for promises of special treatment by President Johnson.
But the Nixon case also exemplifies the second way a President can abuse his power.
Both of these articles charged him with abusing the powers of his office with corrupt intent.
Each article enumerated specific abuses by President Nixon, many of which involved the wrongful, corrupt exercise of Presidential power and many of which were likely not _ statutory crimes.
To be sure, all Presidents account to some extent for how their decisions in office may affect their political prospects.
Elected officials can and should care about how voters will react to their decisions.
They will often care about whether their decisions make it more likely that they will be reelected.
But there is a difference—a difference that matters—between political calculus and outright corruption.
Some uses of Presidential power are so outrageous, so obviously improper, that if they are undertaken for a President’s own personal gain, with injury or indifference to core national interests, then they are obviously high crimes and misdemeanors.
Otherwise, even the most egregious wrongdoing could be justified as disagreement over policy or politics, and corruption that would have shocked the Framers—that they expressly sought to prohibit— would overcome the protections they established for our benefit.
There should be nothing surprising about impeaching a President for using his power with corrupt motives.
To start, the Constitution requires that the President ‘‘faithfully execute’’ the law.
A President who acts with corrupt motives, putting himself above country, has acted faithlessly, not faithfully executing the law.
Moreover, the two impeachable offenses that the Constitution enumerates—Treason and Bribery—each require proof of the President’s mental state.
For treason, he must have acted January 23, 2020 with a ‘‘disloyal mind,’’ according to the Supreme Court.
And it is well established that the elements of bribery include corrupt motives.
In sum, to the Framers, it was dangerous for officials to exceed their constitutional power.
But it was equally dangerous—perhaps more so—for officials to use their power with corrupt, nefarious motives, thus perverting public trust for private gain.
Abuse of power is clearly an impeachable offense under the Constitution.
All prior impeachments considered of high office have always included abuse of power.
All of the experts who testified before the House Judiciary Committee, including those called by the Republicans, agreed that abuse of power is a high crime and misdemeanor.
Here is testimony from Professor Pam Karlan of Stanford Law School, joined by Professor Gerhardt.
Professor Turley, who testified at the Republican invitation, echoed that view.
Another who comes to mind is Professor Allen Dershowitz—at least Alan Dershowitz in 1998.
Back then, here is what he had to say about impeachment for abuse of power.
If you have somebody who completely corrupts the office of President and who abuses trust and poses great danger to our liberty, you don’t need a technical crime.
But we need not look to 1998 to find one of President Trump’s key allies espousing this view.
Consider the comments of our current Attorney General, William Barr, a man known for his extraordinarily expansive view of Executive power.
In Attorney General Barr’s view, as expressed about 18 months ago, Presidents cannot be indicted or criminally investigated—but that’s OK because they can be impeached.
In other words, Attorney General Barr believes, along with the Office of Legal Counsel, that a President may not be indicted.
January 23, 2020 We don’t need that safeguard against a President who would commit abuses of power.
That is the safeguard for abuses of discretion and for his misdeeds in office.
Everyone, except President Trump and his lawyers, agrees that Presidents can be impeached for abuse of power.
The President’s position amounts to nothing but self-serving constitutional nonsense.
A President who sees no limit on his power manifestly threatens the Republic.
Nobody is entitled to wield power under the Constitution if they ignore or betray the Nation’s interests to advance their own.
Under the Constitution, he is subject to impeachment and removal for abuse of power.
Of course, President Trump’s abuse of power—as charged in the first Article of Impeachment and supported by a mountain of evidence—is aggravated by another concern at the heart of the Constitution’s impeachment clause.
When they wrote our Constitution, they had only recently won a bloody war for independence.
But as they looked outward from their new Nation, they saw Kings scheming for power, promising fabulous wealth to spies and deserters.
The young Republic might not survive a President who schemed with other nations, entangling himself in secret deals that harmed our democracy.
To be sure, the Framers did not intend impeachment for genuine, good faith disagreements between the President and Congress over matters of diplomacy.
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE But they were explicit that betrayal of the Nation through plots with foreign powers must result in removal from office.
And no such betrayal scared them more than foreign interference in our democracy.
You are apprehensive of foreign Interference, Intrigue, Influence.—So am I.—But, as often as Elections happen, the danger of foreign Influence recurs.
The Framers never suggested that the President’s role in foreign affairs should prevent Congress from impeaching him for treachery in his dealings.
Where the President betrays our national security and foreign policy interests for his own personal gain, he is unquestionably subject to impeachment and removal.
They understood that corruption had broken Rome, debased Britain, and threatened America.
They saw no shortage of threats to the Republic and fought valiantly to guard against them.
So the Framers attempted to build a government in which officials would not use public power for personal benefits, disregarding the public good in pursuit of their own advancement.
S491 Indeed, no fewer than four delegates to the Constitutional Convention— Madison, plus Morris, Mason, and Randolph—listed corruption as a central reason why Presidents must be subject to impeachment and removal from office.
Impeachment was seen as especially necessary for Presidential conduct corrupting our system of political self-government.
The Framers foresaw and feared that a President might someday place his personal interest in reelection above our abiding commitment to democracy.
The Framers reserved impeachment for situations where the President abused his office, that is, used it for his personal advantage.
And, in particular, they were specifically worried about a situation where the President used his office to facilitate corruptly his own reelection.
That’s, in fact, why they thought they needed impeachment and why waiting for the next election wasn’t good enough.
Professor Feldman’s testimony is grounded in the records of the Constitutional Convention.
There, William Davie warned that a President who abused his office might spare no efforts or means whatever to get himself reelected and, thus, to escape justice.
He feared that Presidents would win election by improperly influencing members of the electoral college.
Gouverneur Morris later echoed this point, urging that the Executive ought therefore to be impeachable for corrupting his electors.
The Framers knew that a President who abused power to manipulate elections presented the greatest possible threat to the Constitution.
After all, the beating heart of the Framers’ project was a commitment to popular sovereignty.
At a time when democratic self-government existed almost nowhere on Earth, the Framers imagined a society where power flowed from and returned to the people.
That is why the President and Members of Congress must stand before the public for reelection on fixed terms, and if the President abuses his power to corrupt those elections, he threatens the entire system.
Professor KARLAN. rawing a foreign government into our elections is an especially serious abuse of power because it undermines democracy itself.
Our government, in James Madison’s S492 words, derives all its powers directly or indirectly from the great body of the people, and the way it derives these powers is through elections.
Elections matter, both to the legitimacy of our government and to all of our individual freedoms, because, as the Supreme Court declared more than a century ago, voting is preservative of all rights.
A President who abuses his power in order to kneecap political opponents and spread Russian conspiracy theories—a President who uses his office to ask for or, even worse, to compel foreign nations to meddle in our elections—is a President who attacks the very foundations of our liberty.
It is a shocking corruption of the election process, and it is without a doubt a crime against the Constitution, warranting, demanding his removal from office.
The Framers expected that free elections would be the usual means of protecting our freedoms, but they knew that a President who sought foreign assistance in his campaign must be removed from office before he could steal the next election.
In a last-ditch legal defense of their client, the President’s lawyers argue that impeachment and removal are subject to statutory crimes or to offenses against established law, that the President cannot be impeached because he has not committed a crime.
It has no support in constitutional text and structure, original meaning, congressional precedents, common sense, or the consensus of credible experts.
Professor Gerhardt succinctly captured the consensus view in his testimony.
Everything we know about the history of impeachment reinforces the conclusion that impeachable offenses do not have to be crimes.
This position was echoed by the Republicans’ expert witness, Professor Turley, in his written testimony.
Although I disagree with Professor Turley on many, many issues, here, he is clearly right.
I might say the same thing of thenHouse Manager LINDSEY GRAHAM, who, in President Clinton’s trial, flatly rejected the notion that impeachable offenses are limited to violations of established law.
It is just—when you start using your office and you’re acting in a way that hurts people, you have committed a high crime.
There are many reasons why high crimes and misdemeanors are not and cannot be limited to violations of the Criminal Code.
We address them at length in the briefs we have filed and in the report of the House Judiciary Committee respecting these Articles of Impeachment, but I would like to highlight a few especially important considerations.
The Framers could not have meant to limit impeachment to statutory crimes.
Presidents are to be impeached and removed from office for “treason, bribery, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors,”’ but bribery was not made a statutory crime until 1837.
Second, the President’s position is contradicted by the Constitution’s text.
It matters because the phrase ‘‘high Crimes’’ refers to offenses against the State rather than to workaday crimes, and it matters because the phrase ‘high crimes and misdemeanors”’ had a rich history in England, where it had been applied in many, many cases that did not involve crimes under British law.
When the Framers added ‘‘high Crimes”’ here but nowhere else in the Constitution, they made a deliberate choice.
A few years later, James Wilson, a Constitutional Convention delegate, agreed with Hamilton.
Impeachments, and offences and offenders impeachable, come not within the sphere of ordinary jurisprudence.
They are founded on different principles, governed by different maxims, and are directed to different objects.
James Madison responded directly to Mason’s concern because Mason’s concern was that the pardon power might be too broad and the President might misuse his broad pardon power to pardon his own coconspirators and prevent a discovery of his own guilt.
If the President be connected, in any suspicious manner, with any person, and there be grounds to believe he will shelter him, the House of Representatives can impeach him; they can remove him if found guilty.
At the North Carolina ratifying convention, James Iredell, who would go on to serve on the Supreme Court, responded to the same concern.
In the early 1800s, this understanding was echoed by Supreme Court Justice Story, who wrote a famous treatise on the Constitution.
Later in American history, Chief Justice and former President William Howard Taft, as well as Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes, publicly stated that impeachable offenses are not limited to crimes but, instead, capture a broader range of misconduct.
Historians have shown that American colonists before the Revolution and American States after the Revolution but before 1787 all impeached officials for noncriminal conduct.
Over the past two centuries, moreover, a strong majority of the impeachments voted by the House have included one or more allegations that did not charge a violation of criminal law.
Indeed, the Senate has convicted and removed multiple judges on noncriminal grounds.
Judge Archbald was removed in 1912 for noncriminal speculation in coal properties.
What is true for judges is also true for Presidents, at least on this point.
The House Judiciary Committee approved three Articles of Impeachment against President Nixon.
One of the articles—obstruction of Congress—involved no allegations of any legal violation.
The House Judiciary Committee approved Articles of Impeachment in July 1974.
Those articles passed with bipartisan support, although most Republicans stood by President Nixon.
Within a week, almost everyone who supported the President the week before changed his position, and the President was forced to resign because of what was revealed on the smoking gun tape.
You must resign, or you will be removed from office because of the evidence on the smoking gun tape.
No law explicitly prohibited that conversation—it was not, in that sense, a crime—but President Nixon had abused his power.
He had tried to use two government agencies—the FBI and the CIA—for his personal benefit.
His impeachment and removal were certain, and he announced his resignation within days.
There is, thus, overwhelming authority against restricting impeachments to violations of established or statutory law.
Impeachment exists to address threats to the political system, applies only to political officials, and responds not by imprisonment or fines but only by stripping political power.
It would make no sense to say that a President who engages in _ horrific abuses must be allowed to remain in office unless Congress had anticipated his or her specific conduct in advance and written a statute expressly outlawing it.
It does not leave us stuck with Presidents who abuse their power in unforeseen ways that threaten our security and democracy.
Until recently it did not occur to me that our President would call a foreign leader and demand a sham investigation meant to kneecap his political opponents, all in exchange for releasing vital military aid that the President was already required by law to provide.
No one anticipated that a President would stoop to this misconduct, and Congress has passed no specific law to make this behavior a crime.
Yet this is precisely the kind of abuse that the Framers had in mind when they wrote the impeachment clause and when they charged Congress with determining when the President’s conduct was so clearly wrong, so definitely beyond the pale, so threatening to the constitutional order as to require his removal, and that is why we are here today.
You must judge for yourselves whether justice will be had for President Trump’s crimes against our freedom and the Constitution.
I will conclude by highlighting a few points that merit special emphasis, as you apply the law of impeachment to President Trump’s misconduct.
The President’s conduct must constitute, as Mason put it, a great and dangerous offense against the Nation— offenses that threaten the Constitution.
Second, impeachable offenses involve wrongdoing that reveal the President as a continuing threat if he is allowed to remain in office.
In other words, we fully recognize that impeachment does not exist for a mistake.
Impeachment is reserved for deliberate decisions by the President to embark on a course of conduct that betrays his oath of office and does violence to the Constitution.
When the President has engaged in such conduct, and when there is strong evidence that he will do so again— when he has told us he will do so again, when he has told us that it is OK to invite interference from a foreign power into our next election—the case for removal is at its peak.
This is certainly the case when he invites, indeed, attempts to compel a foreign government to help him subvert the integrity of our next election.
Finally, high crimes and _ misdemeanors involve conduct that is recognizably wrong to a reasonable, honorable citizen.
The Framers adopted a standard for impeachment that could stand the test of time.
At the same time, the structure of the Constitution implies that impeachable offenses should not come as a surprise.
Impeachment is aimed at Presidents who S493 act as if they are above the law, at Presidents who believe their own interests are more important than those of the Nation, and, thus, at Presidents who ignore right and wrong in pursuit of their own gain.
The President’s abuse of power, his betrayal of the national interest, and his corruption of our elections plainly qualify as great and dangerous offenses.
President Trump has made clear in word and deed that he will persist in such conduct if he is not removed from power.
He poses a continuing threat to our Nation, to the integrity of our elections, and to our Democratic order.
Mr Chief Justice, Senators, President’s counsel, we will now walk through the President’s abuse of power, the corrupt object of his scheme, his three official acts carrying out his scheme, his attempted coverup and exposure, and the harm to our Nation and continuing threat caused by his misconduct.
Senators, we have today provided handouts that you can follow along in our slides.
We will walk through first how the President wanted Ukraine to help in his reelection campaign.
President Trump himself later confirmed this intent in public statements.
We will then explain how we know these investigations were solely for President Trump’s personal, political gain.
First, President Trump made clear he cared only about the announcement— the announcement of the investigations, not the actual investigations.
Third, he used his personal attorney, Mr Giuliani, who repeatedly told us he was pursuing the investigations in his capacity as the President’s personal lawyer and that this wasn’t about foreign policy.
Fourth and fifth, there is no real dispute that these investigations were never part of an official United States policy, and they in fact went outside official channels.
The Department of Justice S494 even publicly confirmed that they were never asked to talk to Ukraine about these investigations—never.
Six, multiple officials who knew what was going on repeatedly reported these concerns to supervisors and even the NSC legal advisors.
Seven, Ukraine expressed concerns multiple times that these were political investigations and Ukraine didn’t want to get involved in domestic United States politics.
Nine, President Trump himself told us what he really wanted and cared about in his own words, in many public statements.
And finally, despite the President’s counsel’s attempts to justify his actions, the evidence makes clear that President Trump did not care about anticorruption efforts in Ukraine.
The Constitution grants the President broad authority to conduct United States foreign policy.
When the President of the United States calls a foreign leader, a President’s first and only objective should be to get foreign leaders to do what is best for the United States national interest, consistent with the faithful execution of his oath of office and consistent with official United States policy.
But on July 25, when President Trump called the President of Ukraine, President Trump did the opposite.
And not only did these investigations diverge from United States national interests, as you will hear, President Trump’s actions harmed our national security.
In putting himself above our country, he put our country at risk, and that is why his actions are so dangerous.
Now let’s take a moment and look carefully at the two investigations that President Trump sought from Ukraine, which are at the heart of the President’s scheme, and how he stood to benefit politically from Ukraine’s announcement of each.
As you can see on the slide, the first investigation was, of course, of former Vice President Biden.
Let’s go straight to that July 25 telephone call again where President Trump stated clearly each of these investigations he wanted.
So let’s start with Vice President Joe Biden and the removal of a corrupt prosecutor in Ukraine.
The first investigation related to former Vice President Joe Biden and the Ukrainian gas company Burisma Holdings, on whose board his son Hunter Biden used to sit.
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE President Trump himself summarized the theory behind his request in broad strokes in his July 25 call with President Zelensky.
The other thing, There’s a lot of talk about Biden’s son, that Biden stopped the prosecution and a lot of people want to find out about that so that whatever you can do with the Attorney General would be great.
Now let’s look carefully at the investigation President Trump was asking for and what it was based on.
In short, President Trump asked for the investigation into Biden based on a made-up theory that no one agreed with—no one.
We will go into this in more detail, but at a high level, the allegation is that late in 2015, Biden pressured Ukraine to remove the then-prosecutor general, Viktor Shokin, by threatening to withhold approximately $1 billion in loan guarantees if he was not removed.
According to this theory, Vice President Biden did this in order to help his son in a company called Burisma.
As the theory goes, Vice President Biden tried to remove Ukraine’s prosecutor, all to make sure the prosecutor wouldn’t investigate that specific company Burisma because, again, his son was on the board.
Then, Senators, if that doesn’t sound farfetched and complicated to you, it should.
In 2014, Vice President Biden’s son Hunter joined the board of the Ukrainian natural gas firm Burisma Holdings.
At the time, Burisma’s owner, a Ukrainian oligarch and former government minister, was under investigation.
In 2015, Viktor Shokin became Ukraine’s prosecutor general, a job similar to Attorney General in the United States.
Although Shokin vowed to keep investigating Burisma amid an _ international push to root out corruption in Ukraine, he allowed the Burisma investigation to go dormant—allowed it to go dormant.
In late 2015, Vice President Biden, who had assumed a significant role in United States policy toward Ukraine, publicly called for the removal of Mr Shokin because of his failure—his failure—to adequately combat corruption.
The European Union, our European allies, January 23, 2020 the International Monetary Fund, and three reformers inside Ukraine also wanted Mr Shokin removed to reform the Ukrainian prosecutor general’s office—to reform it.
Reforming the prosecutor general’s office was also supported on a bipartisan basis by the Ukrainian Caucus here in the Senate.
On February 12, 2016, after Vice President Biden had urged removal of Mr Shokin but before the Ukrainian Parliament voted to remove him, a bipartisan group of Senators, including Senators PORTMAN, DURBIN, SHAHEEN, RON JOHNSON, MURPHY, KIRK, BLUMENTHAL, and SHERROD BROWN sent a letter to President Poroshenko that urged him to make urgent reforms to the prosecutor general’s office.
Vice President Biden called for the removal of this prosecutor at the official direction of United States policy, because the prosecutor was widely perceived as corrupt, and with the support of all of our international allies.
His actions were therefore supported by the executive branch, Congress, and the international community.
Common sense would tell us that this allegation against Joe Biden is false and that there was no legitimate basis for any investigation.
But there are several other reasons you know that the only reason President Trump wanted Ukraine to announce the investigation into Biden was solely for his very own personal benefit.
First, none of the 17 witnesses in the House’s inquiry said there was any factual basis for this allegation—not 1 of the 17.
Second, as I mentioned, the former prosecutor general Vice President Biden tried to remove was widely considered to be corrupt and failed to investigate corruption in Ukraine.
Thus, removing him from office would only increase the chances that Burisma would be investigated for possible corruption.
Third, because the prosecutor was so corrupt, Vice President Biden calling for his removal was also at the direction of official United States policy and undertaken with the unanimous support of our allies.
Fourth, the successor to the fired Ukrainian prosecutor general admitted that Vice President Biden’s son didn’t do anything wrong in connection with Burisma.
So the entire premise of the investigation that the President wanted Ukraine to pursue was simply false.
Finally, President Trump didn’t care about any of this until 2019, when Vice President Biden became the frontrunner for the Democratic Presidential nomination and polls showed that he had the largest head-to-head lead against President Trump.
Vice President Biden’s conduct was uniformly validated by the witnesses in the House investigation, who confirmed his conduct was consistent with United States policy.
Every single witness who was asked about the allegations against Biden said it was false.
Every witness with knowledge of this issue testified that Vice President Biden was carrying out official United States policy in calling for Shokin’s removal because Shokin was corrupt.
These witnesses explained, too, that the United States was not alone in this view.
There is simply no evidence— nothing, nada—in the record to support this baseless allegation.
My understanding is that the prosecutor general at the time, Shokin, was not at that time pursuing investigations of Burisma or the Bidens.
And not just us but all of our allies and other institutions who were involved in Ukraine at the time.
Official United States policy that was endorsed and was the policy of a number of other international stakeholders, other countries, other monetary institutions, and financial institutions.
Williams also confirmed that they are not aware of any credible evidence to support the notion that Vice President Biden did anything wrong.
As David Holmes, a senior official at the United States Embassy in Ukraine testified, by the time that Shokin was finally removed in 2016, there were strong conHill and Mr CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE cerns that Shokin was himself corrupt and not investigating potential corruption in the country.
In fact, part of the concern was that Shokin was not investigating Burisma.
Under Shokin, the investigation into the owner of Burisma for earlier conduct had stalled and was dormant.
That was part of the reason why the United States and other countries wanted to remove Shokin.
Because of this, and as confirmed by witness testimony we will hear shortly, calling for Shokin’s replacement would actually increase the chances that Burisma would be investigated.
In other words, Shokin was corrupt and not investigating allegations that Burisma was corrupt, and so Vice President Biden calling for Shokin’s removal and advocating for his replacement would actually increase chances of Burisma’s investigation.
President Trump and his allies have tried to justify President Trump’s withholding of military aid and a White House meeting unless Ukraine announced the investigations he wanted by saying it is the same thing the Vice President did when he called for Ukraine to remove its corrupt prosecutor.
As you just heard, Vice President Biden followed official United States policy.
He went through official channels to remove the prosecutor that was corrupt, and he did it with the support of our allies.
He pushed Ukraine for an investigation that has no basis, that no one agreed with, that was not at all United States policy, and that only benefited him.
And Mr Kent and Mr Taylor, the defenders of the President’s behavior, have made a big deal out of the fact that Vice President Biden encouraged the Ukrainians to remove a corrupt former Ukrainian prosecutor in 2016, Mr Shokin.
What former Vice President Biden requested of the former President of S495 Ukraine, Poroshenko, was the removal of a corrupt prosecutor general, Viktor Shokin, who had undermined a program of assistance that we had spent, again, United States taxpayer money to try to build an independent investigator unit to go after corrupt prosecutors.
And there was a case called Diamond Prosecutor case in which Shokin destroyed the entire ecosystem that we were trying to help create, the investigators, the judges who issued the warrants, the law enforcement that had warrants to do the wiretapping, everybody to protect his former driver who he had made a prosecutor.
So there is no comparison—none at all— between what he did and President Trump’s abuse of power.
You need look no further than the July 25 call record and the President’s own statements to see that the President wanted the Ukrainians to investigate Vice President Biden.
The other thing, there is a lot of talk about Biden’s son, that Biden stopped the prosecution and a lot of people want to find out about that, so whatever you can do with the Attorney General would be great.
The President was clearly asking President Zelensky to investigate Joe Biden.
Well, I think if they were honest about it, you saw the film yesterday, they would start a major investigation into the Bidens.
But even if the President wanted an investigation S496 of Hunter Biden, there is no basis for that either.
Well, Ukraine’s former prosecutor general admitted that the allegation against Vice President Biden’s son was plainly false.
The long and short of it is that there was no basis for the investigation that the President was pursuing and pushing— none.
Let’s look at one more important reason why it is clear that President Trump simply wanted a political benefit from Ukraine’s announcement of this investigation and didn’t care about the underlying conduct.
The allegations against Vice President Biden were based on events that occurred in late 2015 and early 2016.
They were all well publicized at the time, but as soon as President Trump took office, he increased military support to Ukraine in 2017 and the next year, 2018.
It wasn’t until 2019, over 3 years after Vice President Biden called _ for Shokin’s removal—3 years after—that President Trump _ started pushing Ukraine to investigate that conduct.
Senators, you know what changed in 2019 when President Trump suddenly cared.
On April 25, Vice President Biden announced he would run for President in 2020.
He pushed for the investigation in 2019 because that is when it would be valuable to him, President Trump.
He pushed for it when it started to become clear that Vice President Biden could beat him, and he had good reason to be concerned.
Throughout this scheme, polling had consistently shown the former Vice President handily beating President Trump by significant margins in head-to-head matchups.
The chart shows that from March to December, Vice CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE President Biden had consistently led President Trump in national polls by significant margins.
So _ beginning around March, Vice President Biden is beating the President in the polls, even on FOX News.
In April, Biden officially announces his candidacy, and that is when the President gets worried.
In May, the President’s personal lawyer tells the press that he is planning to travel to Ukraine to urge newly elected President Zelensky to conduct the two investigations—one into Vice President Biden.
And by July, right before President Trump’s call with President Zelensky, where he asked for the investigation into Biden, the FOX News poll showed Biden beating Trump by 10 points.
Then, on July 25, after years of not caring what the Vice President did, does President Trump ask for an investigation in his formidable political rival in the 2020 election.
Senators, looking at this timeline of events, it is not difficult to see why the investigation into the Bidens would be helpful to President Trump.
The mere announcement of such an investigation would immediately tarnish the former Vice President’s reputation by embroiling him and his son in a foreign criminal investigation—even if the charges were never pursued, just the mere announcement.
And if a foreign country announced a formal investigation into those allegations, it would give allegations against the Bidens an air of credibility and could carry through the election.
Everyone knew—even Ukraine—that there was no merit to the allegation that Biden called for the removal of Shokin for any illegitimate reason.
Biden asked for it because it was consistent—consistent with United States policy because Shokin was corrupt, and it was with the backing of our allies.
That is why, for years, after Shokin’s removal, he continued to support Ukraine.
It wasn’t until Biden began beating him in the polls that he called for the investigation.
President Trump had the motive, he had the opportunity, and the means to commit this abuse of power.
Now, let’s turn to the second investigation that President Trump wanted.
What he wanted was a widely debunked January 23, 2020 conspiracy theory that Ukraine—rather than Russia—interfered in the 2016 United States election to benefit President Trump’s opponent.
As we will explain, the allegation that Ukraine interfered in the 2016 elections, just like the allegation that Biden improperly removed the Ukraine prosecutor, has absolutely no basis in fact.
In fact, this theory ignored the unanimous conclusions of the United States intelligence agency, the congressional Intelligence Committees, and Special Counsel Mueller, which found that Russia—Russia attacked our elections.
It also went against the Senate Intelligence Committee report which found no evidence supporting that Ukraine attacked our elections, nor did any witness support the theory that Ukraine attacked our elections.
Indeed, even President Trump’s own advisers told him the claim was false.
You know it was our adversary, Russia, which had everything to gain by deflecting the blame from their attack on Ukraine.
Let’s look at what President Trump was actually suggesting Ukraine investigate.
Instead of listening to our entire intelligence community that concluded that Russia interfered in our 2016 election to assist Donald Trump, the new theory says it was Ukraine that interfered in the election to help Hillary Clinton and hurt Donald Trump.
One aspect of this conspiracy theory was that the American cyber security firm, CrowdStrike, which had helped the DNC respond to Russia’s cyber attack in 2016, moved a DNC server to Ukraine to prevent the FBI from examining it.
Here is what President Trump said about this conspiracy theory during the July 25 call.
Once again, if this sounds farfetched and crazy, it should because it is.
First, as I mentioned, our entire United States intelligence community, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, and Special Counsel Mueller all unanimously found that Russia—not Ukraine—interfered in the 2016 elections, and Russia did it to help Donald Trump and hurt Hillary Clinton.
We assess Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered an influence campaign in 2016 aimed at the United States Presidential election.
Russia’s goals were to undermine public faith in the United States democratic process, denigrate Secretary Clinton, and harm her electability and potential Presidency.
We further assess January 23, 2020 Putin and the Russian Government developed a clear preference for President-elect Trump.
The Committee found that the Russian government tasked and supported the IRA’s interference in the 2016 United States election.
As set forth in detail in this report, the Special Counsel’s investigation established that Russia interfered in the 2016 presidential election principally through two operations.
First, a Russia entity carried out a social media campaign that favored presidential candidate Donald J Trump and disparaged presidential candidate Hillary Clinton.
Second, a Russian intelligence service conducted computer-intrusion operations against entities, employees, and volunteers working on the Clinton Campaign and then released stolen documents.
On December 9, 2019, even President Trump’s own FBI Director Christopher Wray stated unequivocally that there is no evidence to support the theory that Ukraine interfered in our election in 2016.
We have no information that indicates that Ukraine interfered with the 2016 presidential election.
Well, look, there’s all kinds of people saying all kinds of things out there.
I think it’s important for the American people to be thoughtful consumers of information and to think about the sources of it and to think about the support and predication for what they hear.
And I think part of us being well protected against malign foreign influence is to build together an American public that’s resilient, that has appropriate media literacy, and that takes its information with a grain of salt.
And we recently heard from the President himself that he wanted the CrowdStrike portion of this whole conspiracy in the Ukraine investigated, and ’m hearing you say there’s no evidence to support that as far as you know.
As I said, we have no—We at the FBI have no information that would indicate that Ukraine tried to interfere in the 2016 presidential election.
So to be really, really clear, there is no real dispute that Russia, not Ukraine, attacked our elections.
It is not just that there is no evidence to support his conspiracy theory; it is more dangerous than that.
Russian President Vladimir Putin and Russian intelligence services perpetuated this false, debunked conspiracy theory.
Now remember, there is no dispute among the intelligence community that Russia attacked our 2016 elections.
The Senate’s own Intelligence Committee published a report telling us that as well.
In fact, President Trump even said that President Putin is the one who told him it was Ukraine who interfered in our elections.
In short, this is a theory that the Russians are promoting to interfere, yet again, in our democratic process and deflect blame from their own attacks against us.
But what is so dangerous is that President Trump is helping them perpetuate this.
Our own President is helping our adversary attack our processes, all to help his own reelection.
Hill, an expert on these matters, explains it in more detail as to why this is very concerning.
Based on questions and statements I have heard, some of you on the committee appear to believe that Russia and its security services did not conduct a campaign against our country and that perhaps somehow, for some reason, Ukraine did.
This is a fictional narrative that is being perpetrated and propagated by the Russian security services themselves.
The unfortunate truth is that Russia was the foreign power that systematically attacked our democratic institutions in 2016.
This is the public conclusion of our intelligence agencies, confirmed in bipartisan and congressional reports.
It is beyond dispute, even if some of the underlying details must remain classified.
The impact of the successful 2016 Russian campaign remains evident today.
Our highly professional, expert career Foreign Service is being undermined.
United States support for Ukraine which continues to face armed Russian aggression is being politicized.
The Russian Government’s goal is to weaken our country, to diminish America’s global role, and to neutralize a perceived United States threat to Russian interests.
Despite the lack of any evidence to support this debunked conspiracy theory, the unanimous conclusion of the intelligence community, Congress, Special Counsel Mueller, and the FBI to the contrary, President Trump continued to promote this fake conspiracy theory just because it S497 would be beneficial and helpful to his own reelection campaign.
Even President Trump’s own senior advisers told him these allegations were false.
Tom Bossert, President Trump’s former Homeland Security Advisor, stated publicly that the CrowdStrike theory had been debunked.
You know, I don’t know want to be glib about this matter, but last year, retired former Senator Judd Gregg wrote a piece in The Hill magazine saying the three ways or the five ways to impeach oneself.
And at this point, I am deeply frustrated with what he and the legal team is doing in repeating that debunked theory to the president.
And for clarity here, George, let me just again repeat that it has no validity.
So a server inside the DNC was not relevant to our determination to the attribution.
And so while servers can be important in some of the investigations that followed, it has nothing to do with the United States government’s attribution of Russia to the DNC hack.
McMaster spent a lot of time refuting the CrowdStrike conspiracy theory to President Trump.
Hill testified, were to deflect from Russia’s systematic interference in our election and to drive a wedge between the United States and Ukraine, he has succeeded beyond his wildest dreams.
The alternative narrative of Ukrainian interference in the 2016 election has now been picked up by the President’s defenders and the conservative media.
It has muddied the waters regarding Russia’s own interference in our elections—efforts that remain ongoing, as we have learned this week from reporting that Russia hacked Burisma.
S498 If there were any doubt about how President Putin feels about the President’s conduct, you need only look to Putin’s own words.
Thank God nobody is accusing us anymore of interfering in United States elections.
Even though President Trump knew there was no factual basis for the theory that it was Ukraine that interfered in the 2016 election rather than Russia and knew that Russia was perpetuating this theory, he still wanted President Zelensky to pursue the investigation.
Because, while Putin and Russia clearly stood to gain by promoting this conspiracy theory about Ukraine, so did Donald Trump.
An announcement of an investigation by Ukraine would have breathed new life into a debunked conspiracy theory that Ukrainian election interference was there in 2016, and it lent it great credibility.
It would have cast doubt on the conclusions of the Intelligence Committee and Special Counsel Mueller that Russia interfered in the 2016 election to help President Trump.
And it would have helped eliminate a perceived threat to the legitimacy of Donald Trump’s Presidency, that he was only elected because of the help he received from President Putin.
Mr Chief Justice, I am going to recommend that we take a 15-minute break at this point.
Senators, Iam going to pick up where my colleague from Texas left off, but I want to begin by underscoring a few of the points that she made, in listening to her presentation, that really leapt out at me in a way they hadn’t leapt out at me before.
First, I want to address—my colleague shared a number of slides showing the polling strength of Joe Biden vis-a-vis the President as a demonstration of his motive, the fact that he went over these political investigations to undermine someone he was deeply concerned about.
This is an appropriate point for me to make the disclaimer that the House managers take no position in the Democratic primary for President.
I CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE don’t want to lose a single more vote than necessary.
But those polls do show the powerful motive that Donald Trump had—a motive that he didn’t have the year before or the year before that; a motive that he didn’t have when he allowed the aid to go to Ukraine without complaint or issue in 2017 or 2018.
It was only when he had a growing concern with Joe Biden’s candidacy that he took a sudden interest in Ukraine and Ukraine funding and the withholding of that aid.
I also want to underscore what the President said in that July 25 call.
My colleagues have explained what that theory is about that server, that CrowdStrike server—the crazy theory that it was Ukraine that hacked the Democratic server and that server was whisked away to Ukraine and hidden there so that the investigators and the FBI couldn’t look at this server.
That is what Donald Trump was raising in that conversation with President Zelensky.
But it is important to point out here that we are not talking about generic interference.
We are not talking about, as we heard from some of my colleagues in the House, a tweet from a Ukrainian here or an op-ed written by somebody there and equating it with the kind of systematic interference of the Russians.
What we are talking about here—what the President is talking about here is a very specific conspiracy theory going to the server itself, meaning that it was Ukraine that hacked the Democratic server, not the Russians.
At least, that is what Donald Trump wanted to investigate or announced—this completely bogus, Kremlin-pushed conspiracy theory.
I was also struck by that video you saw of Tom Bossert, the former homeland security adviser for the President, in which he talked about how completely debunked and crazy this conspiracy theory is.
And then there was that rather glib line that he admitted was glib, but nonetheless made a point, about the three or five ways to impeach oneself, and the third way was to hire Rudy Giuliani.
Now, it struck me in watching that clip, again, that it is important to emphasize that Rudy Giuliani is not some Svengali here who has the President January 23, 2020 under his control.
And even though the United States intelligence agencies and the bipartisan Senate Intelligence Committee and everyone else told the President time after time that this is nonsense, that the Russians interfered, not’ the Ukrainians, he just couldn’t shake himself of what he was hearing from Rudy Giuliani.
You can say a lot of things about President Trump, but he is not led by the nose by Rudy Giuliani.
And if he is willing to listen to his personal lawyer over his own intelligence agencies, his own advisers, then you can imagine what a danger that presents to this country.
Well, yes, there are, but this person is the President of the United States.
When he says ‘‘there are all kinds of people out there saying all kinds of things,’’ well, what he is really saying is the President of the United States.
It is one thing if someone off the streets says it, but when it is coming from the President of the United States, you can see what a danger it is if it is patently false and it is promulgated by the Russians.
We heard from the President, himself, he wanted the CrowdStrike portion of this whole conspiracy investigated, and I am hearing you say there is no evidence to support this.
It would be bad enough, of course, that the President of the United States believes this Russian propaganda against the advice of all of his advisers—common sense—and everything January 23, 2020 else, but it is worse than that.
On the basis of this Russian propaganda, he withheld $400 million in military aid to a nation Russia was fighting, our ally.
I mean, when we ask about what is the national security implication of what the President did, how much more clear can it be that he is not only pushing Russian propaganda, he is not only misleading Americans about who interfered in the last election, that he is not only doing the Kremlin a favor, but that he is withholding aid from a nation at war.
The Russians not only got him to deflect blame from their interference in our democracy, but they got him to withhold military aid.
Now, of course, there was this convergence of interest between the Kremlin and the President.
The President wasn’t pushing Kremlin talking points just to do Vladimir Putin a favor.
He was doing it because it helped him, because it helped him and because it could get these talking points for him in his reelection campaign.
But nothing struck me more from Representative GARCIA’s presentation than that quote from Vladimir Putin from November of this past year, just a couple of months ago.
He has made a religious man out of Vladimir Putin, but I don’t think we really want Vladimir Putin, our adversary, to be thanking God for the President of the United States, because they don’t wish us well.
We do not want them thanking God for our President and what he is pushing out.
We don’t want them thanking God for withholding money from our ally, although we can understand why they may.
Now, in the first part of this presentation, we walked through the corrupt object of President Trump’s scheme— getting Ukraine to announce these two political investigations that would help benefit his reelection campaign.
And just looking at how baseless and fabricated the allegations behind him were made plain his corrupt motive.
But in addition to this overwhelming evidence, there are at least 10 other reasons we know that President Trump directed his scheme with corrupt intent.
There are at least 10 other reasons we know that President Trump was interested in his own personal gain and not the national interest in pressing for these investigations.
First, the President only wanted these investigations to be announced publicly, not even conducted.
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE Second, the President’s only interest in Ukraine was the ‘‘Big Stuff’ that mattered to himself, not issues affecting Ukraine or the United States.
Third, the President tasked his personal lawyer, Rudy Giuliani, to pursue these investigations on his behalf, not government officials.
Fourth, both before and after the July 25 call, the investigations were never part of United States official foreign policy.
Other witnesses confirmed the investigations, in fact, diverged from United States official policy.
Sixth, Ukrainian officials understood that the investigations were purely political in nature.
Seventh, multiple administration officials reported the President’s July 25 call.
Ninth, President Trump confirmed he wanted Ukraine to conduct investigations in his own words.
And, finally, President Trump did not care about anti-corruption efforts in Ukraine.
First, perhaps the simplest way that we all know that President Trump wanted these investigations done solely to help his personal political interests and not the national interest is that he merely wanted a public announcement of the investigations, not an assurance that they would actually be done.
If his desire for these investigations was truly to assist Ukraine’s anti-corruption efforts or because he was worried about the larger issues of corruption in Ukraine, someone actually investigating the facts underlying the investigations would have been most important.
He just wanted the political benefit of the public announcement of an investigation that he could use to damage his political opponent and boost his own political standing.
Ambassador Gordon Sondland, who was at the center of this scheme, made this quite clear in his testimony.
Now, for Mr Giuliani, by this point, you understood that in order to get that White House meeting that you wanted President Zelensky to have and that President Zelensky desperately wanted to have that Ukraine would have to initiate these two investigations.
I never heard, Mr Goldman, anyone say that the investigations had to start or had to be completed.
The only thing I heard from Mr Giuliani, or otherwise, was that they had to be announced in some form and that form kept changing.
The other evidence gathered by the House’s investigation confirms Ambassador Sondland’s understanding.
For example, recently, the House received documents from Lev Parnas, an associate of Rudy Giuliani’s, now indicted, in response to a subpoena.
As part of the documents that Parnas turned over, we obtained handwritten notes that Parnas apparently took some time in 2019.
Now, it is not every day that you get a document like this—what appears to be a member of the conspiracy writing down the object of the conspiracy, but that is exactly what we see here.
We see the scheme that ultimately was directed by President Trump to coerce Ukraine to announce the investigation of the Bidens.
And in early September, after Mr Giuliani and Ambassadors Volker and Sondland had tried but failed to get President Zelensky to issue a public statement, President Trump made this clear himself.
And so, even though President Trump was saying repeatedly that there is no quid pro quo, Ambassador Sondland relayed to you that the facts of the matter were that the White House meeting and the security assistance were conditioned on the announcement of these investigations.
I understood that to mean that President Trump, through Ambassador Sondland, was asking for President Zelensky to very publicly commit to these investigations, that it was not sufficient to do this in private, that this needed to be a very public statement.
The fact that the President only wanted a public announcement and not the investigations to actually be conducted demonstrates that his desire for investigations was simply and solely to boost his reelection efforts.
As we will explain in more detail in a few minutes, President Trump never expressed any interest in United States anti-corruption policy toward Ukraine, nor did he care about Ukraine’s war against Russia.
This was unequivocally confirmed by the testimony of David Holmes, the senior official at the United States Embassy in Kyiv.
The day after the July 25 call, Holmes overheard a conversation between President Trump and Ambassador Sondland, who was in Kyiv.
The only topic they discussed related to Ukraine was as to the investigations.
It appeared that he was being transferred through several layers of switchboards and assistants, and I then noticed Ambassador Sondland’s demeanor changed and understood he had been connected to President Trump.
While Ambassador Sondland’s phone was not on speakerphone, I could hear the President’s voice through the ear piece of the phone.
The President’s voice was loud and recognizable, and Ambassador Sondland held the phone away from his ear for a period of time, presumably because of the loud volume.
I heard Ambassador Sondland greet the President and explained he was calling from Kyiv.
I heard President Trump then clarify that Ambassador Sondland was in Ukraine.
After the call, Ambassador Sondland confirmed to Holmes that the investigations were the President’s sole interest with Ukraine because—and this is very important—they benefit the President.
After the call ended, Ambassador Sondland remarked that the President was in a bad mood, as Ambassador Sondland stated was often the case early in the morning.
I then took the opportunity to ask Ambassador Sondland for his candid impression of the President’s views on Ukraine.
In particular, I asked Ambassador Sondland if it was true that the President did not give a about Ukraine.
Ambassador Sondland agreed that the President did not give a about Ukraine.
I noted there was big stuff going on in Ukraine, like a war with Russia.
Ambassador Sondland replied that he meant big stuff that benefits the President, like the Biden investigation that Mr Giuliani was pushing.
This understanding by Ambassador Sondland is independently confirmed by President Trump’s own interactions with Ukraine.
During his two telephone calls with President Zelensky—first on April 21 and then on July 25—President Trump did not refer to any anti-corruption efforts or the war against Russia.
Well, I would think that, if they were honest about it, they’d start a major investigation into the Bidens.
So we know from witnesses, the President’s personal agents, and, most importantly, the President himself that the only thing President Trump cared about with Ukraine was his investigations in order to benefit himself.
To see this even more starkly, it is helpful to remember what Presidential head-of-state calls are normally used for.
Talk to any former occupant of the Oval Office, and he will tell you that the disparity in power between the President of the United States and other heads of state is vast.
Since World War II—and consistent with the requirement to ‘‘faithfully execute”’ their oaths of office— United States Presidents from both political parties have made good use of this disparity in power in their telephone calls with foreign leaders.
They have used those calls to secure commitments that have bolstered American security and prosperity.
Acting as our chief diplomat, President Reagan used his calls to our European allies, like Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, to rally the world against the Soviet threat—the shining city on the hill standing up to the evil empire.
His calls laid the foundation for landmark nonproliferation agreements that averted nuclear Armageddon.
W Bush learned that Mikhail Gorbachev intended to resign as Soviet Premier, marking the end of the Soviet Union.
Historians credit his deft diplomacy, including numerous one-on-one phone calls, for bringing about a peaceful end to the Cold War.
Following September 11, President George W Bush used his calls with heads of state to rally global support for the United States campaign to defeat alQaida and to work with our allies to January 23, 2020 protect and defend United States national security and combat terrorism.
President Obama used his calls with foreign leaders to contain the fallout from the global economic crisis, assemble an international coalition to fight the Islamic State, and, of course, to rally support for Ukraine following Russia’s invasion of Crimea.
No matter what you think of the policy views or priorities of these prior Presidents, there is no question that they are examples of the normal diplomacy that happens during Presidential telephone calls, and there is no doubt, when you are the President of the United States and you call a foreign leader, that you are on the clock for the American people.
Consistent with the faithful execution of his or her oath of office, a President’s first and only objective is to get foreign leaders to do what is in the best interest of the United States.
On that date, President Trump used a head-of-state call with the leader of Ukraine to help himself—to press a foreign leader to investigate the President’s political opponent in order to help his reelection campaign.
President Trump abused his authority as Commander in Chief and Chief Diplomat to benefit himself, and he betrayed the interests of the American people when he did so.
Let’s go to the third reason that we know the President put his interests first.
The third reason you know that the investigations were politically motivated is the central role played by President Trump’s personal attorney, Mr Giuliani, who has never had an official role in this government but, instead, was at all times representing the President in his personal capacity.
Dear President-Elect Zelensky, I am private counsel to President Donald J Trump.
Just to be precise, I represent him as a private citizen, not as President of the United States.
This is quite common under American law because the duties and privileges of a President and a private citizen are not the same.
The President is using his personal lawyer to ask January 23, 2020 Ukraine for investigations that aren’t “foreign policy’’ but that will be very, very helpful to the President personally.
Let’s go to the fourth reason that these investigations were never part of United States policy.
It was not just that President Trump used his personal lawyer; it was also that what he was asking for was never a part of United States policy.
Witnesses told us that President Trump’s investigations were not in his official, prepared talking points or briefing materials.
To the contrary, they went against official policy and diverged from our national security interests.
All three witnesses—Tim Morrison at the National Security Council, LTC Alex Vindman at the National Security Council, and Jennifer Williams, who listened to the July 25 call—testified that when President Trump demanded that President Zelensky investigate the Bidens, he had completely departed from the talking points they had prepared for him.
He is not obligated to use his talking points, and he is not obligated to follow the recommendations of his staff no matter how sound they may be.
What this makes clear is that it was not United States policy that he was conducting; it was his private, personal interests that he was conducting.
If it were United States policy, it probably would have been in the talking points and briefing materials, but, of course, it was not.
Colonel Vindman, you are the National Security Council’s director for Ukraine.
They were then reviewed and edited by multiple senior officers at the NSC and the White House.
My point, Mr NUNES, is that we at the National Security Council were not told either by the President directly or CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE through Ambassador Bolton that we were to be focused on these issues as a matter of United States foreign policy towards Ukraine.
So when we are talking about Ukraine in 2016, I never personally heard the President say anything specific about 2016 and Ukraine.
I’ve seen him say plenty of things publicly, but I was not given a directive.
In fact, I was given a directive by Ambassador Bolton on July 10 very clearly to stay out of domestic politics.
So, to be clear, when President Trump asked for these investigations, he was not asking for them based on an official United States policy.
His top official advisers had not even been told about these investigations.
It was not just that President Trump ignored official United States policy and the talking points he was given; it was that what he was doing—withholding support from Ukraine—was actually contrary to and harmful to United States policy.
So our goal should be to help President Zelensky’s anti-corruption reforms and to help Ukraine fight its adversary, Russia, in any way that we can.
President Trump’s own national defense strategy stated that the United States and its European allies ‘‘will deter Russian adventurism’’—a clear reference to Russia’s usurpation of Ukrainian territory and sovereignty.
Consistent with that strategy, we currently have approximately 68,000 troops stationed in Europe.
Roughly 10,000 of those United States troops are deployed on NATO’s eastern border with Russia, to countries like Poland, Hungary, Lithuania, and Bulgaria.
These American forces are literally holding the line against another land grab by Vladimir Putin.
Russia brazenly and implausibly denies its actions and we have failed to impose sufficient costs.
The Kremlin’s confidence is growing as its agents conduct their sustained campaigns to undermine our confidence in ourselves and in one another.
We need to stand up to them, and that is why we support Ukraine, to help defeat Russian aggression.
So, on July 25, when President Zelensky spoke with President Trump, that is what he, McMaster, was hoping to discuss—or he would be hoping that he would discuss how we can support Ukraine in its fight against a huge adversary.
Our confidence in one another; that is what President Zelensky was most worried about when he got on the line with the President on July 25, whether Ukraine could have confidence in United States support.
Nearly 7 percent of Ukraine’s territory had been annexed by Russian-backed forces.
More than 15,000 troops have been lost in the hot war over the past 5 years.
But when President Zelensky raised the issue of United States military aid needed to confront Russian aggression, President Trump did nothing to reassure the Ukrainian leader of our steadfast support for Ukraine’s sovereignty.
It is for these reasons that President Trump’s investigations went against official United States policy.
Witnesses confirmed that President Trump’s requests actually diverged not just from our policy but from our own national security.
As these officials so correctly observed, there is no question that President Trump’s political errand and our national security diverged; that he did this to advance his reelection, not to advance United States national security goals, and that he did it for no good reason but the political one.
And here, what the President did attacks another of the United States strengths, that of our ideals and our values.
It is a fundamental American value underlying our democracy that we do not use official powers to ask for investigations of our political opponents to gain a political advantage.
When President Trump asked a foreign leader to investigate his political opponent, he abused the broad authority provided to the President of the United States.
Vice President PENCE’s adviser, Jennifer Williams, was concerned by the President’s focus on domestic political issues rather than United States national security because the President is not supposed to use foreign governments for political errands.
During my closeddoor deposition, members of the committee asked about my personal views, and whether S502 I had any concerns about the July 25th call.
As I testified then, I found the July 25th phone call unusual because, in contrast to other Presidential calls I had observed, it involved discussion of what appeared to be a domestic political matter.
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman also thought the call was improper and unrelated to the talking points he had drafted for the President.
It is improper for the President of the United States to demand that a foreign government investigate a United States citizen, and a political opponent . . .—it was also clear that if Ukraine pursued an investigation into the 2016 elections, the Bidens and Burisma, it would be interpreted as a partisan play.
This would undoubtedly result in Ukraine using bipartisan support, undermining United States national security, and advancing Russia’s strategic objectives in the region.
It is improper for the President of the United States to demand a foreign government to investigate a United States citizen and a political opponent.
And it wasn’t just that Colonel Vindman thought it was wrong; he was so concerned that he warned Ukraine, too, not to get involved in our domestic politics.
In May, Lieutenant Colonel Vindman grew concerned by the pressure campaign he witnessed in the media, waged primarily by Rudy Giuliani.
During a meeting with President Zelensky on May 20, Lieutenant Colonel Vindman warned the Ukrainian leader to stay out of United States politics—because that is our official United States policy.
To be particularly cautious with regards to Ukraine—to be particularly cautious with regards to Russia, and its desire to provoke Ukraine; and the second one was to stay out of United States domestic policy.
Chairman, in the March and April timeframe, it became clear that there were—there were actors in the U.S., public actors, nongovernmental actors that were promoting the idea of investigations and 2016 Ukrainian interference.
And it was consistent with United States policy to advise any country, all the countries in my portfolio, any country in the world, to not participate in United States domestic politics.
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State George Kent, too, testified that the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE President’s political investigations, of course, had nothing to do with American anticorruption efforts in Ukraine, which has consistently focused on building institutions and never specific investigations, and that if we do ask countries to do our political errands, it entirely threatens our credibility as a democracy.
You also testified on October 15th, in the deposition, about fundamental reforms necessary for Ukraine to fight corruption and to transform the country.
So, finally, Mr Kent, for as long as I can remember, United States foreign policy has been predicated on advancing principled interests in democratic values—notably, freedom of speech, press, assembly, religion; free, fair, and open elections; and the rule of law.
I believe it makes it more difficult for our diplomatic representatives overseas to carry out those policy goals, yes.
They hear diplomats on the ground saying one thing, and they hear other United States leaders saying something else.
What was in the best interest of our country was to help Ukraine, to give them the military aid, to fight one of our greatest adversaries, and to help promote the rule of law.
And when what is best for the country and what was best for Donald Trump diverged, President Trump put himself above the best interests of our country.
Let’s now go to the fifth reason that we know the President put himself first.
On the July 25 call, President Trump told President Zelensky that he should speak to Mr Giuliani and Attorney General Barr, but after the July 25 transcript was released, the Department of Justice disclaimed any knowledge or involvement in the President’s political investigations.
The Department of Justice statement from the day the July 25 call was reJanuary 23, 2020 leased says this.
The President has not spoken with the Attorney General about having Ukraine investigate anything relating to former Vice President Biden or his son.
The President has not asked the Attorney General to contact Ukraine—on this or any other matter.
The Attorney General has not communicated with Ukraine—on this or any other subject.
Nor has the Attorney General discussed this matter, or anything relating to Ukraine, with Rudy Giuliani.
You can say a lot of things about the Attorney General, but you cannot say that he ever has looked to pursue something he thought was not in the President’s interest.
I suspect the Attorney General can recognize a drug deal when he sees it, too, and he wanted nothing to do with this.
Now, if this were some legitimate investigation, you would think the Department of Justice would have a role.
That is traditionally how an investigation with an international component would work, but this wasn’t the case.
The simple answer is that, as we see so clearly, they were against United States official policy and our national security.
The Justice Department wanted nothing to do with it, and by asking for these investigations, the President was abusing his power.
Let’s go to the sixth reason you know President Trump put himself first.
It wasn’t just that these witnesses told us—what these witnesses told us in the impeachment hearings about this being wrong.
So it is not just that they came forward later; they came forward in realtime to report the President’s conduct.
Well, Tim Morrison, former Republican staffer, and Colonel Vindman were sufficiently concerned by what they heard President Trump solicit on that July 25 call that they both immediately went to speak to the lawyer, John Hisenberg, the NSC Legal Advisor.
Now, Mr Morrison, shortly after you heard the July 25th call, you testified that you alerted the NSC legal advisor, John Eisenberg, pretty much right away.
And you indicated in your opening statement, or at least from your deposition, that you went to Mr Hisenberg out of concern over the potential political fallout if the call record became public and not because you thought it was illegal.
Mr Morrison clearly recognized that the request to investigate Biden and Burisma was about United States domestic politics and not United States national security.
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman knew this, too, and he reported his concerns to the White House counsel.
John Eisenberg said that he—he took notes while I was talking, and he said that he would look into it.
And, following the meeting, I had a short conversation—following the postmeeting meeting, in the Ward Room.
In fact, Lieutenant Colonel Vindman reported concerns twice, and Mr Morrison did so multiple times as well.
Mr Kent reported his concerns about the State Department’s failure to respond to the House’s document request.
The President’s demand for poCONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE litical investigations was improper, inappropriate, and wrong, and again confirms that the requested investigations were not about anything except Donald Trump’s political gains.
Let’s go to the seventh reason why you know President Trump put himself first.
American officials weren’t the only ones who recognized the political nature of these requests.
That brings us the seventh reason we know that this was against our national interests.
Ukrainian officials themselves expressed concern that these corrupt investigations would drag them into United States domestic politics.
For example, in mid-July, Ambassador Taylor texted Sondland and Taylor and explained President Zelensky’s reluctance to become a pawn in United States politics.
So here you have Sasha Danyliuk, one of the top advisers to President Zelensky affirming that his President wants to be taken seriously.
It is pretty extraordinary when a foreign leader has to communicate to this country that they want him to take him seriously and not just as some kind of a political pawn for political purposes.
They understood this wasn’t American policy—as much as we do—and they didn’t want to be used as a pawn.
It wasn’t just that they didn’t want to be seen as getting into politics, because if they did and it looked like they were getting on the side of Donald Trump, that would hurt their support with Democrats, and if it looked like they were getting involved with the other side, it would hurt them with the President.
There was no benefit to Ukraine by this, but they also didn’t want to be viewed as a pawn.
He needs to be taken seriously, because if the United States isn’t going to take him seriously, you can darn well bet Vladimir Putin will not take him seriously.
So the perception—not just that there is a rift, that he can’t get mili$503 tary aid or it is in doubt or in question, but the impression—that he is nothing more than a pawn, you could see how problematic that was for President Zelensky.
In other words, Ukrainian officials understood, just as our officials understood, just as all those folks you saw—Morrison, Vindman, Hill, and others, all the people who had to go to the lawyers, all the people who listened to that call and understood—that this was just wrong.
Morrison goes on to say that he is no legal expert and can’t really opine on the legality of what happened on this call, but they all knew it was wrong.
It was the Ukrainians who also understood this was a pure political errand they were being asked to perform.
Let’s go to the eighth reason why you can know that President Trump put himself first, and that is because there is no serious dispute that the White House tried to bury the call record.
Although President Trump has repeatedly insisted that his July conversation with President Zelensky “was perfect,’’ the White House apparently believed otherwise.
Following a head-of-state call, the President issues a summary or readout to lock in any commitments made by the foreign leader and publicly reinforce the core elements of the President’s message.
The White House instead provided reporters with a short, incomplete summary that, of course, omitted the major elements of the conversation.
Today, President Donald J Trump spoke by telephone with President Volodymyr Zelenskyy of Ukraine to congratulate him on his recent election.
President Trump and President Zelenskyy discussed ways to strengthen the relationship between the United States and Ukraine, including energy and economic cooperation.
Both leaders also expressed that they look forward to the opportunity to meet.
Now, I don’t know about you, but that does not seem like an accurate summary of that call.
As you can see, that summary did not mention President Trump’s mention of a debunked conspiracy theory about the 2016 election promoted by Russian President Putin.
The summary did not mention President Trump’s demand that Ukraine announce an investigation into his domestic political rival, former Vice President Biden.
The summary did not mention that President Trump praised a corrupt Ukrainian prosecutor, who to this day continues to feed false claims to the President through Rudy Giuliani.
Sanitizing the call readout wasn’t the only step taken to cover up the President’s wrongdoing.
The White House Counsel’s office also took irregular efforts to hide the call record away on a secure server used to store highly classified information.
However, mistake or no mistake, it remained on that system until at least the third week of September 2019.
This was a corrupt action and it was hidden, and they knew it was, and that is why they hid it.
Let’s go to the ninth reason that you know President Trump put himself first.
The clearest reason that we can tell that all that President Trump CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE cared about was the investigations is that President Trump confirmed his desire for these investigations in his statements to his agents and when this scheme was discovered to the American people.
The very day after he solicited foreign interference to help him cheat in the 2020 election, President Trump spoke with Gordon Sondland, who was in Ukraine.
President Zelensky doesn’t want to be used as a pawn and doesn’t want to be drawn into United States politics, but at this point he feels he has no choice.
Of course, that is the only thing the President asked about in that call.
Sondland says he is going to do it, adding that Zelensky will do ‘‘anything you ask” him to do, including, apparently, be his pawn.
Although Sondland didn’t remember the details of his conversation, he did not dispute Holmes’ recollection of it.
In fact, Ambassador Sondland had an interesting take on it, which you should hear.
Actually, actually, I would have been more surprised if President Trump had not mentioned investigations, particularly given what we are hearing from Mr Giuliani about the President’s concerns.
Yeah, frankly, I would have been surprised if it was something different because we are all in the loop here.
Everybody understood what this President wanted, and apparently everybody also understood just how wrong it was and how damaging it was.
In September 2019, even after President Trump learned that his scheme was in danger of becoming publicly exposed, he would not give up.
He still expected Ukraine to announce investigations into Joe Biden and his alleged Ukrainian interference in 2016.
So here we hear again from the President’s own words what his primary object is, and his primary object is helping his reelection campaign—help to cheat in his reelection campaign.
After all that we have been through and after all that we went through with the Russian interference in our election and all that cost, he was at it again, unrepentant and undeterred.
If anything, he was emboldened by escaping accountability from his invitation and willful use of Russian-hacked materials in the last election, and unconstrained.
This is a President who truly feels that under article II he can do whatever he wants, and that includes coercing an ally to help him cheat in an election.
A remedy in which the President can cheat is no remedy at all, which is why we are here.
Ironically, the President has argued that his corrupt conduct in soliciting sham investigations from Ukraine was driven by his concerns about corruption in Ukraine.
This attempt to legitimize his efforts is simply not credible and not the least bit believable given the mountain of evidence in the record of President Trump’s corrupt intent.
There is no evidence that President Trump cared one whit about anti-corruption efforts at all.
First, the evidence and President Trump’s own public statements make clear that when the President talks about corruption in Ukraine, he is only talking about that sliver—that little sliver—of alleged corruption that just somehow happened to be affected by his own political interests, specifically two investigations that would benefit his reelection.
For example, on September 25, in a joint press availability with President Zelensky—the man who doesn’t want to be a pawn—at the United Nations General Assembly, President Trump emphasized his understanding of corruption to relate to the Biden investigation.
Now, when Biden’s son walks away with millions of dollars from Ukraine, and he knows nothing, and they’re paying him millions of dollars, that’s corruption.
I mean, you can imagine how President Zelensky feels sitting there and hearing this— the man who does not want to be a pawn and the man who doesn’t want to be pulled into American politics.
And January 23, 2020 there is the President, at it again, trying to draw his nation in, even while they have a war to fight.
But there was a lot of corruption having to do with the 2016 election against us.
And we want to get to the bottom of it, and it’s very important that we do.
This is, of course, again, bringing up the CrowdStrike conspiracy theory.
He is not concerned about actual corruption cases, only about matters that affect him personally.
Two days later, President Trump again tried to link corruption with the Biden investigation.
The only thing that matters is the transcript of the actual conversation that I had with the President of Ukraine.
And, in, I believe, 1999, there was a corruption act or a corruption bill passed between both—and signed—between both countries, where I have a duty to report corruption.
Just 2 days after that, the President again equated corruption with actions by others to hurt him politically.
Here’s what’s okay: If we feel there’s corruption, like I feel there was in the 2016 campaign—there was tremendous corruption against me—if we feel there’s corruption, we have a right to go to a foreign country.
So here, again, the President is pushing out the Kremlin talking points of Ukrainian interference in 2016 and the CrowdStrike conspiracy theory.
Again, when President Trump is talking about corruption, he is talking about perceived efforts by political opponents to hurt him.
It is personal, and it is political, but it is not anti-corruption policy.
Fighting corruption in Ukraine, when used by President Trump and Giuliani, in fact, refers to the investigation of the Bidens in 2016.
In hindsight, I now understand that others saw the idea of investigating possible corruption involving the Ukrainian company Burisma as equivalent to investigating former Vice President Biden.
The evidence, including the President’s own statements, makes clear that this is simply code for the specific investigations that President Trump wanted Ukraine to pursue.
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE Second, as we have discussed, the President’s timing of his purported concerns about corruption in Ukraine make it all the more suspect.
Before news of Vice President Biden’s candidacy broke, President Trump showed no interest in Ukraine.
He gave Ukraine hundreds of millions of dollars under a regime that lost power because of mounting concerns about corruption.
So here we are, the President, in these prior years, giving money to a government, to Mr Poroshenko, that is viewed as corrupt, and Zelensky comes and runs against him in an underdog campaign—underdog campaign of Zelensky against Poroshenko.
That Poroshenko’s government is corrupt, and he is running to clean it up.
He succeeds because the Ukrainians really want to clean up their government.
President Trump had no problem giving money appropriated by Congress to Ukraine under the corrupt regime of Poroshenko where corruption had existed during Poroshenko.
But a reformer gets elected, devoted to fighting corruption, and suddenly there is a problem.
We had a President for whom this was the central pillar of his campaign.
No one disputes that Marie Yovanovitch was and is a devoted fighter against corruption.
If you look at that July 25 call, the President is badmouthing this person fighting corruption.
There was no problem supporting the former regime with corruption problems but problems supporting a reformer trying to clean it up; no problems with a corrupt former Ukrainian prosecutor whom he praises in that call—he is a good man—but problems with a United States Ambassador who has devoted her life to this country.
It wasn’t until 2019, after Biden emerged as a considerable opponent and after Special Counsel Mueller conS505 firmed that President Trump’s campaign had welcomed Russian assistance in 2016 that President Trump, we are to believe, suddenly developed an interest in anti-corruption reforms in Ukraine.
Never mind that his own Defense Department said they were meeting all the benchmarks.
This new administration, the reformer, was doing exactly what we wanted him to do.
Third, when given the opportunity to raise the issue of corruption with the Ukrainians, the President never did.
Despite at the request of his staff, the word ‘‘corruption’’ never crosses his lips, just the Bidens and CrowdStrike.
When the President first spoke to President Zelensky on April 21, he was supposed to—he was asked to by his staff—bring up corruption.
Go back and check, but I think the readout of that congratulatory call actually said that he brought up corruption.
In the congratulatory call to President Zelensky—great reformer—he doesn’t bring it up, but you know the readout says that he did.
Of course, the readout for the second call was far more misleading because there was far more to mislead about.
We are to believe that, apart from the Bidens, this is what our President was concerned about in Ukraine.
Those were the recommended talking points that were cleared through the NSC staff for the President, yes.
President Trump also did not mention the word ‘“‘corruption’’ on the July 25 call.
Well, actually, that slide is what I was referring to earlier—the good work of my staff.
President Donald J Trump spoke today to President-elect Volodymyr Zelensky to congratulate him on his victory in Ukraine’s S506 April 21 election.
The President wished him success and called the election an important moment in Ukraine’s history, noting the peaceful and democratic manner of the electoral process.
President Trump underscored the unwavering support of the United States for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity—within its internationally recognized borders—and expressed his commitment to work together with President-elect Zelensky and the Ukrainian people to implement reforms that strengthen democracy, increase prosperity, and root out corruption.
When President Trump had the ear of President Zelensky during the April 21 and July 25 calls, he did not raise that issue—the word ‘‘corruption’’—a single time.
White House officials made clear to President Trump that President Zelensky was anti-corruption, that President Trump should help him fight corruption.
The Defense Department and State Department certified that Ukraine satisfied all anti-corruption benchmarks before President Trump froze the aid.
It establishes clearly that President Trump did not care about corruption.
In fact, it was inconsistent with and diverged from American national security and American values.
He has made it clear he didn’t care about corruption; he cared only about himself.
Now it is up to us to do something about it, to make sure that a President—that this President cannot pursue an objective that places himself above our country.
Those sham investigations were to advance his personal political interests, not the national interests of America.
Let’s drill down on the how— how the President abused the power of his office and executed his corrupt scheme.
All three of President Trump’s official actions were an abuse of his power as President and done for personal gain, but the original abuse was President Trump’s solicitation of election interference from a foreign country— Ukraine.
He tried to get an announcement of investigations designed to help him in the 2020 Presidential election, so let’s start there.
President Trump’s corrupt demands of President Zelensky in the July 25 phone call were not just a spontaneous outburst; they were a dramatic crescendo in a monthslong scheme to extort Ukraine into assisting his 2020 reelection campaign.
As was shown, there is evidence of President Trump himself demanding that Ukraine conduct the investigations, but President Trump also delegated his authority to his political agent, Rudy Giuliani, to oversee and direct this scheme.
First, in January of 2019, Mr Giuliani and his associates discussed the investigations with the then current and former prosecutor generals of Ukraine.
The fear was that President-elect Zelensky would replace the corrupt prosecutor Giuliani had been dealing with.
President Trump removed Ambassador Yovanovitch because his agents, including Giuliani, believed she was another roadblock to the _ corrupt scheme they were undertaking on his behalf.
In her place, President Trump directed a team of handpicked political appointees— United States officials who were supposed to work in the public interest—to instead work with Mr Giuliani to advance the President’s personal interests.
But even with Ambassador Yovanovitch gone, President Zelensky still resisted Mr Giuliani’s overtures.
So, at the President’s direction, throughout May and June, Giuliani ratcheted up public pressure on Ukraine to announce the investigations.
It was only then, when January 23, 2020 Mr Giuliani could not get the deal done, that President Trump turned to the second official action—using the Oval Office meeting to pressure Ukraine.
Before we turn to this scheme for soliciting foreign election interference, we need to understand how Mr Giuliani, the President’s private agent, assumed the leadership role in this scheme that applied escalating pressure on Ukraine to announce investigations helpful to the President’s political interest.
The evidence shows Mr Giuliani and President Trump were in constant contact in this time period.
Both United States and Ukrainian officials knew Mr Giuliani was the key to Ukraine.
First, no one disputes that Mr Giuliani was and is President Trump’s personal lawyer.
Second, President Trump at all times directed and knew about Mr Giuliani’s actions.
On May 10, 2019, Mr Giuliani wrote to a foreign leader, President-elect Zelensky.
Rudy Giuliani, not a government official, asked to speak about President Trump’s specific request, and he makes it clear that it was in his role as the President’s counsel.
Mr Giuliani didn’t just tell a foreign leader that; he also told the press.
Mr Giuliani said his trip was to pressure Ukraine to initiate investigations into false allegations against the Bidens and the 2016 election and that it was at the request of the President.
President Trump repeatedly admitted knowledge of Mr Giuliani’s activities and to coordinating with him about the Ukrainian activities.
In a telephone interview with POLITICO on Friday, Trump said he didn’t know much about Giuliani’s planned trip to Ukraine, but wanted to speak to him about it.
January 23, 2020 President Trump knew and directed Mr Giuliani’s activities in May 2019 when Mr Giuliani was planning his visit to Kyiv, and that remains true today.
Even as President Trump faced impeachment in the House of Representatives, he was coordinating with his personal attorney on the Ukraine scheme.
The evidence also shows that Mr Giuliani and the President were in frequent contact.
During the investigation and in response to a lawful subpoena, the House got call records.
They show contacts—not content—between Giuliani, the White House, and other people involved in the President’s scheme.
For example, on April 23, Rudy Giuliani learned President Trump had decided to fire Ambassador Yovanovitch.
According to phone records, on that day, Giuliani had an 8minute-and-28-second call with a White House number.
For example, he had one 8-minute-42second call with a White House number.
An hour and a half later, he had another call, which lasted 3 minutes and 15 seconds, with the White House.
Rudy Giuliani remained in close contact with the White House after the disclosure of his planned trip to Ukraine in mid-2019.
We know from Mr Giuliani and the President’s own statements about his role as President Trump’s personal agent advancing the Ukraine scheme.
We know from their comments and the documentary evidence about the frequency of their contact.
But it wasn’t just the frequency of Mr Giuliani’s contact that is significant.
President Trump directed United States officials to work with his personal agent, who was pursuing investigations not at all related to foreign policy.
United States officials, including the President’s own National Security Advisor, knew there was no getting around Rudy Giuliani when it came to Ukraine.
Witnesses repeatedly testified to the constant presence of Rudy Giuliani on television and in the newspapers.
Hill testified that Ambassador Bolton issued guidance for the National Security Council staff to not engage with Rudy Giuliani.
Because Mr Giuliani was not conducting official United States foreign policy; he was doing a domestic political errand for President Trump.
Rudy Giuliani’s role in Ukraine policy is yet another topic that Ambassador Bolton could speak to.
Even without Ambassador Bolton’s testimony, multiple other administration officials confirmed Mr Giuliani’s central role.
It was apparent to everyone that the key to changing the President’s mind on Ukraine was Giuliani.
Bad enough that the President ordered United States diplomats to ‘‘talk to Rudy’’ about Ukraine, the scheme got worse.
The evidence shows that Ukrainian officials also came to recognize the important role of Mr Giuliani.
On July 10, 2019, Andriy Yermak, the top aide to President Zelensky, sent a text to Ambassador Volker about Rudy Giuliani.
I feel that the key for many things is Rudi and I ready to talk with him at any time.
So the President used his personal agent to conduct his scheme with Ukraine.
Everyone—White House officials and Ukrainian officials—knew they had no choice but to deal with Giuliani.
Mr Giuliani’s focus was to get investigations into President Trump’s political rival to help the President’s reelection.
We have walked through some of the timeline of Mr Giuliani’s actions and statements about Ukraine, but let’s just line them up briefly because it makes the story so clear.
At the time of Biden’s announcement and for months after, public polling, including from FOX News, showed that Biden would beat President Trump.
Mr Giuliani tweeted on June 21 and urged President Zelensky to pursue the investigation.
Mr Giuliani has tweeted about Joe Biden over 65 times since September, and President Trump told you himself.
He has made this clear to United States officials and to the Ukrainians.
The evidence shows President Trump and Rudy Giuliani were in constant contact during this period.
Rudy and his associates pressed Ukraine for investigations into the President’s political rival.
AS we mentioned, in late 2018 and early 2019, Rudy Giuliani and his associates Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman were busy soliciting information from corrupt Ukrainians to help President Trump.
In late 2018 and early 2019, Parnas, Fruman, and Giuliani met extensively with two corrupt Ukrainian prosecutors, Yuriy Lutsenko and Viktor Shokin, to gather information they believed would help President Trump.
And remember, because Shokin was corrupt, Vice President Biden had urged his removal.
Shokin blamed the former Vice President for his dismissal by the Ukrainian Parliament.
He wanted to revive his political fortunes in Ukraine by assisting with Giuliani’s effort.
At the end of January, Giuliani, Parnas, and Fruman participated in a conference call with Shokin.
Shokin also falsely claimed that Ambassador Yovanovitch had improperly denied him a United States visa and that she was close to Vice President Biden.
Lutsenko held a_ grudge against Ambassador Yovanovitch because she and the broader State Department were critical of Lutsenko’s failures.
This was the motivation for Lutsenko to give Giuliani and his associates false information on Biden and Burisma.
Lutsenko and Shokin had grudges against Biden and Ambassador Yovanovitch.
Because they were implementing United States policy to fight corruption in Ukraine.
They had motive to remove Ambassador Yovanovitch or anyone else who got in the way of their efforts to smear Biden.
WhatsApp exchanges that Parnas recently gave to Congress made clear that, in exchange for derogatory information about Biden, Lutsenko wanted Yovanovitch removed from her post in Kyiv.
Now, here, ‘‘B’’ could either be Biden or Burisma or both, but “Madam’’ is Ambassador Yovanovitch.
In the March 22 text, Lutsenko implied that, if Parnas wanted dirt on Biden—Burisma—he needed to _ do something about Ambassador Yovanovitch.
Days later, on March 28, Parnas assured Lutsenko that his efforts were being recognized in the United States and that he would be rewarded.
I was asked to personally convey to you that America supports you and will not let you be harmed no matter how things look now.
Just so you know, here people are talking about you as a true Ukrainian hero.
This text message, along with others, shows that Lutsenko was providing derogatory information on the Bidens in exchange for Parnas pushing for Ambassador Yovanovitch’s removal.
Now, in late March and throughout April 2019, the smear campaign against the Bidens and against Ambassador CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE Yovanovitch entered a more _ public phase through a series of opinion pieces published in The Hill.
The public airing of these allegations was orchestrated— orchestrated by Giuliani, Parnas, and Lutsenko.
We know from records produced by Parnas that he played an important role in getting derogatory information from Lutsenko and his deputy to John Solomon, who wrote the opinion pieces in The Hill.
One, Vice President Biden’s efforts in 2015 to remove Shokin; two, Hunter Biden’s role as a Burisma board member; three, Ukrainian interference in the 2016 election in favor of Hillary Clinton; and four, the misappropriation and transfer of Ukrainian funds abroad.
Now, Mr Giuliani was very open about this, and here is a clip worth watching.
I got information about three or four months ago that a lot of the explanations for how this whole phony investigation started will be in the Ukraine, that there were a group of people in the Ukraine that were working to help Hillary Clinton and were colluding really— —with the Clinton campaign.
And it stems around the ambassador and the embassy, being used for political purposes.
So I began getting some people that were coming forward and telling me about that.
And then all of a sudden, they revealed the story about Burisma and Biden’s son.
Mr Giuliani got laughed at on FOX News for advancing the crowd source conspiracy theory, but the clip shows that he had been making an effort to get derogatory information from the Ukrainians on behalf of his client, President Trump.
I understand the presentations will continue for a while, and I would suggest a dinner break at 6:30 for 30 minutes.
Chief Justice Roberts, Senators, and, of course, the counsel for the President, at this point, everything was going to plan.
Mr Giuliani was scheming with the corrupt Ukrainian prosecutors who were offering dirt on Biden that would help President Trump get reelected.
They were pressing President Trump to remove Ambassador Yovanovitch, including publicly tarnishing her reputation, based on false and_ baseless claims.
On April 21, President Zelensky— then the anti-corruption candidate— January 23, 2020 won a landslide victory in Ukraine’s Presidential election.
United States officials unanimously testified that President Zelensky’s mandate to pursue reform would be good for our national security.
As a reformer, he would be less amenable to announcing the sham investigations.
Zelensky would not want to get dragged into United States domestic politics.
Additionally, the election of a new Ukrainian President raised the concern that Lutsenko, with whom Mr Giuliani had been plotting, would be replaced by a new Ukrainian prosecutor general.
A new prosecutor general, especially one appointed in an anti-corruption regime, would likely be less willing to conduct sham investigations to please an American President.
He pressed President Trump to remove Ambassador Yovanovitch, which would keep Lutsenko happy.
And he tried to get a meeting with Zelensky to secure the new Ukrainian leader’s commitment to press the investigations.
First, on April 23, Parnas and Fruman were in Israel, trying to arrange a meeting between Giuliani and the newly minted Ukrainian President Zelensky.
Well, I was going to say it would be difficult to hear, but I am sure you cannot hear it at all.
According to phone records, Parnas and Giuliani had a 1-minute-50-second call.
Fifteen minutes after they hung up, the records also show that Mr Giuliani placed three short phone calls to the White House.
Giuliani spoke with someone at the White House for 8 minutes and 28 seconds.
I will quickly note that at the time the Intelligence Committee issued its report in mid-December, we did not know whether that 8-minute-28-second call was from the White House.
We have since received information from a telecom company that it was indeed the White House.
Neither the White House nor Giuliani produced any information to Congress about what was discussed.
Of course, the White House has refused, as you already know, to cooperate in any way.
But even without the evidence that the White House is hiding—with January 23, 2020 the evidence we do have—these phone records prove that Mr Giuliani was keeping President Trump informed about what was going on when he was trying to meet President Zelensky and get Ukraine to commit to the investigations.
Let’s look at President Trump’s decision to remove Ambassador Yovanovitch.
Following the call between Mr Giuliani and the White House on April 238, Parnas asked Giuliani for an update.
Her removal would no doubt please the corrupt Ukrainian prosecutor, Lutsenko, who offered derogatory information about Hunter Biden.
And it did—because we know that the very next day, on April 24, Ambassador Yovanovitch received two _ frantic phone calls from Ambassador Carol Perez at the State Department.
Within hours of Mr Giuliani saying he prayed Ambassador Yovanovitch would get fired, Ambassador Yovanovitch got a frantic phone call to get on the next plane.
That same day, on April 24, Giuliani appeared on ‘‘Fox & Friends’’ and promoted the false conspiracy theories about Ukraine and Vice President Biden that were all part of this agreement.
And I ask you to keep your eye on Ukraine, because in Ukraine, a lot of the dirty work was done digging up the information.
I think you’d get some interesting information about Joe Biden from Ukraine.
About a company he was on the board of for years, which may be one of the most crooked companies in CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE Ukraine.
And Biden bragged about the fact that he got the prosecutor general fired.
The prosecutor general was investigating his son and then the investigation went south.
Ambassador Yovanovitch was never provided a justification for her removal.
While American Ambassadors serve at the pleasure of the President—we do understand that—I am sure you would all agree that the manner and circumstances surrounding the Ambassador’s removal were unusual and raised questions of motive.
Every witness who testified confirmed that there was no factual basis to the accusations Lutsenko lodged against Ambassador Yovanovitch.
Under Secretary of State David Hale, the most senior career diplomat at the State Department, testified that Maria Yovanovitch was an outstanding Ambassador and should have been permitted to remain in Kyiv.
Even more significant, several witnesses testified that President Trump’s decision to remove Ambassador Yovanovitch undercut United States national security objectives in Ukraine during a critical time.
Hill, for example, explained that many of the key United States policies toward Ukraine were being implemented by the United States Embassy in Kyiv.
This created what Hill labeled ‘‘a period of uncertainty’’ as to how our government was going to execute United States policy.
President Trump removed Ambassador Yovanovitch because she was in the way.
She was in the way of the sham investigations that he so desperately wanted; investigations that would hurt former Vice President Biden and undermine the Mueller investigation into Russian election interference; investigations that would help him cheat in the 2020 election.
Rudy Giuliani admitted that he personally told President Trump about his concern that Ambassador Yovanovitch was an obstacle to securing Ukrainian cooperation on the two bogus investigations they solicited from Ukraine.
And Rudy Giuliani confirmed that S509 President Trump decided to remove Ambassador Yovanovitch based on the bogus claim that she was obstructing his scheme to secure Ukraine’s cooperation.
Mr Giuliani and his agents, on behalf of President Trump, the United States President, worked with corrupt Ukrainians to get dirt on President Trump’s political opponent.
He texted about it with his agents, and he repeatedly called the White House.
That is how far President Trump was willing to go to get his investigations.
To smear a highly respected, dedicated Foreign Service officer who had served this country unselfishly for his own selfish political interests is disgraceful.
Even with the removal of Ambassador Yovanovitch, President Zelensky’s election victory threw a wrench into the President’s scheme.
Ukrainian officials publicly pushed back on the suggestions of corruptions proposed by Mr Giuliani, who was working on behalf of the United States President.
Well, Mr Giuliani canceled his trip on May 10 and claimed on FOX News that President Zelensky was_ surrounded by ‘‘enemies’’ of President Trump.
I am not going to go because I think I’m walking into a group of people that are enemies of the President.
It appears Giuliani’s statement influenced President Trump’s view of Ukraine, as well.
At an Oval Office meeting on May 23, United States officials learned of Giuliani’s influence.
Ambassador Volker testified that President Trump ‘‘didn’t believe’’ the positive assessment government officials gave the new Ukrainian President.
Mr Giuliani and the President knew that they were going to have S510 trouble with President Zelensky fulfilling his corrupt demand for investigations that would benefit President Trump’s reelection campaign.
Although his corrupt scheme was in trouble due to the unexpected results of the Ukrainian election—the election which yielded an anti-corruption reformer—President Trump doubled down on his scheme to solicit investigations for his personal benefit.
In May of 2019, with a gap in American leadership in Ukraine after Ambassador Yovanovitch was removed, President Trump enlisted United States officials to help to do his political work.
The scheme grew from false allegations by disgruntled, corrupt Ukrainian prosecutors to a plot by the President of the United States to extort the new Ukrainian President into announcing his political investigations.
During the May 23 Oval Office meeting, President Trump directed Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker, and Secretary Perry to work with Mr Giuliani on Ukraine.
Giuliani had made clear he was pursuing investigations for President Trump in a personal capacity.
He said publicly, on numerous instances, that he was only working for the President in a personal capacity and not on foreign policy.
Yet President Trump still told White House officials that they had to work with Mr Giuliani to get anywhere on Ukraine.
Let me say again, we weren’t happy with the President’s directive to talk with Rudy.
I believe then, as I do now, that the men and women of the State Department, not the President’s personal lawyer, should take responsibility for Ukraine matters.
Nonetheless, based on the President’s direction, we were faced with a choice.
We could abandon the efforts to schedule the White House phone call and the White House visit between Presidents Trump and Zelensky, which was unquestionably in our foreign policy interest, or we could do as President Trump had directed and talk with Rudy.
We chose the latter, of course, not because we liked it, but because it was the only constructive path open to us.
And just like that, United States officials charged with CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE advancing United States foreign policy—u United States officials who were supposed to act in our country’s interest—were directed to, instead, advance President Trump’s personal interests.
From that point on, they worked with the President’s personal agent on political investigations to benefit the President’s reelection.
Their work on President Trump’s behalf to solicit foreign interference in our elections continued throughout all of June.
For instance, on June 21, Mr Giuliani tweeted that President Zelensky had not yet publicly committed on two politically motivated investigations designed to benefit President Trump.
And when Mr Giuliani’s public efforts and his tweets didn’t move President Zelensky to announce the investigations, he used United States diplomats as directed by President Trump.
After Giuliani canceled his trip to Ukraine in May and commented that President-elect Zelensky had enemies of President Trump around him, Giuliani had minimal access to the new Ukrainian leader’s inner circle.
His primary Ukraine connection, Prosecutor General Lutsenko, had already been informed that he would be removed as soon as the new Parliament convened.
So President Trump gave him United States diplomats and directed them to work with Mr Giuliani on his scheme.
As you heard, President Trump told Ambassadors Sondland and Volker to talk with Rudy and work with Rudy on Ukraine.
Well, Mr Giuliani tried to use Ambassador Sondland and Volker to gain access to President Zelensky and his inner circle through their official State Department channels and made clear to President Zelensky that he had to announce the investigations.
On June 27, Ambassador Sondland brought Ambassador Taylor up _ to speed on Ukraine since Ambassador Taylor had just arrived in the country a few weeks beforehand.
Ambassador Sondland explained that President Zelensky needed to make clear that he was not standing in the way of the investigations that President Trump wanted—that President Zelensky needed to make clear that he was not standing in the way of the investigations that President Trump wanted.
On June 27th, Ambassador Sondland told me during a phone conversation that President Zelensky needed to make clear to President Trump that he, President Zelensky, was not standing in the way of investigations.
Ambassador Taylor relayed this conversation to one of his deputies, United States Diplomat David Holmes, who testified that he understood the investigations to mean the ‘“‘Burisma-Biden investigations that Mr Giuliani and his associates had been speaking about” publicly.
I understood that this meant the Biden/Burisma investigations that Mr Giuliani and his associates had been speaking about in the media since March.
Even with the addition of President Trump’s political appointees to aid Mr Giuliani’s efforts, President Zelensky did not announce the investigations.
As Mr Giuliani’s June 21 tweet shows, the Ukrainian President was resisting President Trump’s pressure.
Senators, I know we have covered a lot of ground, but as we have shown, there is overwhelming and uncontradicted evidence of the President’s scheme to solicit foreign interference in this year’s Presidential election.
Each time that we remind this body of the President’s scheme to cheat, to win, some of his defenders say that we are only concerned about winning the next election—the Democrats are only doing this to win the next election.
But you know better because this trial is much bigger than any one election, and it is much bigger than any one President.
Whether a maid or a janitor, whether a nurse, a teacher, or a truck driver, whether a doctor or a mechanic, this moment is about ensuring that their votes matter and that American elections are decided by the American people.
He abused the power of his office by ordering United States diplomats to work with his political agent to solicit two politically motivated investigations by Ukraine.
The investigations were designed solely to help his personal interests, not our national interests.
Neither investigation solicited by President Trump had anything to do with promoting United States foreign policy or United States national security.
Indeed, as we will discuss later, both investigations and the President’s broader scheme to secure Ukraine’s interference was a threat.
The only person who stood to benefit from the abuse of office and solicitation of these investigations was Donald Trump—the 45th President of the United States.
This was a violation of public trust and a failure to take care that the laws be faithfully executed, but when it came down to choosing between the national interests of the country and his own personal interests—his_ reelection—President Trump chose himself.
So, to be honest, I thought to myself, Well, the President is now back in town.
Perhaps the one thing that falls into that category is the sanctity and continuity of the United States Constitution.
As House managers, we are here in this august body because we believe it is necessary to defend our democracy.
Some of you may agree with us at the end of the day, and others most likely will not, but we do want to thank you for your courtesy and for your patience in extending to us the opportunity to present our case with dignity to you and to the American people during this solemn constitutional moment.
I want to speak for just some time on the second official act that President Trump used to corruptly abuse his power, which was the withholding of an official Oval Office meeting with the President of Ukraine.
President Trump refused to schedule that Oval Office meeting until the Ukrainian leader announced the phony political investigations that he demanded on July 25.
He knew that President Zelensky needed the meeting to show Vladimir Putin that he had the support of Donald Trump, but President Trump exploited that desperation for his own political benefit—this for that.
I know that members of this committee frequently frame these complicated issues in the form of a simple question.
As I testified previously with regard to the requested White House call and the White House meeting, the answer is yes.
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE The phony political investigations that President Trump demanded from Ukraine were part of a scheme to sabotage a political rival—Joe Biden—and cheat in the 2020 election.
The President used his awesome power to help himself and not the American people.
The President’s defenders may argue, as Mick Mulvaney tried to, that quid pro quo arrangements are a common aspect of United States foreign policy.
There are situations where official United States acts, like head-of-state meetings or the provision of foreign assistance, are used to advance the national interests of the United States.
Here, President Trump sought to advance his own personal political interests, facilitated by Rudolph Giuliani, the human hand grenade.
Let’s walk through the overwhelming evidence of how President Trump withheld an official White House meeting, which was vitally important to Ukraine, as part of a corrupt scheme to convince President Zelensky to announce two phony political investigations.
First, the Oval Office meeting President Trump corruptly withheld constitutes an official act.
It was one of the most powerful tools he could wield in his role as the leader of the free world.
It would have demonstrated United States support for Ukraine’s newly elected leader at a critical time.
Ukraine is under relentless attack by Russian-backed separatists in Crimea and in the East.
Ukraine desperately needed an Oval Office meeting, and President Trump knew it.
Second, President Trump withheld that Oval Office meeting to increase pressure on Ukraine to assist his reelection campaign by announcing two phony investigations.
As my colleagues have detailed extensively throughout the day, this is a classic quid pro quo.
Third, multiple administration officials, including the President’s own handpicked supporters and appointees, confirmed that a corrupt exchange was being sought.
Finally, contemporaneous documentation makes clear that the President corruptly abused his power to advance the scheme to try and cheat in the 2020 election—this for that.
Let’s explore whether the granting or the denial of an Oval Office meeting constitutes an official act.
As we discussed earlier today, an abuse of power occurs when the President exercises his official power to obtain a corrupt personal benefit while ignoring or injuring the national interests.
Article II grants the President wide latiS511 tude to conduct diplomacy and to, specifically, receive Ambassadors and other public Ministers.
The President decides which head-of-state meetings best advance the national interests and which foreign leaders are deserving of an official reception in the Oval Office—perhaps one of the most prestigious nonreligious venues in the world.
Meetings between heads of state are make-or-break moments that can determine the trajectory of global events, and a meeting with the President of the United States in the Oval Office is unquestionably monumental, particularly for a fragile democracy like Ukraine.
The Oval Office is where foreign leaders facing challenges at home go—like a war with Russia—in pursuit of a strong and public demonstration of American support.
The decision to grant or withhold an Oval Office meeting to President Zelensky has profound consequences for the national security interests of both Ukraine and the United States.
To understand the full context of President Trump’s corrupt demands to the Ukrainian leader, it is important to consider the geopolitical context— that all of you are very familiar with— confronting the Ukrainian people.
The United States and other European countries rallied to Ukraine’s defense, providing economic assistance, diplomatic support, and later, with strong advocacy from this body, lethal aid.
Here is Ambassador Yovanovitch’s testimony explaining just how important the United States is to Ukraine.
The United States relationship for Ukraine is the single most important relationship, and so I think that President Zelensky, any president, would do what they could to lean in on a favor request.
I’m not saying that that’s a yes, I’m saying they would try to lean in and see what they could do.
I’m sure there are limits, and I understand there were a lot of discussions in the Ukrainian government about all of this, but yeah, we are an important relationship on the security side and on the political side.
And so, the president of Ukraine, one of the most important functions that individual has is to make sure the relationship with the United States is rock solid.
It was a public meeting in the White House that would show United States support for Ukraine.
A meeting with the President of the United States in the Oval Office is one of the most forceful diplomatic signals of support that the United States can send.
New leaders, particularly countries that are trying to have good footing in the international arena, see a meeting with the United States president in the Oval Office at the White House as the ultimate sign of endorsement and support from the United States.
To achieve both goals, he needed strong United States support, particularly from President Trump, which Zelensky sought in the form of a White House meeting.
David Holmes, political counselor to the Embassy in Kyiv, described the particular importance of a White House visit to Ukraine in the context of its war with Russia.
It is important to understand that a White House visit was critical to President Zelensky.
President Zelensky needed to show United States support at the highest levels in order to demonstrate to Russian President Putin that he had United States backing, as well as to advance his ambitious anticorruption agenda at home.
That was particularly true in the spring of 2019, when Donald Trump launched the scheme at the center of the abuse of power charge.
During this time period, Vladimir Putin was preparing for peace negotiations with the new Ukrainian leader.
Putin could choose to escalate or he could choose to deescalate Russian aggression.
And influencing his decision was an assessment of whether President Trump had Ukraine’s back.
An Oval Office meeting would have sent a strong signal of support that President Trump had Ukraine’s back.
Indeed, Ukraine made very clear to the United States just how important a White House meeting between the two heads of State was for its fragile democracy.
At the deposition, as the one on the screen reveals, LTC Alexander Vindman, the director for Ukraine on the National Security Council, recalled that following President Zelensky’s inauguration, at every single meeting with Ukrainian officials, they asked their American counterparts about the status of an Oval Office meeting between the two Presidents.
Initially, the Ukrainians had reason to be optimistic that a White House meeting would be promptly scheduled.
On April 21, during President Zelensky’s first call with President Trump, the new Ukrainian leader CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE asked about a White House visit three times.
As part of that brief congratulatory call, President Trump himself did extend an invitation.
Ukraine’s dependence on the United States and its desperate need for a White House meeting created an unequal power dynamic between the two Presidents.
As Lieutenant Colonel Vindman testified, it is that unequal power dynamic that turned any subsequent request for a favor from the President into a demand.
Colonel, you’ve described this as a demand, this favor that the President asked.
Chairman, the culture I come from, the military culture, when a senior asks you to do something, even if it’s polite and pleasant, it’s not—it’s not to be taken as a request, it’s to be taken as an order.
In this case, the power disparity between the two leaders, my impression is that, in order to get the White House meeting, President Zelensky would have to deliver these investigations.
Ambassador Gordon Sondland, Trump appointee, also acknowledged the importance of this power disparity and how it made President Zelensky eager to satisfy President Trump’s wishes.
And then you added that President Zelensky will do anything that you, meaning President Trump, ask him to.
I probably said something to that effect because I remember the meeting—the President—or President Zelensky was very—‘‘solicitous’” is not a good word.
He was just very willing to work with the United States and was being very amicable.
And so putting it in Trump speak by saying he loves your ass, he’ll do whatever you want, meant that he would really work with us on a whole host of issues.
Because Ukraine depends on the United States as its most significant ally.
In other words, any request President Trump made to Ukraine would be difficult to refuse.
So when President Trump asked Ukraine to investigate Joe Biden, as well as the wild conspiracy theory about the 2016 election, those were absolutely interpreted by President Zelensky and his staff as a demand.
When Ukraine did not immediately cave to Rudy Giuliani in the spring and announce the phony investigations, President Trump ratcheted up the presJanuary 23, 2020 sure.
As leverage, he chose the White House meeting he dangled during his April 21 call, precisely because President Trump knew how important the meeting was to Ukraine.
Following their visit to Kyiv for the new Ukrainian leader’s inauguration, Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker, and Secretary Perry met with President Trump, and each of them encouraged the President to schedule the meeting.
We advised the president of the strategic importance of Ukraine and the value of strengthening the relationship with President Zelensky.
First, a working phone call between Presidents Trump and Zelensky, and second, a working oval office visit.
In our view, both were vital to cementing the USUkraine relationship, demonstrating support for Ukraine in the face of Russian aggression and advancing broader United States foreign policy interests.
So even though this meeting was critical to both Ukraine and America, President Trump ignored all of his policy advisers and expressed reluctance to meet with the new Ukrainian President.
And even though on May 29 the President signed a letter reiterating his earlier invitation for President Zelensky to visit the White House, he still did not specify a date.
Ukrainian officials became concerned when President Trump scheduled that face-to-face meeting with Vladimir Putin at the G20 summit in Japan on June 28.
Mr Holmes testified on this particular point and the troubling signal that meeting sent to our friend, to our ally, Ukraine.
He met with Russian President Putin at the G20 Summit in Osaka, Japan, sending a further signal of lack of support to Ukraine.
Now, let’s discuss how exactly President Trump used the withholding of the White House meeting to pressure Ukraine for his phony investigations—his quid pro quo scheme.
It is important to understand that the pressure exerted on Ukraine by delaying the White House meeting didn’t just occur right before the July 25 call.
That pressure existed during the entire scheme, and it continues to this day.
We know this from the efforts of administration officials to secure the meeting and from the Ukrainians continuously trying to lock down a date.
January 23, 2020 For example, even after President Trump expressed reluctance about Ukraine on May 23, his administration officials continued working to secure a White House meeting.
On July 10, for instance, they raised it again when Mr Yermak and Ukraine’s national security advisor met with John Bolton at the White House.
And then we knew that the Ukrainians would have on their agenda, inevitably, the question about a meeting.
As we get through the main discussion, we are going into that wrap-up phase.
The Ukrainjians, Mr Danylyuk, starts to ask about a White House meeting and Ambassador Bolton was trying to parry this back.
As you have seen, President Zelensky didn’t just raise the Oval Office meeting on his April 21 call, he raised the meeting on the July 25 call with President Trump again.
After the July 25 call, the Ukrainians continued to press for the meeting, but that meeting never happened.
Only on September 25, after the House announced its investigation into the President’s misconduct as it relates to Ukraine and the existence of a whistleblower complaint became public, did President Trump and President Zelensky meet face-to-face for the first time.
It was dominated by public release of the July 25 call record that occurred the day before.
It was a far cry from the demonstration of strong support that would have been achieved by an Oval Office meeting.
Even President Zelensky recognized that a face-to-face talk on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly was not the same as an official Oval Office meeting.
You invited me, but I think—I’m sorry, but I think you forgot to tell me the date.
President Trump was not just withholding a small thing; the Oval Office meeting was a big deal.
As a result, the pressure on Ukraine not to upset President Trump—who still refuses to meet with President Zelensky in the Oval Office— continues to this day.
David Holmes testified that the Ukrainian Government wants an Oval Office meeting even after the release of the security assistance and that our own United States national security objectives would also benefit from such a meeting.
And although the hold on the security assistance may have been lifted, there were still things they wanted that they weren’t getting, including a meeting with the President in the Oval Office.
Whether the hold, the security assistance hold continued or not, the Ukrainians understood that that’s something the President wanted and they still wanted important things from the President.
In fact, right now President Zelensky is trying to arrange a summit meeting with President Putin in the coming weeks, his first face-to-face meeting with him to try to advance the peace process.
He needs President Putin to understand that America supports Zelensky at the highest levels.
Ukraine still needs us, and as I said, still fighting this war this very day.
Let’s evaluate exactly how President Trump made clear to Ukraine that a White House meeting was conditioned on Ukraine announcing two phony political investigations that would help with President Trump’s reelection in 2020—help him cheat and corrupt our democracy.
By the end of May, it was clear that President Trump’s pressure campaign to solicit foreign election interference wasn’t working.
President Zelensky had been elected and was rebuffing Mr Giuliani’s overtures.
Even when President Trump directed his official staff to work with Mr Giuliani in an effort to get President Zelensky to announce the two phony political investigations, that didn’t work.
So President Trump apparently realized that he had to increase the pressure.
That is when he explicitly made clear to Ukraine that it would not get the desperately sought after Oval Office meeting unless President Zelensky publicly announced the phony investigations that President Trump sought.
On July 2, 2019, Ambassador Volker personally communicated the need for investigations directly to President Zelensky during a meeting in Toronto.
After weeks of reassuring the Ukrainians that it was just a scheduling issue, I decided to tell President Zelensky that we had a problem with the information reaching President Trump from Mayor Giuliani.
I did so in a bilateral meeting at a conference on Ukrainian economic reform in Toronto on July 2, 2019, where I led the United States delegation.
I suggested that he call President Trump directly in order to renew their personal relationship and to assure President Trump that he was committed to investigating and fighting corruption, things on which President Zelensky had based his Presidential campaign.
I was convinced that getting the two Presidents to talk with each other would overcome the negative perception of Ukraine that President Trump still harbored.
After Ambassador Volker instructed President Zelensky in Toronto on what to do, he updated Ambassador Taylor on his actions.
In addition to Ambassador Volker’s direct outreach to President Zelensky, Ambassador Sondland continued to apply pressure as well during two White House meetings that took place on July 10 with Ukrainian officials.
Fiona Hill, LTC Alexander Vindman, Secretary Rick Perry, Ambassador Volker, as well as Bolton’s Ukrainian counterpart and Ukrainian Presidential aide Andriy Yermak.
After discussion on Ukraine’s national security reform plans, Ambassador Sondland broached the subject of the phony political investigations.
Ambassador Volker also recalled that Ambassador Sondland raised the issue of the 2016 election and Burisma investigations.
Ambassador Volker found Ambassador Sondland’s comments in that meeting to be inappropriate.
I participated in the July 10 meeting between National Security Advisor Bolton and then-Chairman of the National Security Defense Council, Alex Danyliuk.
As I remember, the meeting was essentially over when Ambassador Sondland made a general comment about investigations.
The exchange underscores that by early July, President Trump’s demand for investigations had come to totally dominate almost every aspect of United States foreign policy toward Ukraine.
Securing a Ukrainian commitment to do investigations was a major priority of senior United States diplomats, as directed by President Donald John Trump.
The July 10 meetings also confirmed that the scheme to pressure Ukraine into opening investigations was not a rogue operation but one blessed by senior administration officials at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.
Mr Majority Leader, based on the statement that we should break at around 6:30m., I ask your indulgence.
This may be a natural breaking point in connection with my presentation.
Mr Chief Justice, I ask unanimous consent that we have a break for 30 minutes.
Mr Chief Justice, after consulting with Congressman ScHIFF, it looks like roughly 10:30 tonight.
Mr Chief Justice, distinguished Members of the Senate, counsel to the President, my colleagues, the American people, the second official act that President Trump used to corruptly abuse his power was the withholding of an Oval Office meeting with the President of Ukraine.
Before we took the break, we started walking through the overwhelming evidence about how President Trump withheld this official White House meeting that was vitally important to Ukraine as part of a corrupt scheme to convince President Zelensky to announce two phony political investigations.
These investigations were entirely unrelated to any official United States policy and solely benefited President Trump.
We talked about why withholding the meeting was so significant to our ally Ukraine.
Ukraine is a fragile democracy, under relentless attack from Russian-backed separatists in the east.
Because of this vast power disparity, President Trump had immense power over Ukraine, and President Trump knew it.
So when President Trump asked for a favor on a July 25 call, he knew that President Zelensky would feel incredible pressure to do exactly what President Trump wanted.
President Trump used his agents— both his administration appointees and his personal attorney, Rudolph Giuliani—to make clear to Ukraine, even in early July, that the muchneeded White House meeting they requested would only occur if they announced these phony political investigations.
That includes Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, and Secretary of Energy Rick Perry.
Even ahead of the July 25 call, Ambassador Sondland was in close, repeated contact with these officials.
Schedule a telephone conversation during which the new Ukrainian leader would personally commit to do the phony investigations sought by President Trump in order to unlock a meeting in the Oval Office— this for that, a quid pro quo.
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE On July 18, for example, Ambassador Sondland emailed National Security Council official Timothy Morrison and made the case for President Trump to call the Ukrainian leader prior to the parliamentary elections scheduled for July 21.
In that email, as the highlighted text shows, Ambassador Sondland said the ‘‘sole purpose’’ of the call was to assure President Trump that investigations would be allowed to move forward.
In other words, to get the Oval Office meeting, President Zelensky had to move forward on the phony political investigations, part of the scheme to cheat in the 2020 Presidential campaign—this for that.
On July 19, Ambassador Sondland spoke directly with President Zelensky.
He spoke directly with President Zelensky to prepare him for a call with President Trump.
Ambassador Sondland coached President Zelensky to use key phrases and reassure President Trump of Ukraine’s intention to bend to President Trump’s will with respect to the phony investigations that President Trump sought.
Ambassador Sondland told Kurt Volker that he gave the Ukrainian leader ‘‘a full briefing.
That same day, Ambassador Sondland emailed top administration officials, including Acting Chief of Staff Mulvaney, Secretary Pompeo, and Secretary Perry, to summarize his conversation with Zelensky.
In that email, Ambassador Sondland said Zelensky is ‘‘prepared to _ receive POTUS’ call.
Both Acting Chief of Staff Mulvaney and Secretary Perry responded to the email, noting that the head-of-state call would be scheduled.
Neither Mulvaney nor _ Secretary Perry took issue with the fact that Sondland coached Zelensky to yield to President Trump’s pressure campaign, but instead they took steps to connect the two leaders.
They were aware that during the July 20 call, President Trump intended to solicit foreign interference in the 2020 election and pressed the Ukrainian leader to announce investigations into former Vice President Biden and the CrowdStrike conspiracy theory.
There was no focus on advancing America’s foreign policy or national security objectives.
The only priority was President Trump’s corrupt demand for phony investigations in exchange for an Oval Office meeting—this for that.
Everyone was informed via email on July 19th, days before the Presidential call.
As I communicated to the team, I told President Zelensky in advance that assurances to run a fully transparent investigation and turn over every stone were necessary in his call with President Trump.
Now, we come to July 25, the morning of the infamous phone call—the culmination of a monthslong campaign to engineer a corrupt quid pro quo.
That morning, before the call took place, President Trump provided guidance to Sondland.
On the morning of July 25, he told him that President Zelensky should be prepared to announce the investigations in exchange for the White House meeting.
After Sondland’s call with President Trump on the morning of July 25, Sondland urgently tried to reach Kurt Volker.
When he could not reach Ambassador Volker by phone, he sent a text that said, ‘‘Call ASAP,’’ and he left a message.
That refers to the Russian-inspired fake, phony, and false conspiracy theory about Ukraine having been involved in interfering in our 2016 elections.
Ambassador Volker then conveyed that message approximately 30 minutes before the Trump-Zelensky call to Zelensky’s top aide, Andrey Yermak.
AS you can see on the slide, Ambassador Volker texts Yermak, Zelensky’s guy, and says, ‘‘assuming President Z convinces Trump he will investigate/ ‘get to the bottom of what happened’ in 2016,” the White House meeting would get scheduled—this for that.
Volker talks to President Zelensky’s aide Yermak, and then the July 25 call occurs.
Kurt Volker sent this text message to January 23, 2020 Andriy Yermak to prepare’ President Zelensky, and then President Trump had a phone call where President Zelensky spoke very similar to what was in this text message.
Indeed, on the July 25 call when President Trump asked for a favor, President Zelensky was ready with the magic words.
On the other hand, I want to ensure you that we will be very serious about the case and will work on the investigation.
We have read the transcript, and it is damning evidence of a corrupt quid pro quo.
During our presentation, we walked through the serious issues presented in the plain reading of the July 25 call, but now you can see the entire content of how this corrupt parade of horribles unfolded.
The quid pro quo was discussed in text messages, emails, voicemails, calls, and meetings amongst top administration officials and top Ukrainian officials.
Before that fateful call on July 25, President Zelensky understood exactly what needed to be done—a quid pro quo.
The evidence of President Trump’s grave misconduct does not end with that July 25 call.
From that point onward, President Zelensky was on notice that it was President Trump himself who demanded those two phony political investigations.
After the July 25 call, the Ukrainians followed up with President Trump’s direction and began to coordinate with Rudolph Giuliani, the President’s political bagman.
Acting on the President’s orders, United States diplomats, including Ambassador Sondland and Ambassador Volker, worked with Mr Giuliani to continue pressuring Ukraine to announce the phony investigations that President Trump sought in exchange for that Oval Office meeting.
Over the next 2 weeks, Mr Giuliani directed Ambassadors Sondland and Volker to negotiate a public statement for President Zelensky announcing the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE investigations that President Trump corruptly demanded.
Mr Giuliani conveyed to Secretary Perry, Ambassador Volker and others that President Trump wanted a public statement from President Zelensky committing to investigations of Burisma and the 2016 election.
Mr Giuliani expressed those requests directly to the Ukrainians and Mr Giuliani also expressed those requests directly to us.
We all understood that these prerequisites for the White House call and the White House meeting reflected President Trump’s desires and requirements.
In mid-August it became clear to me that Giuliani’s efforts to gin up politically-motivated investigations were now infecting United States engagement with Ukraine, leveraging President Zelensky’s desire for a White House meeting.
In short, United States diplomats responsible for Ukraine policy understood that Giuliani had de facto control over whether the Oval Office meeting would be scheduled and under what circumstances.
Mr Giuliani had been given that level of authority by President Trump, and it was infecting official United States policy toward Ukraine.
To shake loose the White House meeting, top Ukrainian officials knew that they had to meet with Mr Giuliani, who John Bolton described as a human hand grenade who was going to blow everybody up.
So, on August 2, Mr Giuliani met with Mr Yermak, President Zelensky’s top aide, in Madrid—Giuliani, in Madrid, meeting with Zelensky’s top aide on August 2.
Mr Giuliani made clear in that meeting that President Trump needed more private assurances that Ukraine would pursue the investigations.
According to Ambassador Sondland— and this is very important—President Trump did not require that Ukraine actually conduct the investigations in order to secure that White House meeting.
The Ukrainian Government only needed to announce the investigations because they were phony and they were simply designed to cheat in the 2020 election, solicit foreign interference, and corrupt our democracy—to the benefit of President Trump.
So the goal was not the investigations themselves but the corrupt political benefit President Trump would receive as a result of these announcements.
He also wanted to shake ‘‘this Russia thing’’ and instead blame Ukraine with the fairytale that Ukraine interfered in the 2016 election.
The facts didn’t matter for President Trump; he only cared about the personal political benefit of these S515 sought-after investigative announcements.
Over the next few weeks, Ambassadors Sondland and Volker worked with Mr Yermak to draft a public statement for President Zelensky to issue.
Ambassador Volker was also in frequent contact with Rudy Giuliani regarding the content of that statement.
He was working in the political personal interests of President Trump, interacting with Ukrainian officials.
On August 9, Ambassador Volker texted Mr Giuliani and requested a call to update him on the progress of the negotiations for the statement and discuss the content of what it should include.
Later that afternoon, Ambassador Sondland suggested to Ambassador Volker that they obtain a draft statement from the Ukrainian Government “to avoid misunderstandings”’ or, in other words, make sure that President Trump’s political objectives were met.
Ambassador Sondland also reiterated that President Trump would not be satisfied by a vague statement.
The Ukrainian leader needed to commit to the phony investigations in explicit terms in order to secure the soughtafter Oval Office meeting—this for that.
Call records subpoenaed by the House show multiple communications between Ambassador Sondland and Mr Giuliani on the one hand and numbers associated with the Office of Management and Budget and the White House on the other.
On August 8, around the time of direct communications between Mr Giuliani and Mr Yermak, Mr Giuliani communicated repeatedly with the White House, sending or receiving six text messages and completing several calls.
Most notably, late in the evening on August 8, Mr Giuliani called the White House in a highly distinctive pattern.
Two minutes later, Mr Giuliani attempted to return the call, trying an Office of Management and Budget number, then the White House Situation Room, and then the White House switchboard.
At 10:28, 16 minutes after Mr Giuliani tried to call the White House back, frantically—Situation Room, Office of Management and _ Budget, switchboard—16 minutes after Mr S516 Giuliani tried to call the White House back, Giuliani and the -1 number connected for 4 minutes 6 seconds.
We do not know who was on the other end of that mysterious call with the -1.
President Trump refused to produce documents and ordered key witnesses not to testify, hiding part of the truth from the American people.
But we do know that Rudolph Giuliani frantically called the White House late into the night.
We do know that he talked to someone at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, and we know that Mr Giuliani likely talked about the drug deal that John Bolton characterized.
Over the next few days, President Zelensky’s aide, Mr Yermak, exchanged drafts of the public statement with Ambassadors Volker and Sondland, who consulted on _ these drafts with Mr Giuliani.
They agreed to Mr Giuliani’s specific language about the phony political investigations in exchange for the Oval Office meeting.
On August 10, Yermak texted Volker that the Ukrainians were willing to make the requested statements but only if they received a date for the White House meeting first.
He later wrote that the statement would come out ‘‘after we ‘receive a confirmation of date’ for the White House visit.
They would iron out the statement in private, use that to get the date for the meeting in the Oval Office, and then President Zelensky would make the public statement—this for that.
Two days later, Mr Yermak sent the draft statement, but the statement did not reference Burisma or the 2016 election.
They sought a call with Rudolph Giuliani to see if the statement would suffice.
They needed to check in with Mr Giuliani, who was leading the charge to lock down the corrupt quid pro quo.
This is the first draft of that from Mr Yermak after the conversations that we had.
And you testified in your deposition that you and Ambassador CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE Sondland and Mayor Giuliani had a conversation about this draft after you received it.
And Mr Giuliani said that if the statement did not include Burisma and 2016 election, it would not have any credibility.
Mr Giuliani, acting on behalf of President Trump, made clear that the statement from the Ukrainians had to target Vice President Biden—for reasons outlined earlier today—and it had to mention the conspiracy theory about Ukraine interfering in the 2016 election.
After Mr Giuliani conveyed this on the telephone call, Ambassadors Volker and Sondland texted Mr Yermak and requested a call to convey that message.
Now, Ambassador Volker made clear to Mr Yermak that the statement needed the two key items Mr Giuliani required for the President.
It is about the need for us here in this great Chamber to have a fair trial with witnesses and January 23, 2020 evidence.
Perhaps, above all, it is about liberty, because in America, for all of us, what keeps us free from tyranny is the sacred principle that in this great country no one is above the law.
You also saw inescapable documentary proof that clearly proves a corrupt quid pro quo.
It comes in many forms, from many individuals who are lifelong public servants with no motivation to lie.
Given how much we have gone through, let’s review some of those career public servants’ testimony, who state clearly that they too believed it was a quid pro quo—a this for that—because it is really powerful to hear directly from them.
By mid-July, it was becoming clear to me that the meeting President Zelensky wanted was conditioned on the investigations of Burisma, and alleged Ukrainian interference and the 2016 United States elections.
It was also clear that this condition was driven by the irregular policy channel I had come to understand was guided by Mr Giuliani.
We know this too because Ambassador Sondland said so at the July 10 meeting.
Fiona Hill described the scene in Ambassador Bolton’s office, where the quid pro quo was made clear.
Ukrainian Mr Danylyuk starts to ask about a White House meeting, and Ambassador Bolton was trying to parry this back.
Although he’s the National Security Advisor, he’s not in charge of scheduling the meeting.
We have input recommending the meetings, and this goes through a whole process.
And he does not as a matter of course like to discuss the details of these meetings, he likes to leave them to, you know, the appropriate staff for this.
I was sitting behind him in the chair, and I saw him sit back slightly like this.
And, for me, that was an unmistakable body language, and it caught my attention.
And then he looked up to the clock and, you know, at his watch, or at his wrist in any case.
Again, I am sitting behind him . . and basically said, ‘‘Well, you know, it’s been really great to see you.
Hill’s recollection of the July 10 meeting, and that it was made clear that the deal for the White House meeting was investigations.
I want to move now to that July 10th meeting that you referenced, Colonel Vindman.
As I recall, he referred to specific investigations that the Ukrainjians would have to deliver in order to get these meetings.
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman, firsthand knowledge—they would have to deliver in order to get these meetings.
It was also clear that this wasn’t about general investigations about corruption.
Ambassador Sondland directed everyone—including the Ukrainian officials—_to reconvene in the Ward Room, where he discussed the arrangement he had reached with Mr Mulvaney in more detail.
He made clear that it was about specific investigations that would benefit President Trump personally.
Here is Lieutenant Colonel Vindman testifying, where he explains that Ambassador Sondland referred to the Bidens, Burisma, and the 2016 election, which had nothing to do with national security policy.
Ambassador Sondland referred to investigations into the Bidens, Burisma, and 2016.
I said that this request to conduct these meetings was inappropriate—these investigations was inappropriate and had nothing to do with national security policy.
President Trump’s scheme was for his personal Colonel CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE interest, not national security.
And so when I came in, Gordon Sondland was basically saying, well, look, we have a deal here that there will be a meeting.
There will be a meeting if the Ukrainians open up or announce these investigations into 2016 in Burisma.
Because by this point, having heard Mr Giuliani over and over again on the television and all of the issues that he was asserting, by this point it was clear that Burisma was code for the Bidens, because Giuliani was laying it out there.
And what’s more, as Ambassador Sondland told us, everyone was in the loop— meaning, it became clear that President Trump was directing this.
Hill, who at one point confronted Gordon Sondland over this arrangement, further reached the conclusion that he was acting on the President’s orders and coordinating with other senior officials.
So, I was upset with him that he wasn’t fully telling us about all of the meetings that he was having.
And the point is we have a robust interagency process that deals with Ukraine.
It includes Mr Holmes, it includes Ambassador Taylor as, the Charge in Ukraine, it includes a whole load of other people.
But it struck me when yesterday, when you put up on the screen Ambassador Sondland’s emails and who was on these emails and he said, these the people who need to know, that he was absolutely right.
Because he was being involved in a domestic political errand, and we were being involved in national security foreign policy.
The White House meeting would only be scheduled if Ukraine announced the investigations that everyone, including the Ukrainians, understood to be purely political efforts to benefit the President.
The only way to come to a different conclusion is to ignore the evidence.
One additional way you can tell that this conduct is truly corrupt, and not United States foreign policy as usual, is that these officials—these lifetime, career public servants—didn’t just testify S517 about this in impeachment proceedings.
Their reactions illustrate that this was not the kind of thing that both parties do when they have the White House.
This was something different, something corrupt, something ‘‘insidious,’’ to use Ambassador Sondland’s characterization in later testimony.
The officials who instinctively recoiled from the corrupt deal that Sondland blurted out were distinguished patriotic public servants.
After the July 10 meeting we just talked about, where Ambassador Sondland made clear the agreement that the White House meetings were conditioned on the investigations, Dr.
Ambassador Bolton gave her, as she put it, a ‘“‘very specific instruction’’ to report this conduct in realtime, and she did.
The specific instruction was that I had to go to the lawyers, to John Hisenberg, our senior counsel for the National Security Council, to basically say, you tell Eisenberg, Ambassador Bolton told me, that I am not part of this whatever drug deal that Mulvaney and Sondland are cooking up.
Hill’s recounting, after both the July 10 meeting and the July 25 call, Lieutenant Colonel Vindman reported what he had learned through the lawyers.
When Vindman said he reported this conduct, again, ‘‘because that was my duty,” he acted as he did out of a sense of duty and as a Purple Heart veteran, with confidence that in America he would be protected for doing the right thing even if it angered the President of the United States.
His father, who fled the Soviet Union to come to this country, worried about his son fulfilling that duty.
Dad, my sitting here today in the United States Capitol talking to our elected officials is proof that you made the right decision 40 years ago to leave the Soviet Union to come here to the United States S518 of America in search of a better life for our family.
And I’m struck by the word ... that phrase, ‘‘do not worry,’ you addressed to your dad.
He deeply worried about it because in his context it was the ultimate risk.
This is the country I’ve served and defended, that all of my brothers have served, and here right matters.
President Trump has suggested that all of the witnesses are Never Trumpers.
As we just saw, these United States officials are brave public servants.
It is wrong—just flat wrong—to suggest they were doing anything other than testifying out of a sense of duty, as Lieutenant Colonel Vindman testified.
But it wasn’t just United States officials whose reactions show us that this was wrong; it is also clear how corrupt this scheme was because Ukraine resisted it.
But once I arrived in Kyiv, I discovered a weird combination of encouraging, confusing, and ultimately alarming circumstances.
He appointed reformist ministers and supported long-stalled anti-corruption legislation.
He took quick executive action, including opening Ukraine’s High Anti-Corruption Court.
With a new parliamentary majority stemming from snap elections, President Zelensky changed the Ukraine Constitution to remove absolute immunity from Rada deputies, the source of raw corruption for two decades.
This time could be different, a new Ukraine finally breaking from its corrupt, post-Soviet past.
So we know that President Zelensky was a reformer, fighting corruption, fighting for reform, and he got started early, as soon as he was sworn in.
We know that President Zelensky’s agenda was in our United States national interest.
In fact, every witness testified that President Zelensky deserved America’s support CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE and that they told President Trump that.
So keeping that in mind, it is extremely telling what President Zelensky and his aides were saying behind closed doors.
They recognized the political peril of going along with the President’s corrupt scheme.
We know that was the case for many reasons, but let’s look at some of the evidence showing that now.
First, the Ukrainians made their concerns clear directly to United States officials.
On July 20, just days ahead of the July 25 call, Ambassador Taylor spoke with President Zelensky’s national security advisor.
Mr Danyliuk understood that these investigations were pursuant to Mr Giuliani’s request to develop information, to find information about Burisma and the Bidens.
Mr Giuliani made this point clear in several instances in the beginning—in the springtime.
Mr Danyliuk indicated that President Zelensky certainly understood it, that he did not want to get involved in these type of activities.
Instead, Ambassador Sondland reinforced the importance that President Zelensky reassure President Trump of his commitment to investigations.
The ‘‘pretext’’ that Ambassador Sondland referred to was President Trump’s requirement that Ukraine announce investigations that would benefit him personally and politically.
Yermak was very uncomfortable when this was raised with him, and suggested that if that were the case, if that were really the position of the United States, it should be done officially and put in writing.
Normally, if something is actually about official United States policy, the President would go through official United States channels, but, as we have seen here, he didn’t.
His personal attorney made this—this wasn’t about foreign policy; it was something that would benefit President Trump personally.
There was undisputed testimony that the investigations were not part of United States policy.
In fact, they diverged with the United States national security and our Nation’s values.
The Department of Justice has made this crystal clear in public statements.
There has never been an official asked officially to do any of these investigations.
Even Ukraine, a_ struggling, new country, knew this was wrong, and they stood up to President Trump and said no.
Show us you are willing to stand behind the legitimacy of what you are asking.
President Trump’s political investigations, which were solely to help his reelection and had nothing to do with foreign policy.
President Zelensky tried in different ways to resist the pressure of becoming January 23, 2020 a “pawn’’ in United States politics.
Even though the Oval Office meeting was important, Zelensky repeatedly tried to find a way around committing to the investigations that President Trump _ demanded—or at the very least, schedule it before taking any official action.
This is what you saw in the negotiation over the statement in August, and this is why even President Trump’s second official act—withholding the White House meeting—was not enough to make Ukraine do his dirty work.
Senators, we are coming to the end of a section of the presentation regarding the withholding of the White House meeting.
So I want to just quickly remind us one last time about the central points that we have covered.
President Trump conditioned that Oval Office meeting on Ukraine’s announcing investigations that would help him politically.
President Trump directed United States officials who were supposed to work for the American people to work, instead, with his personal agent, Rudy Giuliani, and focus only on his personal political interests.
Acting on behalf of the President and with the President’s full knowledge, Mr Giuliani worked with those United States officials to carry out the President’s scheme.
They pressured the Ukrainian Government to act as a personal opposition research firm for President Trump.
They tried to use a foreign government to dig up dirt on his client’s rival, former Vice President Biden, an American citizen—all so President Trump could win his election.
Remember that an abuse of power occurs when a President corruptly exercises official power to obtain a personal benefit in a way that ignores or injures the national interest.
By withholding a White House meeting, President Trump used official power to corruptly pressure Ukraine.
Indeed, the entire quid pro quo—the ‘‘this for that’’—the entire campaign to use the Oval Office meeting as some kind of asset for the President’s reelection campaign—was corrupt.
I think, deep down, we all know it, and I think the American people know it.
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE If any other public official did that, he or she would be held accountable.
The only way to hold this President accountable is right here in this trial.
Otherwise, you would be telling Ukraine and the world that it is OK for the President to use our Oval Office and this country’s prestige and power for himself instead of for the American people.
If we allow this gross abuse of power to continue, this President will have free rein to abuse his control of United States foreign policy for personal interests and so would any other future President.
A President could take the powers of the greatest office in this land and use those powers not for the country, not for the American people but for him or herself.
I ask you to make sure this does not happen because, in this country, no one—no one—is above the law.
In the morning, there will be a coronavirus briefing for all Members at 10:30.
Chief Justice Roberts, Senators, and counsel for the President, we have now been through the first two official acts by the President.
But neither of those official acts got the President what he wanted—help in his reelection campaign.
So he turned to another official act to turn up the pressure even more— withholding nearly $400 million of vital military assistance to Ukraine in exchange for the investigations.
Withholding military assistance to Ukraine made the original abuse of power, soliciting foreign interference in our elections, that much worse.
The Government Accountability Office, a nonpartisan, independent agency, concluded that President Trump’s hold on the security assistance clearly violated the Empowerment Control Act, a law that Congress enacted to curb President Nixon’s own abuse of power.
President Trump may not like it, but once a law is passed, the President cannot change that law without coming back to us, the Congress.
S519 And President Trump did not just break the law, he jeopardized our national security, because Ukraine’s national security is our national security.
Because a free and democratic Ukraine is a shield against Russian aggression in Europe.
Let us now explain how President Trump’s improper withholding of military assistance was clearly done to pressure Ukraine to announce the two baseless investigations—a gross abuse of power.
First, we will briefly describe how important the military aid was to Ukraine’s defense against Russian aggression, which affects our security.
Second, we will explain how President Trump used the power of his office to freeze military aid to Ukraine in a way meant to conceal it from Congress.
Let us start with the importance of the aid to our—the United States’—national security.
The United States has supported Ukraine since it secured independence from the Soviet Union in 1991.
Our support was critical to convince Ukraine to forgo its pursuit of a nuclear arsenal in 1994.
But our support became truly vital in 2014, when Ukraine revolted against its Russian-friendly President, Viktor Yanukovych.
Ukrainian citizens rose up in protest, demanding democratic reforms and an end to corruption.
The protests, rightly known as the Revolution of Dignity, removed the pro-Kremlin President.
Russia responded by using its own military forces and proxies in Ukraine to invade Ukraine.
Approximately 7 percent of Ukraine’s territory is now occupied by Russia.
Approximately 15,000 people have been killed as a result of the conflict, and over 1. million people have been displaced.
In response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the United States and our allies imposed sanctions on Russian individuals and entities and agreed to provide billions of dollars in assistance to support Ukrainian sovereignty and democratic development.
We understood immediately, Democrats and Republicans alike, that Ukraine’s safety and security was directly tied to our safety and security.
With this all in mind, since 2014, the United States has delivered roughly $1. billion in security assistance and another $1. billion in other assistance S520 to our ally Ukraine.
Our allies in Europe have provided approximately $18 billion in loans and grants since 2014.
AS we have explained, the United States assistance comes partially from the Department of Defense, which provides important military support.
It comes partially from the State Department, which helps Ukraine purchase military services or equipment manufactured by American companies in the United States.
Ambassador Taylor explained how security assistance counters Russian aggression and can help shorten the war in the east.
These weapons and this assistance allows the Ukrainian military to deter further incursions by the Russians against Ukrainian territory.
If that further incursion, further aggression, were to take place, more Ukrainians would die.
It’s also the ability—it gives the Ukrainians the ability to negotiate from a position of a little more strength when they negotiate an end to the war in Donbas, negotiating with the Russians.
This also is a way that would reduce the numbers of Ukrainians who would die.
To release all of the funds, DOD, in coordination with the State Department, must conduct a review and certify to Congress that Ukraine has done enough to fight corruption.
President Trump may argue that the conditions imposed by Congress are similar to the hold he placed on aid to Ukraine.
These types of conditions, which are often included in appropriations bills, are designed to promote official United States policy, not the policy of one individual or one President.
This is exactly the type of permissible condition on aid that Vice President Biden was implementing when he required that Ukraine fire its corrupt prosecutor general before getting a loan guarantee.
Prior to 2019, the Trump administration provided security assistance to Ukraine without incident.
Even under the previous Ukrainian administration of President Petro Poroshenko—which suffered from serious corruption— President Trump allowed $510 million in 2017 and $359 million in 2018 to flow unimpeded to Ukraine.
But in the summer of 2019, without any explanation, President Trump abruptly withheld the security assistance for Ukraine.
The Department of Defense had certified that Ukraine was meeting the required anti-corruption reforms.
In CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE fact, DOD had begun to spend the funds.
Second, the Mueller investigation concluded that Russia interfered in the 2016 United States elections to assist the Trump campaign and that the Trump campaign had extensive contacts with Russians and even took advantage of some of the Russian efforts.
The evidence shows that the only reason—the only logical reason, and we deal in what is reasonable—President Trump withheld the aid was to undermine these threats to his political future.
As we have discussed, security assistance to Ukraine has broad bipartisan support from Congress, as well as every agency within the President’s own administration.
Witness testimony revealed that this money was 10 percent of Ukraine’s defense budget—10 percent.
Now imagine if President Trump just decided without cause or explanation to hold 10 percent of our own defense budget.
Keep in mind, too, that President Trump had to sign the bill into law, which he did in September of 2018.
At no time—at no time—through the congressional debate or passage of the bill did the White House express any concerns about the funding or the program itself.
It shows President Trump signs the bill authorizing aid to Ukraine for fiscal year 2019.
On June 18, President Trump’s own Department of Defense certified that Ukraine had met all of the anti-corruption requirements necessary to receive aid.
The Department of Defense announced that the money was on its way, just as we, the United States of America, had promised.
So let us make certain that America continues to live up to its promise.
Mr Chief Justice and Senators, thank you so much for the attention that you have given to our presentation throughout this day.
You are here without your cell phones or any access to other information.
It is not easy, but you are paying attention, and the country and the managers thank you for that.
We have just gone through the importance of security assistance to Ukraine to our national security and the clear consensus among Congress, the Executive, and the President’s agencies and advisers that the aid should be released to Ukraine.
In fact, January 23, 2020 by June 18, after having certified that Ukraine had met all the anti-corruption reform requirements to receive the aid, DOD announced its intention to provide the $250 million in security assistance to Ukraine.
Soon after that June 18 press release, President Trump quickly moved to stop the aid from flowing.
He did this with no explanation, against the clear consensus of his advisers and his agencies, and against our Nation’s security interests.
He was so determined to do it in order to pressure Ukraine to do his political dirty work that he was willing to violate the law, something his own officials were well aware of and worried about.
The hold on security assistance to Ukraine was a unilateral official act by the President.
Immediately after the DOD’s June 18 press release announcing the $250 million in security assistance funds for Ukraine, President Trump started asking questions about the funding program.
Laura Cooper from DOD and Mark Sandy from OMB testified about this sudden interest in Ukraine security assistance, something that Cooper called unusual.
We, of course, have received no documents from OMB and DOD because of the President’s obstruction.
We don’t know, but thanks to Freedom of Information Act lawsuits and hard-working reporters, we know a little from the documents that we do have.
For instance, we know that the day after the DOD press release, the President asked for information about the Ukraine aid.
The President has asked about this funding release, and I have been tasked to follow-up with someone over there to get more detail.
It seems that on June 19, Robert Blair, Mick Mulvaney’s deputy, called Acting OMB Director Russell Vought to discuss Ukraine’s security assistance.
The hold was actually directed impulsively without any policy or agency review as soon as President Trump learned about it from a press release.
We know what was on the President’s mind about Ukraine that day because President Trump gave a phone interview with Sean Hannity on FOX News.
During the interview, he mentioned the so-called CrowdStrike conspiracy theory that blames Ukraine rather than January 23, 2020 Russia for interfering in the 2016 election.
Remember, President Trump raised the CrowdStrike theory a month later during his July 25 call with President Zelensky.
Of course—and this has been said many times—that theory has been completely refuted by United States intelligence agencies, as well as the President’s own handpicked senior advisers.
Blair, who previously worked for Congress, knew that Congress would be “unhinged’’ because there was overwhelming bipartisan support for Ukraine.
DOD had already told Congress and the world that it was going to spend the $250 million on Ukraine security assistance, and it had already started to do so.
Mark Sandy, the senior career official at OMB responsible for this type of aid, couldn’t recall any other time in his 12-year career at OMB when a hold was placed on security assistance after a congressional notification was made.
Later, if the President’s counsel starts listing other times that aid has been held, ask yourself three questions.
There was nothing new or important in Ukraine to disrupt the aid—just that a true anti-corruption reformer was elected.
From freedom of information releases and press reports, we know about just a few of the many documents being hidden from you about how the hold began.
If he had a legitimate executive privilege claim, he could follow the rules and make each claim.
Jennifer Williams, special adviser to Vice President PENCE for Europe, learned about the hold on July 3.
She said it came ‘“‘out of the blue”’ and hadn’t previously been discussed by OMB or the National Security Council.
The hold was never discussed with any policy experts in any of the relevant agencies.
President Trump ordered a hold on congressionally appropriated funds without the benefit of any interagency deliberation, consultation, or advice.
The evidence shows the President’s hold was an impulsive decision unrelated to any American policy.
This is according to Sandy, the career officer at OMB who got a copy of the email.
Now, we don’t have a copy of the email because of the President’s obstruction, but here is what we do know from Mr Sandy’s description of the email, as well as testimony from other witnesses.
We do know it was not the result of a policy debate about what was best for America.
Instead he said ‘‘we need to let the hold take place’ and then ‘‘revisit’’ the issue with the President.
Blair either didn’t know the reason or wouldn’t share the real reason because it was corrupt.
It sure would be nice to know what Blair knew about the reason for the hold and what Duffey knew.
Now, we had hoped, as we said, that the Senate would authorize subpoenas before our arguments were made.
But we know that you will have another opportunity to call witnesses, to require documents, and we hope that your decision will be informed by the arguments we are making to you over these days and that you will, in fact, get the full story.
Well, we do know actually the reason why the President did what he did.
It wasn’t because of any policy reason to benefit America or any concern about corruption in Ukraine or any desire for more burden-sharing from other countries.
It was because the President was upset that Ukraine was not announcing the investigations that he wanted because he wanted to ramp up pressure to force them to do it.
From the very beginning, it was clear the hold was not in America’s national interest.
Support for the aid and against the hold was unanimous, forceful, and unwavering.
The President can call Ukraine policy experts ‘‘unelected bureaucrats’’ all he wants, but those are officers charged with implementing his official policy developed by the President himself, $521 which was also a product of congressional action.
President Trump’s own politically appointed senior officials—his Cabinet members—also opposed the hold.
But the President wasn’t persuaded by arguments about national interest.
The demand for Ukraine to announce these investigations was not a policy decision but a personal decision by the President to benefit his own personal interest.
At an NSC-led meeting on July 8, OMB announced that President Trump had directed a hold on Ukraine security assistance.
Ambassador Taylor testified that he and others on the call ‘‘sat in astonishment’’ when they learned about the hold.
Since there was unanimity about this security assistance to Ukraine, it was in our national interest, it just surprised all of us.
With the exception of OMB, which was following the direction of the President, everyone supported lifting the hold.
He provided no credible explanation for it—not from the day the hold was made until the day it was lifted.
Witness after witness—including Hale, Vindman, Croft, Holmes, Kent, Cooper, Sandy—testified they weren’t S522 given any reason for the hold while it was in place.
Even as OMB was implementing the hold, officers in OMB were saying it should be lifted.
Mr Sandy testified that his team drafted a memo on August 7 to OMB Acting Director Russ Vought.
It recommended lifting the hold because of, one, the assistance was consistent with national security to support a stable, peaceful Europe; two, the aid countered Russian aggression; and three, there was bipartisan support for the program.
Michael Duffey, the senior political appointee overseeing funds, approved the memorandum.
Senior advisers in the administration tried over and over again to convince President Trump to lift the hold over the summer.
Sometime prior to August 16, Ambassador Bolton had a one-on-one meeting with President Trump about the aid.
Then, at the end of August, when the hold on the aid became public, Ambassador Taylor expressed to multiple officials his concerns about withholding the aid from Ukraine at a time when it was fighting Russia.
Ambassador Taylor stressed the importance of the hold not just as a message to Ukraine but, importantly, to Russia as well.
Withholding the aid on vital military assistance while Ukraine was in the midst of a hot war with Russia sent a message to Russia about United States support of Ukraine.
Ambassador Taylor felt so strongly about the harm withholding the security assistance that for the first time ever in his decades of service at the State Department, he sent a first-person cable with his concerns to Secretary Pompeo.
In the cable, he described directly the ‘‘folly’’ that Taylor saw in withholding the aid.
Ambassador Taylor never received an answer to the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE cable, but he was told that Secretary Pompeo carried it with him to a White House meeting about security assistance to Ukraine.
There are press reports that Secretary Pompeo, Secretary Esper, and National Security Advisor Bolton discussed the hold with President Trump shortly after Ambassador Taylor sent his cable.
This was 2 days after the hold was publicly reported and after the President was briefed on the whistleblower complaint.
On August 30, Michael Duffey sent an email to Elaine McCusker, the DOD comptroller.
President Trump has refused _ to produce this or any other email to Congress.
When the administration was forced to produce it in a freedom of information case in response to a court order, this critical passage was actually blacked out.
The President finally released the hold on September 11, but, again, there was no credible reason given for the release.
On the day it was released, OMB still didn’t know why President Trump had ordered the hold.
According to the 17 witnesses in the House impeachment inquiry, President Trump insisted on holding the aid and provided no reason, despite unanimous support for lifting the hold throughout his administration, including his handpicked top advisers.
The aid had the clear support of career officers and political appointees in President Trump’s administration as important for national security.
DOD had already certified to Congress, as the law required, that Ukraine had met the anti-corruption conditions for the aid and that it January 23, 2020 planned to begin implementing the expenditures.
It wasn’t just that the President ordered a hold on the aid without any explanation against the unanimous advice of his advisers and even after, for weeks, as his administration—both career and political appointees—continued to try to get him to release the hold.
In ordering the hold, President Trump not only took a position contrary to his senior advisers, counter to congressional intent, and adverse to American national security interests in Ukraine, he also violated the law.
From the start of the hold in July, compliance of the Impoundment Control Act was a significant concern for OMB and DOD officials.
Mark Sandy raised concerns with his supervisor, Michael Duffey, that the hold might violate Impoundment Control Act.
She further testified that there was no legal mechanism to use to implement the hold after Congress had been notified of the release of the funding.
At a July 31 meeting with more junior officials, Laura Cooper put all attendees on notice, including representatives of the White House, that because ‘‘there were only two legally available options, and we do not have direction to pursue either,’’ DOD would have to start spending the funds on or about August 6.
He was so determined to turn up the pressure on Ukraine that he kept the hold for no legitimate purpose and without any congressional notification for long enough to violate the law.
As has been mentioned just last week, the nonpartisan Government Accountability Office found that President Trump broke the law by implementing the hold and in failing to notify Congress about it.
Because of the President’s hold, DOD was ultimately unable to spend all the $250 million in security assistance before the end of the fiscal year, as Congress—as we—intended.
January 23, 2020 As GAO explained, the Constitution grants the President no unilateral authority to withhold funds from obligation.
Faithful execution of the law does not permit the President to substitute his own constitutional priorities for those that Congress has enacted into law.
OMB withheld funds for a policy reason, which is not permitted under the Impoundment Control Act.
The bottom line, President Trump froze the aid to increase the pressure on Ukraine to announce the investigations he wanted.
He violated his constitutional duty to take care that the laws be faithfully executed.
But the President didn’t just violate the Impoundment Control Act while pressuring Ukraine to announce the investigations he wanted.
This is really telling because he is still not telling the truth about it even now.
There was no ongoing interagency process after July 31 after it became clear that the entire interagency, including Cabinet offices, unanimously agreed the aid should be released.
The truth is, there simply was no debate or review in the interagency regarding the best use of such funds.
So the reason given by the President was not only illegal; it was false too.
The dishonesty in the budget documents weren’t the only steps that the President’s men at OMB took to cover up his misconduct and enable his scheme.
OMB went so far as to remove the authority to approve the budget documents from Mark Sandy, a career officer, and gave it to Michael Duffey, a political appointee without experience managing such documents.
It occurred less than 2 weeks after Sandy raised concerns that the hold violated the law.
Sandy was not aware of any prior instance when a political appointee assumed this kind of funding approval authority.
Duffey’s explanation that he simply wanted to learn more about the accounts doesn’t make sense to Sandy.
The White House did not assert any privileges or immunities when it directed Duffey to defy Congress’s subpoena.
If Mr Duffey knew about any legitimate reason for the hold, I will bet he would not have been blocked from testifying.
The fact that he was blocked CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE might lead you to infer that his testimony would be damaging to the President and would be consistent with the testimony of the other witnesses that the hold was solely used to ratchet up pressure on Ukraine.
By August 12, the Department of Defense told OMB it could no longer guarantee it would be able to spend all $250 million that Congress had directed before the end of the fiscal year.
Not long after this August 12 email, DOD determined that time had run out.
Cooper testified that DOD estimated that as much as $100 million of aid might go unspent, even if the hold was immediately lifted.
As a result, DOD refused to certify that it would be able to spend the funds by September 30.
On August 20, OMB issued the first of six budget documents and removed the language providing legal cover for the hold.
From that point on, the White House knew that DOD would not be able to spend all the funds, which was what the law required before September 30.
Yet, even though he knew the hold would violate the Impoundment Control Act, President Trump continued the hold for another 23 days without telling us—without telling the Congress.
After the President lifted the hold on the evening of September 11, DOD had only 18 days to spend the remaining $223 million, which is about 89 percent of the total.
That $35 million would have expired and would have been forever lost to Ukraine had Congress not stepped in to pass a law to roll the money over to the next year.
But even as of today, more than $18 million of that money has not yet been spent.
OK, all of this shows, clearly, that President Trump knowingly and willfully violated the law when he withheld aid from Ukraine.
But just to be clear, the Articles of Impeachment do not charge Donald Trump with violating the Impoundment Control Act.
We are not arguing that, but understanding this violation of the law is important to understanding the broader scheme of his abuse of power.
It shows the great lengths the President was willing to go to in order to pressure Ukraine to do his political dirty work.
The security assistance wasn’t something the law allowed him to give or take at his discretion.
No, he was legally obliged to release the money, but he simply didn’t care.
He was so determined to get the announcement from Ukraine to smear his election opponent that holding the aid to force Ukraine to do that S523 was the most important thing.
Keeping that new order, the democracy, where the power is in the hands of the people, not in the hands of an unaccountable executive, is what we in the Congress—the House and the Senate—are charged to do.
I turn now to Mr CRow, who will outline information about the President’s intentions.
Mr Chief Justice, Members of the Senate, counsel for the President, just bear with us a little while longer.
We know it because senior administration officials, including the President’s own senior political appointees, have confirmed it.
We know it because the President’s own Chief of Staff said it at a national press conference.
One, the President asked President Zelensky for a favor on July 25, and we all know what that favor was.
Two, multiple United States officials with fact-based knowledge of the process have confirmed it.
Three, President Trump lifted the hold only after his scheme was exposed.
Four, there were no other legitimate explanations for the release of the hold.
There are no facts that show that the President cared about any of those things.
As Ambassador Sondland said, the President was a businessman who saw congressionally approved, taxpayerfunded military aid for Ukraine, our partner at war, as just another business deal to be made.
Military aid in exchange for fabricated dirt on his political opponent.
Let’s start with the President’s own words to President Zelensky on the July 25 call.
With the hold on his mind and on President Zelensky’s mind, too—we know that—President Trump linked military aid to his request for a favor.
I would also like to thank you for your great support in the area of defense.
We are ready to continue to cooperate for the next steps specifically we are almost ready to buy more Javelins from the United States for defense purposes.
The ‘‘great support in the area of defense’’ included, of course, the $391 million in military aid, because remember, just a month before, DOD had publicly announced its intent to provide $250 million of that aid.
President Zelensky was showing gratitude to the President for the aid that DOD had just announced would be on its way.
Immediately after President Zelensky brought up the United States military support and said that Ukraine was almost ready to buy more Javelin antitank missiles, President Trump pivoted to what he wanted in return.
It was the two specific political investigations that he wanted Ukraine to announce to help his own personal political campaign.
President Trump’s quick pivot from the critical military aid that he knew Ukraine desperately needed to the investigations that would benefit him personally speaks volumes.
By bringing up the investigations immediately after President Zelensky raised the issue of military support, he linked the two issues.
United States officials listening to the call also made that connection.
You said that it shed some light on possible other motivations behind the security assistance hold.
Mr Chairman, I was asked during the closed-door testimony how I felt about the call; and, in reflecting on what I was thinking in that moment, it was the first time I had heard internally the PresiCONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE dent reference particular investigations that previously I had only heard about through Mr Giuliani’s press interviews and press reporting.
So, in that moment, it was not clear whether there was a direct connection or linkage between the ongoing hold on security assistance and what the President may be asking President Zelensky to undertake in regard to investigations.
But it raised a question in your mind as to whether the two were related.
It was the first I had heard of any requests of Ukraine which were that specific in nature.
In fact, the hold was formally implemented by OMB the very day of the call.
Just hours after the call between President Trump and President Zelensky, Duffey sent an email to senior DOD officials instructing them to put a hold on the security aid.
President Trump has_ obstructed Congress’s ability to get those answers.
Indeed, with no explanation for the hold, unanimous support for its release in the administration, and ongoing efforts by the President’s top advisers to pressure Ukraine into announcing the investigations by holding up the White House meeting, it became crystal clear, as confirmed by multiple witnesses, that the only reason for the hold was to put additional pressure on Ukraine.
David Holmes, the senior official at the United States Embassy in Kyiv, explained.
Mr Holmes, you have testified that by late August you had a clear impression that the security assistance hold was somehow connected to the investigation that President Trump wanted.
President Zelensky had received a letter, a congratulatory letter, from the President saying he’d be pleased to meet him following his inauguration in May.
And we hadn’t been able to get that meeting, and then the security hold came up with no explanation.
I’d be surprised if any of the Ukrainians ... you said earlier, we discussed earlier, sophisticated people . .. when they received no explanation for why that hold was in place, they wouldn’t have drawn that conclusion.
Ambassador Sondland didn’t reach that conclusion based only on common sense.
So let’s begin with what Secretary Pompeo knew about the link between the investigations and the aid.
At the end of August, before President Trump canceled his trip to Warsaw to meet with President Zelensky, Sondland sent an email to Secretary Pompeo in which he proposed a pull-aside between President Zelensky and President Trump at the proposed meeting in Warsaw.
Later in August, you told Secretary Pompeo that President Zelensky would be prepared to tell President Trump that his new justice officials would be able to announce matters of interest to the President, which could break the logjam.
When you say matters of interest to the President, you mean the investigations that President Trump wanted.
Secretary Pompeo didn’t ask any questions and didn’t show any surprise or confusion in response to the email.
This shows that Secretary Pompeo, who also listened to the July 25 call as well, understood that the security assistance was conditioned on the investigations.
Sondland raised the issue to Vice President PENCE during a meeting to prepare for the Warsaw trip.
What Sondland was referring to, of course, was the military aid and the White House meeting.
Now, I want to go back to that conversation that you had with Vice President PENCE right before that meeting in Warsaw.
And you indicated that you said to him that you were concerned that the delay in the aid was tied to the issue of investigations.
This was a briefing attended by many people, and I was invited at the very last minute.
But I think I spoke up at some point late in the meeting and said, it looks like everything is being held up until these statements get made, and that’s my, you know, personal belief.
Like Secretary Pompeo, Vice President PENCE wasn’t surprised, nor did he ask _ what Sondland meant—because they all knew.
This meeting also confirmed Sondland’s understanding that the President had indeed conditioned the military aid on the public announcement of the investigations.
This was a commonsense conclusion, confirmed by the Secretary of State and the Vice President.
With that confirmation in mind, Sondland pulled aside Yermak, the top aide to President Zelensky, immediately after the Pence-Zelensky meeting.
Now, recall, he was the one who resisted the public statement about the specific investigations in August.
Ambassador Sondland described what he told Yermak in that short meeting.
Based on my previous communication with Secretary Pompeo, I felt comfortable sharing my concerns with Mr Yermak.
It was a very, very brief pull-aside conversation that happened within a few seconds.
I told Mr Yermak that I believed that the resumption of United States aid would likely not occur until Ukraine took some kind of action on the public statement that we had been discussing for many weeks.
You see, this just wasn’t an internal scheme among the President’s top advisers.
President Trump, through his agents, communicated the quid pro quo clearly to Ukraine.
Ambassador Sondland told President Zelensky’s top aide on September 1 that Ukraine would not get the military aid unless it announced the investigations.
Morrison watched Sondland’s conversation with Yermak and then received an immediate readout from Sondland after that meeting.
Morrison urgently reported the interaction to Ambassador Bolton on a secure phone call, and, of course, Bolton told him to go tell the NSC lawyers.
And as everyone knows, when someone says ‘‘call me,’’ it says stop putting this in writing.
Here is how Taylor, who took contemporaneous notes of the conversation, explained that call.
During that phone call Ambassador Sondland told me that President Trump had told him that he wants President Zelensky to state publicly that Ukraine will investigate Burisma and alleged Ukrainian interference in the 2016 election.
Ambassador Sondland also told me that he now recognized that he had made a mistake by earlier telling Ukrainian officials that only a White House meeting with President Zelensky was dependent on a public announcement of the investigations.
In fact, Ambassador Sondland said, everything was dependent on such an announcement including security assistance.
A private commitment wasn’t enough for President Trump because he needed the political benefit, and he could only get the political benefit if it was public.
We all know how this works with President Trump, how he weaponizes investigations for political purposes.
That is actually the exact opposite of how law enforcement investigations are conducted.
If they are legitimate, law enforcement does not announce to the world they are investigating before actually doing it.
But the President didn’t actively want S525 a legitimate investigation.
At the end of that conversation between Taylor and Sondland on September 1, Taylor asked Sondland to speak to the President to see if he could change his mind.
First, Morrison testified that he had a conversation with Sondland on September 7 about Sondland’s discussion with the President.
Third, Sondland and Taylor had a conversation on September 8 about the conversation that Sondland had the day before.
Finally, Sondland texted Taylor and Volker on September 8 that he had conversations with ‘“‘POTUS” and “Ze’’—meaning President Trump and President Zelensky.
So we know that the conversations must have happened before the morning of September 8, when that text was sent.
For his part, Sondland, who doesn’t take notes, also recalled that on that call, he simply asked President Trump an open-ended question about what he wanted from Ukraine.
The President had just learned about the whistleblower complaint in the Washington Post editorial linking the military aid to the investigations just 2 days before.
The fact that the President immediately blurted that out speaks volumes.
You will no doubt hear a lot from the President’s counsel that Sondland testified no one in the world told him that there was a quid pro quo, including President Trump.
And, of course, that is right, because people engaging in misconduct don’t usually admit it.
We know it because Sondland testified that his own conclusion that there was a quid pro quo was confirmed by his conversation with President Trump.
And we know it because Sondland relayed the exact message to President Zelensky right after he spoke to President Trump.
S526 Keep in mind that Sondland does not take notes, and he readily admitted that if he could have seen his own documents prior to testifying, he would have remembered more.
But Morrison and Taylor took extensive notes at the time and testified based on those notes, and Sondland— and this is important—said he did not dispute any of the accounts of Morrison and Taylor.
Let’s look at what Morrison and Taylor said about that September 7 phone call.
Now, a few days later, on September 7th, you spoke again to Ambassador Sondland, who told you that he had just gotten off the phone with President Trump.
If I recall this conversation correctly, this was where Ambassador Sondland related that there was no quid pro quo, but President Zelensky had to make the statement and that he had to want to do it.
Here is the consistent recollection of how Ambassador Taylor described his understanding of the call.
According to Mr Morrison, President Trump told Ambassador Sondland he was not asking for a quid pro quo, but President Trump did insist that President Zelensky go to a microphone and say he is opening investigations of Biden and 2016 election interference and that President Zelensky should want to do this himself.
And _ second, here is Ambassador Taylor explaining what Sondland himself told Taylor about what took place on_ that Sondland-Trump call a day later.
He confirmed that he had talked to President Trump, as I had suggested a week earlier, but that President Trump was adamant that President Zelensky himself had to clear things up and do it in public.
Like Sondland, both Taylor and Morrison recalled that President Trump said that he did not want a quid pro quo, but they both testified that President Trump followed that statement immediately by describing perfectly an exchange of this for that—or, in other words, a quid pro quo.
Prior to his call with the President, Sondland had reached the conclusion that the aid was being held until the CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE public announcement of the investigations.
And after this phone call with President Trump, that conclusion was confirmed.
I don’t ever recall because that would have changed my entire calculus.
I’m just saying, you still believed that the security assistance was conditioned on the investigation after you spoke to President Trump.
Sondland relayed the message to President Zelensky right after his conversation with President Trump.
Here is Ambassador Taylor’s recollection of what Sondland _ told Zelensky, based on his notes.
Ambassador Sondland also said that he had talked to President Zelensky and Mr Yermak and had told them that, although this was not a quid pro quo, if President Zelensky did not clear things up in public, we would be at a stalemate.
I understood a ‘‘stalemate’”’ to mean that Ukraine would not receive the much needed military assistance.
Ambassador Sondland confirmed that Taylor’s memory of this call was accurate; there would be a stalemate without the investigations.
And then you also told Ambassador Taylor in that same conversation that if President Zelensky, rather you told President Zelensky and Andriy Yermak that although this was not a quid pro quo as the President had very clearly told you, it was however required for President Zelensky to clear things up in public or there would be a stalemate.
Nothing would happen with the aid unless President Zelensky publicly announced the investigations.
Second, Morrison received a readout from January 23, 2020 Sondland immediately after the call and testified based on his notes.
And fourth, Sondland agreed that President Trump had confirmed a quid pro quo, and Sondland actually relayed the message to the President of Ukraine and told Ambassador Taylor about it.
At the end of the conversation between Sondland and President Zelensky, President Zelensky explained that he had finally relented.
President Zelensky had resisted making the announcement of the corrupt investigations for months.
He resisted when Giuliani and other agents of the President made it known that President Trump required it.
He resisted when the White House meeting he so desperately desired was conditioned on that announcement.
Ambassador Taylor was worried that even if the Ukrainian leader did as President Trump wanted, President Trump might continue to hold the military aid.
In other words, the nightmare is that they make the announcement but President Trump doesn’t release the aid.
Russian propaganda would be adopted by the United States and the United States would be withdrawing its support for Ukraine.
On September 9, Ambassador Taylor reiterated his concerns about the President’s quid pro quo in another series of text messages with Ambassadors Volker and Sondland.
The message to the Ukrainians (and Russians) we send with the decision on security assistance is key.
As I said on the phone, I think it is crazy to withhold security assistance for help with a political campaign.
Mr Goldman, I meant that the importance—because of the importance of security assistance that we had just described and had a conversation with the chairman, because that was so important, that security assistance was so important for Ukraine as well as our own national interests, to withhold that assistance for no good reason other than help with a political campaign made no sense.
I mean that the United States was trying to support Ukraine as a frontline state against Russian attack.
And, again, the whole notion of a rules based order was being threatened by the Russians in Ukraine.
I meant that the investigation of Burisma and the Bidens was clearly identified by Mr Giuliani in public for months as a way to get information on the two Bidens.
In response to Taylor’s text message that it was ‘‘crazy to withhold security assistance for help in a political campaign,’’ Sondland repeated again the false denial of a quid pro quo.
If you still have concerns, I recommend you give Lisa Kenna or S— That is Secretary Pompeo— CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE a call to discuss them directly.
But Sondland’s testimony revealed this text and the President’s denial were false.
Just like President Trump, when Ambassador Sondland thought he was getting caught, he got nervous, and he wanted to deny it in writing to cover his tracks.
We know that Sondland’s denial in the text was false because later, when he was under oath, under penalty of perjury, he actually said a quid pro quo did exist.
It is clear that President Trump himself confirmed that the aid was conditioned on the public announcement of the investigations that the President wanted.
To get Ukraine to help him with his reelection campaign, the President of the United States violated the law by withholding nearly $400 million of taxpayer dollars intended to fight Russia.
He put his own interests over the country, and that is why we are here.
Mr Chief Justice and Members of the Senate, in deference to our proposed schedule and the late hour, I am now going to yield to my colleague, Mr SCHIFF, to provide a brief recap of today and then we will begin again in the morning.
We started out the day with the Chaplain asking for empathetic listening, and I think that is certainly what you have delivered for us today.
I know you have been bombarded with information all day, and when you leave this Chamber, you are bombarded again by members of the press.
And I just want to thank you for Keeping an open mind about all the issues that we are presenting—an open mind for us and an open mind for the President’s counsel.
Having watched you now for 3 days, whether it is someone you are predisposed to agree with or predisposed not to, it is abundantly clear that you are listening with an open mind, and we can’t ask for anything more than that, so we are grateful.
At the beginning of the trial, you may have seen the President’s tweet.
So I thought at the end of the evening, I would join in the President’s request that you reread the transcript because now that you know a lot more of the facts of this scheme, it reveals a lot more about that conversation.
S527 Let me just point out a few things that may have escaped your attention about that transcript, which is not really a transcript because it is not complete.
Let me just tell you a few things that may have escaped your attention about that call record.
There are the pivotal sections where he talks about CrowdStrike and he asks for that favor and he wants investigation of the Bidens.
Now that you know so much more about that scheme, let me just point out a few things that really struck my attention.
Not the old politicians, not the typical politicians, because we want to have a new format and a new type of government.
Early in the call, President Zelensky wants to impress upon President Trump he has brought in new people; that he isa reformer.
So if there had been any concern about corruption in Ukraine, he is bringing in new people.
You can better well believe that he is prepared for this call because he needs that White House meeting.
And early on, he wants to make sure that he lets the President know he is a reformer.
I wouldn’t say that it’s reciprocal necessarily because things are happening that are not good but the United States has been very very good to Ukraine.
This is very interesting that he brings up very early in the conversation this relationship is nonreciprocal.
We’ve been ‘‘very very good to Ukraine,’ but, you know, can’t say there is much coming the other way.
Now, you will remember that Bill Taylor had this reaction to talking to Gordon Sondland.
Before he writes a check, he likes to get what he is owed, Taylor’s reaction is, well, that makes no sense because Ukraine doesn’t owe us anything.
Well, in this call you can see that Donald Trump does think he is owed.
You want to get this military, you want to get this meeting—I don’t see much reciprocity here.
I will personally tell you that one of my assistants spoke with Mr Giuliani just recently and we are hoping very much that Mr S528 Giuliani will be able to travel to Ukraine and we will meet once he comes to Ukraine.
You should read this carefully yourself, but this may be the first mention of Giuliani.
And we know he was rebuffed or something happened because he didn’t get that meeting.
So Zelensky is prepared for this call, and he knows it is going to resonate with Donald Trump if he says he would like to meet with Rudy Giuliani.
That is the third time he wants to underscore what great friends they are.
I also plan to surround myself with great people and in addition to that investigation, I guarantee as the President of Ukraine that all the investigations will be done openly and candidly.
He needs to assure the President that he is going to get his deliverable because it has been made clear before this call what the President wants to hear—more than that—what the President needs to hear is there will be no stone unturned in that investigation.
That is pretty remarkable—right?—a head-of-state to head-of-state call.
Now, bear in mind a couple of other things that you know at this point.
Bear in mind that there was a whistleblower complaint before this call record was released.
Bear in mind that the law that we passed and you passed requires that a whistleblower complaint that is designated to go to Congress must go to Congress and must go to the intelligence committees.
If the inspector general finds it credible and urgent, it has to not only go to Congress, it has to go to Congress soon.
He contacts the White House, and he contacts Bill Barr’s Justice Department.
We are telling you—Bill Barr’s Justice Department is telling you—you don’t have to.
We will get our guys at the Office of Legal Counsel to write some opinion.
They are supposed to turn it over to you, and I don’t know what to do about it, but I need to tell you, to meet my obligation, they are not doing what they should.
So we subpoena the Director of National Intelligence, and we make it clear to the Director of National Intelligence that he is going to have to come before Congress in an open hearJanuary 23, 2020 ing and explain why he is the first Acting Director to refuse to turn a complaint over to Congress.
It is the same call record that mentions the Attorney General of the United States, but it fails.
That effort to cover up—to conceal the whistleblower complaint—fails, and it comes out.
Of course, if that had never been released, well then, the Attorney General’s name would have never come up in this call record, and there would have been no necessity to distance himself from the President’s actions.
In the next exchange, President Zelensky says that he or she—he is going to have a new Prosecutor General—will look into the situation, specifically into the company that you mention in this issue.
There is no company mentioned in this issue in the call record, but, of course, you have heard now testimony from two witnesses who were on that call that Burisma was mentioned.
That call record went to that highly classified server, and the mention of Burisma didn’t make it into the call record.
The issue of the investigation of the case is actually the issue of making sure to restore the honesty.
So we will take care of that, and we will work on the investigation of the case.
Time after time after time, Zelensky feels the need to assure the President he is going to do those political investigations that the President wants.
I will have Mr Giuliani give you a call, and I am also going to have Attorney General Barr call, and we will get to the bottom of it.
Don’t take my word, but I think there is no one who comes up more in this call record than Rudy Giuliani, which tells us something.
On the other hand, I also want to assure you that we will be very serious about the case, and we will work on the investigation.
I January 23, 2020 also want to assure you we are serious about doing the investigation.
I am going to have you talk to Rudy and the Attorney General, and by the way, any time you want to come to the White House, just call.
Again and again, Zelensky goes into that call with his wanting the meeting.
He knew what he had to promise, and he knew what he wanted to obtain, and that was the visit.
I can tell you something—and this is what is so frightening about these circumstances.
Yes, we forced the aid to be released because the President got caught, but, even now, our ally can’t get his foot in the door.
This brings me to the last point I want to make tonight, which is, when we are done, we believe that we will have made the case overwhelmingly of the President’s guilt—that is, that he has done what he is charged with.
Nobody is really making the argument ‘‘Donald Trump would never do such a thing’’ because, of course, we know that he would, and, of course, we know that he did.
When all of them were telling him this Ukraine 2016 stuff was kooky, crazy, Russian propaganda, he chose not to believe them.
Because he wanted to, because what Rudy was offering him was something that would help him personally and what Christopher Wray was offering him was merely the truth.
What Christopher Wray was offering him was merely the information he needed to protect this country and its elections, but that was not good enough.
My colleagues on the Intel Committees of the House and Senate are trying to find out.
Well, let’s say they get in, and let’s say they start dumping documents to interfere in the next election.
Let’s say they start dumping some fake things they didn’t hack from Burisma, but they want you to believe they did.
Let’s say they start blatantly interfering in our election again to help Donald Trump.
Maybe you could have given him a freebee and said he was joking, but now we know better.
Hours after he S529 did that, Russia did, in fact, try to hack Hillary’s emails.
The American people deserve a President they can count on to put their interests first—to put their interests first.
If right doesn’t matter—if right doesn’t matter—it doesn’t matter how good the Constitution is; it doesn’t matter how brilliant the Framers were; it doesn’t matter how good or bad our advocacy in this trial is; it doesn’t matter how well written the oath of impartiality is.
The Framers couldn’t protect us from ourselves if right and truth don’t matter.
You know, that is what they do in the old country that Colonel Vindman’s father came from or the old country that my _ great-grandfather came from or the old countries that your ancestors came from or maybe you came from, but here, right is supposed to matter.
And you know you can’t trust this President to do what is right for this country.
This is why, if you find him guilty, you must find that he should be removed— because right matters.
Mr Chief Justice, I ask unanimous consent that the trial adjourn until 1m., Friday, January 24, and that this order also constitute the adjournment of the Senate.
There being no objection, at 10:32 p.m., the Senate, sitting as a Court of Impeachment, adjourned until Friday, January 24, 2020, at 1m.
