Ukraine may have foiled a plot to assassinate President Poroshenko when it intercepted a large cache of weapons coming out of Russia-invaded and occupied Donbas.
The Security Service of Ukraine or SBU revealed a plot involving Volodymyr Ruban, the Russian terrorist leaders Alexander Zakharchenko and Oleksandr “Tashkent” Timofeev, and operation co-ordinators in Moscow to potentially kill many people in Kyiv.
A mass-casualty terrorist operation of the Putin regime against the Ukrainian people may just have been averted.
In the Shevchenkivsky district court, on March 9, Ruban was charged with the preparation of a terrorist act and the illegal possession of weapons.
Volodymyr Ruban is widely believed to be an operative of Viktor Medvedchuk.
Medvedchuk is a Ukrainian oligarch who is Putin’s “grey cardinal” in Russia’s war against Ukraine.
Putin feigns to ‘consult’ with Medvedchuk, the figureheads of the so-called “LPR” and “DPR,” and Vladimir Gundyayev when he is determining his war policy against Ukraine.
Viktor Medvedchuk is on the list of sanctioned individuals of both the United States and Canada.
His actions during Russia’s invasion of Ukraine make him a grave threat to international peace and security.
As Medvedchuk’s negotiator, Volodymyr Ruban held direct talks with the Russian terrorist group, the so-called “DPR,” regarding the prisoner exchange which ended up taking place on 27 December 2017.
Ruban also brought Nadiya Savchenko to Russia-occupied Makiivka on 24 February 2017.
Savchenko was a hostage of the Putin regime who upon her release took up her role as a member of parliament in the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.
Since her release, Savchenko has adopted the Putin-Medvedchuk policy against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Savchenko has said that Crimea should be surrendered to Russia and that the so-called “DPR” and “LPR” should be treated as representative bodies of a pro-Russian, separatist Donbas.
Savchenko because she spoke patriotic defiance while a hostage of the Putin regime; Ruban because he succeeded in freeing many Ukrainian P.O.W.s and hostages from the horrors of Russian captivity and torture.
Savchenko is widely suspected of being a Putin agent – as Medvedchuk is known to be.
Ruban is now charged with terrorist offences – part of a conspiracy in which Ruban was acting as an operative of Medvedchuk and therefore Putin.
Muscovy is waging total war against the Ukrainian people, and that includes using the temporarily occupied territory of Crimea and Donbas to launch attacks, send spies, infiltrate sabotage and disruption teams, and to further terrorist conspiracies like the one that Volodymyr Ruban was caught in on March 8.
Ukrainian authorities will follow the conspiracy up from Ruban to Medvedchuk, and up to Putin.
Russia’s plot through Ruban against Kyiv will be the template for Russia’s plot against other Western capitals soon enough.
