Now, the amusing fact is that Poroshenko himself actively supported the Euromaidan protests between November 2013 and February 2014 in Kiev that resulted in the overthrow of Yanukovych.
As the current head of Ukraine, who became the president after the illegal coup, Poroshenko’s statement seems strange at best.
By admitting that the overthrow of Yanukovych was illegal and stressing that the President of Ukraine should be forever protected by the country’s law, Poroshenko might be insinuating that his own presidency is put in jeopardy.
Alexei Pushkov, the head of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Lower House of Russia’s parliament, commented on Poroshenko’s bizarre revelation.
Last year, Yanukovych became the scapegoat of Ukrainian politics after his government was accused of all the misfortunes in the country.
Now, more than a year after the former president was gone, his legacy is still around.
Mikheil Saakashvili, the new governor of Ukraine’s Odessa Region, said that in the best case scenario, Ukraine will need 20 more years to reach the economic level of Yanukovych’s government in 2013.
President Poroshenko entered office on 25 May 2014 after a U.S.-sponsored coup in Kiev that installed Arseniy Yatsenyuk as Ukraine’s Prime Minister on 26 February 2014, after the United States Assistant Secretary of State for European and Asian Affairs, Victoria Nuland, had instructed the United States Ambassador in Kiev on 4 February 2014 to get “Yats” appointed as the junta’s leader; she issued that instruction to him by phone on February 4th and the coup occurred on February 22nd; Yatsenyuk was then appointed on February 26th, and he remains in power today.
One pro-Russian part of Ukraine, Crimea, then seceded and joined Russia, and another, Donbass, seceded and was not accepted by Russia; it thus was bombed by the Ukrainian Government during May through December 2014, since Donbass’s repeated requests to be allowed to join Russia were spurned by Vladimir Putin.
German intelligence estimates that “up to 50,000” people were killed in that bombing campaign, but United States and other official estimates are only around 5,000.
And it was a very violent coup, which was followed shortly thereafter by the extremely violent ethnic-cleansing campaign to get rid of the residents in Donbass.
Yet they vainly parade with their enormous deluded egos, patting each others’ backs, as our countries fall apart and their special forces kill those who want freedom and real peace.
President of Ukraine Poroshenko offered Right Sector leader a position at the Ministry of Defense.
This was announced on the TV Channel 5 by Anton Gerashchenko, a Poroshenko advisor.
I would be very pleased if Yarosh were to start working as part of the state administration.
I would be most pleased to create, together with Yarosh, a Volunteer Union for the Defense of Ukraine based on the Estonian, Finnish, and Swiss systems,” Gerashchenko added.
If I were Yarosh I’d seriously consider it, though of course I’d be concerned about losing control over the Right Sector should it become absorbed into some state structure.
But a territorial defense job—now that would be something right up Yarosh’s alley.
If he doesn’t like the carrot, he might have to taste the stick instead.
It’s also becoming clear that Poroshenko is aiming not at destroying but at isolating Kolomoysky.
The arrests during the Cabinet meeting were of officials who gave state contracts to Kolomoysky’s companies.
The offer to Yarosh is an effort to peel off the oligarch’s militant support.
Incidentally, I would not attribute any of it to the United States or any other outside force.
Yes, Poroshenko can arrest Yatsenyuk’s ministers right from under his nose.
He managed to similarly neutralize Parubiy and Turchinov and, at least temporarily, secure the support of Avakov and Nalivaychenko whose star is rising.
The United States and the EU are, at most, recognizing the reality on the ground, and that reality is Poroshenko as the clearly dominant force in Ukrainian politics.
What that “clearly dominant force” will do is another question, of course.
President Petro Poroshenko has introduced a bill to parliament to let foreign armed forces into Ukraine to take part in five joint exercises with Ukrainian forces.
According to the draft law, Ukraine plans three Ukrainian-American command post exercises, Fearless Guardian 2015, Sea Breeze 2015 and Saber Guardian/Rapid Trident 2015, and two Ukrainian-Polish exercises, Secure Skies 2015, and Law and Order 2015, for this year.
Fearless Guardian will take place in Yavoriv district, Lviv region, in the period from March to November and will bring together a maximum of 2,200 troops.
Sea Breeze will be a 25-day exercise held between June and October in the Black Sea and at training sites in the regions of Odesa, Mykolaiv and Kherson.
Ukraine and the United States will each be represented by a maximum of 1,000 troops.
Law and Order is a one-week military police exercise in Yavoriv that will together 50 Ukrainians and 50 Poles.
Permission from parliament is needed to allow foreign military personnel into Ukraine.
The President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko introduced a bill to the Verkhovna Rada to enlarge the maximum size of the national forces.
However, it was noted that during an emergency the military may be strengthened with conscription.
The funds for an increase in the Ukrainian Armed Forces are provided for by the budget of 2015.
This comes a week after President Petro Poroshenko said that the new Minsk agreements on regulating the crisis in eastern Ukraine give hope, but he is unsure whether they will be fully implemented.
I don’t want anybody to have illusions and I don’t want to seem naive – we are still far from peace…and nobody has a firm belief that the Minsk peace agreements will be strictly implemented,” Poroshenko said last week.
The Ukrainian leader expressed hope that the situation will de-escalate, and peace will be achieved through ceasefire and withdrawal of artillery.
A similar bill was introduced the Prime Minister of Ukraine Arseniy Yatsenyuk on behalf of the government in January.
Obama’s subordinate , the President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko, is now arranging to receive those weapons via a less direct channel; and this arrangement couldn’t happen if the United States White House were opposed to it.
This is called the IMF’s “austerity” program, for looted nations such as Greece and Ukraine, and it holds sacred the thefts by aristocrats, while it transfers all of aristocrats’ losses off onto their respective publics, who pay it via their stripped governmental services and hiked taxes; and these poor people then serve aristocrats as virtual slaves , many of whom thus migrate to wealthier countries, which, in turn, reject the burden of caring for them, thus producing yet more resentments and hatreds against these poor people, regardless of how they behave.
The reason why Arabic royals are naturals for this — the logical persons to serve as the middle-men to sell Western-made weapons to Russia’s new enemy, Ukraine — is that the United States aristocracy has, for at least 70 years, been allied with Sunni aristocracies, against, originally, the Soviet Union, and then Russia.
Russia had been the chief supplier of oil and gas to the other Soviet republics; it was and is the local oil-and-gas giant.
Whereas Russia’s aristocrats bonded instead with Shia Iran , the American aristocrats had bonded with Sunni Saudi Arabia, and with other Arab royals, in UAE, Qatar, Bahrain, etc.
So, with the exception of Armand Hammer’s Occidental Petreoleum, which bonded with Libya’s pro-Soviet Sunni anti-imperialist and anti-Western Muammar Gaddafi, Western oil companies generally allied with the Saud family, who had allied with the most intensely Sunni clergy of all, who were the followers of Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, who had personally agreed in 1744, with Muhammad bin Saud, that the Sauds and Wahhabs would jointly control the Kingdom and ultimately the world — Wahhabs controlling the laws, and Sauds controlling the military.
