Golts notes that Russia’s new military formations must be understrength, as new units are being formed while overall force personnel numbers are static.
There are many Russian speakers living across the globe – in the U.S., Germany, the Czech Republic, Kazakhstan, Belarus and, of course, in Ukraine.
Notable essays by Krasheninnikov , Kholmogorov, Kolomeytsev and RFE/RL’s Miller – his expose of Russia’s treatment of Russia’s Donbass veterans is astounding.
Ukrainian Minister of Defense Poltorak states that Ukraine is prepared for a Russian invasion.
Donbass fires continue, while OSCE is obstructed, and Russia pilfers Donbass coal, yet charges Ukraine for gas used by occupied Donbass.
DPRK debate continues – although much of it appears to be a deluge of MSM speculation, and creative appeasement proposals.
United States agrees to consult RoK before any offensive operations conducted.
China produces video skit mocking India, which sells poorly with Indian audiences.
Ethnic Russian susceptibility to Moscow propaganda a concern in Germany, while SDP leader tries to distract from Crimea deoccupation.
Good precis of problems with multilateral alliance forming in Asia and Middle East – many local animosities are very old and run deep.
Four reports on cyber, one on propaganda, and one on Russian GPS spoofing.
Republican voter support for Putin and Russia claimed to be rising – Reagan would simply despair.
Later this year, Russia will launch what could be the largest military exercise since the end of the Cold War.
It will test contingency plans for a full-scale conflict with NATO and interoperability with Belarus and the Commonwealth Security Treaty Organization.
In the past, Russia has used military exercises as cover to invade neighboring states – as seen with Georgia in 2008 and Ukraine in 2014.
Cutting through this fog of fact and disinformation, CEPA StratCom is launching “The Road to Zapad 2017” – an in-depth resource to track and analyze the lead up to Zapad 2017 and its outcomes.
Around the world, few people trust Putin to do the right thing when it comes to international affairs.
South Korean President Moon Jae-in said there would be no second war on the Korean Peninsula.
It wasn’t entirely clear at the time, but that vote marked the end of Russia’s rocky and tumultuous post-Soviet experiment with liberal democracy.
Because from that moment on, it didn’t matter if Putin was the prime minister or the president; from that moment on, power resided in him.
Institutions were steadily eroded and replaced by the cult of Putin the leader.
A child born on that late summer Monday 18 years ago would know no other leader than Putin.
For a bit of context, Leonid Brezhnev ruled the Soviet Union for 18 years and one month — a milestone that Putin will soon pass, making him the longest ruling Russian or Soviet leader since Josef Stalin.
In November, after all, German Chancellor Angela Merkel will have been in office for 12 years.
The problem is that Putin has ruled without the checks and balances and independent institutions that constrain and limit the powers of Western democratic leaders like Merkel.
For Putin, of course, longevity and unchecked power are two sides of the same coin.
He has used his time in power primarily to eliminate and make a mockery of any and all constraints on his power — from the media, to the Duma, to the courts, to civil society.
But it’s also been a recipe for the stagnation and ossification that will — sooner or later — be the Putin regime’s undoing.
Since August 9th, the Russian Federation President, Vladimir Putin, has not appeared in public, Dozhd reports.
At the same time, there is no mention of Putin’s vacation this year,” the message says.
According to the channel’s report, the last time Putin appeared in public was on August 8th, and the next time will be when he meets with journalists only on August 16th.
This was relayed by two people who are familiar with the Russian President’s schedule.
On August 8th, Putin worked in Abkhazia and Sochi, where he stayed for one day.
In addition, all media outlets published only the pictures taken by Putin’s personal photographer.
One of the saving goals of the 2018 budget is to reduce defense expenditure, but this will not affect the plans to retrofit the army and the navy.
Russian President Vladimir Putin made a statement to this effect at a meeting with United Russia party leader Vladimir Vasilyev in the State Duma.
But we do plan several reductions compared to the previous budget, and so close attention will need to be paid to the matters which always arise in the process of drafting the country’s primary financial document,” the president emphasized.
According to Putin, these matters include not only defense and national security, but also the economy, the social sector and healthcare.
In Oliver Stone’s documentary film on the Russian president, Putin mentioned plans to reduce defense expenditure.
According to the president, an effectively functioning economy is a priority for the country, and the armed forces need to be modern and effective, but also compact.
The law would also limit foreign ownership in any company that owns an exchange point to 20 percent.
The sea-otter trade brought adventurers across the Bering Strait to Alaska and beyond, and remnants of their footprints remain.
ON MY MIND One of the more interesting developments in the run-up to next month’s joint Russian-Belarusian Zapad 2017 military exercises has been the behavior of Belarus.
Unlike Moscow, which seems intent on using the exercises as something of a psyop to spook Russia’s neighbors and the West, Minsk appears determined that they not become a source of external friction.
With the exercises taking place on Belarusian soil, Minsk has invited military observers from NATO and non-NATO countries, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe , and the Red Cross.
Belarus has made a special effort to reach out to — and assuage the concerns of — countries in the neighborhood like Poland, Ukraine, and the Baltic states.
There has been much speculation and anxiety in Minsk that Russia will use the exercises to tighten its grip on Belarus, perhaps stealthily leaving troops behind.
But Minsk’s surprising transparency also stems from the fact that Belarus does not want to be drawn into a conflict between Russia and the West — and wants to distance itself from any attempt to use the exercises as a psychological operation to unnerve the West.
Ever the gamer, Alyaksandr Lukashenka wants to keep his options open and to play both sides — even as the wily Belarusian president prepares to join Putin in presiding over the biggest wargaming exercises since the Cold War.
Russian-Belarusian West-2017 military exercises in Belarus start in September, but now this topic has become one of the main in the world media.
The unusual nature of upcoming exercises more reminiscent of the “smooth occupation” of the country, was mentioned even when it became known that a record high number of railroad carriages – more than 4.000 – was involved in the transfer of the Russian contingent to Belarus.
Now many Belarusian and European politicians as well as the military men believe that Russian troops will remain in Belarus after the exercises.
Belarusians are outraged by their country’s involvement in geopolitical games of an aggressive neighbour from the East.
On September 8 the Warning Action demanding the abolition of the West-2017 exercises starts at 7 pm, Kastrychnitskaya Square, Minsk.
Numerous comments on Charter97.org devoted to the West-2017 exercises testify to the mood of Belarusians.
When the Crimea was evaded, they also had exercises “In a train window I saw a huge column of troops near Pechy.
You can create guerrilla accounts under fictitious names, so as not to get fried.
Intelligence and information gathering is a part of military operations, a very important part.
If the world community sees that all our people are against exercises, against occupation, this will give us great moral support.
And this will be the ground to remove our inadequate person from power.
The Fight Is Required “I hope that Belarusian soldiers will refuse to obey orders of traitors and will take the side of the people in order to defend our common interests and our homeland – Belarus.
If foreign troops do not leave Belarus after exercises, there will be problems.
Workers wake up, young people make all kinds of bikers run away, they have no place in our country.
We are peparing for aggression, and this is not a joke or a stupid dream.
The dictator replaced the chief of the General Staff and the head of the Transport Support of the Defence Ministry.
It became known that some divisions of the Belarusian Defence Ministry had their heads changed.
The press service of Lukashenka reported on two new appointments at senior positions in the country’s military-defence sector.
On August 16 Aleh Mishchenka became the new chief of the communication department of the General Staff.
Other innovations are connected with the leadership of one of departments at the Defence Ministry.
Yury Shaplauski is appointed to the position of the head of the Transport Department of the Defence Ministry.
Russian-Belarusian exercises “West-2017” begin in September on the territory of Belarus.
A column of tented trucks has driven into the territory of the Foliush military unit.
Perhaps, they were bringing the “Kozaks from abroad,” – the journalist wrote.
We remind that yesterday the Russian troops arrived on tented trucks at the territory of the military unit in Pechy near Barysau.
The Moldovan Foreign Ministry has denied media reports that the country’s authorities intend to introduce a visa policy with Russia.
He called these initiatives provocations and noted that he saw no grounds for introducing a visa policy with Russia.
We understand what threats may arise, and we will respond adequately to those threats connected with these exercises,” said the head of the defense department.
According to preliminary data, up to 13,000 servicemen will take part in the exercises.
The General Staff of the Ukrainian Armed Forces has designed a package of measures for the Ukrainian army in response to threats that may arise due to the Zapad 2017 drills that are due in Russia and Belarus this September, Ukrainian Defense Minister Stepan Poltorak said.
We understand what kind of threats may arise and will react in an adequate manner to the threats the military exercises may pose.
The General Staff has identified a number of measures that would be adequate for these threats,” Poltorak told reporters in Kyiv on Wednesday.
Poltorak went on to note that the upcoming exercises potentially pose a threat because large numbers of Russian Armed Forces personnel are moving closer to the Ukrainian border,” and currently, we view everything happening at our border as an unfriendly act,” Poltorak said.
On Tuesday, the Air Force of the Armed Forces of Ukraine launched bilateral command post exercises which include all types of aircraft, anti-aircraft missile units and radio-technical troops.
As reported on Tuesday on the Facebook page of the General Staff of the Armed, the goal of the exercises is to plan and manage troops and provide all-round support during the preparation and conduct of combat operations in responsible areas in a rapidly changing environment.
Militants launched 35 attacks on positions of the Armed Forces of Ukraine in ATO area in Donbas over the past day.
Russia's hybrid military forces attacked Ukrainian army positions in Donbas 35 times in the past 24 hours, with one Ukrainian soldier reported as killed in action and four as wounded in action , according to the press service of the Anti-Terrorist Operation Headquarters.
Four Ukrainian soldiers were wounded in fighting in eastern Ukraine in the past 24 hours, according to a Ukrainian defense ministry spokesman.
The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine still has no access to the settlements of Pikuzy in Donetsk region and Shchastia in Luhansk region, since mine clearance on these routes has not yet started, according to a report posted by the mission on its Facebook page.
In the first half of 2017, Russian Gazprom delivered 1,389 billion cubic meters of gas to the separatist DPR and LPR (Luhansk People’s Republic.
The price of Russian gas as of the first quarter of 2017 was $306. per thousand cubic meters, as supported by the data from Gazprom’s report for the second quarter.
According to Gazprom’s data, in the first quarter of 2017, 1.11 billion cubic meters of gas were supplied to separatist-controlled territories in the Donbas.
Gazprom had started supplying gas to the uncontrolled territories on February 19, 2015.
Russia adds these deliveries to the debt owed by Naftogaz of Ukraine, though the Ukrainian company has long stated that it does not intend to pay for gas delivered to the territories which are not under Ukraine’s control.
Naftogaz stressed that it does not accept gas under a contract with Gazprom coming through Prokhorovka and Platovo gas-metering stations.
Accordingly, data on gas supplies through these stations cannot be used in the preparation of reports on acceptance of gas and, accordingly, these gas deliveries cannot be paid for by Naftogaz.
Certain changes in training have taken place, but not all problems are solved yet,” the Minister of Defense said.
They have to be trained during practical classes and exercises,” Stepan Poltorak said.
The Ukrainian Navy plans to establish a NATO doctrines and tactic center before the end of 2017, Capt.st Rank Andriy Ryzhenko, Ukrainian Navy deputy chief of staff for Euro-Atlantic integration, said.
The SBU Security Service of Ukraine together with the Military Prosecutor's Office has detained a 37-years-old criminal, who was trying to sell four RPG-26 grenade launchers in the village of Hvardiiske of Novomoskovskyi district of Dnipropetrovsk region, the SBU's press center said.
Thanks to a favorable climate and fertile chernozem—the black-colored soil containing a high percentage of humus—that makes up a third of the world’s stock, Ukraine could become a huge export base of fruits and vegetables, both fresh and processed.
This was reported by the United States Department of Commerce in the report on the fruit and vegetable industry of Ukraine, Voice of America reports.
Ukraine currently ranks fifth in Europe in terms of producing fruits, vegetables, and berries and is eleventh out of 45 countries in Europe for organic farming.
In 2016, the total volume of organic production in Ukraine was estimated at $22 million, 17% more than in 2015.
According to the Ministry of Agricultural Policy and Food of Ukraine, many factors, especially an average return on investment of about 300%, make organic farming one of the most attractive destinations for investment in Ukraine, the report says.
The deterioration of trade relations with Russia gave impetus to the development and modernization of the industry.
During the last two years, Ukraine has reoriented the export of most fruits and vegetables from Russia to the European Union, South Asia, and South Africa.
Such change in direction from East to the West requires Ukrainian companies to comply with higher production standards, which in turn requires them to search for better means of production and resources,” the report notes.
It’s been more than three years since Ukrainians were driven in large measure by the rampant corruption in Ukraine to retake their country.
Yet state-owned enterprises —the organs of systemic corruption and deterrence for western investment—remain in the hands of the same elites who drain these state treasures of their financial and material resources.
Even worse, this unwritten system scares away further capital, expertise, and technology required to restart an economy which is moving away from Russia.
At the same time, the Ukrainian economy is starved for capital and the GDP growth required to support its population.
Privatizing Ukraine’s state enterprises would send a powerful signal to corrupt elites and foreign investors.
So far, major privatizations haven been too difficult both technically and politically.
The tradeable market value of Ukrainians SOEs in their current state is very low to zero, even if the underlying fundamental value is high.
Many of these SOEs are natural monopolies and should be producing attractive cash flow.
Romania’s recent history shows how dramatic SOE reform can fix many facets of a broken economy.
In our view, and based on our relevant experience in neighboring Romania, Ukraine needs a program to supplement the current privatization effort, a way to rapidly reform other state enterprises which are not ready for stock privatizations.
Such a solution would keep the majority ownership of SOEs in the hands of Ukraine’s government, but incentivize these SOEs to adopt corporate governance reform, which will transfer operations and profits from the hands of corrupt elites into a properly functioning and transparent corporate entity.
This means more profit and value for the state, combined with better operations for growth and investment at SOEs which dominate Ukraine’s economy.
Former Odesa Regional Governor Mikheil Saakashvili has said that he will return to Ukraine from Poland on September 10.
Saudi Arabia closed its land border with Qatar in June as part of an economic and political blockade.
Assuring his people “there will be no war,” President Moon Jae-in said that the United States had promised to consult with South Korea before acting.
Joint military exercises between the United States and South Korea, which are set to begin Monday, could provide an opening for efforts to reduce tensions over the North’s nuclear program.
US President Donald Trump implied in one of his latest tweets that he forced North Korea to back down over its threat to Guam.
It’s a dangerous misperception that could cause the crisis to escalate and Trump to miss what could be the best chance he will have to halt the tests of missiles that can now threaten the American homeland.
Tillerson reiterates that Pyongyang must show it is serious about denuclearization United States Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said on Aug. that he plans to continue working toward bilateral dialogue to resolve the North Korean nuclear issue, but called for a change in behavior first from Pyongyang.
Appearing at a press conference for the publication of the 2016 International Religious Freedom Annual Report at the State Department building in Washington, Tillerson was asked to assess the current situation with North Korea.
The world will need to get used to North Korea having nuclear weapons for now, according to a former top United States intelligence advisor.
In comments at an 11 August youth forum in Moscow, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov urged all sides involved in the controversy over North Korea’s nuclear weapons program to avoid using force and exercise maximum restraint.
In a 26 April speech to the annual Moscow conference on international security, Russian Security Council Chief Nikolai Patrushev much more pointedly claimed that “external provocateurs”—a clear reference to the United States—were pushing North and South Korea toward war.
If China won’t help us on North Korea, let’s try to get North Korea to help us on China.
The Clinton, Bush and Obama administrations each tried to threaten or cajole North Korea into abandoning its weapons programs.
North Korea’s leaders know that the United States would cheerfully topple their regime if it had the chance.
As rhetoric escalates between President Trump and Kim Jong-Un, we asked an expert about the prospects for war, peace and anything in between.
A former Department of Defense and State Department official explains why a hardline approach on North Korea will likely fail, as it did with Iran.
A ban on North Korean seafood exports began to be felt this week, curtailing an easy source of cash for the North Korean government but angering Chinese wholesalers.
An explainer about why Chinese video accusing India of committing seven sins in Doklam is an attempt to spread false propaganda.
German political parties campaigning for elections next month are competing to attract 2 million voters with roots in the former Soviet Union, amid concerns that Russian propaganda could sway votes in the community.
In an interview with the German daily newspaper Kolner Stadt-Anzeiger, German Foreign Minister Sigmar Gabriel claimed that Christian Lindner, a leader among German liberals, is just trying to get headlines when speaking of the temporary postponement of the issue of Crimea’s annexation, and that the main task at present is to achieve an ceasefire in eastern Ukraine.
We need to think about how to reach a ceasefire in the east of Ukraine,” Gabriel said.
According to Gabriel, the truce is a necessary condition for easing tensions with Russia, and in the Minister’s opinion, Lindner does not make any contribution to achieving this goal with his statements.
Lindner later clarified his position, saying that his party does not recognize the annexation of the Crimea.
However, since it is impossible to solve the problem of occupation now, other issues should not be linked to it, because otherwise it will not be possible to achieve progress in relations with Russia.
Pence wants the region to do more to isolate North Korea and called on countries there to “do more” to address the situation in Venezuela.
Kevin Mandia, CEO of FireEye, provided an in-depth review of tactics, techniques and procedures of the top adversaries facing the United States in cyberspace at DoDIIS Worldwide 2017.
Preparing for a world where GPS connectivity isn’t guaranteed sure isn’t convenient but it may be entirely necessary.
Republicans are more likely than Democrats to have confidence in Vladimir Putin, and less likely to see Russia as a threat.
Caroline Gawlik For Americans in light of the Charlottesville events, Ukraine is a world away.
Right now it has been difficult enough for a citizen of Virginia to find common ground with their neighbors—it is even harder to look across the world for guidance.
But in this time of disorder, I think there is much that Americans can learn from Ukraine.
Ukraine has never been the modern powerhouse empire that America once was.
Instead, Ukrainians have long been the subaltern to various empires—particularly to the Russian Empire, and in turn the Soviet Union.
Therefore with the collapse of Communism in 1991, Ukrainians began their modern advancement towards discovering their own national values, identity, and memories.
They marked the beginning of this transition by toppling Soviet monuments.
Parliament member demands to know whether his country’s government targeted Trump in the 2016 campaign.
Hope Hicks, 28, will take the position after Anthony Scaramucci lasted just 10 days in the job, according to a report from the Daily Caller.
