On 17 March 2014, the Council adopted Decision 2014/145/CFSP concerning restrictive measures in respect of actions undermining or threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
On the basis of a review by the Council, the entries in the Annex should be amended and the entry for one deceased person should be deleted.
Article 1 Decision 2014/145/CFSP is amended as follows: in Article 6, the second paragraph is replaced by the following: ‘This Decision shall apply until 15 March 2016.’; the Annex is amended as set out in the Annex to this Decision.
Article 2 This Decision shall enter into force on the day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.
His Валерьевич AKCëHOB), ‘election’ was decreed unconstitutional by Oleksandr Turchynov on 1 March Serhiy Valeriyovych 2014.
He actively lobbied for the ‘re­ AKSYONOV (Сергiй ferendum’ of 16 March 2014.
L 239/160 EN Official Journal of the European Union 15.9.2015 Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 9.
On 1 March 2014 Totoonov publicly supported, in the Federation Council, the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Addit­ ionally the Black Sea Fleet falls within the District's control.
He was an organiser of (Владислав Юрьевич region the process in Crimea by which local Сурков) Crimean communities were mobilised to stage actions undermining the Uk­ rainian authorities in Crimea.
Responsible for administer­ (Михаил Григорьевич ing the Crimean referendum.
Respon­ Малышев) sible under the Russian system for signing referendum results.
Responsible for administer­ (Валерий Кириллович Primorsky region ing the Crimean referendum.
Bui, Kostroma and co-sponsor of recent legislative Dmitriyeva) region proposals in Russia that would have (Елена Борисовна allowed regions of other countries to Мизулина (born join Russia without their central Дмитриева) authorities' prior agreement.
Bandurovo, for overseeing the integration of the (Дмитрий Николаевич Kirovograd region, annexed Autonomous Republic of Козак) Ukrainian SSR Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Leningrad sible for the integration of the an­ (Олег Генрихович nexed Autonomous Republic of Савельев) Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Responsible for initiat­ Неверов) ing legislation to integrate the an­ nexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Makiivka (Donetsk seizure and occupation of the regio­ Пушилiн), oblast) nal administration.
Re­ (Вячеслав Викторович Saratov region. sponsible for overseeing the political Володин) integration of the annexed Ukrainian region of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Responsible for facil­ (Владимир Николаевич itating the adoption of legislation on Vologodsk Oblast, USSR. the annexation of Crimea and Sevas­ Плигин) topol into the Russian Federation.
Skvortsovo village, systematic and expedited issuance of Simferopol region, Russian passports for the residents of Crimea Crimea.
Sloviansk (Donetsk Vyacheslav oblast) mir Putin to send in Russian troops Volodymyrovich to protect the city and later asked him PONOMARYOV to supply weapons.
Remains active in (Вячеслав Владимирович supporting separatist actions and po­ Пономарëв) licies.
Bes control of the Security Service of Uk­ raine's Office in Donetsk region build­ ing and afterwards seized the Ministry of Internal Affairs' district station in the town of Horlivka.
Remains active in Царьов), supporting separatist actions or poli­ Oleg Anatolevich cies.
Mikhailovka, menting Russia's annexation of (Наталья Владимировна Voroshilovgrad region, Crimea.
Actively im­ 12.5.2014 Shevchenko plementing Russia's annexation of Se­ (Игорь Сергеевич vastopol.
Remains active in supporting Ходаковський), separatist actions or policies.
Aleksandr Sergeevich KHODAKOVSKII (Александр Сергеевич Ходаковский) 64.
Boris Vyacheslavovich DOB 15.12.1950 Permanent member of the Security 25.7.2014 GRYZLOV Council of the Russian Federation.
Vladivostok (Борис Вячеславович a member of the Security Council, Грызлов) which provides advice on and coordi­ nates national security affairs, he was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Kuibyshev On 23.5.2014 he announced the in­ (Михаил Владимирович auguration of the ‘de facto embassy’ Дегтярëв) of the unrecognised, so-called ‘Do­ netsk People's Republic’ in Moscow, he contributes to undermining or threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Vyselki, Krasnodar (Александр Николаевич region He was awarded the medal ‘for the Ткачëв) liberation of Crimea’ by the Acting head of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea for the support he provided to the unlawful annexation of Crimea.
In addition, her bank account is (Катерина Юрiйовнa used to finance illegal separatist Губарева) groups.
He is associated with Березин), Igor Strelkov/Girkin, who is responsi­ ble for actions which undermine or Fedir Dmitrovych threaten the territorial integrity, sover­ BEREZIN eignty and independence of Ukraine.
Former vice-prime minister of Do­ (aka Vladimir SHEVTSOV, netsk People's Republic, responsible Vladimir Iurievici for security and law enforcement.
Simferopol, Crimea (Сергей Вадимович public of Crimea’ by the President of Абисов) Russia on 5 May 2014 and by his actions as so-called ‘Minister of Interior’ he has under­ mined the territorial integrity, sover­ eignty and unity of Ukraine 92.
ROTENBERG He developed his fortune during Pre­ (Аркадий Романович sident Putin's tenure.
Yuriy Valentinovich DOB 25.7.1951 Mr Kovalchuk is a long-time acquain­ 30.7.2014 KOVALCHUK tance of President Putin.
Leningrad (St founder of the so-called Ozero Dacha, Ковальчук) a cooperative society bringing to­ gether an influential group of indi­ viduals around President Putin.
Belarus (Николай Терентьевич founder of the so-called Ozero Dacha, Шамалов) a cooperative society bringing to­ gether an influential group of indi­ viduals around President Putin.
Debalcevo (Мирослав Владимирович they will continue their fighting in Руденко) the rest of the country.
Moscow (Андрей Николаевич his statements he has, inter alia, talked Родкин) about the militias' readiness to con­ duct a guerrilla war and their seizure of weapon systems from the Ukrai­ nian armed forces.
Mikhail Sergeyevich DOB 23.5.1971 So-called ‘First Deputy Prime Minister’ 12.9.2014 SHEREMET of Crimea.
Dzhankoy (Михаил Сергеевич in the organisation and implementa­ Шеремет) tion of the 16 March referendum in Crimea on unification with Russia.
Yuri Leonidovich DOB 2.2.1948 Deputy Speaker of the Federation 12.9.2014 VOROBIOV Council of the Russian Federation.
Krasnoyarsk (Юрий Леонидович 1 March 2014 Vorobiov publicly sup­ Воробьев) ported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Uk­ raine.
Alma-Ata, Kazakh (Владимир Вольфович SSR actively supported the use of Russian Жириновски) Armed Forces in Ukraine and annexa­ tion of Crimea.
Stefanidin Dar, (Виктор Петрович Rostov region Forces, and deputy of the State Duma.
Opochka (Владимир Степанович Countries, Eurasian Integration and Никитин) Links with Compatriots of the State Duma.
Rudny, Kostanai (Олег Владимирович region, Kazakh SSR tries, Eurasian Integration and Links Лебедев) with Compatriots of the State Duma.
SEMENOV In taking on and acting in this capa­ (Дмитрий Александрович city, he has therefore actively sup­ Семенов) ported actions and policies which un­ dermine the territorial integrity, sover­ eignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
In taking on and acting in this capa­ city, he has therefore actively sup­ ported actions and policies which un­ dermine the territorial integrity, sover­ eignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
In taking on and acting in this capa­ city, she has therefore actively sup­ ported actions and policies which un­ dermine the territorial integrity, sover­ eignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
Eduardovych Mychaylov) In taking on and acting in this capa­ (Евгений Здуардович city, he has therefore actively sup­ Михайлов) ported actions and policies which un­ dermine the territorial integrity, sover­ eignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
Pavlo Leonidovych In this capacity, he has actively sup­ DRYOMOV ported actions and policies which un­ dermine the territorial integrity, sover­ (Павло Леонщович eignty and independence of Ukraine, Дрьомов) and further destabilised Ukraine.
Krasny Luch, In taking on and acting in this capa­ Voroshilovgrad Lugansk city, he has therefore actively sup­ ported actions and policies which un­ dermine the territorial integrity, sover­ eignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
Omsk (Анатолий Иванович the deployment of Russian troops in Антонов) Ukraine.
Zhilino, (Валерий Фëдoрoвич Kaliningrad region He is the founder of the civil move­ Рашкин) ment ‘Krassnaya Moskva — Red Mos­ cow — Patriotic Front Aid’ which or­ ganised public demonstrations sup­ porting separatists, thereby support­ ing policies which undermine the ter­ ritorial integrity, sovereignty and inde­ pendence of Ukraine.
Prizrak brigade Armed separatist which has actively supported actions which 16.2.2015 undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
