It seems so strange, twenty-seven years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, to be living through a new Cold War with Russia.
The United States media following its State Department script depicts Russia as an expansionist power.
That it can do so, so successfully, such that even rather progressive people—such as those appalled by Trump’s victory who feel inclined to blame it on an external force—believe it, is testimony to the lingering power and utility of the Cold War mindset.
Russia is twice the size of the United States with half its population.
It does not claim to be the exceptional nation appointed by God to preserve “security” on its terms anywhere on the globe.
Since the dissolution of the USSR in 1991, the United States has waged war in Bosnia , Serbia , Afghanistan , Iraq , Libya , and Syria , while raining down drone strikes from Pakistan to Yemen to North Africa.
The United States heads an expanding military alliance formed in 1949 to confront the Soviet Union and global communism in general.
Yet it has expanded from 16 to 28 members since 1999, and new members Estonia and Latvia share borders with Russia.
Alliance officials expressed outrage when Russia responded to the warmongering by placing a new S-400 surface-to-air missiles and nuclear-capable Iskander systems on its territory of Kaliningrad between Poland and Lithuania on the Baltic coast.
But Russia has in fact been comparatively passive in a military sense during this period.
In 1999, as NATO was about to occupy the Serbian province of Kosovo , nearby Russian peacekeepers raced to the airport in Pristina, Kosovo, to secure it an ensure a Russian role in the Serbiam province’s future.
But the British officer on the ground wisely refused an order from Gen.
Wesley Clark to block the Russian move, declaring he would not start World War III for Gen.
This, recall, was after Bill Clinton’s secretary of state, Madeleine Albright presented to the Russian and Serbian negotiators at Rambouillet a plan for NATO occupation of not just Kosovo but all Serbia.
This Pristina airport operation was largely a symbolic challenge to United States hegemony over the former Yugoslavia, a statement of protest that should have been taken seriously at the time.
He was thanked by George W Bush with the expansion of NATO by seven more members in 2004.
Then in April 2008 NATO announced that Georgia would be among the next members accepted into the alliance.
Soon the crazy Georgian president Mikhail Saakashvili, emboldened by the promise of near-term membership, provoked a war with the breakaway republic of South Ossetia, which had never accepted inclusion of the new Georgian state established upon the dissolution of the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1991.
The Ossetians, fearing resurgent Georgian nationalism, had sought union with the Russian Federation.
The two “frozen conflicts,” between the Georgian state and these peoples, had been frozen due to the deployment of Russian and Georgian peacekeepers.
Russia had not recognized these regions as independent states nor agreed to their inclusion in the Russian Federation.
But when Russian soldiers died in the Georgian attack ion August, Russia responded with a brief punishing invasion.
The Ukrainian president opted out in favor of a generous Russian aid package.
That decision — to deny these “European aspirations” — was used to justify the coup.
Just look at this map, of the expanding NATO alliance, and imagine it spreading to include that vast country between Russia to the east and Poland to the west, bordering the Black Sea to the south.
The NATO countries at present are shown in dark blue, Ukraine and Georgia in green.
And imagine NATO demanding that Russia vacate its Sevastopol naval facilities, which have been Russian since 1783, turning them over to the alliance.
The Russians denounced the coup against President Viktor Yanukovych , which was abetted by neo-fascists and marked from the outset by an ugly Russophobic character encouraged by the United States State Department.
Russia has no doubt assisted the secessionists while refusing to annex Ukrainian territory, urging a federal system for the country to be negotiated by the parties.
The Soviet munitions industry integrated Russian and Ukrainian elements.
One must assume there are more than enough Russians angry about such atrocities as the May 2014 killing of 42 ethnic Russian government opponents in Odessa to bolster the Donbas volunteers.
Still, these two incidents — the brief 2008 war in Georgia, and Moscow’s response to the Ukrainian coup since 2014 — have been presented as evidence of a general project to disrupt the world order by military expansion, requiring a firm United States response.
The teleprompter will refer routinely to Putin’s aggression and Russian expansion and the need for any mature presidential candidate to respect the time-honored tradition of supporting NATO no matter what.
And now the anchor is expected to repeat that all 17 United States intelligence services have concluded that Vladimir Putin interfered in the United States presidential election.
Since there is zero evidence for this, one must conclude that the Democratic losers dipped into the reliable grab bag of scapegoats and posited that Russia and Putin in particular must have hacked the DNC in order to — through the revelation of primary sources of unquestionable validity, revealing the DNC’s determination to make Clinton president, while sabotaging Sanders and promoting Donald Trump as the Republican candidate — undermine Clinton’s legitimacy.
All kinds of liberals, including Sanders’ best surrogates like Nina Turner, are totally on board the Putin vilification campaign.
It is sad and disturbing that so many progressive people are so willing to jump on the new Cold War bandwagon.
It is as though they have learned nothing from history but are positively eager, in their fear and rage, to relive the McCarthy era.
United States Russophobia does not rest on reason, judgment, knowledge of recent history and the ability to make rational comparisons.
The hawks in Congress — bipartisan, amoral, ignorant, knee-jerk Israel apologists, opportunist scum — are determined to dissuade the president-elect from any significant rapprochement with Russia.
They want to so embarrass him with the charge of being Putin’s “puppet” that he backs of from his vague promise to “get along” with Russia.
The first Cold War was based on the western capitalists’ fear of socialist expansion.
It was based on the understanding that the USSR had defeated the Nazis, had extraordinary prestige in the world, and was the center for a time of the expanding global communist movement.
It was based on the fear that more and more countries would achieve independence from western imperialism, denying investors their rights to dominate world markets.
Russia and the United States are equally committed to capitalism and neoliberal ideology.
Their conflict is of the same nature as the United States conflict with Germany in the early 20th century.
The Kaiser’s Germany was at least as “democratic” as the U.S.; the system was not the issue.
It was just jockeying for power, and as it happened, the United States intervening in World War I belatedly, after everybody else was exhausted, cleaned up.
In World War II in Europe, the United States having hesitated to invade the continent despite repeated Soviet appeals to do so, responded to the fall of Berlin to Soviet forces by rushing token forces to the city to claim joint credit.
Up is down, black is white, Russia is the aggressor, the United States is the victim.
It’s a demand for the Trump camp to buy the Russian blame game, or get smeared as a fellow-traveler with international whistle-blowers keen on exposing the multiple crimes of United States imperialism.
But stupid people — or wise people, cynically exploiting others’ stupidity — are shaping opinion every day, and have been since the first Cold War, based like this one on innumerable lies.
