The move comes amid escalating tensions between Russia and Ukraine over the free movement of merchant ships to Ukrainian ports in the Sea of Azov.
Ukraine’s navy will take possession of the two United States patrol boats, Ukrainian defense officials say, reflecting a recent shake-up in which the country’s military chain of command has taken over from the border guard in defending the country’s southern coastline.
That shift in authority underscores how Russia’s aggression in the Sea of Azov has spurred Ukraine to shore up its defenses against the threat of a Russian amphibious invasion from either the Sea of Azov or Black Sea.
In April, Russian naval forces in the Sea of Azov—including submarines—stepped up the harassment of merchant vessels traveling to and from Ukrainian ports in the shallow water sea.
The twin American Island-class cutters due for delivery to Kiev—the Drummond and the Cushing—are typically armed with a 25 mm machine gun, two .50-caliber machine guns, and other small arms.
The United States cutter deal is also part of a broader NATO effort to shore up Ukraine’s maritime defenses.
On Sept., British Defense Secretary Gavin Williamson announced the United Kingdom will deploy more Royal Marine commandos and a naval attaché to Ukraine.
U.K. military units have been in Ukraine training the country’s armed forces since 2015.
Last week alone, international cease-fire monitors recorded more than 5,500 cease-fire violations along the Donbass front line.
Beginning in July, Poroshenko kick-started a plan to build up Ukraine’s naval strength and harden its coastal borders.
And on Sept., Kiev unveiled a plan to stand up a new naval base on the Sea of Azov to “repel the aggressive actions in the region by the Russian Federation,” Kiev said in a statement.
Poroshenko also ordered the navy to rapidly build a new fleet of shallow water gunboats—known colloquially in military circles as a “mosquito fleet”—armed with advanced anti-ship weapons.
So far this summer, Ukraine has launched two of its new Gyurza-M class gunboats to the Sea of Azov region.
Only Russia and Ukraine have coastlines on the Sea of Azov—a shallow-water sea through which roughly 80 percent of Ukraine’s exports pass and with vast untapped gas deposits that have yet to be claimed by either Russia or Ukraine.
Russia’s Kerch Strait bridge was immediately seen by Ukraine and its allies in the West as a threat to the free flow of maritime traffic into the Sea of Azov.
This is a tool for economic and political pressure on Ukraine,” Ukrainian Infrastructure Minister Volodymyr Omelyan said during a May 16 Cabinet meeting—the day after the Kerch Strait bridge opened.
More of a concern for Kiev, however, was the uptick in Russian harassment against Ukrainian ships passing under the bridge.
Underscoring the current crisis, on Sept. two Ukrainian navy vessels effectively ran Russia’s de facto blockade of the Sea of Azov.
On Sept., Russian vessels escorted the Ukrainian ships “under complicated circumstances” as they passed through the strait, Ukraine’s navy reported.
According to Ukrainian news reports, a United States Air Force RC-135V surveillance aircraft was flying near the Kerch Strait on Sept. as the Ukrainian ships made the crossing.
Meanwhile, Russian warplanes reportedly buzzed the two Ukrainian navy ships.
They require a strong response, including an enhanced sanctions policy and other targeted measures,” Poroshenko said.
Ukrainian and Western military experts alike worry that tensions in the Sea of Azov could widen or escalate the ongoing land war in the Donbass.
Its behavior only increases the risk of miscalculation and the prospect of crisis turning to chaos,” said Williamson, the British defense secretary, in an interview with British media last week after he announced the deployment of Royal Marines to Ukraine.
Ukraine is like ""The Mouse That Roared"" the 1955 Cold War satirical novel by Irish American writer Leonard Wibberley.
