Artemenko himself claimed to have evidence showing corruption by President Poroshenko, that could help oust him and that he had received encouragement for his plans from top aides to Mr Putin.
Felix Sater, a Russian-American, pleaded guilty to a role in a stock manipulation scheme decades ago that involved the Mafia, while Michael Cohen is being investigated by the FBI for links with Russia.
Most commentators agree that this ‘peace plan’ originated, not from Artemenko, but from the Kremlin, in tactics designed to test whether the United States and Ukrainian society might be ready for some kind of deal.
In a press conference for foreign media in Moscow on 21 February, ex-President Yanukovych announced he would send letters to the US, French, German and Russian presidents, asking them to act to stop the war in eastern Ukraine and to request an honest and open investigation into the murders of police and protesters in Kyiv in February 2014.
Yanukovych also repeated his claims that “unidentified snipers” attacked both police and protesters on Maidan in 2014 and that he had evidence which would help identify the real masterminds behind the killings.
This is not the first time that Yanukovych has made such claims, while at the same time refusing to provide that evidence to Ukrainian investigators.
Ukraine was, as it has been in the last three years, firmly on the agenda at the Munich Security Conference which, amongst other things, saw the first meeting between President Poroshenko and United States Vice-President Mike Pence.
Poroshenko said he received a “very strong message supporting Ukraine” in a meeting with Pence and recent talks with United States Secretary of State Rex Tillerson.
Asked whether he was concerned that United States President Donald Trump and members of his administration were sending mixed signals on Ukraine, Poroshenko dismissed that notion.
Nevertheless, Poroshenko spoke about the need to maintain sanctions against Russia.
To move in that direction would be naive, wrong and dangerous — not only for Ukraine, but also for Europe and for the world,” he said.
He also warned against “any agreement behind our back” with Russia on Ukraine.
Mike Pence said the Trump administration would demand that Russia honours the 2015 Minsk agreement.
The United States will continue to hold Russia accountable, even as we search for new common ground, which as you know President Trump believes can be found,” he said.
For his part, Sergiy Lavrov announced a fresh ceasefire brokered by Russian, Ukrainian, German and French negotiators to halt fighting between Ukrainian forces and Russian-backed separatists from 20 February, though there was little confidence that this would be any more successful than previous ceasefire agreements, particularly in the light of comments from self-proclaimed DNR leaders that they were ready to use extreme force to push back at Ukrainian troops.
Hardly had the talks ended when President Putin dropped an unexpected bombshell by signing an executive order granting visa-free travel to anyone living in self-declared separatist territories in eastern Ukraine and recognising all documents issued by separatist militias.
The statement said it related to “certain districts of Ukraine’s Donetsk and Luhansk”, without specifically referring to the self-proclaimed People’s Republics.
It gives birth, marriage and death certificates, identification, qualification, vehicle registration certificates and other documents issued by pro-Russian separatist “authorities” official recognition in Russia.
Sergey Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, claimed the recognition was afforded so “Donbass residents” can enter Russia legally, with thousands already fleeing over the border as asylum seekers.
However, the timing was no coincidence, coming as it did on the heels of Mike Pence’s statement about United States support for Ukraine.
It seems clear that although Russia has repeatedly and consistently denied interference in eastern Ukraine, it will not lessen its political support for the separatists and is challenging the United States and the West to test their appetite for further action.
This week, an Austrian court approved the extradition of Ukrainian oligarch Dmytro Firtash to the United States in a bribery case, overturning an earlier ruling that had said the United States request was politically motivated.
However, minutes after the Austrian judge announced his extradition verdict to a packed courtroom, a spokeswoman for Austrian prosecutors said Firtash had been detained on a European arrest warrant based on a separate Spanish request.
Austrian police took him into custody on an outstanding warrant from Spain that accuses him of money laundering and engaging in organized crime.
Mr Firtash gained much of his wealth through arrangements with Russian energy giant Gazprom.
A key paid adviser in Yanukovych’s campaign was Paul Manafort, who later became Mr Trump’s election campaign adviser.
Manafort and Firtash were linked in a real estate project to redevelop the Drake Hotel site in Manhattan.
Yulia Tymoshenko argued this was a money-laundering project to siphon huge amounts of cash out of Ukraine.
Firtash denies this, telling Bloomberg that although he was initially interested in the project, he changed his mind.
Whatever now happens, it will be interesting to watch how the Firtash story plays out, how it will affect the Trump administration, and indeed, whether the administration might use the power of the oligarch to examine options for its involvement in Ukraine – as some commentators have suggested that Firtash’s support for a ‘neutral’ Ukraine, combined with the significant business and financial leverage he still has in Ukraine might be something that the Trump administration finds useful.
Whether any of this might work in the interests of the Ukrainian people is an open question.
