For KURT VOLKER: MARGARET E DAUM, PARTNER, SQUIRE PATTON BOGGS LLP 2550 M STREET, NW WASHINGTON, DC 20037 25 5 1 THE CHAIRMAN: Good morning.
It is being conducted by the House 7 Intelligence Committee with the participation of the 8 Oversight and Foreign Affairs Committees.
We expect the questions 11 to be professional, that you'll be treated civilly.
Then we'll begin the questioning, and my 16 colleague will set out the time limits.
I'm the director of 14 investigations for the HPSCI majority staff, and I want to 15 thank you for coming in today.
He's a senior counsel 17 for the majority staff, and he will be conducting the 18 majority of the questions today.
However, because the -the interview is 3 being conducted here in the Intelligence Committee's secure 4 spaces and in the presence of staff who all have appropriate 5 security clearances.
Now, if any of our questions can only be answered with classified information, please inform us of that before you answer the question, and we will reserve time at the end for a classified portion of the interview.
The majority will be given 1 hour to ask questions, then the minority will be given 1 hour to ask questions.
Thereafter, we will alternate back and forth between majority and minority in 45-minute rounds until the questioning is complete.
We will take periodic breaks as needed, and if you need a break at any time, please let us know.
Under the committee rules you are allowed to have an attorney present during this interview, and that I see you have brought one.
There is a stenographer to your left 2 taking down everything that I say and everything that you say 3 to make a written record of the interview.
For the record to 4 be clear, please wait until each question is asked before you 5 answer, and we will wait until you finish your response 6 before asking you the next question.
If a question is unclear or you 12 are uncertain in your response, please let us know.
And if 13 you do not know the answer to a question or cannot remember, 14 simply say so.
Now, Mr Volker, with that, we turn it over to you for any opening statement that you would like to make.
I'm not going to prohibit Members, but we'd like to keep this professional at the staff level.
Mr Chairman, I've probably sat in on more transcribed interviews than maybe any other Member, at least on our side, and I have never seen an effort to prohibit Members from asking the witness questions.
I'm not going to prohibit you, Mr Jordan, but we will expect you to treat the witness with respect.
We have conducted innumerable interviews in the HPSCI over the last several years without any difficulty, and I hope that the decorum that we expect here will be represented on both sides.
I have never seen a 8 time where agency counsel was not allowed to be present.
And 9 I've certainly never seen an indication that you would prefer 10 Members not even participate in the interview.
But I at least wanted to 12 get that on the record before we heard from our witness 13 today.
Mr Volker, if you have an opening 17 statement, now is the time for you to deliver it.
That is a testament to the strength of our people, 3 our institutions, and our country.
My efforts as United States Special Representative for 20 Ukraine negotiations were no different.
I would not have been true to myself, my duties, 25 or my commitment to the people of the United States or 14 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Ukraine if I did not dive in and try to fix problems as best I could.
There are five key points I would like to stress in this testimony, and I would like to submit a longer version and timeline of events for the record.
Let me be clear that I wish to be complete and open in my testimony in order to help get the facts out and the record straight.
First, my efforts were entirely focused on advancing United States foreign policy goals with respect to Ukraine.
United States policy toward Ukraine for the past 2 years has been strong, consistent, and has enjoyed support across the administration, bipartisan support in Congress, and support among our allies and Ukraine.
While I will not be there to lead these efforts any longer, I sincerely hope that we are able to keep this policy strong going forward.
I believed I could steer 18 United States policy in the right direction.
I was 20 the administration's most outspoken figure highlighting 21 Russia's ongoing aggression against Ukraine and Russia's 22 responsibility to end the war.
Ukraine policy is perhaps the one area where the United States and its European allies are in lockstep.
This coordination helped to strengthen United States sanctions against Russia and to maintain EU sanctions as well.
Along with others in the administration, I strongly advocated for lifting the ban on the sale of lethal defensive arms to Ukraine, advocated for increasing United States security assistance to Ukraine, and urged other countries to follow the United States lead.
I engaged with our allies, with Ukraine, and with Russia in negotiations to implement the Minsk agreements, holding a firm line on insisting on the withdrawal of Russian forces, dismantling of the so-called People's Republics, and restoring Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In order to shine a spotlight on Russian aggression and to highlight the humanitarian plight suffered by the people in the Donbas as a result, I visited the war zone in Ukraine three times with media in tow.
Together with others in the administration, we kept United States policy steady through Presidential and parliamentary elections in Ukraine and worked hard to strengthen the U.S.-Ukraine bilateral relationship under the new President and government, helping shepherd a peaceful transition of power in Ukraine.
In short, whereas 2 years ago most observers would have said that time is on Russia's side, we've turned the tables, 18 1 and now time is on Ukraine's side.
I did so solely because I understood that the new 13 Ukrainian leadership wanted to convince those, like Mayor 14 Giuliani, who believed such a negative narrative about 15 Ukraine, that times have changed and that, under President 16 Zelensky, Ukraine is worthy of United States support.
As you will see from the extensive text messages I am 24 providing, which convey a sense of real-time dialogue with 25 several different actors, Vice President Biden was never a 19 1 topic of discussion.
This 24 included in-person meetings with senior United States officials at 25 State, Defense, and the NSC, as well as staff briefings on 20 1 Capitol Hill and public testimony in the Senate on June 18th, 2 2019.
I have no doubt that there is a 5 substantial paper trail of State Department correspondence 6 concerning my meetings with Ukrainians, allies, and so forth.
I became aware of 13 a hold on congressional notifications about proceeding with 14 that assistance on July 18th, 2019, and immediately tried to 15 weigh in to reverse that position.
The position was indeed 24 reversed and assistance allowed to continue within a few 25 weeks after that.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony, and I look forward to answering your questions.
I'm a senior counsel on HPSCI, and I'm going to be asking you most of the questions today.
Before I begin, I just want to remind you that you're under oath and that it's very important, obviously, for you to tell the truth today.
I want to begin at the beginning -at the end actually -and it's our understanding that on September 27th, 2019, you resigned your position as the Special Envoy for Ukraine.
A I felt that I would no longer be effective as a special representative with this impeachment inquiry beginning and my name associated with that and all the media attention around that.
I didn't think I would be able to go to Ukraine or meet with Russians and be able to carry out those duties in that way anymore.
I also wanted to make sure that I would be able to provide testimony, because I could see this coming, with as much candor and integrity as I possibly could.
I called him and told him that I was very sorry, I felt that I would not be able to be effective as a special representative going forward, and I thought it was important that I be able to provide testimony as I have just done.
He was disappointed because he was focused on the mission with Ukraine, and after the record that we had accomplished over 2 years it's going to be very difficult to have someone step in and pick that up from here.
A I don't recall discussing the whistleblower's complaint with him in that call.
Q Are you aware of any -A May I -may I -I did not discuss the contents of the testimony that I just read.
A It did not provide any instruction not to cooperate, and neither did I receive any separate instruction.
Q We'd ask that you provide a copy of that letter to the committee for the record.
It is from Marik String, the acting legal adviser at the State Department.
Q For the record, we're going to mark the letter that's dated October 2nd, 2019, as Exhibit 1.
And he 6 told me that he did not have any clear guidance -that the 7 administration was still deliberating internally what they 8 would say.
I became aware of the 21 President being interested in investigations concerning Vice 22 President Biden and his son on September 25th when the 23 transcript of the phone call came out.
We're going to go through some of your text messages that you turned over, and I'll ask you some more questions about that.
Q Now, I believe in your opening statement you said that President Trump -you were not aware of President Trump exerting pressure on Ukraine to open investigations.
A That's correct, to open investigations into Vice President Biden or his son.
A I knew that he was concerned about the possibility of there having been election interference.
A We had a meeting with the President in May following my participation in a Presidential delegation for the inauguration of the new Ukrainian President.
That was Secretary of 10 Energy Rick Perry, it was Ambassador to the European Union 11 Gordon Sondland, it was Senator Ron Johnson, and it was 12 myself.
I believe the deputy 15 national security adviser, Mr Kupperman , was one person 16 who was there.
The four of us, who had been part of the 22 Presidential delegation, had requested the meeting in order 23 to brief the President after our participation at the 24 inauguration of the new Ukrainian President, and meeting with the new President, an hour-long meeting that we had with him.
We believed that he was sincerely committed to 3 reform in Ukraine, to fighting corruption.
And we believed 4 that this was the best opportunity that Ukraine has had for 5 20-some years to really break the grip of corruption that has 6 set the country back for so long.
Most 19 people who would know anything about Ukraine would think 20 that.
That’s why it was important that we wanted to brief 21 him, because we were saying, it's different, this guy is 22 different.
We urged that he invite President Zelensky to meet 25 with him at the White House.
We 31 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 persisted.
During the course of this conversation he did reference Mayor Giuliani, because he said that what we were saying as a positive narrative about Ukraine is not what he hears.
And he gave the example of hearing from Rudy Giuliani that they're all corrupt, they're all terrible people, that they were -they tried to take me down -meaning the President in the 2016 election.
And so he was clearly demonstrating that he had a negative view of and that information that he was getting from other sources was reinforcing that negative view.
There were accusations that had been made by the prosecutor general of Ukraine.
I think that would be helpful for the court reporter to spell some of the Ukrainian names.
A No, ""he"" being the prosecutor general of Ukraine, made a couple of accusations or allegations in early 2019.
And they made their way into United States media, reported both in print and then a journalist's writing who was then interviewed on television, so it was major news.
One of them that Ukrainians had sought to influence the 2016 election by providing derogatory information about President Trump and about Mr Manafort to the Hillary Clinton campaign, that this was done by passing that information to our ambassador at the time in Ukraine, Masha Yovanovitch.
Her proper name is Marie L Yovanovitch, Y-o-v-a -1 second -Y-o-v-a-n-o-v-i-t-c-h, and she goes by Masha, and I've known her for 30 years -is that correct? -'88 to now, so 31 years.
So the accusation was that derogatory material to influence the election was given to her and to the Ukrainian ambassador in Washington, Valeri, V-a-l-e-r-i, Chaliy, C-h-a-l-i-y.
And this information was therefore intended to reach the Hillary campaign to influence the election.
This was before Zelensky was elected, 17 but you could see the wave of popularity.
I think there were a couple motivations to this, 20 but I think most important was that he would stay in office 21 probably to prevent investigations into himself for things 22 that he may have done as prosecutor general.
A Well, he obviously met with Rudy Giuliani, I've learned that from media reports, and therefore that was also a target of how to get information into the United States system.
I know that Mr Giuliani did, and I know that Mr Giuliani reported to President Trump.
A We had a difficult time scheduling a bilateral meeting between President Zelensky and President Trump.
But the reason the answer is no is we did 8 have difficulty scheduling a meeting, but there was no 9 linkage like that.
And 11 we're going to come back to the President's interest in that 12 investigation later on.
The second allegation is the one about 15 Burisma and Hunter Biden and Vice President Biden.
And the 16 allegation there is that Hunter Biden was put on the board of 17 a corrupt company that a prior prosecutor general, Shokin -18 I believe it's S-h-o-k-i-n -was seeking to investigate that 19 company and that Vice President Biden weighed in with the 20 President of Ukraine to have that prosecutor general, Shokin, 21 fired.
When Vice President Biden made those representations to President Poroshenko he was representing United States policy at the time.
And it was a general assumption -I was not doing United States policy at the time -but a general assumption among the European Union, France, Germany, American diplomats, U.K., that Shokin was not doing his job as a prosecutor general.
Q Now, you mentioned that during your Oval Office meeting with the President and others, following the May 20th or 21st inauguration, you urged the President to have a meeting with President Zelensky.
He was taking on an effort to reform 8 Ukraine, fight corruption, a big sea change in everything 9 that had happened in Ukraine before, and demonstrating strong 10 United States support for him would have been very important.
In addition to what the 15 content of the meeting would be, where we do have a very 16 strong policy of supporting Ukraine, the imagery of the 17 Ukrainian President, you know, at the White House, walking 18 down the colonnade, in the Rose Garden, whatever it might be, 19 that imagery conveys a message of United States support.
I have two more questions on the second 21 allegation, as you call it, and then I'm going to move on to 22 your text messages.
I believed him to be a private citizen who is President Trump's personal attorney.
A Approximately September 2nd to 5th timeframe, somewhere in that range, I believe.
Q Do you know whether he has opened an investigation or reopened an investigation into Burisma Holdings -A No, I don't.
So before we move to the text messages, I want to ask you a clarifying question.
If I can explain -Q You do not know or he did not -A I do not know whether he advocated for any linkage between those things or not.
And we ended up 18 talking about, well, then, make a statement about 19 investigating corruption and your commitment to reform and so 20 forth.
And the thought behind that was just trying to be convincing that they are serious and different from the Ukraine of the past.
Q Now, I recall that in that text -one of the text messages to Andrey Yermak -I might have you spell that for the record.
Andrey is A-n-d-r-e-y, and Yermak is Y-e-r-m-a-k, and he is an assistant to -or a -I don't know what the exact title is -but an assistant to the President of Ukraine, probably his closest adviser.
Q I believe in the text messages, and we'll probably go through it, but you sent a proposed statement to Mr Yermak for President Zelensky to release.
Q -for the statement that President Zelensky was going to release -A Yes.
A To Giuliani, and therefore that information flow reaching the President would be more positive than it had been.
And so we talked about it, and I said, well, if it said Burisma, let's be clear, we're talking about the Ukrainian company and Ukrainians that may have violated Ukrainian law or whether any Ukrainians may have tried to influence United States elections, that's what we're talking about.
I advised him that making those specific 14 references was not a good idea, that a generic statement 15 about fighting corruption and, you know, if anyone had tried 16 to interfere in United States domestic politics, it's unacceptable, we 17 have to make sure that never happens again, that's fine.
Prosecutor 24 General Lutsenko was at this time still in office, and so the 25 one who's making these allegations, which, you know, there is no -no evidence was brought forward to support.
And so he said, first off, we don't want to -if there is any evidence here, we don't want to say this and then have Lutsenko destroy it.
Secondly, we don't want to commit to anything that we might do as an investigation without having our own prosecutor general in place, that is the new team that took office.
And in addition, I just think it's important that you avoid anything that would look like it would play into our domestic politics, and this could.
For the reason that you highlighted earlier, 46 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 which is that it was known that Hunter Biden was a board member of Burisma, so it could be interpreted that way.
A Well, we're talking about what we see today especially in light of the phone call on July 25th.
At the time I was not aware of that phone -the contents of that phone call.
A In August, because of conversations with Giuliani, I wanted to make sure that I was cautioning the Ukrainians, don't get sucked in.
I believe that he was doing his own communication about what he believed and was interested in.
A Because the Ukrainians asked to be connected to him in order to try to get across their message of being different from the past.
So I do want to go through the text messages because I believe that they're a good anchor for some of the other topics that we've been discussing that I do want to 48 1 discuss.
So for the record, I'm handing the witness 5 what the witness produced yesterday as KV1 through KV65.
A Gordon is United States Ambassador to the European Union Gordon Sondland; and Bill is Ambassador Bill Taylor, who is the Charge d'affaires in Kyiv.
If you jump down to -and I think it will be easiest to refer to the messages by the date and timestamps on the left-hand side.
When a person sends a text message in WhatsApp and then they go in themselves and delete it, because they're correcting what they were trying to say, I did this, didn't -you know, I wanted to say something different instead, they delete that.
And WhatsApp records that there was a prior message that was deleted before the next message is there.
Bill Taylor is the Charge d'affaires at the United States Embassy in Kyiv.
A He was a career civil servant, and he served as Ambassador to Ukraine, I believe, in the late 2000s.
And when Ambassador Yovanovitch departed, the DCM at the Embassy also was at the end of her tour.
And it was my judgment, and I recommended this to Secretary Pompeo, that we needed a more seasoned diplomat in place to be the United States Charge.
And Bill had been the vice president of USIP, and he took a leave of absence from that to take on the role of Charge.
Gordon, can I ask you to see if 13 you can break through on two key issues, a date from the 14 White House for the Zelensky visit -ZE visit means 15 Zelensky.
Gordon, you 6 might not have seen the message from George Kent on the high 7 side that tells us that senior levels at the White House said 8 that the visit is not happening any time soon.
If not, 10 I don't think a senior call with the Ukrainians on Friday, as 11 your staff is suggesting, makes sense.
I want to ask you about two of the people 22 who are mentioned in these messages.
A Alex Vindman is a National Security Council staffer who has worked on Ukraine.
So this is after President Trump wrote a letter to President Zelensky, inviting him to meet with him at the White House.
And then, in trying to nail down a date to propose to the Ukrainians for that visit, we were not getting anywhere.
He believed that Alex Vindman was slow-rolling this invitation to President Zelensky.
So we need to do more first with Ukraine to build up to White House visit.
We need the personal relationship between President Trump and President Zelensky.
Once they get to know each other, that will give President Trump the confidence that this is a new day in Ukraine, a new President, a team committed to reform.
So I just wanted to get the two of them together as quickly as possible.
Now, you referenced a letter from President Trump to President Zelensky congratulating him on his inauguration.
Q And yet, as of the time of these text messages in late June, no meeting had yet been scheduled.
I think we just keep it among ourselves and try to build a working relationship and get the damn date for the meeting.
I don't usually -and a smiley face because I don't normally use profanity.
And, for instance, February 28th, we had a United States 16 Destroyer visit the Port of Odessa.
I went there, as the 17 senior representative, to be there for that Destroyer visit.
He had -he’s a political 22 appointee and had close ties with the political side of the 23 White House that I did not have.
I just know that he had a relationship with President Trump that I did not have.
A I would say that he felt that he could call the President and that they could have conversations.
So what I understand this to be -it took me a while to reconstruct this in my own mind.
I believe that Gordon and Bill had a phone call with President Zelensky, and they were -I don't know what the purpose was, but they were trying to somehow steer President Zelensky on the where we are with the request for a meeting because we had the letter, you know -Q From the President.
That is a tremendous symbol of support to have their president visiting with our President in the White House.
A Ulrich is Ulrich Brechbuhl, who is the counselor of the State Department.
A I believe they have a very close relationship and work well together.
He was a way of communicating so that information could get to the Secretary if he needed it to.
And one that I did not use very much, but I think Gordon and Bill did call him a few more times than I did.
I'd have to look at -I'd have to think about calendar and where I might have been or what I was doing, but I'm not sure.
He was at that time the chair of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine, appointed by President Zelensky.
And he was seeking a meeting with National Security Advisor John Bolton as a first meeting with his counterpart.
A And I believe the meeting in question with Bolton -waiting for the Bolton meeting I understand to be 62 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Q Is that the meeting that -I apologize for interrupting, but is that the meeting that later took place on July 10th -A That is correct.
And I'll just have you read those, starting with what Bill Taylor said at 7:56m.
He is now the Foreign Minister of Ukraine but at this time was a diplomatic adviser to President Zelensky.
It could be Andriy Bohdan, A-n-d-r-i-y, Bohdan but spelled in the Ukrainian way, B-o-h-d-a-n.
Good grief, please tell 19 Vadym to let the official USG representatives speak for the 20 United States Lutsenko has his own self-interest here.
Eager to hear if your meeting with Danylyuk and Bolton resulted in a decision on a call, a phone call between President Trump and President Zelensky.
If I can explain that -Q Let's finish the text, then we'll go back and have you explain some things.
A Just what it says here, that according to Rudy Giuliani, the Zelensky-POTUS meeting will not happen.
So it's possible that they had further communications, but I don't know.
A Yes, because with the message that Lutsenko said, that according to Rudy Giuliani this meeting will not happen, he wanted to make sure that the Secretary -by briefing Ulrich, it would get to the Secretary -that there's this issue, that this is what was said.
A Well, when he says ""briefed Ulrich this afternoon on this,"" I assume what it is, is that message from Andriy and Vadym about what Lutsenko told them.
So Bill Taylor learns from Andriy and Vadym that Rudy Giuliani told Lutsenko that the meeting with the President of the United States was not happening.
And then Bill Taylor briefs that to 66 1 Counselor Ulrich so that Ulrich can inform Secretary Pompeo.
He was getting into 12 the weeds about restructuring the intelligence services, the 13 security services in Ukraine, into the weeds about 14 restructuring the Defense Ministry, how they were going to 15 set up a National Security Council apparatus different from 16 the one -and this is not the level of conversation you 17 should be having with the National Security Advisor of the 18 United States.
We want to work 22 with -that's what the message should have been, and he just 23 di dn 1 1 do i 24 Q Okay.
We kind of tried to 4 shepherd this relationship together as best we could.
I don't 7 remember who it was now, whether it was Alex or -Vindman or 8 whether it was senior director at the time.
And when she left, she was replaced by Tim Morrison, 18 and I don't remember when that transition took place.
Eager 24 to hear if your meeting with Danylyuk and Bolton resulted in 25 a decision on a call.
And the reason we were now seeking a phone call was because it had been so long since the letter inviting the President of Ukraine to the White House without scheduling the visit that we thought it would be a good idea for President Trump to call him again.
And, in addition, we were looking forward to the Parliamentary election, which was going to be concluded on July 21st.
Let's see if we can get agreement that we'll do a phone call either just before or just after that Parliamentary election.
My time is up, so I'm going to turn it over to my colleagues on the minority side.
We were just amazed by your deep knowledge of the region, your ability to recall specific names, pronounce them.
During the break, all of the members, the staff at large talked about it, just an incredible 69 1 appreciation for your knowledge of the region.
We have great respect for the career 5 Foreign Service officers, and to the extent any Foreign 6 Service officer is thrust into the political realm, we 7 appreciate that that is just an unfortunate circumstance.
So, if I get any of the names, if I mispronounce it, 12 anything of that sort, if I'm not as savvy as you, please 13 forgive me.
It in no way is a lack of respect for the job 14 that you and your colleagues do.
And, with that in mind, I 15 mean, you mentioned in your opening statement that at all 16 times you conducted yourself with the highest level of 17 personal and professional integrity.
It was I think in 6 the United States interest for the information that was reaching the 7 President to be accurate and fresh and coming from the right 8 people.
I believe it must have come up in the conversation that Mr Giuliani had with Mr Yermak in Madrid on August 2nd because it was Yermak who came to me with a draft statement.
And I viewed this as valuable for getting the Ukrainian Government on the record about their commitment to reform and change and fighting corruption because I believed that would be helpful in overcoming this deep skepticism that the President had about Ukraine.
I wouldn't say I 18 thought it was necessary to have it in there because I 19 thought the target here is not the specific investigations.
And if you go through the pages and pages 2 here, you know, there's -of everything that was the topic 3 of conversation -and there's a lot -that never comes up.
Don't do anything to 15 interfere, that that would be seen as interfering in United States 16 elections.
Q It's my understanding he's a former Interior Minister and that he has great control over energy companies in the energy sector.
Ukraine 14 has a long history of pervasive corruption throughout the 15 economy throughout the country, and it has been incredibly 16 difficult for Ukraine as a country to deal with this, to 17 investigate it, to prosecute it.
A slogan that I 19 have used a lot or in explaining this to people is that in a 20 situation where everybody is guilty of something, the choice 21 of whom to prosecute is a political decision.
Q Then what was the knock on Lutsenko, other than you had said earlier that he may not have been a reliable -A Well, the information about Lutsenko -and I'm not vouching for this; I'm telling you what was the rumor mill in Kyiv -that he himself was corrupt, that he was protecting President Poroshenko and friends of President Poroshenko in this, you know, how does prosecution work.
He was a politician himself who became the prosecutor general, not a judge or lawyer who got into that position directly, and playing a very political role as prosecutor general.
And that he saw the writing on the wall when Zelensky's popularity was rising and Poroshenko was likely to lose the election, and he was concerned about possible investigations into himself once he was out of office and possible investigations into President Poroshenko once he was out of office.
It struck me as normal at the 15 beginning, and then the longer it went on, it became clear 16 there's an issue here.
I -when I was at the 20 National Security Council staff, trying to get meetings with 21 President Bush for various leaders there, banging your head 22 against the wall trying to get it scheduled.
You know, in your experience, foreign assistance sometimes gets locked up.
I agree with you in saying that assistance gets held up for a variety of reasons at various times.
In this case, here you had an instance where everyone that I spoke with in the policy side of the administration -you know, Pentagon, military, civilian, State Department, National Security Council -they all thought this is really important to provide this assistance.
And so, in that circumstance, for there to be a hold placed struck me as unusual.
It came from 0MB, so I immediately thought about budgetary issues, that, for whatever reason, there's a hold placed.
There was one report about a hold placed on all assistance because of a concern about end-of-year spending not being done efficiently.
And I just didn't believe that this hold would ever be sustained because the policy community in the administration was determined to see it go forward.
I don't believe -in fact, I am quite sure 8 that at least I, Secretary Pompeo, the official 9 representatives of the U.S., never communicated to Ukrainians 10 that it is being held for a reason.
By the time it hit Politico publicly, I 19 believe it was the end of August.
And I got a text message 20 from, it was either the Foreign Minister or -I think it was 21 the future Foreign Minister.
They expressed concern that, since this has now come 7 out publicly in this Politico article, it looks like that 8 they're being, you know, singled out and penalized for some 9 reason.
I was working and still am as the executive 23 director of the McCain Institute.
Some of you may have heard of it by now, which 2 means that we've been successfully building this institute.
And so I asked 9 then-Secretary of State Tillerson if he would be okay if I 10 did this on a part-time, voluntary, unpaid basis rather than 11 as a full-time employee because I didn't want -I didn't 12 feel I could give up the responsibilities I had taken on in 13 developing the McCain Institute.
There I would say quite unfortunately 83 1 because I think we were in a very -we had developed a very 2 strong Ukraine policy.
The Ukrainians are 7 being very smart about the negotiations right now, and it's 8 developing some new pressure on Russia.
So to be unable to 9 be in a position to keep pressing that I think is very 10 unfortunate.
We 4 want to be able to have candid conversations with them, and 5 we don't want to feel that they will not have that degree of 6 openness in speaking with us if they believe what they tell 7 us is going to be released publicly.
So there has been United States assistance provided to 24 Ukraine for some time, under the Bush administration, Obama 25 administration, and now under the Trump administration.
I 85 1 was particularly interested in the security assistance and 2 lethal defensive weapons.
The reason for this is this was 3 something that the Obama administration did not approve.
It is not 6 my -you know, I was just a private citizen, but that's my 7 opinion.
I thought that this is a country that is defending 8 itself against Russian aggression.
They had their military 9 largely destroyed by Russia in 2014 and '15 and needed the 10 help.
And humanitarian assistance is great, and nonlethal 11 assistance, you know, MREs and blankets and all, that's fine, 12 but if you're being attacked with mortars and artilleries and 13 tanks, you need to be able to fight back.
I had a 17 fundamentally different view that if we did not provide it, 18 it's an inducement to Russia to keep up the aggression, and 19 there's no deterrence of Russia from trying to go further 20 into Ukraine.
So I believed it was important to help them 21 rebuild their defensive capabilities and to deter Russia.
It took a 4 while, but Secretary Tillerson, you know, he wanted to think 5 it through, see how that would play out.
And they met -I 9 did not meet with the President about this -but they met 10 with the President and the President approved it.
I mean, I'm 24 sure there were other things, like night vision goggles, 25 scopes for rifles, counter-battery radars.
So, if you're being fired on with mortar or artillery, you can calibrate where that's coming from better with a counter-battery radar, and that enables you to then fire back more accurately.
So we weren't giving them the weapon to fire back, but we were giving them the radar.
So these are the sorts of things that were being finessed by the Pentagon before we changed the policy.
And then said, no, we're going to provide genuine lethal defensive arms, anti-tank missiles, anti-sniper systems, and so forth.
We have not done as much in the naval and coastal defense area as we have on ground.
And I could see the body language and the chemistry between them was positive, and I felt that this is what we needed all along.
A I believe it was about 3 weeks prior to what the opening of the normal Foreign Service transfer season would be.
A Well, without commenting on the merits of it, it is 89 1 absolutely the right of the President to determine who his 2 Ambassadors are in the world.
That is a Presidential 3 nomination, a Senate confirmation, and the President has the 4 right to recall anyone at any time that he wants.
And I 19 think that's unfortunate for her because she is a 20 professional.
And I think it is unfair to her to have that 22 reputational damage or that image created as a result.
And I have always 12 known her to be upstanding, high integrity, capable, honest, 13 and professional in the way she carries out her duties.
Q I mean, is it fair to say that -I guess part of the trouble that some of my Republican colleagues are having with the emotion connected to her recall is, granted, anything that besmirches your character and integrity, anybody would be upset about that, to a degree a little bit emotional.
A I think you can look at it as a matter of the President's prerogatives as President, and it's unquestionable.
If you look at it from the perspective of a capable career diplomat who then suffers some damage to her reputation or career or perceptions about her, that is unfortunate.
Q There have been allegations that, from time to time, not just on one occasion, that officials from the Embassy in Ukraine, whether it be Ambassador Yovanovitch or Ambassador Pyatt, communicated to the prosecutors general in Ukraine, both Shokin and Lutsenko at various points in time, that there were certain entities or individuals that should not be prosecuted.
And there's a question of whether or not a list was given by Ambassador Yovanovitch.
A I've seen that allegation as well, and I believe the State Department put out a statement addressing that.
I don't recall exactly how it was addressed, but -Q There certainly are facts on both sides, and there are -like I said, this is one of those allegations that provokes great emotion.
But Lutsenko has said that there was a list of, you know, entities not to prosecute.
And this is the same prosecutor general who I described earlier as saying things that I believed were intended to be self-serving.
Q And Shokin I think at various points in time has alleged that he was encouraged not to investigate Burisma.
A Well, this -there's more of a record on that, 93 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 where it was a matter of United States policy to investigate corruption in Ukraine, disappointment with him in not doing that, and then a push to remove him for those reasons.
On one occasion when I met with him, 23 he brought Prosecutor General Lutsenko to the meeting so I 24 could meet with him.
I was -that was just me with President 95 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Poroshenko.
I don't remember how many meetings I had with him, but possibly, you know, 10, 12, something like that.
Ambassador Yovanovitch, we interacted quite regularly, just as you see with Bill Taylor here.
And when I visited Ukraine, for the most part, we were in all our meetings together.
A Oh, I think -again, I'd have to refer back to the statement that the State Department put out addressing this, because I think that was actually put together -researched and put together.
Q There's another allegation that Lutsenko's visa was denied, he wanted to come to the United States and he had his visa denied.
If a name is flagged for any reason, then it triggers a review by people, and then they make a decision as to whether to approve a visa or not.
A If someone applies for a visa and the visa is denied, then you can apply for a waiver of the denial, depending on what the denial is.
I was -I was the -I don't know what you would call it -the waiver officer.
And they submit an explanation, a petition, to have a waiver of the denial.
You mentioned this morning that in advance of your coming in for the interview nobody at the State Department told you, you couldn't come.
Q And while there was a letter from Pompeo and -the State Department has concerns about their diplomatic -A Yeah.
One of them is the importance of protecting members of our Foreign Service.
Another is that it is difficult to put together information of the right quality for a committee like this in such a short period of time.
And I noticed even in the long form written testimony that I prepared for you, I already noticed this morning I got three dates wrong.
So I had a conversation with the acting 18 legal adviser, Marik String, on the Tuesday of this week, 19 which had to have been the 1st of October.
I saw -I had 20 prior conversations with him, but those prior conversations 21 were not at a point where it would -I had resigned and 22 was -clearly was going to testify.
In none of these conversations did he say I am instructed not to testify.
The letter does not say, don't do it, and there was no formal instruction.
There was a concern expressed in this letter that was sent to my attorney last night about protection of classified material.
As was asked earlier, I believe all of the information that is contained in these things that I'm discussing is unclassified.
I was communicating on unclassified devices, I was doing it with people, there's no intelligence, there's no deep national security information.
There are a couple of conversations I would categorize as sensitive, but I would not characterize any of those as classified.
And that is, however, one of the things that was communicated in that letter from Marik String.
I had a conversation with White House Counsel lawyers soon after the -not the subpoena -when the request for transcribed testimony came in, and I had a conversation with White House Counsel.
As a matter of completeness, the State Department acting legal adviser did call my attorney yesterday.
Q So maybe we could just get you to talk about your reaction when you saw your name -A Yeah.
He got some facts wrong, but I thought that trying to do damage limitation -I wouldn't have used the word ""damage limitation,"" but I under -I kind of get what he's talking about.
This is what I am referring to when I say make sure that there's a -there's not a negative narrative about Ukraine that's reaching the President from other means, that we get one story straight.
And then secondly, helping the Ukrainians ""navigate,"" was the word that he used, ""requests,"" I believe he said from the President, if I'm not mistaken.
I -the whistleblower report says that I was dispatched to Ukraine after the President's phone call to meet with President Zelensky to talk about it.
I was planning a visit to Ukraine to fall after the 21st of July, which is when the parliamentary election was.
I did not want to show up in Ukraine during an election campaign, because all they do is ask you, do you like this candidate, do you like that candidate, did you talk to these -so I just avoid going during election seasons.
So I wanted to go after that, and I wanted particularly to go to the conflict zone, which I tried to do every year, as a way of highlighting that Russia is still here killing people.
So in setting that trip up, we arranged it to be around the 25th, 26th of July.
I left Washington on the 23rd of July, and en route I learned that the proposed phone call, congratulatory phone call from President Trump to President Zelensky, was then starting to be scheduled.
It turns out that it took place on the 25th of July, which was the day I was in Kyiv already having meetings.
The next day is when my meeting with President Zelensky was scheduled, and then after that meeting, we went out to eastern Ukraine to the conflict zone.
But the message was congratulations from the President to President Zelensky; President Zelensky reiterating that he is committed to fighting corruption and reform in the Ukraine; and President Trump reiterating an invitation for President Zelensky to visit him at the White House.
And we 5 like to be real strict with our 1 hour, so I will literally 6 try to stop in the middle of a sentence at my hour, because 7 we don't want to abuse the process.
And in my view, that's the wrong person to be 21 talking to in Ukraine.
I was vaguely aware, meaning I had heard in 15 early 2019 that he was on the board of Burisma.
I didn't 16 know much more about the company or the details than that -17 other than that it had a bad reputation, which is probably 18 why they wanted him on the board.
My suspicion is that Burisma, having had a very bad reputation as a company for corruption and money laundering, was looking to spruce up its image by having, you know, prominent-named people on its board.
In the interests of time, I'll stop there before opening up a new line of questions.
Ambassador, we've been discussing the events, in many respects, as if the call between the President and President Zelensky never happened.
I realize you weren't on the call, but we now know what was said on that call, and I think we need to evaluate what you witnessed in the context of a call that we now know the details of.
The other thing, there's a lot of talk about Biden's son, that Biden stopped the prosecution, and a lot of people want to find out about that.
Biden went around bragging that he stopped the prosecution, so if you can look into it.
So the President's request here is that President Zelensky look into allegations concerning Joe Biden and his son.
Insofar as I'm reading it, yes, you're right, but it's specifically about stopping this prosecution, which I think is the conversation with Shokin that Vice President Biden would have had at that time.
There's a lot of talk about Biden's son -and then it says -that Biden stopped the prosecution.
And I interpreted that immediately as the first one being the son and the second one being Joe Biden, but you could read it as both being the son.
This isn't some generic interest in energy companies or one particular company.
The President's interest as expressed here is in Joe Biden and his son.
So Andriy Yermak knows that the President of the United States wants Joe Biden and his son investigated and that the President thus far has not been willing to commit to a date for a meeting.
And some time after this call, Rudy Giuliani goes to Madrid to meet with Andriy Yermak.
I then discussed that with Mr Yermak after that conversation, and he did not want to include Burisma and 2016, and I agreed with him.
That it -well, what I interpreted that to mean, which I thought at the time, is that it doesn't convey a sense this Ukraine, this leader, this leadership in Ukraine being any different than the past.
So now you do know that and now you can put in context what Giuliani was saying, because Giuliani was saying: Without a mention of Burisma, this statement won't be credible: that is, it won’t help get the meeting.
He said -he said that it needs to mention Burisma and 2016, and if it doesn't do that, it's not credible in terms of being a convincing statement that this Ukrainian Government is serious about finding out what happened in the past, cleaning it up.
He was interested in Burisma because he thought it reflected ill on the Bidens and would be helpful to his client.
I don't know whether he was representing the President or whether he was doing his own things to try to be helpful to the President.
You understood that the Ukrainians recognized that Rudy Giuliani represented the President, that he was the agent of the President, that he was a direct channel to the President.
I would not say that they thought of him as an agent, but that he was a way of communicating, that you could get something to Giuliani and he would be someone who would be talking to the President anyway, so it would flow information that way.
I'm not so sure about that, because I don't know whether -I was not part of the discussion that they had in Madrid.
I don't know whether Mr Giuliani represented himself as speaking for the President.
I do know from the Ukrainians that they viewed him as someone who communicated with the President and, therefore, they wanted to tell their story to him.
He's saying that the statement, in order to be credible, needs to mention Burisma and 2016.
It's less clearly linked to that that would break free the scheduling of a meeting.
I don't think Mr Giuliani ever -ever suggested that he's in a position to do that.
Because there's no indication from the call record of any interest by the President in Burisma, but there is an interest of the President in the Bidens.
And so I think in -Congressman, what I hear you suggesting, if I understand correctly, is Rudy Giuliani seeing these as synonymous.
What I was trying to do was understand, you know, what is the request to investigate Burisma.
Is it reasonable for the Ukrainians to do that or not, to say that they would do so.
And in talking with the Ukrainians and conveying that that was what Rudy Giuliani had said, it should mention Burisma and 2016, they expressed discomfort with that, and I agreed with that and said I don't think you should do it.
One of them was that the prosecutor general in place at the time was not, quote, unquote, their prosecutor general, it was the carryover from the previous government, Lutsenko.
So they didn't trust him and they didn't want to put anything out suggesting investigations that would either get him engaged, or that he would then try to obstruct or thwart somehow.
I think the way they put it was they don't 10 want to be seen as a factor or a football in American 11 domestic politics.
But -19 THE CHAIRMAN: I think we're we 1 re toying around the 20 edges here.
But -22 THE CHAIRMAN : They didn't want to be drawn i nto 23 investigating a Democratic candidate for President, which 24 would mean only peril for Ukraine.
They didn't express that to me, and, of course, I didn't know that was the context at the time.
And the first conversation I had was when the diplomatic adviser to President Zelensky, Vadym Prystaiko, I believe it was, texted me a copy of the Politico article about the hold on assistance.
So I had had many conversations with him in the months prior to that, and this did not come up from him to me, which makes me believe that this was not on his radar until that time when he saw the article.
And you would agree, Ambassador, that if the President makes a request of a foreign power that is dependent on the United States for military support, that request is going to carry enormous weight with that foreign leader.
We're getting now into, you know, a 12 conflation of these things that I didn't think was actually 13 there.
Well, you weren't knowledgeable about the 15 request at all at the time, but you are now.
So, again, Congressman, I don't believe -THE CHAIRMAN: It's a pretty straightforward question.
The timeline doesn't -as I understand it, 8 and, again, my understanding here will have been impartial, 9 because I was not privy to a lot of information -but the 10 timeline about talking with Andriy Yermak about whether there 11 would be a statement or not to convey their commitment to 12 fighting corruption and being a new day in Ukraine was in the 13 middle of August.
And by the time 18 that we had that, we had dropped the idea of even looking at 19 a statement.
Ambassador, you're making this much more 21 complicated than it has to be.
And even though the suspension may have occurred earlier, the request is made to investigate the Bidens, and then Ukraine learns, for mysterious reasons, hundreds of millions in military support is being withheld.
But, Congressman, this is why I'm trying to the say the context is different, because at the time they learned that, if we assume it's August 29th, they had just had a visit from the National Security Advisor, John Bolton.
He was recommending and working on scheduling the visit of President Zelensky to Washington.
And in that context, I think the Ukrainians felt like things are going the right direction, and they had not done anything on -they had not done anything on an investigation, they had not done anything on a statement, and things were ramping up in terms of their engagement with the administration.
Ambassador, I find it remarkable as a career diplomat that you have difficulty acknowledging that when Ukraine learned that their aid had been suspended for unknown reasons, that this wouldn't add additional urgency to a request by the President of the United States.
There's no chance that -as the Congressman said as well -there's no chance, given the broad support for this in Washington, this will not go through.
So I and others were communicating to the Ukrainians, We will get this taken care of.
A This was the President's trip to Warsaw as part of that World War II commemoration.
The nightmare is they give the interview and don't get the security assistance.
A I believe this is still the idea of a statement or interview by Zelensky talking about his commitment to fighting corruption and mentioning Burisma and the 2016 election interference.
Q So this is -and he just said he had just had a conversation with Ambassador Sondland.
I don't have any clear 10 indicator here, but it would be normal for me to talk to him.
We had a letter from several 16 members of the Senate to 0MB pushing to get that lifted, and 17 I was confident that it would.
It's important that we have competent professional 22 people staying on the job here.
They come out and they make a statement like this and then we still don't lift security assistance, and the Russians will see that and that will benefit Russia.
Q And, again, Bill Taylor was threatening that he would resign -A He did.
A Well, he was saying if that nightmare scenario plays out, that he would quit.
The message to the Ukrainians -parenthesis -(and Russians), we send with the decision on security assistance is key.
The message to the Ukrainians we send with the decision on security assistance is key.
With the hold, we have already shaken their faith in us; thus, my nightmare scenario.
I said we are where we are, and believe we have identified the best pathway forward.
As I said on the phone, I think it's crazy to withhold security assistance for help with a political campaign.
The President is trying to evaluate whether Ukraine is truly going to adopt the transparency and reforms that President Zelensky promised during his campaign.
If you still have concerns, I recommend you give Lisa Kenna or S -meaning Secretary Pompeo -a call to discuss them directly.
I think it's crazy to withhold security assistance for help with a political campaign.
A I could only interpret this as meaning President Trump's political campaign and that he thought it would be crazy to withhold security assistance to help with that.
Lisa Kenna is the executive secretary of the State Department and S refers to Secretary Pompeo.
His message was just broader in general about fighting corruption in Ukraine.
Q I'd like to go back to some more questions about the July 25th call between President Trump and President Zelensky.
Before that call, is it true -is it accurate that you set up a meeting between Rudy Giuliani and Andriy Yermak, President Zelensky's assistant.
A I believed that Rudy Giuliani, as we saw in an earlier text message, he had been in touch with Prosecutor General Lutsenko.
I believe he was getting bad information, and I believe that his negative messaging about Ukraine would be reinforcing the President's already negative position about Ukraine.
So I discussed this with President Zelensky when I saw him in Toronto on July 3rd, and I said I think this is a problem that we have Mayor Giuliani -so I didn't discuss his meeting with Lutsenko then.
But I discussed even on July 3rd with President Zelensky that you have a problem with your message of being, you know, clean, reform, that we need to support you, is not getting -or is getting countermanded or contradicted by a negative narrative about Ukraine, that it is still corrupt, there's still terrible people around you.
At this time, there was concern about his chief of presidential administration, Andriy Bohdan, who had been a lawyer for a very famous oligarch in Ukraine.
And so I discussed this negative narrative about Ukraine that Mr Giuliani seemed to be furthering with the President.
It was, in my 8 view, it was impeding our ability to build the relationship 9 the way we should be doing, in my -as I understood it.
I reached out to Rudy to see whether -and 15 Andriy asked me to connect him to Rudy.
I reached out to 16 Rudy to see whether he could get together so that I could ask 17 him whether he wanted to be connected to Yermak.
I wanted 18 both parties to want to be connected to each other before 19 doing anything.
I 21 then set up a phone call between the two of them on the 22nd 22 of July.
Q I'd like to mark as exhibit 6 pages 18, 19, and 20 of your text messages.
A This was in advance of the phone call between President Trump and President Zelensky.
A The best of my recollection is I heard from Gordon, who spoke to someone at the White House.
A The things that President Trump wanted to investigate I did not know, and this was before the call and well before I found out what was in the call.
In terms of getting to the bottom of what happened in 2016, remember, you had the allegation from the prosecutor general that there had been Ukrainians who had passed documents to try to influence the 2016 election.
Q You did not believe there was any validity to the two allegations as we -A No, I do not.
Q -called them earlier, and yet, that's what President Trump wanted Zelensky to commit to investigating before he could get -A Right.
It's a matter of President Zelensky being convincing that he is going to get to the bottom of what happened.
So on that call it went well and President Trump asked President Zelensky to propose dates for a White House visit.
Please remind Mr Mayor -that's Rudy Giuliani -to share the Madrid dates.
I'm going to let my colleague, Dan Goldman, ask some questions on this.
Q Real briefly, because we only have a couple minutes, Ambassador Volker.
Whether or not you believed it was true, you relayed a message from the White House to President Zelensky that he needed to convince President Trump that he will get to the bottom of what happened in 2016 in order for there to be a White House meeting.
A I understand it to be get to the bottom of what happened in 2016, and we will nail down a visit for Washington.
In other words, what I'm quibbling about is I believe we were still going to push for a White House visit anyway, whether or not Zelensky did, you know, a convincing job saying that I am committed to finding out if there was any effort in election interference, finding out what Lutsenko was talking about.
But here is that if he is, you know, strong in this phone call, that will help.
Q You didn't say, ""Oh, if you can convince President Trump that you're going to root out corruption in Ukraine then we can set up a White House visit"" -A Correct.
A Get to the bottom of what happened in 2016 is a reference to the prosecutor general's claims that there was interference.
That to be investigated I always thought was fine, because that is just a matter of, you know, we don't want anybody interfering in our elections and did it happen.
And my belief was that it didn't, and this is helping -trying to help President Zelensky convey the right message in a phone call to build a relationship with the President that he needs to build just to have confidence in each other.
A To make sure he conveyed a message that would be convincing to the President.
We were talking -last time we were asking you 7 questions, the Republicans, about the President's skeptical, 8 deep concerns about Ukraine prior to President Zelensky.
But Ukraine had for decades a reputation of 18 being just a corrupt place.
There are a handful of people 19 who own a disproportionate amount of the economy.
Oligarchs, 20 they use corruption as kind of the coin of the realm to get 21 what they want, including influencing the Parliament, the 22 judiciary, the government, state-owned industries.
I would have to believe that President Trump would be aware of that general climate.
My view is that there's already a baseline of negative assessment and then this just reinforces.
Q And it's fair to say that the investigation, prosecution of Paul Manafort during -either -that too surely -A Yeah, I would think so as well that there was a Ukraine connection in that somehow.
Q And so there's a belief, fair or not, that perhaps Poroshenko or his allies were feeding information to somebody to, you know, get Paul Manafort in trouble.
In the investigations of Manafort's activities in Ukraine, there was a supposed ledger, and there's been in the media discussions, is this a valid ledger, is this a forgery ledger.
He's 10 played a variety of roles from journalist to member of 11 Parliament, supporting Poroshenko, opposing Poroshenko, 12 supporting Zelensky, not supporting Zelensky's team.
And I personally did not see him as, you know, 12 motivated by anything other than that.
I 17 believe that they were investigated and declared to be valid, 18 but, nonetheless, this was in the public domain.
Going back to the same page we were on, 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 A Q page four.
Her attitude towards me -and this is Yovanovitch -her attitude towards me was far from the best as she admired the previous President, and she was on his side.
It's the penultimate sentence of that paragraph and then the last sentence.
Her attitude towards me was far from the best as she admired the previous President, and she was on his side.
Well, he's expressing his view, and I -in my dealings with Masha, I found her trying to be impartial.
I found her trying to navigate the election without taking sides on anyone.
Some of the context to this is that Zelensky kind of came up out of nowhere.
There were other prominent candidates, so most of the 2 focal point was Poroshenko or Yulia Tymoshenko, will he run, 3 will he not run about a rock star named Sovavakochuk , 4 and Zelensky was not in the picture.
And maybe he felt that she was not like on board, 8 you know, communicating with him early enough, that that's 9 possible, as he perceived it.
What 16 a foreign leader thinks of our ambassador shouldn't drive how 17 we treat our ambassadors.
I think it's the President's own 18 judgment about our ambassadors that should matter.
Q -meaning we're turning -I mean, there's a lot of ambiguities in this document, and so it's very difficult to know for certain what's in the mind of the people that are recorded on the transcript.
You have to really know the issues and the context to understand what they're talking about, because it was in a particular moment.
They knew what they were discussing, but, you know, if you read it just cold and you don't know the context, I'm sure it's hard to figure out.
There's a lot of talk about Biden's son, that Biden stopped this prosecution, and a lot of people want to find out about that.
There's a lot of people talking about Biden's son, a lot of talk about Biden's son.
Get it into an official communication, an official contact between Ukraine and the Attorney General.
And it's not specifically saying investigate, but I think, you know, this came out in September, September 25th, and there's been a lot of commentary about that.
And I don't think you can make any other assumption than that it meant investigate, but it was at least saying, you know, work in an official, legal channel.
Q I was just mentioning that Biden shows up in this paragraph, you know, the top of page four, but the call doesn't -I mean, this call -it wasn't a call about Joe Biden.
I was not on the call and didn't get a detailed readout at the time, so I'm only reading the same text as you are.
I was back in Kyiv after visiting the 23 conflict zone and gave an interview and was asked about the 24 phone call and at that time reiterated the readouts that I 25 was given at the time, so this did not come up.
Q I think it was maybe suggested that Biden is synonymous for Burisma or Burisma is synonymous for Biden.
I mean, the name Burisma may not have been on the tip of the President's tongue during the call.
No doubt that he would not know or even know how to pronounce or be familiar with the name of a company like that.
There is Burisma the company, which was notorious for having had a history of corruption and been investigated for money laundering: there is Vice President Biden and his son; and there is 2016 election interference that had been alleged by the prosecutor general of Ukraine.
So there are three separate things that we're talking about, and sometimes they're getting conflated in the discussion here, but they are three distinct things.
And, in fact, I think it would only be proper for Ukrainians to investigate Ukrainian citizens who violated Ukrainian law, which is what the middle of those, Burisma, is about.
And in my duties as the special representative I would meet with him, talk with him.
But at the same time, my principal engagement was visiting Ukraine and meeting the President and staying in touch with the Foreign Minister and the diplomatic adviser to the President.
Q She is a consultant that -hired by the DNC during the 2016 election cycle, was paid $71,000.
I read about -Q Do you know anything about -A No, I have no personal knowledge of any of it.
Q So anything you know about Chalupa is just what you've read in the press -A Exactly.
Q But you're aware of the general allegations that Chalupa is trying to -A That she was looking for things for the benefit of the DNC and the election campaign.
We happened to be booked on a radio interview at the same time about Ukraine, and so we were chatting there.
He then attended a conference in Tbilisi, Georgia, and I met him and his new wife at that time.
Then I did not see him again after that until I visited Ukraine for the United States Destroyer visit to Odessa, went up to Kyiv that evening, had a meeting with candidate Zelensky, and he was at that meeting along with a number of other people.
So his involvement in the Manafort-related issues, you never had any firsthand -A I never spoke -I didn't know that he was involved in that until I later read about it in the media that he had a role with the ledger.
I think he was serious that, if we don't give 10 Ukraine the security assistance, because we all believe this 11 is critically important, then he would step down, and that 12 would be beneficial to the Russians as well because if we 13 can't get our policy right, then I don't think he wants to be 14 there representing it.
And he should know that 22 nobody in any of the policy agencies would sit still for 23 suspending this.
I don't need to go into examples, but I've come across many in my experience for any number of reasons where there is a hold on assistance or a condition placed on assistance because they want a particular policy outcome.
Sometimes it's human rights related, so that we're trying to get a government to do -you know, release a political prisoner or, you know, respect human rights better.
So there's a lot of reasons why assistance gets held from time to time.
We had one meeting, one breakfast, and the rest was just by text or by phone.
The reason I 3 assisted the Ukrainians in contacting him was precisely to 4 advance the interests of the United States because I wanted the 5 information that the President would be getting to reflect a 6 better understanding of who this new President, who his new 7 team are.
I believe it's part of 12 my job to try to advance the relationship between the United States 13 and Ukraine, to advance United States interests with Ukraine, foreign 14 policy, national security interests, to strengthen Ukraine as 15 a democracy.
I didn't 21 think it improper to contact Mr Giuliani much as I would, 22 you know, not think it improper to contact anybody.
You 23 know, I've had meetings with businessmen who have invested in 24 Ukraine.
Q And there were probably, you know, some individuals you decided not to do that with.
I can't imagine just even as a matter of time that I would have done that, but the focal point here, again, as you already stated, was how do we advance the United States interests here and the relationship between the United States and Ukraine.
To elaborate on that point, it was clear to me after, say, the spring of 2018 that the Russians were not going to move out of eastern Ukraine; they were content to keep the war going.
We had had some exploratory discussions late 2017, early 2018, that I thought might have some promise.
But by the time we hit the middle of 2018, it was clear they had made a conclusion to just keep the war going.
As a result of that, I concluded that the only thing we can really do is strengthen Ukraine.
If we want Russia to negotiate a way out, the only way they're going to do that is if they are convinced that it's pointless to stay.
And so helping Ukraine militarily, economically, security, reform, fighting corruption, and demonstrating a critically strong United States relationship is all part of demonstrating to the Russians that this is an expensive, wasted effort to keep this war going in eastern Ukraine.
I want to make sure that I give time to our members if they have questions.
I want to start out with this skepticism that the President had -that you talked about that the President had for Ukraine.
Well, what I can say is that when I briefed 8 the President and then participated in his meeting with 9 President Poroshenko in September 2017, it was already clear 10 then that he had a very skeptical view of Ukraine.
And I'll read it this time: The other 18 thing, there's a lot of talk about by Biden's son, that Biden 19 stopped the prosecution, and a lot of people want to find out 20 about that, so whatever you can do with the Attorney General 21 would be great.
They leave that to the law enforcement community, the Attorney General, prosecutor general, things like that.
But on the need for cooperation as a general matter, then, yes, I've heard that raised in other phone calls in previous administrations.
Of course, he's referring to -the 2 President is referring to Attorney General Barr.
I'm making 6 an entree to kind of set the table, set the stage, open the 7 window.
In terms of process to say work with 9 the Attorney General, that's the right process.
In the last round, there was a conversation 11 you had with Chairman Schiff that I just want to kind of 12 clarify.
So you had said that you get the readout 24 from the call that was basically congratulations, fighting 25 corruptions, and then initiation to a White House visit, so to speak.
But in your conversation with Representative Schiff, he kind of implied and wanted you to intimate that there was an agreement based on that conversation that: If you do the investigation, then you can have a meeting and maybe we'll consider this military aid.
And, in fact, we had conversations, and some of them are in these text streams here, where they wanted to make a statement to show that they are serious about investigating the past and fighting corruption and turn a new page in Ukraine.
Bill, I believe you are incorrect about President 3 Trump's intentions.
Gordon and I and, you know, Bill 7 and other -were in frequent contact.
And my final question is, in the last 10 round you were questioned a few times regarding the 11 acceptability of a President seeking the assistance of a 12 foreign government regarding our electoral process.
My view -just an American citizen here; 23 it doesn't have anything to do with being a special 24 representative to Ukraine -but my view is that we do not 25 want foreign countries interfering in American elections, period.
Mr Ambassador, it's Mark Meadows from North Carolina, and I'm not going to ask questions because the majority has indicated that they don't want members to do that.
I'm going on the record to indicate to the majority that we need to make sure that we clarify the rules, and members should be allowed to ask questions.
And I can tell you that, from my standpoint, it is critically important that we establish this going forward.
This is for the record, and I can tell you that I object to the way that this deposition -transcribed interview has been conducted in terms of the overall rules.
On behalf of the American people, it is a great loss that you are going back to your passion.
I can tell that you have done an incredible job of representing our country.
You've represented the State Department and our Foreign Service personnel in such a gracious way today that I just want to say thank you.
And your testimony here today has given me such great encouragement that, regardless of the outcome of what you believe or didn't believe, you've come across in an unbelievably transparent and authentic way, and I just want to thank you for that.
I'm acting as the chairman for the rest of the day, so you can ask questions.
I'm asking going forward because that's why I put it on the record, Mr Swalwell.
Well, when Chairman Schiff gets back, we'll ask someone who is really in Charge.
And so here is the last thing I would say: You've done a great job of answering as a fact witness, and I think that that's critically important, that in the context of all of this for the record is, when there's a fact, you have answered those to the best of your ability.
Now, I would say my friends opposite have tried to lead you down a road where you're supposed to get in the mind of everybody else that was on a text message and have you opine on what they thought.
And I think all the counselors around here realize that it would be leading the witness.
Well, there was a letter that was 18 submitted by three Democratic Senators to Lutsenko demanding 19 his assistance with regards to the Mueller probe.
You testified earlier that a problem in 15 the past for Ukraine was its leaders investigating political 16 rivals.
You mentioned that President Trump had expressed skepticism about Ukraine as long as you had known President Trump's views on Ukraine.
You had said that, as long as you had known Mr Trump had a view on Ukraine, you believed he had skepticism about Ukraine.
There was the meeting with President Poroshenko in September 2017, and then there was the Oval Office meeting on May 23rd of this year.
If you look at President Trump's bio, he had visited Ukraine, I believe, Miss America or Miss Universe Pageant, something like that.
And like a lot of businesspeople, I think he just recoiled at the corrupt environment.
You mentioned that, I think to Mr Perry, that it is not unusual for countries to have an investigation cooperation agreement, you know, as far as law enforcement goes, but you said it would be unusual to discuss specific investigations.
I'd just like to level set in light of many of the questions you received today.
I've consulted with them before and after those phone calls and meetings.
And when even the most laudable goals of 10 trying to advance national interests can get ensnared and 11 enmeshed with efforts to advance personal political 12 interests.
And I think it's going to be an 24 important thing to clarify for the rest of this interview.
Q I'd like to go back to what my colleague on the minority asked you about.
There's a lot of talk about Biden's son, that Biden stopped the prosecution, and a lot of people want to find out about that, so whatever you can do with the acting -with the Attorney General would be great.
My colleague suggested that when the President said Biden no less than three times in the portion of the transcript I just read, he actually meant to say Burisma.
He or she will look into the situation, specifically to the company that you mentioned in this issue.
If you could turn to page 42, and this is going to be marked, I believe, as a new exhibit, Exhibit 6.
And I believe this referred to Yermak confirming 12 that President Zelensky was going to make a statement along 13 the lines that we had discussed in that other exchange.
The reason I asked this question is because there 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 is a -to me, anyway, it appeared that the flow of information to the President up and down from the National Security Council staff was not working very well.
Q And if you can skip down to August 9th, 2019, at 5:51m., and just read what Ambassador Sondland said.
So to avoid misunderstandings, it might be helpful to have Andriy -to ask Andriy for a draft statement -that's the one we're talking about -embargoed -that he can see exactly what they propose to cover.
Even though Zelensky does a live presser, they can still summarize in a brief statement.
Q And then on the next, I guess the next day, August 10th, 2019, Ambassador Sondland says he briefed Ulrich.
I think it's possible to make this declaration and 5 mention all these things which we discussed yesterday, but it 6 will be logic to do after we receive a confirmation of date.
We talked about making sure that 14 there is no effort to interfere in United States elections and that if 15 there was anything in the past it should never happen again.
If you could turn to page 18 19, and I believe this is already marked as part of exhibit 19 6.
Once we have a date, we'll 12 call for a press briefing announcing upcoming visit and 13 outlining vision for the reboot of U.S.-Ukraine relationship, 14 including, among other things, Burisma and election meddling 15 in investigations.
We're going to go through the various 8 versions of the statement in a moment.
And you appear to be arguing or having 14 some disagreement about which came first, it's a chicken and 15 the egg problem.
Special attention should be paid to the problem of interference in the political processes of the United States, especially with the alleged involvement of some Ukrainian politicians.
We intend to initiate and complete a transparent and unbiased investigation of all available facts and episodes which, in turn, will prevent recurrence of this problem in the future.
Q Let's go to page 23, which we’re going to mark as a new exhibit, exhibit 8.
Q And that's what Rudy Giuliani wanted to be in the statement from -A That's right.
And when I say we will work on official request, Andriy asked whether any request had ever been made by the U.5. to investigate election interference in 2016.
That's why I said I will work on that, because 4 I didn't know what the answer was.
This is a version that inserted Burisma and 10 2016 U.5. elections into the text that Andriy had provided, 11 and it was meant to reflect the conversation with Rudy that 12 we had just talked about, so that he could see what it was 13 that we were talking about.
There is Bidens; there is Burisma as a company, which has a long history; and there is 2016 elections.
And part of what I was doing was making sure -and why I wanted to make sure I was in this conversation -that we are not getting the Ukrainians into a position about talking about anything other than their own citizens, their own company, or whether their own citizens had done anything in 2016.
Q But when President Trump told President Zelensky he wanted President Zelensky to start an investigation of the Bidens, President Trump -or President Zelensky understood that to also be referring to Burisma.
President 2 Trump asked about investigating Biden, said work with the 3 Attorney General concerning Biden, and President Zelensky 4 responded by saying, we will look into the company.
I think he would have thought this was a former Vice 15 President of the United States, it would be highly political, 16 a politicized thing, it would just be seen that way.
I wanted to go over it with Gordon, make sure we understood the same thing before I discussed it with -I assume the timing backs that up, I have to check it -but before discussing it with Andriy.
A Whether we had ever made an official request from the Department of Justice.
A Bruce Schwartz is a senior official in the Department of Justice responsible for international affairs, someone I've known for many years.
Q Did you reach out to Mr Schwartz about mentioning these investigations or whether -I'm sorry, strike that.
And because of that was another factor in my advising the Ukrainians then don't put it in now.
A It came up in this conversation with Andriy about the statement, and he asked whether we ever had.
As I found out the answer that we had not, I said, well, let's just not go there.
Q So Mr Yermak wanted to know whether the United States DOJ -198 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 A Yes.
He said, I think quite appropriately, that if they are responding to an official request, that's one thing.
Q Skipping down to August 19th -A And when I say that's the clear message so far, I just literally mean that.
I'm hoping we can get -can put something out there that causes him to respond with that.
When I said that's the clear message so far, that means that I have not made up in my mind that this is where we want to go, okay.
And then when I say I'm hoping we can put something out there that causes him to respond with that, meaning that we actually have an official request.
And if we have an official request through appropriate channels, then it's a reasonable thing for them to respond to.
And about this time, I stopped pursuing it as well, because I was becoming now here convinced this is going down the wrong road.
It is the level of trust that the President has with President Zelensky.
He has this general negative assumption about everything Ukraine, and that’s the larger issue.
You said you were concerned that it would go down the wrong road -A Yes.
Q -if there was not an official Department of Justice request, although even if you didn't know there had been an official request from President Trump to President Zelensky.
A First off, I didn't know anything about the Presidential conversation which was referencing Vice President Biden.
What we're talking about here is pushing the Ukrainians or asking the Ukrainians to include Burisma and 2016 in a statement that they would make.
And when it came to saying investigate 2016 elections, you know, was there an effort to interfere, it was rattling in my mind, you know, we've had a number of inquiries about 2016 elections and foreign interference, Russia, China, potentially others.
And so I thought, you know, before going down this road with the Ukrainians, I should check to see whether there has ever been an official request about that.
And when I discovered that there had not been, then I thought, oh, then we should not be going further than what we have done in official channels.
When I say official request, I mean law enforcement channels, Department of Justice to law enforcement in Ukraine, please investigate was there any effort to interfere in the United States elections.
So in this context, you also mentioned that Yermak had raised concerns that there had not been an official request.
A Definitely the latter, that their caution and my advising and agreeing with that caution I think led them to never make a statement.
Q But in this August -mid-August timeframe specifically, because there's obviously another effort to get a statement out in September once the military aid has become a public matter, but we'll get to that later.
A There's something in the first part of your question, though, that I wanted to comment on.
I remember what it was now, so no need to read back now, but thank you.
I've 10 known him a long time, he’s a person of integrity, and that's 11 not credible.
In my understanding, as I said, I'm separating the two, that there's one thing about the Bidens, there's another thing about Ukrainians trying to do bad things, and it's appropriate to investigate the second.
I knew they had a track record of a company that had a lot of problems.
A Well, this is investigating what happened then, not what's happening now.
That was one, and the other one was peace, that he was going to be, you know, redoubling efforts, doing anything he could to bring peace to eastern Ukraine.
I think some have just been around Ukraine so long, they are just skeptical of everybody.
Q So the official message coming from the State Department about Zelensky was that he was a legitimate anti corruption -A Yes.
A May I also add, importantly, from the Presidential delegation at the inauguration, because we viewed ourselves as having been empowered as a Presidential delegation to go there, meet, make an assessment, and report, and that's exactly what we reported.
A If things happened in the past that were corrupt or illegal, then President Zelensky is quite appropriately investigating them.
If nothing happened in the past, then you don't turn up anything and there's no problem.
And, indeed, it was the Ukrainians' own message that they want to clean up Ukraine, find out if anything happened, make sure it doesn't happen again.
I think the Ukrainians were doing the same thing I was doing, is drawing a distinction.
Looking into what Hunter Biden or Joe Biden's relationships were, different issue.
A I mean that, for example, although we didn't discuss Vice President Biden, but that is an example of if they had done something like that, that would have been seen very politically and that would have had a ripple effect.
The message that Giuliani was sending to change the statement was so that they would include an announcement of an investigation into Hunter Biden and Joe Biden.
I know that may be what's in his mind, I understand that, that may be what's in his mind, but by saying Burisma and 2016, that is a legitimate thing for the Ukrainians to check out.
Whether any Ukrainians had done anything improper -and this was a company that had a history of improper things -that's legitimate for them to investigate.
A Because it was the 2016 one that concerned me even more, because we had not made an official request.
And so now we're going down the road in talking about a statement of asking them to investigate something or them saying they will investigate something where we have not made such an official request.
A As I understood it at the time, we were all convinced, Rudy -not Rudy -Gordon Sondland, myself, Rick Perry, Bill Taylor, that this is someone we very much need to support in Ukraine.
In retrospect, when you see the transcript 14 of the phone call and you hear what Rudy Giuliani has now 15 said on television, that's clear.
It 20 was not clear to me that he was seeking investigations of 21 that specifically by Ukraine.
A With Rudy and with Ukraine, and saying to the Ukrainians, you know, investigating your own people for what things may have happened in the past is reasonable, but the further we talked about it the more I became convinced that even this is not a good idea.
A That it would be seen politically here, and that wouldn't be in Ukraine's interests.
And Rudy Giuliani publicly tweeted on June 21st, 2019, well before the events -most of the events we've been talking today, quote: New Pres of Ukraine still silent on investigation of the Ukrainian interference in 2016 election and alleged Biden bribery of President Poroshenko.
Time for leadership and investigate both if you want to purge how Ukraine was abused by Hillary and Obama people.
If that tweet was -I'm not familiar with the tweet, but yes, then that would have been in public.
And finally, Ambassador, I understand 2 your belief that it's okay to look in the past at corruption 3 if that's what the Ukrainians were going to do, but you would 4 agree that Burisma associated with Biden.
That's the time, so I think a 8 5-minute bathroom break, if that works for you.
Several hours in today answering a lot of 16 questions, much appreciated.
And I think there's a difference between the 22 manufacture or dig up dirt versus finding out did anything 23 happen in the 2016 campaign or did anything happen with 24 Burisma.
But I just wanted to reiterate, when I had 10 that breakfast with Rudy Giuliani in May, I pushed back on 11 his discussing the Bidens just as they had been in the media, 12 I pushed back on that.
Whether Ukrainians may have 15 wanted to buy influence in some way, that's another matter, 16 or whether this company was doing anything, that's another 17 matter.
And so, when we talked or heard 20 Burisma, I literally meant Burisma and that, not the 21 conflation of that with the Bidens.
And that is something that I think 25 is important to understand when we're talking about Burisma later on in August what I'm talking about and what I understood us to be talking about together.
Conversation with Andriy Yermak on the Ukrainian side and an overall readout, overall briefing from Charge Bill Taylor, and from my assistant in the State Department who was traveling to Ukraine with me at the time.
And she, I believe, had been in touch with NSC staff to get a cursory readout of the call.
I know -I believe that because Burisma had a reputation for corruption and money laundering that they were trying to spruce up their image, and one way that a company might do that is to put, you know, names on their board that would make it appear, okay, we've cleaned ourselves up.
Q It's been reported -A I'd say that I don't know much about him at all.
Q It's been reported that he was drawing a monthly salary of 50,000 or more.
A No, this is what I was referring to is that I don't believe that Vice President Biden would be corrupted in the way that he would carry out his duties as Vice President at all.
But whether Ukrainians may have sought to buy influence or to believe that they were buying influence, that's quite possible.
Q I mean, this isn't -you know, this isn't, you know, appointing former Senator Mitchell to somebody's board.
A That came up earlier, and I was reminded that he was also associated with Hunter Biden and Burisma in some way.
A If it was in the same media reports, I probably just skimmed right over it.
It is -it's a way of trying to demonstrate cleanliness and credibility, getting some international people on your board because Ukraine has such a bad reputation of its own.
Q I want to go back to your text messages, and I’d like to turn to the text messages with Rudy Giuliani.
And I’m going to mark as the next exhibit, exhibit 9, pages 2 through 9, 2 through 9.
Q But I really only -I think we've covered a lot of the ground regarding how you introduced Mr Giuliani to Mr Yermak.
Q I kind of want to just turn to the end of these, this message chain, to page 7.
You 7 called me about Yermak, and I reported back to you and 8 Sondland,g., a conference call on August 11th, three 9 others before.
And he was very, very public, you know, and I think, you know, cell phones held up on camera and, you know, text messages tweeted out and feeding these out there.
And I think he was getting frustrated that I was not responding to any of that because I'm not backing up that story.
A Well, he was saying that we were directing him and that he was acting on the behest of the State Department to do things.
Q Rudy Giuliani was not telling the truth when he was saying that he was acting at the direction of -A Correct.
And, again, we went over this earlier, but Andriy asked me to introduce him to Rudy.
And my thought was he's going to get much better information than he's getting from Lutsenko.
A Well, I'm not sure what it means, because I had spoken with the Secretary and I knew the Secretary knew that I had connected them.
So, when he says the Secretary seems not to know, I don't know what he's referring to.
It may be that there was a media appearance that the Secretary made where he did not affirm that, indeed, I had connected them.
A In -I don't want to say same day, but we're talking in the same time period.
Q So it's fair to say the Secretary was aware of what Rudy Giuliani -that the fact that at least Rudy Giuliani was communicating directly with Andriy Yermak -A Yes.
I'm -please go ahead and keep asking, but I can skip ahead to something here if you would like.
A So, skipping ahead, so the date of these text messages is Sunday, the 22nd of September.
So I did not answer those calls, and I think that's 6 partly why I think he was frustrated.
I had done it earlier in August, and he 12 just wanted to be refreshed.
Some are the first two 15 that you mentioned, and then he continues on saying that he's 16 going to let the Secretary know that he connected, which 17 fine.
Thanks for your help, just the courtesy, you know, 22 of getting together with Andriy.
Get out a statement that the State 24 Department connected me to Yermak, and I reported back to 25 State on my conversations.
And I walked the Secretary through, again, you 9 know, the narrative so it was fresh in his mind.
And he said, what Rudy was concerned about 14 was that we were not affirming that we had connected Yermak 15 and him rather than him just doing it on his own.
Well, that's easy, because on August 22nd, 17 we put out a statement from the State Department saying that 18 Yermak had asked me, and I had put him in touch with Rudy, 19 because it had made media back then.
So why don't 21 you call Rudy back, tell him that, and give him a copy of 22 what was handed out at the time.
But it was prepared, it was cleared, and it was handed to Ken Vogel , who then tweeted it.
I described my concern that he is projecting a damaging or a negative image about Ukraine, and that's reaching the President, and that I am trying to work with Ukrainians to correct that messaging, correct that impression.
Good speaking with you yesterday, which meant May 10th then I must have spoken with him.
We would like to brief you more about the Zelensky discussion and also Russia-Ukraine dynamic.
So I had learned through the media that he was going to go to Ukraine and he was intending to pursue these allegations that Lutsenko had made, and he was going to go investigate these things.
A To say that I had met with Zelensky as a Presidential candidate, and I believe he's the real deal, and we should be trying to support him.
And, third, I wanted to talk to him about what's going on with Russia and Ukraine so he's aware of that.
It must have been -I don't have an exact time in mind, but I'm guessing it was 10 minutes, something like that.
I'm happy to follow up, because we didn't have a full conversation, and he was going to go to Ukraine.
Because he didn't go to Ukraine, there was no point in pursuing it any further.
Even at this time, I wasn’t aware that he had as many Ukraine connections as it later became apparent that he did.
And he attended the breakfast that I had with Rudy Giuliani on May 20-whatever, 25th, something like that.
Q This is the breakfast at the White House meeting A I'm confusing the White House readout after the inauguration as the date.
July 19th is when I had breakfast with Rudy, and Lev Parnas attended that breakfast.
I assumed that Giuliani brought him along to the meeting because he's Ukrainian-American and, therefore, knows a lot about Ukraine.
A Because I was guessing that's where Rudy was going to be staying, so that would be the easiest thing to do.
It's possible he was at the same breakfast, but I honestly don't remember.
A Lev Parnas, it was interesting, because I was expecting to have a very negative view of Zelensky and to have a very pro-supportive view of Lutsenko, the prosecutor general.
I think there's a 3to 6-month window in 2 which the next 5 years of the Ukraine are going to be 3 determined.
I think 11 this is a self-serving narrative to preserve himself in power 12 and protect himself, possibly protect Poroshenko as well.
I think I want to switch gears a little bit and ask you about some other messages.
Q And on page 26, I'd like to direct your attention to the first entry for May 26, 2019.
I was there for the presidential inauguration with the others that we discussed.
And I was concerned that we were not going to 2 have a serious senior diplomat on the ground in Ukraine once 3 Ambassador Yovanovitch had left.
We were getting a brand-new 4 DCM later that week who had not served in Ukraine before, so 5 completely new, and I, therefore, thought it was important 6 that we get a seasoned diplomat in there.
And I suggested 7 Bill Taylor because he had been ambassador there before, he 8 knew the country, he knew the players, he had a lot of 9 experience, and he could go on a temporary basis as a Charge 10 while we appointed a new ambassador.
I 12 don't want to -I don't want to over-characterize his 13 reasons, but, you know, being on the outside and seeing the 14 administration, he was not sure if we would maintain as 15 robust a support for Ukraine as we had had for the past 16 2 years.
It was more a generic 23 fear, but I think hanging over everyone's head on the expert 24 community is, is there some grand bargain with Russia where 25 we throw Ukraine under the bus.
We have lift -we have increased 4 sanctions, we have lifted the arms embargo.
We are on track here, 7 and it's important that we have people in there fighting to 8 do that.
It was 0MB that announced in the interagency meeting that there was a hold -Q Okay.
Q And I believe you said the first time you learned about that was -well, actually, it's in the text messages.
And it was a sub PCC meeting, which is typically deputy assistant secretary level.
So let's pick up where Bill Taylor says -and I believe he's talking about his decision whether or not to -A Correct.
And just to recall, we're talking -we're talking about May 26, 2019, which is approximately 2 months before President Trump's phone call with President Zelensky when he urged President Zelensky to investigate the Bidens.
A He was referring to what he had seen in the media about Giuliani talking about Hunter Biden and whether Vice President Biden had acted inappropriately in attacking the former Prosecutor General Shokin.
He was working at USIP, so he's just referring to the -what's out there in the media swirl.
Aside from the -yes, I did, because in 6 conversations about whether he would take the job, I would 7 reiterate, ""Look, Giuliani does not represent the United States 8 government.
Bill wanted to be 16 reassured that the Secretary of State is saying the same 17 thing that I'm saying about where our policy is, that we are 18 robustly in support of Ukraine.
He's going to be out there speaking publicly and saying what he says no matter what.
But we can right now -you know, the key thing is what we can do, meaning those of supporting United States and United States interests, what we can do, since the future of Ukraine is in play right now.
We have a new president, there's going to be a new parliament, a new government, and it's going to be a dicey time.
A Because they had a different relationship, attorney for the President, then perhaps.
A I explained it to President Zelensky and the Chief of Presidential Administration, Andriy Bohdan, was standing next to him.
So this is a negative factor for Ukraine's image 4 in the United States and our ability to advance the bilateral 5 relationship.
And, Ambassador, 17 days after you 7 explained that, we now know, you know, the phone call readout 8 from the White House of the call between President Trump and 9 President Zelensky.
I don't know, yeah, because I was not aware 16 of the content of that phone call.
President Zelensky and 17 Andrey Yermak never mentioned that to me, so I don't know.
I actually -I hadn't thought about it, 22 you know, in this context before, but as I think about it, it 23 was probably very helpful that I had told this to President 24 Zelensky when I did so that when he heard this from the 25 President, he was forewarned, right, there's a Giuliani problem here.
Q Going back to page 28, if you can flip to the bottom portion on August 26, 2019, at 11:05m.
He was going to see the President; he was going to see Danylyuk, who was technically his counterpart.
Danylyuk's star within the Zelensky orbit was fading at this point, and he's since resigned, and Yermak's star was up.
He did -he did send me a text message before this testimony today to wish me well, but I haven't spoken with him.
A But my understanding is that he became very uncomfortable with the visibility of this oligarch, Igor Kolomoisky , in recent months in Ukraine.
A Danylyuk became uncomfortable with it, and did not want to continue in his duties if he thought that this individual is having too much freedom of maneuver in Ukraine.
So Igor Kolomoisky is one of the handful of 3 very, very, very wealthy Ukrainians.
Together, if you 4 include influence over state-owned industry as well as 5 privately owned things, they probably control at least 6 20 percent of the GDP, and it is all the GDP that matters; so 7 energy, energy distribution, infrastructure, defense 8 industries, coal and steel production, transportation, you 9 name it, media, especially, they have got it.
And the Ukrainian 14 taxpayer officially is bailing out the bank for the money 15 that Kolomoisky stole.
He 19 was living in exile in Switzerland, and then moved to exile 20 in Israel.
I mean, we 5 don't have -I don't want to keep you here all night -6 A Okay.
After Zelensky was elected, he returned to 12 Ukraine, he visited some of his businesses, he gave media 13 interviews, he played a very visible public role.
A Tim is Tim Morrison, who is the Senior Director for Europe at the National Security Council.
And I'll get to that, but here at the very end, you wrote, Kurt -or Bill Taylor wrote to you, ""Kurt, can you WhatsApp Defense Minister"" -oh, wow -Zagor -A Zagorodnyuk.
I had done some staff meetings with 8 the Armed Services Committee, Senate Armed Services 9 Committee.
He should establish a counterpart relationship, 13 and give a call and express his concern about this, and 14 empower Esper to raise this issue.
Also, somewhere in here I texted him a letter that several Senators signed to Chief of Staff Mulvaney urging -saying that they had heard that there was a hold, and urging that there not be such a hold.
Senator Shaheen, Senator Durbin, Senator Blumenthal, Senator Portman, and Senator Johnson, and it was addressed to the Director of 0MB, Mick Mulvaney, in that capacity and copied to Secretary Pompeo and Secretary Esper.
Q And, again, to page 56, I want to direct your attention to August 29th, 2019.
A This is Vadym Prystaiko, who was the diplomatic advisor to President Zelensky.
He had been ambassador to -Ukraine's ambassador to NATO, was tapped to be diplomatic advisor.
There was a possibility of a hurricane hitting Florida, and he cancelled his trip for that stated reason.
Q And President Trump was supposed to meet with President Zelensky in Warsaw.
A I had been pushing for the two of them to get together from May; that I sincerely believed that once President Trump sat down with President Zelensky, he would have the same conclusion that this is someone we can work with, as I had when I met with him.
As long as we have at the end where we can 11 come back and do a round.
I had just been traveling for 7 about a week prior to that, including to Ukraine, and I had 8 some scheduling conflicts.
And with the Vice President going 9 there and not being part -manifested on the delegation to 10 the Warsaw, whatever it is, anniversary of World War II, it 11 just wouldn't have been possible to attempt.
I would think that there 22 would have been some contact with the State Department, but 23 I 1 m not aware of who would have done that.
In Munich, in February of -I guess it was February of this year, February 2019, Vice President Pence led the administration delegation to the Munich Security Conference, and I was there.
I had asked to be included in his meeting with President Poroshenko, and I was not included in that meeting.
The Vice President's staff, the Vice President or Vice President's staff.
And I my understanding is that the Vice President likes to keep his meetings very, very small.
So when it was the Vice President going, flying from the U.S., I'm heading back -or had just headed back to the U.S., I didn't really push for it.
Essentially that it went well, that concerning security assistance, the Vice President did not have an answer to lifting the hold.
So he said, Whatever the decision ultimately is, rest assured that we stand side by side with Ukraine, we support you, and that he would advocate for a meeting with the President when he got back.
The logical person would have been my assistant at the State Department, Catherine Croft.
He repeated that same line of -I don't -maybe you know where it is in the timeline here.
It could easily be a very successful meeting with POTUS,"" meaning that if we have a President Trump-President Zelensky meeting, Vadym is convinced that would go well.
So just to set the table, at this point in time, September 1st, 2019, the security assistance funds to Ukraine was frozen.
Q You were still, and the Ukrainians were still pushing for a White House meeting.
Q And then they -there's this meeting with Vice President Pence -A Yes.
A He couldn't give a date for the meeting with President Zelensky, but he undertook to support such a meeting.
Q So we had talked about that before, the statement that we were going back -you were going back and forth on.
Let's work on substantive 6 issues like this, security assistance and all.
And then once the parliament was seated, then 15 they could vote in the ministers.
They did it because we agreed it just wasn't a 21 good idea, it's not productive.
I must admit, I felt that you 24 sugarcoated a message on a visit, or the message I got 25 earlier was not correct.
There was a conference 8 hosted by the Canadians on supporting Ukrainian economic 9 reforms, and I led the United States delegation.
And I had probably 20 communicated with him, I can go back and look, but explaining 21 that, you know, we're getting nowhere here.
We're trying, 22 but we're not getting any date out of the White House.
Just exactly what I just said, that in the 8 meeting with President Zelensky, I didn't say, this is a 9 problem in terms of getting a meeting.
I said we are working 10 it, I'm confident we're going to get there, more like that.
I'm not 23 making any promises, but we can set those aside for right 24 now.
Q Ambassador Volker, I want to turn back for a moment to the security assistance issue.
Let me direct your attention to Bates number 37 of your text messages, if you have them there.
Q So at that point, you understood that the President of the United States had issued the order to freeze the Ukrainian aid.
And then the next day, August 30th, was when President Trump cancelled his trip to Warsaw.
Well, the meeting in Warsaw with Vice President Pence was September 1st.
A He had been in France at the G-7, and then I believe he returned to the United States rather than do the other stop.
Now, Vice President Pence relayed to the Ukrainians -he did not relay an official explanation for why the aid was being held.
Q So from the Ukrainian perspective, they understood from their American counterparts that, one, the aid was being held, and two, no one had a reason why.
Three, that we all thought this is a mistake, and we're going to fix it.
The call record, I think, kind of speaks for itself as to what the President said.
It's a little different than saying Burisma and 2016, but the call record is there.
It was a real struggle 17 to push Ukraine to fight corruption, and that had been an 18 impediment.
And he's saying 21 here that he believes that he convinced President Trump that 22 he is serious and will be able to do this, and that will help 23 to improve the U.S.-Ukraine relationship.
I don't know if all calls are read 9 out, and if they are, they are just so perfunctory, you don't 10 learn anything from it anyway.
And they did not have a detailed 23 conversation until August 2nd when they met in Madrid.
So I 24 put them together and then had no follow-up from either of 25 them about that other than -274 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Q And just to be clear, they had planned that meeting in Madrid prior to the President's call -A Correct.
So moving ahead now where we are with the security assistance where I was before is, you were aware that during that whole time from mid July until late August, that the security assistance had been held -A Uh-huh.
He's affirmatively trying to make a phone call happen, that's -correct me if I'm wrong.
Is now advocating for a phone call, is now supporting a phone -I -I take them to be the same, but, okay; advocating for, urging that there be a phone call.
And I don't know whether I said it that explicitly to the Ukrainians, but I think it's reasonable to see this as something happening on its own.
Now, you said in one text that you were out of the loop, you had only two phone conversations with Donald Trump, you were not privy to Rudy Giuliani's conversations with the Ukrainians.
Q So you don't really have firsthand knowledge as to what messages were relayed to the Ukrainians.
The -did you -you reviewed the call record of the July 25th call -A Yes.
I made the argument that President Zelensky is the real deal, he is going to try to fix things, and, you know, he just did not believe it.
He did not mention investigations to me in that meeting, or call for investigations.
Rudy Giuliani, as we know from a lot of his public commentary, talks about this all the time.
He's interested in that, but that doesn't mean that the President is as focused on that as Rudy is, and so I would -I would differentiate there.
To this day he’s not met with President 20 Zelensky in the Oval Office, but he would take meetings with 21 President Putin.
I can't answer other than that I 24 think it's important that both take place.
It's also 2 important that the President meet with President Putin 3 because we can't have a risk of conflict with Russia either.
And for you to sit 15 here and say that you don't think that through all of your 16 efforts to persuade Rudy Giuliani, through all of the 17 Ukrainian efforts to communicate and coordinate with Rudy 18 Giuliani that he's acting alone as a rogue actor without any 19 connection to Donald Trump, who is his client.
So at the 3 time, neither President Trump nor Rudy Giuliani, after that 4 first breakfast meeting that I had with him, ever brought up 5 Joe Biden.
Now, understanding that you've been 12 testifying today primarily to what you knew at the time, 13 let's just take a step back and look back with hindsight that 14 is 20/20, because you know this area very well.
I had conversations with them about this 24 after August 29, and for about a week and they never raised 25 that with me.
When we were talking about the statement that was being drafted in August of 2018, I believe you testified it was never issued.
I heard about that from Gordon Sondland that he had been in touch with Ukraine, and there was talk about Zelensky giving an interview in which he would talk about his commitment to investigating things that happened in the past.
I don't know the details of those conversations, and I don't believe any such interview happened.
My understanding is that it was just a congratulatory phone call on his election victory.
Q It's our understanding that the White House had put the inauguration for President Zelensky on Vice President Pence's calendar, but at some point President Trump instructed Vice President Pence not to attend the inauguration.
A I was aware that we were trying to get Vice President Pence to lead the delegation, and in the end he wasn't able to do so.
Given that this was put together over the course of a couple days, I'm not surprised -I wasn't surprised at the time that the Vice President couldn't do it.
A I was not aware that it was at the direction of President Trump, and I assumed it was just a matter of scheduling.
A Cabinet level, so that we were at least, if we weren't getting the vice president, it was still important to have someone at a cabinet level, and because we have a lot of issues with Ukraine on energy.
I had known him years past, but nothing 7 concerning Ukraine in a contemporary time space until we went 8 there together.
We met with the speaker of the parliament, the then-speaker of the parliament because it was before the parliamentary election.
I was a little surprised that this was still 23 going, so i I'm sure you're exhausted.
And I don't think we have very many 4 questions left, if any, but we may have just a couple.
These all-day interviews can be a challenge, so we 8 would like -we wish you could get home by, you know, 6:00 9 or at some reasonable hour, so we'll try not to stand in the 10 way of that.
In the last round there was some 14 questions that present some ambiguous facts -15 A Uh-huh.
And, 19 you know, you were asked whether Vice President Pence didn't 20 travel because of, you know, the aid issue or there wasn't an 21 investigation into Joe Biden and so forth.
And you testified 22 that you didn't have any firsthand knowledge on that and, in 23 fact, you said it was probably his schedule.
It is difficult to get 25 things on the President or Vice President's calendar.
A It was a very short notice announcement of when the inauguration would be, so I think, as a -you know, anybody in the world only had like 4 days' notice, and putting together a presidential delegation in that short space of time is tough.
A It was a very -it was the largest delegation from any country there, and it was a high-level one.
It would have been nice to have the Vice President, but, you know, you can't always -yeah.
I'm not certain the word ""corruption"" appears, but, you know, if you turn to page three at the bottom -A Yes.
Q You know, I don't know if that’s an ambiguous statement or not, but, you know, reasonable people could equate very bad people -A Right.
So the question that I answered was whether the word ""corruption"" appears and does the President say it.
I said, there are some things that you can infer, and that was what I was looking at is, he talks about a prosecutor who was very good getting shut down, says that’s really unfair.
Q At various points today we’ve talked about the President's deep-seated concern about Ukraine, the business culture there.
And we've gone through several reasons why the President may have had that view, whether it was related to his prior business experience -A Possibly.
But among all of those things, you would 8 testify that indeed the President had a very genuine -9 A Yes.
Q Exhibit 12 earlier was the -A Oh, yes, the statement from the President's Office of Ukraine, yes.
Q This morning we spoke in some detail about the delay in the assistance funds.
There's different power centers on any type of assistance to a foreign nation.
Q So to the extent there were some, you know, hair-on-fire moments, for lack of a better word, that this wasn't going to happen, you stayed the course, you stayed confident, and indeed, in the end, the assistance funds were -A That is exactly right.
Q There was some discussion about whether President Trump has met with Rudy Giuliani in the Oval Office.
A And there had been no -it had been difficult scheduling a meeting with President Zelensky.
President Zelensky was elected in May of 2019, and we had a meeting in September of 2019.
So the only reason that can be is because these 19 investigations are or are not involved.
It never came up in conversation with them, and I believe they had trust in me that they would have asked if that was really what they were worried about.
And so the second that's appropriated and the President signs into law, the Ukrainians have an expectation that it's coming.
So whether they learned about the hold in August or before, every day that goes by after it's appropriated and they don't receive it, as far as they're concerned, it's binary.
I believe, and I'd have to go back and read it again, but I believe it was the Politico article that suggested that.
And we, Gordon Sondland and I, both spoke with Bill and said, I don't think that's it, and don't panic over this.
A No, I think the way I read his note, if we actually did not deliver the security assistance, that would be a major change in United States policy and that would cause him to resign.
We tried to work as a team, that group that had been part of the presidential delegation, at least Gordon and Rick Perry and myself and with Bill Taylor, in order to try to keep momentum, keep Ukraine on the front burner, build a bilateral relationship, get the White House visit, and so forth.
And he had some particular issues in the energy sector that he was very keen on working with the Ukrainians, and so he was very active on that.
To recap, we had the delegation that had been the presidential delegation, Rick Perry, myself, Gordon Sondland, and Senator Johnson.
I believe Mr Kupperman, the deputy national security adviser was there, I believe Mr Mulvaney was there, but I'm not sure about that.
The President started the meeting and started with kind of a negative assessment of the Ukraine.
A -it's a terrible place, all corrupt, terrible people, just dumping on Ukraine.
And each of us took turns from this delegation giving our point of view, which was that this is a new crowd, it's a new President, he is committed to doing the right things.
It is a terrible place, and he campaigned on cleaning it up, and that's why the Ukrainian people supported him.
So, you know, we strongly encouraged him to engage with this new President because he's committed to fighting all of those things that President Trump was complaining about.
And I don't know how he phrased it 10 with Rudy, but it was -I think he said, not as an 11 instruction but just as a comment, talk to Rudy, you know.
I don't know who those might be, but 16 he -or at least he said, I hear from people.
It's possible, but -I was 20 sitting facing the desk, and he was sitting facing us, and I 21 couldn't see what was happening behind me.
A The outcome was that the President agreed to sign a congratulatory letter to President Zelensky and invite him to the White House.
So I'd like to move on, ask you quickly about a June 4, 2019 meeting between Jared Kushner and President Zelensky at the United States mission to the EU's Independence Day celebration.
A I am aware of President Zelensky going to United States -or to the European Union, and I believe there was a dinner that Gordon Sondland was at with him or maybe Gordon even hosted.
And there 6 was some obvious, I don't want to call it tension, but a 7 little sense of Danylyuk assuming the official role when 8 Yermak feels that he's the one closer to President Zelensky, 9 so it just created a little bit of a dynamic between them 10 that you could see.
I met with -so I said I met with 11 Danylyuk for drinks in the evening before.
It was talking about legislation to reform the security services, legislation to reform the defense establishment, and really getting down into the bureaucratic weeds, and not conveying a top-level message, a strategic message.
It was only Danylyuk doing his presentation and talking because he was -Yermak was respecting Danylyuk's role of making this presentation.
And the meeting was just kind of flat, and I thought it was a missed opportunity.
It was just a normal, you know, he's coming as a new counterpart, but I was hoping that Danylyuk would give Bolton more of a political sense about what's going on in Ukraine, who the new team is, who Zelensky is, and he didn't talk about that.
A It was just do we have a date for a visit yet, and John Bolton saying, no, we don't have a date.
The President's got a lot of things stacked up on his calendar looking forward, not giving a substantive reason but a scheduling reason.
He told me subsequently and it was probably -we're probably looking at least a month later, we were talking, and he mentioned that not only was he there for the Bolton meeting but he had other meetings with Members of Congress as well, bipartisan.
I wanted to meet with the heads of each 8 of the different parties that had been elected to the 9 parliament.
I think I had a 16 breakfast with humanitarian organizations working in the 17 Donbas, maybe a civil society group as well that are dealing 18 with the anticorruption issues.
The next day -I had lunch 19 with Yermak that day as well, on the 25th.
Bill Taylor was at that 25 meeting as well, along with other staff from the embassy.
Did you discuss with the Ukrainians after President Trump and President Zelensky's call about the call, having any discussions -A Just very briefly as we discussed before, just top lines.
And they were encouraged again because the President had asked them to pick dates for coming to the White House.
A -the principle topic of the meeting with Zelensky at the time was what was going on in Stanitsa Luhanska with the disengagement of Ukrainian forces, what the Russians were doing, and how the Ukrainians now saw the next steps of how to improve the ceasefire, work towards Minsk implementation.
This was the first time that Zelensky really seemed to have a command of those issues and was doing things.
And so we had a -I'd say, at least two-thirds of the conversation, if not more, was just about that.
There are two letters -there were two 6 letters sent from the three committees to Secretary Pompeo, 7 one seeking this transcribed testimony and another one 8 seeking documents.
When the news media broke the story about 22 there being a whistleblower who was -the initial news 23 reports were that the President made an inappropriate promise 24 in a phone call with a foreign leader.
And then, you know, the cycle just escalated from there, and I followed those media reports and then I saw the transcript released and then I saw the whistleblower report released.
We understand there was a call between Secretary Pompeo and the Ukrainian foreign minister.
A In the sense that I would meet with the Secretary periodically to update him on what I was doing and things with Ukraine.
I think I had met with him on -I had just made a note as I was going through some of these messages that are in here.
Then we had the national day things, then we had Bolton's visit, then we had Labor Day, and then I was traveling.
And so I did not speak to the Secretary specifically before that phone call in a narrow time window, but I was pretty sure he was up to speed on things happening with Ukraine.
I believe that it was a first phone call, you know, that it's, I'm the new foreign minister.
Remember, he had no information to give about security assistance, and he was going to advocate for a White House meeting.
A I'm just trying to remember conversations I had with Bill Taylor who told me about it.
Q So then I want to jump to the meetings on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly -A Yes.
I did have these conversations with Secretary Pompeo in advance of the UNGA meetings.
By this time it 2 was all well in the public domain about Rudy Giuliani, about 3 text messages, about, you know, investigations and so forth.
They would 7 also like to have the meeting first and talk before releasing 8 a transcript.
And also there's -in their minds 16 this is also a little bit of respect, that if -you know, 17 they first off, don't want a transcript involving their 18 leader to be released, but if it's going to be released, at 19 least do the courtesy of sharing it and talking about it 20 first so that it can be seen to be something that they agreed 21 on rather than just letting it go.
And the public 20 commentary about this was coming from the President, so I'm 21 not really engaging in trying to discuss it.
I said I would see what 16 I could do, and I conveyed that message to Secretary Pompeo 17 and through an intermediary, through the executive secretary.
I heard that there was a threat 18 to withhold funding for other things from Congress if this 19 funding did not go forward.
There was also timelines involved, and the Pentagon was very clear in communicating with me, and I assume therefore also communicating with the White House, that they were going to have to move some of this anyway because they were going to comply with the law.
President Zelensky and President Trump did about the first 30 minutes of their bilateral meeting on camera in order to show that they're sitting there and working together and answering questions.
Dan Hoffman is a former CIA 11 station chief in a couple of different places.
The 12 Ukrainians were in the midst of reforming their security 13 structures, and they were concerned about personnel, and they 14 were concerned about getting the structure right.
And Mr Hoffman is a private citizen who 24 sits on the President's Intelligence Advisory Board today.
I have no reason to think that he would 5 have been involvec 1 in that at all.
The password on the government phone always 20 seemed to i drop, and I couldn't get into it.
I just want to ask, you know, going through your biography and your service to our country and the fact that you stepped up here to serve for free, as you said, sacrifice to your family, sacrifice to the McCain Institute, and you had, I think as Mr Goldman said, very good intentions as far as executing United States policy.
And he's not sharing with 8 you and the President is not sharing with you this other 9 track.
What I would say is it makes me feel 11 that it's very, very unfortunate, because we had done such 12 good work on policy with Ukraine, pushing back Russia, 13 supporting them, democratic transition.
And this separate track, as you refer to it, ends up 15 overshadowing the work that we've done and the need to 16 continue that work going forward.
And he also has 3 this dynamic of Mr Kolomoisky showing up and being quite 4 visible in Ukraine.
And if he doesn't get that 9 through in the first 3 to 6 months, he will probably lose his 10 parliamentary majority and probably be unable to accomplish 11 much after that.
The imagery you get from 24 being at the White House is the best in the world, in terms 25 of how it enhances someone's image.
It's essential that we continue to provide it for a variety of reasons, for the substantive reason of reforming and improving their defense capabilities, deterring further Russian aggression, a symbol of United States support, and strengthening a negotiating position to cause Russia to eventually want to settle the war.
It is critically important that we do everything we can as quickly as we can.
Q A couple rounds ago, you answered some questions about this Burisma investigation.
I just wanted to circle back to it for one second, because I think you testified that it was important to find out what the facts might be about Burisma.
He was executing United States policy at the time 13 and what was widely understood internationally to be the 14 right policy, right.
I'm sorry, I 20 don't mean to be -21 Q No, I just mean you're familiar I think with what 22 you said in your meeting that you had with Mr Giuliani about 23 how he was explaining to you what Biden, Vice President 24 Biden's role was and Prosecutor General Shokin.
Q So when Rudy Giuliani, or now, you have the benefit of the call record where President Trump talks about Burisma or Biden, you understand that -or talks about Burisma, rather, let's just -Rudy Giuliani talks about Burisma.
A What Rudy said to me once was, all I want is for Ukraine to apply its own laws, and investigate and apply its own laws, no political interference in investigation.
I believe that Giuliani was interested in Biden, Vice President Biden's son Biden, and I had pushed back on that, and I was maintaining that distinction.
We did have allegations made by the Prosecutor General in Ukraine, which he later retracted, Lutsenko.
A So what I think would have been very useful would be for Ukraine to clarify what's all this about,e. nothing.
A Well, in order to say that, you would presumably want to investigate.
Are you aware of a Skype conversation between -A I was always did best in geography when it came to Trivial Pursuit.
I don't know if he did that or not, but I think I heard that he had said that.
Q And then he later closed those investigations in, I believe, May of 2019.
A I believe I saw him on that visit, and he was distancing himself from Poroshenko and wanted to have a separate set of relationships in Washington different from Poroshenko, probably with a view of wishing that he would be kept in office as well.
And the focus that I had in communicating with him was free and fair elections.
No, I -it was a 10-minute call and it was about my decision to step down.
I'm looking down at poor Mr Meadows and he 6 looks a little bit sad down there.
Mr Ambassador, I want to come back to one 8 thing, only because I've been on Foreign Affairs for a long 9 time.
And when we talk about foreign aid, and I think the 10 point was made that once it's appropriated, it's a done deal.
So, to suggest that there 19 is some nefarious purpose just because one foreign aid 20 allotment gets held up, you would have nefarious purposes 21 every single year through every appropriation process.
Because I think it's real important that 25 we put this in the context of what it really is.
It was a delay that you believed was ultimately going to get finished and corrected.
You believed and communicated that to the Ukraine officials, not to worry, that we are going to get this done.
And, in fact, everyone in your circle believed it would be done, including Mr Taylor, once you had that conversation.
That conversation I believe relates to his decision to accept being appointed as Charge.
I want to clarify one other thing, because as we've looked at this, one of the things that we continue to look at is this whole Burisma-Biden.
That's exactly my understanding, is that it has 8 never been investigated.
And you have these allegations and 9 then retraction of allegations, and it has never actually 10 been investigated.
I just think it's important that we look 12 at the clarification of these.
And I do appreciate the fact 13 that you've been very strong in believing that Joe Biden 14 didn't do anything inappropriate.
You're a career professional, and honestly, over eight hours now, I've been impressed.
I'm disappointed, because I believe that America is being deprived of an unbelievable public servant with knowledge of Ukraine and perhaps what is, maybe with the exception of just the Middle East, one of the most difficult places to actually navigate foreign policy.
I've been impressed not only with your spelling, but with your knowledge here today.
And I hope that you look at staying involved as a Ukrainian expert, because that's, indeed, what you are.
I've gotten to meet a whole lot of experts in their field, and yet, I'm very rarely impressed and today I was impressed.
I want to close by saying this: There's going to be spin that comes out of this particular transcribed interview.
There's going to be things that are in the media that you supposedly said.
They're going to take, you know, a little sentence and suggest that it means something other than the context of the 8 hours that we've had.
I think it's critically important that the message to the American people is very clear.
And that message that I heard you very loud and clear today is that there was no quid pro quo at any time ever communicated to you.
We went over earlier this thing about a statement and how that would be helpful in getting a White House date, but I think that we eventually dropped that, kept working on the date and saying we are still going forward.
In fact, the readout, according to your testimony, from Ukraine and the understanding from the State Department, two groups that didn't talk to each other, were very similar in that they felt like the call was a positive call and a positive move going forward.
And finally, in all of this, I think it's also important to the American people that they understand one critical component of your involvement in all of this.
And I found myself in a position where I was working to put together the right policies for the administration and using all the friends and network and contacts that you have, Pentagon, State Department, NSC, to stitch that together, and I feel that we were successful at doing that.
We have a renewed commitment to 4 there being such a White House visit.
And we have momentum 5 in putting a little bit more pressure on Russia in the Minsk 6 process.
This is about as good as you would want -9 this is where you would want to be if we didn't have all this 10 other thing going on in the background.
Well, you have my word that I’m going to 12 encourage -based on your expertise and your expertise 13 alone, I'm going to encourage that very meeting.
There was some 16 Q&A about whether you would -after the whistleblower 17 complaint came to light whether, you know, you were talking 18 to Secretary Pompeo and some of the other folks about the 19 contents of the complaint.
What I understood the question -yeah, what I understood the question to be was President Trump's phone call with President Zelensky in which Vice President Biden was mentioned.
I do want to put it in the context, though, that I believe that your expertise should have been prioritized over Mr Giuliani's, and I think that is part of the problem here and I wish that would have occurred.
I also don't want to be naive about the security assistance that has gone through finally and the meeting that may happen at the White House.
I mean, that has to be a part of the context, that only once those two happened did the security assistance be released.
Now, whether they're related or not we may never know, but, I mean, that's an important contextual aspect of this.
This was to have a meeting, which for me was 16 the phone call on the 22nd of September, to talk with 17 Secretary Pompeo about Giuliani going very public with the 18 statements about our instructing him and that he was 19 representing the State Department and so forth.
And so this was a followup to that for a 25 conversation with the Secretary.
A He said to tell him that we had already said on August 22nd, through the spokesperson of the State Department, that I had connected Yermak to him at Yermak's request, and provide him with that.
A He said that that is helpful to have that statement from August 22nd that confirms that I was the one who put Yermak in touch with him, and he was going to then tell that to John Solomon.
A I presume John Solomon was writing something, and so he wanted to get this point into the article that Rudy was not acting alone, but -or that is not the right way to say it.
That Rudy was -he did not initiate the contact with the Ukrainians on his own, that I facilitated that for him.
A Because I didn't want to be engaging in this media cycle with Rudy Giuliani.
I think he was talking about the Burisma/Biden investigation, and I just want to be sure.
A Burisma had -I believe there was an investigation into Burisma for a number of things, and Shokin, the former-former Prosecutor General, was not doing enough on that.
I believe that the next prosecutor general, Lutsenko, started and stopped.
You had mentioned earlier this morning, actually, that there was some contact or communication that either you or your attorney had with the White House Counsel's Office.
It was after the telephone transcript came out and the whistleblower report came out.
Who am I, what did I say, what did I do, what -you know, what is -there's a reference to me in the whistleblower report.
Q So the whistleblower complaint came out the morning of last Thursday, the 26th of September, and you resigned the evening of the following day.
Just getting the basic facts so that they were aware of what's out there.
Q And other than the one call that your attorney had with the acting legal adviser at the State Department, have you had any additional conversations since you resigned -A Yes.
I believe I spoke with him on the weekend, and I spoke with him on October 2nd.
He wanted to make sure that I had seen the Secretary's letter, which I told him that I had, giving reasons why this was an unreasonable request, as the Secretary saw it.
He wanted to make sure that I was making sure the State Department had access to all the things that are here in this -the text messages and things that you have access to, which they do.
That was the rule that I tried to follow and that was approved is I can send things from my personal email, but I must copy my State Department email address.
And I tried to follow that religiously, but there may have been examples where I failed to, and to make sure that I went ahead and did that.
A Bill Taylor that we've talked about and the Acting Assistant Secretary, Phil Reeker.
As I said in my opening testimony, my view is if it's a fact, we've got to deal with it.
I had not heard anything about Biden, Hunter Biden or Joe Biden in this entire time.
I've been very active in communicating with people, in trying to solve some of these problems, in trying to get the White House visits together, phone calls.
And for that to have taken place and my not to know that was quite a surprise.
It creates a problem again where all of the things that we're trying to do to advance the bilateral relationship, strengthen our support for Ukraine, strengthen the positioning against Russia is now getting sucked into a domestic political debate in the U.S., domestic political narrative that overshadows that.
I apologize for not being here 14 to hear all of your testimony, Ambassador.
I believe you're referring to the 18 prosecutor general of Ukraine, Yuriy Lutsenko, who is no 19 longer in office.
And I believe that he was not credible and 22 that he was making things up, frankly, to create a 23 self-serving narrative to make himself look valuable to the 24 United States, in the hopes that we would urge the new 25 President not to remove him from his job.
And there was at one point I believe in the conversation between the President and President Trump in which he was encouraging that Mr Lutsenko be retained.
The phone call here, I think they're talking past each other a little bit on that point.
I heard you had a prosecutor who was very good and he was shut down, and that's really unfair.
I think President Trump here is referring to the former Prosecutor General Shokin.
A lot of people are talking about that, the way they shut your very good prosecutor down and had some very bad people involved.
This is the one that Vice President Biden was involved in helping to remove from office, because he was widely perceived as not fighting corruption.
First of all, I understand and I am 6 knowledgeable about the situation.
President Zelensky did not trust Prosecutor 18 General Lutsenko at all.
He thought that he was there for 19 his own interests and to protect Poroshenko's interests and 20 was determined to remove him from office.
But you're interpreting President Trump's 22 comments differently than I did.
I read the President's comments here as not talking about Lutsenko but talking about Shokin.
And Zelensky is not understanding that and talking about he's going to get his own prosecutor general in place and then we will have a reliable prosecutor general.
And then recently, Mr Lutsenko was interviewed by one of the cable TV channels and said that he had investigated Mr Biden and Hunter Biden and did not find anything.
I saw an interview on Face the Nation on Sunday, and in that interview he said that he did not investigate the Bidens, that he would only investigate Ukrainian citizens.
As I think you can all appreciate, the 4 Ambassador has been very open.
He's been cooperative with 5 answering all of your questions today and in providing 6 information, documents to the committees today.
This information has been provided to you 11 with the understanding that it's not classified and that this 12 interview transcript and the documents associated with it 13 will not be made public except in accordance with the rules 14 of the committee.
So this is not in executive session, but you are, of course, welcome to come and review the transcript.
I'd like to ask a question, because my attorney mentioned that there are some sensitive things in here.
