NATO has strongly condemned Russian actions in Ukraine and has taken steps aimed both at reassuring allies and partners in Central and Eastern Europe and at deterring further Russian aggression.
These include demonstrations of support for Ukraine and its territorial integrity; actions to demonstrate NATO’s commitment to defending Central and Eastern European allies; and measures aimed at rebuking Russia.
NATO members have said they will continue to conduct previously planned military exercises in Ukraine and elsewhere in the region.
The United States has been a key driver of the NATO response and has taken additional military measures intended to reassure its allies and partners in Central and Eastern Europe.
Among other things, the ERI would enable augmented United States troop rotations and military infrastructure in Central and Eastern Europe.
Among other things, critics have called for more robust forward or permanent deployment of United States and NATO forces in Central and Eastern Europe; additional military exercises in the region; and additional military assistance to Ukraine, including military training and anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons.
However, some Members of Congress have called on the Obama Administration and NATO to take additional military action to reassure allies and deter Russia.
Some Members have also called for a more resolute demonstration of NATO’s commitment to enlargement, including to Georgia, a former republic Soviet republic, with which Russia had a military conflict in 2008.
For example, the proposed Forging Peace through Strength in Ukraine and the Transatlantic Alliance Act calls for additional NATO and United States military assistance to Ukraine and calls for immediate NATO membership for Montenegro and the granting of a NATO Membership Action Plan to Georgia.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine Overview The United States Congress has expressed deep concern over Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its role in the ongoing crisis in Ukraine.
Some policy makers and analysts have called for a reassessment of the transatlantic community’s progress in realizing its goal of a Europe “whole, free, and at peace,” citing security concerns in some of NATO’s Central and Eastern European member states and ongoing territorial disputes in countries on the alliance’s borders, such as Moldova, Ukraine, and Georgia.
However, some NATO members, including many former members of the communist bloc, have consistently expressed concern that the alliance’s transformation could come at the expense of its capacity to uphold its commitment to collective defense, enshrined in Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen and others have argued that the budgetary constraints facing allied governments could spur much-needed defense cooperation among European allies.
In early April, NATO announced the suspension of all “practical” civilian and military cooperation with Russia in the framework of the NATORussia Council.
Cooperative activities in the NATO-Russia Council that could be affected include a helicopter maintenance fund and a counternarcotics initiative in Afghanistan, and some joint counter-terrorism initiatives.
NATO Support for Ukraine The allies have agreed to strengthen political and military cooperation with the government in Kyiv.
This includes providing military trainers to assist in Ukraine’s military modernization efforts and improving the interoperability of Ukrainian and allied armed forces through exercises and joint operations.
In June, Secretary General Rasmussen announced the creation of several new NATO trust funds to help develop Ukrainian defense capacity, including in the areas of 3 NATO officials have announced 24 new multinational defense projects in which assets are pooled or shared, including acquisition, training, force protection, and ISR initiatives.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine logistics, command and control, cyber defense, and assisting retired military personnel to adapt to civilian life.
Total contributions to these trust funds has not as yet been publicly disclosed.
NATO has not provided Ukraine with military hardware and is not expected to do so.
This does not, however, preclude bilateral military assistance from individual allies.
All NATO allies have thus far ruled out providing Ukraine with lethal military aid, arguing, among other things, that such assistance could lead to a further escalation of the conflict.
NATO Reassurance Measures in Central and Eastern Europe Since Russia’s annexation of Crimea, NATO has sought to reinforce its commitment to defending central and eastern European allies.
Measures taken thus far have centered on air defense and surveillance, maritime deployments, and military exercises.
Despite calls from some Member states, NATO has thus far ruled out permanent troop deployments in the region.
NATO member states have deployed additional fighter jets to the alliance’s Baltic Air Policing mission and NATO is carrying out aerial surveillance flights over Poland and Romania.
In April, NATO increased the Air Policing Mission from four to 16 fighter jets.
Denmark, France, Poland, and the UK are each currently contributing four fighter aircraft to the mission.
Canada has also deployed jets to Romania to conduct training exercises with the Romanian air force.
NATO has used surveillance images to monitor Russian troop movements along the Ukrainian border.
NATO has deployed two maritime groups on patrols to the Baltic and Mediterranean Seas.
One group of 5-7 mine clearance vessels has been patrolling the Baltic Sea since late April.
It includes ships from Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Norway.
A second maritime contingent of frigates has been patrolling the Mediterranean since May.
It includes ships from Canada, Germany, Norway, Turkey, and the United States.
In mid-July, a third NATO maritime group participated in naval exercises in the Black Sea.
The group of four ships conducted interoperability exercises with naval units from Greece, Italy, Romania, Turkey, and the United States.
NATO member states have conducted several military exercises in Central and Eastern Europe, and have planned at least one major exercise in Ukraine in September.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine conducted a military exercise in Estonia aimed at repelling a potential attack on Estonian territory.
The United States Army-led Rapid Trident 2014, originally scheduled to take place in western Ukraine in July, has been tentatively postponed until mid-September.
The Army anticipates that up to 14 nations, including many NATO member states, will participate in the exercise, which will reportedly feature a combined U.S.-Ukrainian battalion headquarters practicing a peacekeeping operation.
Although they have welcomed these measures, some allies in Central and Eastern Europe have called for a more robust demonstration of NATO’s willingness and capacity to defend them.
Other allies have cautioned against a further “militarization” of NATO relations with Russia, highlighting, among other things, NATO’s 1997 pledge to refrain from permanently stationing substantial combat forces in countries that joined NATO after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Officials in Germany, for example, have said that permanent troop deployments in member states formerly aligned with the Soviet Union could represent a counter-productive provocation of Russia.
United States Reassurance Measures in Central and Eastern Europe – Operation Atlantic Resolve and the Proposed European Reassurance Initiative As well as being a key proponent of the NATO response thus far, the Obama Administration has taken additional military measures intended to reassure Central and Eastern European allies.
These efforts, under the umbrella of United States European Command’s Operation Atlantic Resolve, have consisted primarily of enhanced United States troop rotations in the region and joint military exercises with allies and partners.
According to the Department of Defense, these and other United States troops have participated in at least ten land-based military exercises with NATO Central and Eastern European and other allies this spring and summer.
The United States has suspended all military-to-military activities with Russia, including two previously scheduled trilateral exercises with Canada and Norway.
The Defense Department has also enhanced United States naval presence in the Black and Baltic Seas.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine the USS Taylor, and the USS Vella Gulf) were at varying times deployed to the Black Sea for naval exercises.
The USS Oscar Austin has conducted naval exercises and port visits in the Baltic Sea.
The Proposed European Reassurance Initiative During a visit to Poland on June 3, 2014, President Obama announced that he would seek congressional approval for up to $1 billion to fund a European Reassurance Initiative intended to reassure allies and bolster the security and defense capabilities of partner countries in the region.
The Administration has since requested $925 million in the Department of Defense’s FY2015 Overseas Contingency Operations budget request to fund the initiative.
Could include augmented United States Army rotations to the NATO Response Force ; enhanced F-15 fighter jets deployments and increased participation in NATO’s Baltic Air Policing mission; expanded naval presence in the Baltic and Black Seas; and expanded Marine rotations through the Black Sea Rotational Force in Romania.
Could include improvements to air fields and training ranges and operations centers in Central and Eastern Europe.
Activities could include adding United States air equipment in Eastern Europe; and improved prepositioning facilities for Marine equipment in Norway.
Could include increased United States force levels in military exercises in Europe, as well as funding to enable enhanced allied and partner participation in such exercises.
The exercises aim to improve allied and partner readiness and interoperability.
Activities could focus on building military capacity in Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine.
Areas of emphasis include filling critical operational gaps in border security and air and maritime awareness and strengthening civilian oversight of the defense establishment.
The proposed ERI has been welcomed by Central and Eastern European leaders who have called for increased U.S. military engagement in the region.
However, while the ERI would allow the United States to prolong measures that were already planned or were taken in the wake of Russia’s annexation of Crimea, it falls short of the permanent basing of NATO forces called for by some in the region.
Critics emphasize that contributions to the ERI from NATO members other than the United States could be important, both to enable a sustained response and to demonstrate allied unity.
On the other hand, as noted above, some Western European leaders, including in Italy and Germany, have repeatedly cautioned against further militarization in the region.
Rand Corporation, June 9, 2014; and “Troops In,” The Economist, June 7, 2014.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine Security Situation and Concerns in Central and Eastern Europe Poland and the Visegrád Four Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its continued support for separatist forces in eastern Ukraine have sharpened concerns in Central and Eastern Europe about Vladimir Putin’s possible future intentions.
Geographical proximity and long-standing historical relationships, including the experience of Soviet invasion and domination during the Communist era, color regional attitudes toward Russia.
Many officials and analysts in Central and Eastern Europe relate that they have not been especially surprised by Russia’s actions in Ukraine and assert that their past efforts to convey concerns about President Putin’s revanchist ambitions went largely unheeded in the United States and Western Europe.
Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary joined NATO in 1999, and Slovakia joined in 2004.
All four countries regard NATO as the central pillar and guarantor of their national security, and all four have demonstrated their commitment to the alliance by participating in the NATO-led mission in Afghanistan, among other activities.
While business usually centers on natural gas, Hungary also agreed to a deal with Russia’s state nuclear 14 The governments of Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia founded the Visegrád Group as a platform for regional cooperation in 1991 in the city of Visegrád, Hungary.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine company in early 2014 for the upgrade of a Hungarian nuclear power plant, financed by a €10 billion loan from Moscow.
Furthermore, after the shooting down of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 on July 17 and Russia’s subsequent failure to halt support for separatist forces in eastern Ukraine quickly shifted the sanctions debate in Europe, the V4 countries joined their fellow EU member states in adopting wider financial and trade sanctions against Russia on July 29.
Nevertheless, debates during the spring and early summer of 2014 about EU sanctions and responding to the Ukraine crisis exposed differences within the V4 significant enough that some observers questioned the future relevance of the grouping as a mechanism for coordinating foreign policy.
Poland’s consistent and forceful advocacy of a robust response to Russia’s actions made it something of an outlier in the V4.
Whether owing to a desire to preserve energy and economic ties with Russia, concerns about provoking Russia further, or the perception that Russia’s actions in Ukraine are distant and do not pose a direct threat to their countries, the governments of the other three countries have tended to be more reserved.
Critics of these governments’ response noted an apparent preference for inaction by the governments of the Czech Republic and Slovakia, and even some outright pro-Russian stances by the prime minister of Hungary.
Poland is by far the most populous country, the largest economy, and the most significant military actor of the V4.20 Like many European countries, Poland is in the midst of a long-term transformation to a smaller, more capable, and more deployable military.
Grappling with irrelevance, Central European Policy Institute, June 30, 2014.
Since 2010, analysts assert that the Fidesz party has used its parliamentary supermajority to weaken systemic checks and balances, limit the independence of mass media and civil society, and concentrate power around the prime minister.
Ideological affinity between Orbán and Putin appears to derive largely from their similar visions of structuring their respective states in contrast to the “liberal” models of Western Europe and from parallel emphases on safeguarding the identity and rights of ethnically Hungarian or Russian communities living outside the borders of Hungary and Russia.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine individual soldier equipment, Poland has reportedly significantly increased equipment expenditures.
Poland has been a leading allied participant in NATO’s mission in Afghanistan.
At the same time, given its enduring perception of Russia as a threat, Poland has also been a leading voice in calling for NATO to focus on its traditional vocation as an alliance of territorial defense.
In the wake of the Crimea annexation, Polish officials revived a long-standing wish to base United States forces on their territory, calling for two NATO brigades to be stationed in Poland as a security guarantee.
Of additional note with regard to Poland’s security is the 5,800 square mile Russian exclave Kaliningrad, wedged between Poland and Lithuania.
Hungary intends to increase defense spending from the current 0.8% of GDP to 1.4% by 2022, to replace Soviet-era transport aircraft and helicopters, and to focus on maintaining elite special operations forces, developed in close cooperation with the United States, as well as rapidlydeployable light infantry units.
Analysts observe that a low defense budget presents the Slovak military with an especially difficult challenge because it faces a need to replace a large percentage of its ageing equipment— as much as 75% of Slovakia’s defense equipment is past its life cycle and the military remains heavily dependent on Russian armaments.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine In recent years, the V4 countries have sought to expand their cooperation from largely political matters to include security and defense.
Current or prospective areas of such cooperation include joint procurement of ammunition, armored vehicles, individual soldier equipment, and battlefield imaging systems, as well as joint logistics programs, and joint development of capabilities such as countering improvised explosive devices ; CBRN; joint training of helicopter pilots and air traffic controllers; and cyber defense.
All three initially called for the EU to impose harsh political and economic sanctions, but moderated their stance after economists suggested that severe EU sanctions against Russia, the Baltics’ largest non-EU trade partner, could push the countries into an economic recession, with Latvia and Lithuania likely most affected.
Despite the potential economic consequences of the wider EU sanctions adopted July 29, however, the leaders of the Baltic countries have backed the expanded measures as a political imperative that outweighs economic disruption and discomfort.
The defense planning of the Baltic countries consequently relies heavily on NATO membership, and they have emphasized active participation in the alliance, including by having contributed troops to the Afghanistan mission.
All three Baltic countries also contribute forces to the EU’s Nordic Battlegroup, a rapid reaction unit of 2,400 troops expected to be ready and available for deployment in 2015 .28 26 ""Crimea crisis causes unease in the Baltics,"" Economist Intelligence Unit, April 1, 2014.
Transnistria, Moldova’s breakaway region with a strongly pro-Russian government, has redoubled its long-standing efforts to secure Russia’s recognition for its independence.
Russia has not yet done so, but may have little more to lose in doing so now, given international condemnation of its actions in Ukraine.
In March 2014, NATO’s top military commander, General Philip Breedlove, expressed concern that Russian forces could sweep across eastern and southern Ukraine to link up with Transnistria.
However, while Moscow has shown hostility toward the Moldovan government, especially due to its signature of an Association Agreement with the European Union in June 2014, it has so far given no indications that it is planning military action against Moldova.
Most observers believe that for the present Russia will continue to try to turn Moldova away from a pro-Western orientation by using indirect tactics such as imposing de facto trade sanctions, increasing support for Transnistria and separatism in Moldova’s Gagauzia region, and supporting the Communist opposition to the government in the run-up to Moldova’s parliamentary elections in November 2014.
NATO cooperation with Moldova includes such areas as defense strategy, planning and budgeting, as well as improving military education and training.
The Administration’s FY 2015 aid request, drafted before the current conflict in Ukraine, includes the same amounts for FY 2015 for Moldova.
However, Moldova may receive additional security assistance from the United States, perhaps as part of the Administration’s proposed European Reassurance Initiative.
Ukraine Ukraine’s armed forces and police were unable to effectively oppose Russia’s invasion of Crimea in February and March 2014.
Pro-Russian gunmen took over Donetsk, Luhansk, and other towns and cities in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine in April and May.
According to many observers, the weakness of Ukrainian forces was due to many factors, including poor training, poor morale, shortages of key equipment, and treason in the military and police.
However, since June 2014, Ukrainian forces have managed to overcome some of these problems and have inflicted serious defeats on the pro-Russian separatists.
Ukrainian forces are seeking to surround the key “rebel” bastions in Donetsk and Luhansk and cut the separatists off from their source of supplies in Russia.
Ukrainian leaders say they are seeking to avoid house-to-house fighting in big cities, which could cause a dramatic increase in military and civilian casualties.
Even a prolonged siege of the cities would likely dramatically worsen the humanitarian situation.
Ukrainian military spokesmen and some outside observers claim that Ukraine may be able to defeat the separatists in a matter of weeks, if Russia does not massively intervene to support them.
Ukrainian leaders say that they want to negotiate the peaceful withdrawal of Russia-backed separatists from Ukraine as part of a peace plan for the region.
According to United States policymakers, the “rebels’” deteriorating situation has caused Russia to increase its supply of tanks, artillery, armored personnel carriers, and other heavy weapons to them.
Administration officials also say Russia supplied the “rebels” with the SA-11 anti-aircraft missile that was used to shoot down Malaysian Airline Flight MH17.
United States officials have also provided satellite imaging that reportedly shows that Russian forces have launched artillery attacks on Ukrainian forces from Russian territory.
They have said that Russia could be preparing to send additional, sophisticated heavy weaponry to separatists in eastern Ukraine.
Analysts have expressed concern about Russia’s reaction if the forces it has supplied are close to defeat.
Russia could decide to abandon them (perhaps hoping to loosen United States and international sanctions on Russia), or it could openly invade eastern Ukraine with the forces it has deployed on the border.
On July 30, NATO Supreme Allied Commander General Breedlove said that Russian troops on the border with Ukraine had increased to well over 12,000.
The Administration has declined so far to send lethal military aid to Ukraine, but has provided non-lethal assistance.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine additional $8 million in non-lethal support includes explosive ordinance disposal equipment and handheld radios for Ukraine’s military and engineering equipment, communications equipment, vehicles, and non-lethal individual tactical gear for Ukraine’s border guards.On June 4, the Administration announced an additional $5 million in security assistance to Ukraine.
On June 7, the United States announced a further $10 million to assist Ukraine’s State Border Guard Service, bringing total security assistance to Ukraine since the beginning of the crisis to $33 million.
In testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on July 9, Assistant Secretary of Defense Derek Chollet said that during June and July, the United States delivered to Ukraine 1,929 first aid kits; 80 multiband handheld radios, 1,000 sleeping mats; over 5,000 uniform items.
Some Members of Congress have argued for supplying lethal military aid to Ukraine and/or providing real-time intelligence support to Ukraine’s armed forces, particularly in locating surface-to-air missiles, such as the one that shot down Flight MH17.
Supporters of such aid say the United States needs to show resolve in the face of Russian aggression against Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
They argue such aid could serve to deter Putin from further incursions into eastern Ukraine.
Some objections to lethal aid for Ukraine are that it could foreclose a diplomatic solution to the crisis; that it could actually provoke Putin to invade eastern Ukraine with his army; and that it could end U.S.-Russian cooperation in such issues as the withdrawal of United States equipment from Afghanistan.
As noted above, on April 2, NATO suspended all practical civilian and military cooperation with Russia.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine commitment to partnership, its unpredictability, acts of hostility toward NATO and its partners, and perceived attempts to sow disunity within the alliance.
On the other hand, while Russian actions have drawn uniform condemnation from NATO and the European Union, many in Europe and the United States emphasize that Europe’s long-term security will depend on cooperative relations with Russia.
Many European allies continue to stress that they aspire to cooperation and partnership with Russia.
However, analysts expect ties to continue to be marked by contention and mistrust, at least for the time being.
Moscow has objected to NATO and the United States’ military responses to the crisis, calling into question the alliance’s 1997 commitment—codified in the NATO-Russia Founding Act—not to permanently station substantial combat forces in countries that joined NATO after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
The first of these Mistral ships is scheduled to be delivered later this year.
French President François Hollande has repeatedly stated that France would honor the existing contract.
Even before the annexation of Crimea, some Members of Congress and European leaders repeatedly criticized France’s decision to sell the Mistral to Russia, expressing concern about Russia’s military intentions,34 while French commentators have noted the economic and 32 NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen as quoted by Kathrin Hille and Peter Spiegel, “NATO Chief Defends Eastern Advance,” Financial Times, April 4, 2014.
As quoted by Hugh Carney, “Spotlight on French Military Deal with Russia,” Financial Times, March 7, 2014.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine associated political benefits of the sale for France.
Some Members of Congress have called on NATO to offer to purchase the Mistrals built for Russia from France.
Since Russia’s annexation of Crimea, Germany has cancelled the planned sale of a military training facility to Russia; the UK and United States also say they have halted military cooperation.
Although it is considered the candidate with the most advanced membership prospects, NATO officials have cautioned that Montenegrin security agencies and the defense sector require reforms to meet NATO standards and that further efforts need to be made to fight corruption and organized crime in the country.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine to a protracted dispute with NATO ally Greece over the country’s official name.
As the conflict in Ukraine has persisted, there has been some indication that public support for NATO membership has increased to some degree, though not significantly.
Georgia has not been granted a Membership Action Plan, but Administration officials have indicated that they would support granting a MAP to Georgia at NATO’s September summit in Wales.
In 2013, Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev said that Moscow would be forced to “respond” if Finland or Sweden joined NATO, and in the past year Russian forces have performed air and land exercises near Swedish and Finnish territory.
Nonetheless, public opinion in both countries remains firmly opposed to NATO membership.
The adjusted United States force posture has coincided with United States calls for European allies and the EU to enhance their own military capabilities in order to boost NATO’s effectiveness and reduce Europe’s dependence on the United States security guarantee.
The United States system, designed to defend alliance territory against possible missile attacks from Iran and other potential adversaries, serves as the foundation for a new NATO missile defense capability, based primarily on United States assets under NATO command and control.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine While they have welcomed these steps, critics of the Administration’s and NATO’s response to Russian actions in Ukraine have argued that more should be done to support Ukraine, reassure allies in Central and Eastern Europe, and counter Russian aggression.
As discussed above, the United States has provided the Ukrainian government with some nonlethal military aid but has thus far declined to provide lethal military aid.
Congress could continue to play an important role in shaping United States and NATO responses to Russia’s actions in Ukraine.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine Ukraine and Georgia, NATO relations with Russia, and NATO involvement in areas such as cybersecurity and energy security.
