One year ago, on September 5, 2014, the same day Kohver was kidnapped, Russia signed an agreement in Minsk, Belarus, with representatives of Europe, Ukraine, and the Russian-backed separatists who have been waging war in the Donbass region of eastern Ukraine.
That agreement, the Minsk Protocol, was supposed to end the fighting, return the border between Russia and Ukraine to the Ukrainian military, and establish local elections, governed by Ukrainian law and monitored by international observers.
This diplomatic “breakthrough,” however, was negotiated at the point of a gun—a Russian gun; or rather a small army of Russian special forces, volunteers, armored and airborne units, tanks, multiple-launch rocket launchers, advanced anti-aircraft systems , and a seemingly infinite supply of ammunition and fuel to keep the war machine running.
In fact, as a recently published report I coauthored establishes, Russian troops led every major battle between May 2014 and today, taking advantage of the nominal “ceasefire” to expand proxy-controlled territory in a more gradual way.
And in eastern Ukraine today, the carnage left by last year’s invasion by tens of thousands of Russian troops, tanks, and other heavy weapons, has been replaced by a permanent, foreign occupation of European soil.
Each day violence is reported near the border between territory Ukraine controls and the edge of “Novorossiya,” or “New Russia,” the territory controlled by Russian proxies and occupied by Russian military units and war machines.
Ukraine continues to increase its military spending to match this threat, despite having to cut back government spending overall.
It is the poor who suffer the most, and there are many of them since more than a million Ukrainians have been internally displaced because of the illegal annexation of Crimea and the fighting in the Donbass.
In territory controlled by Russian proxies, the Russian ruble—which has rapidly deteriorated in recent months—is replacing the Ukrainian hryvnia as the currency in a kind of “creeping institutionalization,” which violates both the spirit and letter of the Minsk Protocol.
The UN warns of a growing humanitarian crisis, but UN aid workers have just been forced out by the “de facto authorities” who run Donetsk and Lugansk.
The international community placed Russia in the driver’s seat of diplomatic efforts to ensure that conditions agreed to by Russian-backed proxies were adhered to.
Not only did Russia fail to hold up its end of the bargain, it continues to increase military support for the Russian-backed fighters.
This month, the Secretary General for the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe , the international body which the Minsk Protocol placed in charge of monitoring the ceasefire, confirmed to this author something he told a conference in Kiev earlier in the day—the “militants” in eastern Ukraine continue to get stronger, supplied by an outside source, despite yet another ceasefire that was supposed to go into effect on Sept. of this year.
Kim Sengupta of The Independent recently interviewed other aid workers and NGOs in Donetsk who are in the process of pulling out, fleeing physical violence and intimidation against their workers and bureaucratic conditions imposed by the “leaders” which the Russian military installed.
Meanwhile, dozens of Western and Ukrainian reporters have said, some privately to this author and some publicly, that they have had their “accreditation” pulled by the Russian-backed proxies.
Russia and its proxies, it seems, do not want the outside world to see what happens in territories that they have effectively and illegally annexed.
Despite the stark realities on the ground in Ukraine—undisputed by all except those who openly support or work for the Kremlin or those who have no familiarity with the facts—the fighting has decreased since this new ceasefire, and Russia is once again engaging with the international community, some of which is hailing this false “peace” as a victory for diplomatic relations with Moscow.
And now Russian soldiers and jets, some of which are being shipped from Russian-occupied Crimea and led the invasion of Ukraine, are building their presence in Syria.
There are calls, in the Western media and perhaps even from political advisers to President Obama, to work with Vladimir Putin to help solve the crisis in Syria.
It is against this backdrop that Putin’s speech to the United Nations General Assembly must be assessed.
Putin used his first address in a decade at Turtle Bay to lay out his peculiar vision for “peace” in the world, particularly in the Middle East.
It was a speech filled with lies and distortions that have become the dominant worldview inside the Kremlin and propagated outward on state-controlled media.
He claimed that the West fomented a “military coup” in Ukraine and was busy cutting secretive trade deals to expand its own economic sphere of influence.
In reality, the European Union’s Association Agreement with Ukraine was negotiated out in the open; the former Yanukovych government even campaigned on its promise; and Putin had earlier expressed his support for Ukraine’s signing it.
Putin even hinted darkly that ISIS was a Western invention designed to weaken or overthrow “secular” autocratic regimes.
In reality, his client Bashar al-Assad spent a decade underwriting al-Qaeda in Iraq, the predecessor of ISIS, including by dispatching into Iraq foreign jihadists freshly arrived in Damascus for the purpose of blowing up United States coalition and Iraqi forces.
When the Syrian uprising began, Assad released from prison many of the jihadists his security organs arrested upon their return to Syria, knowing that they’d radicalize what started as a peaceful protest movement.
According to IHS Jane’s Terrorism and Insurgency Center, of all the military operations Assad’s regime waged in 2014, the minority were against ISIS, and ISIS returned the favor.
Both parties instead preferred to annihilate the moderate opposition which Putin today insists simply never existed in Syria; in some instances, Assad’s warplanes have even bombed targets the jihadists’ ground forces were simultaneously besieging.
To this day, ISIS sells oil it pumps from seized Syrian refineries back to Damascus.
