Ukraine President Petro Poroshenko tells FBN’s Liz Claman in an exclusive interview that President Trump and Defense Secretary Mattis have said they are ready to support his nation, including with military and technical cooperation.
For the past three years, Ukraine has been locked in a slow-burn war with Russia, which in 2014 invaded and annexed Ukraine&apos;s Crimean peninsula, sparking fighting between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian government forces that left more than 10,000 people -many of whom were civilians -dead.
At the time, both the United States and the European Union widely denounced the annexation, slapping strict sanctions on Russia in retaliation.
That support, he said, would be strictly limited to defense weapons rather than lethal weapons.
It marks the first time in years that a United States president will flex American military power in the eastern European nation.
Crimea remains a source of friction between the United States and Russia amid a time of sanctions and accusations of election meddling between the two nations.
Previously, President Trump has said he expects Russia to return Crimea, though Moscow has refused to bring Crimea to the negotiating table.
In July, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson threatened that sanctions would remain in place until Russia began de-escalating tensions in the region.
And on Thursday, President Trump approved an energy trade deal in order to sell United States coal and steel to Kiev, which is currently fighting to take back the Black Sea peninsula.
An unbridled Poroshenko lashed out at Russian President Vladimir Putin for instigating the insurrection against Ukraine.
The president said he was blindsided by both the annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbass, which followed the latter in 2014.
Despite international outcry, Russia has continued to claim the annexation, and the war, as legal.
Whether or not United States involvement affects the war remains to be seen, but Poroshenko was adamant that the annexed lands would be returned to Ukraine.
