IMR’s mission is to foster democratic and economic development in Russia through research, advocacy, public events, and grant-making.
We are committed to strengthening respect for human rights, the rule of law, and civil society in Russia.
Our goal is to promote a principlesbased approach to US-Russia relations and Russia’s integration into the community of democracies.
The Interpreter is a daily online journal dedicated primarily to translating media from the Russian press and blogosphere into English and reporting on events inside Russia and in countries directly impacted by Russia’s foreign policy.
Conceived as a kind of “Inopressa in reverse,” The Interpreter aspires to dismantle the language barrier that separates journalists, Russia analysts, policymakers, diplomats and interested laymen in the English-speaking world from the debates, scandals, intrigues and political developments taking place in the Russian Federation.
More debate, more things get even more complex when we come to polyphony, will eventually lead to new ideas and the idea of financial interdependence.
The story of the 20th century ization of markets, the theory goes, will lead to was also the story of the battle against censorthe sublimation of conflict into peaceful comship.
Feeling itself relatively at least 2008, Kremlin military and intelligence weak, the Kremlin has systematically learnt to thinkers have been talking about information not use the principles of liberal democracies against in the familiar terms of “persuasion,” “public them in what we call here “the weaponization of diplomacy” or even “propaganda,” but in weainformation, culture and money,” vital parts of ponized terms, as a tool to confuse, blackmail, the Kremlin’s concept of “non-linear” war.
The demoralize, subvert and paralyze. danger is that these methods will be copied by other countries or strong, malevolent non-state Like freedom of information, free dialogue beactors.
New ideas and tools are needed to deal tween cultures is key to the liberal vision of glowith this.
But what should we do when the Kremlin begins to use the RusPeter Pomerantsev O ne of the stranger aspects of 21st-century geopolitics has been the West’s denial that it has an adversary or enemy in Vladimir Putin. of the US-Russian “reset” in 2009.
Kremlin, no matter how often the latter behaved as if the opposite were true.
This myth blanketIf the ongoing catastrophe in Syria and the ed everything, from counterterrorism to nuclear Edward Snowden affair weakened the myth that de-proliferation to energy security to global fiRussia desired true partnership or alliance with nance.
And in spite of rather naked periods of disthe West, then Putin’s annexation of Crimea and ruption—the pro-democracy “color revolutions” his invasion of eastern Ukraine destroyed it.
Now in Europe and the Caucasus in 2004–2005, the the United States and Europe have been forced gas wars with Ukraine in 2005–2006, the Rusto face the reality of a revanchist and militarisian-Georgian War in 2008—the myth endured ly revitalized Russia with imperial ambitions. and was actually expanded upon with the advent International treaties that were meant to govern 4 the post–Cold War order have been torn up.
Land The wisdom of Orwell must be combined with that was not so long ago the cynosure of the the savvy of Don Draper. worst atrocities of modernity has once again become an active war zone, above which commerRussia combines Soviet-era “whataboutism” and cial airliners filled with hundreds of foreign-born Chekist “active measures” with a wised-up, postinnocents are blown out of the sky with impunity. modern smirk that says that everything is a sham.
A former KGB lieutenant-colonel, rumored to be Where the Soviets once co-opted and repurposed the wealthiest man in Europe, stands an excellent concepts such as “democracy,” “human rights” chance of outstripping Josef Stalin’s tenure in and “sovereignty” to mask their opposites, the power and now speaks openly of invading five Putinists use them playfully to suggest that not separate NATO countries.
Gitmo, the seriousness of his threat, he dispatches fighter Iraq, Ferguson, BP, Jobbik, Schröder—all liberaljets and long-range nuclear bombers into their ism is cant, and anyone can be bought. airspaces on a near weekly basis.
A mafia state as conceived by an advertising Putin is many things, but he is no fool.
The executive is arguably more dangerous than a inviolability of NATO’s Article V is now being communist superpower because ideology is no debated or questioned in major NATO capitals longer the wardrobe of politics but rather an with the underlying assumption being that one interchangeable and contradictory set of accesday, this supposedly sacred covenant might be sories.
There is no better place reactionaries, Australian anarchists, British to start than in understanding how Putin seeks to anti-imperialists and Hungarian neo-Nazis all win friends and influence people worldwide, but find so much to favor in the application of Pumost especially in the West. tinism, at home and abroad.
Russia has hybridized not only its actual warfare but also its informational warfare.
Much of the What follows is an overview of the challenges epistemology democratic nations thought they this system presents to the West, and a set of had permanently retired after the Cold War modest recommendations for how best to conneeds to be re-learned and adapted to even clevfront them. erer forms of propaganda and disinformation.
The effect is not to persuade (as in classic while making the West more dependent on the public diplomacy) or earn credibility but to sow Kremlin. confusion via conspiracy theories and proliferate • The Kremlin is helping foster an anti-Western, falsehoods. authoritarian Internationale that is becoming ever • The Kremlin is increasing its “information war” more popular in Central Europe and throughout budget.
RT, which includes multilingual rolling the world. news, a wire service and radio channels, has an • The weaponization of information, culture and money estimated budget of over $300 million, set to inis a vital part of the Kremlin’s hybrid, or non-lincrease by 41% to include Germanand Frenchear, war, which combines the above elements with language channels.
The social media to spread disinformation and trolls conflict in Ukraine saw non-linear war in action. to attack publications and personalities.
Other rising authoritarian states will look to copy • Unlike in the Cold War, when Soviets largely supMoscow’s model of hybrid war—and the West has ported leftist groups, a fluid approach to ideolno institutional or analytical tools to deal with it. ogy now allows the Kremlin to simultaneously back far-left and far-right movements, greens, anti-globalists and financial elites.
The aim is to exacerbate divides and create an echo chamber of Defining Western Weak Kremlin support.
Spots • The Kremlin exploits the openness of liberal democracies to use the Orthodox Church and expatriate NGOs to further aggressive foreign • The Kremlin applies different approaches to differpolicy goals. ent regions across the world, using local rivalries • There is an attempt to co-opt parts of the expert and resentments to divide and conquer. community in the West via such bodies as the • The Kremlin exploits systemic weak spots in the Valdai Forum, which critics accuse of swapping Western system, providing a sort of X-ray of the access for acquiescence.
Other senior Western underbelly of liberal democracy. experts are given positions in Russian companies • The Kremlin successfully erodes the integrity of and become de facto communications representainvestigative and political journalism, producing tives of the Kremlin. a lack of faith in traditional media.
But whereas the For journalists, the threat of libel means few publiberal idea of globalization sees money as politlications are ready to take on Kremlin-connected ically neutral, with global commerce leading to figures. peace and interdependence, the Kremlin uses the • Lack of transparency in funding and the blurring of openness of global markets as an opportunity to distinctions between think tanks and lobbying employ money, commerce and energy as foreign helps the Kremlin push its agendas forward withpolicy weapons. out due scrutiny.
A non-profit organization, based an internationally recognized ratings system for in Western capitals, modeled on Lawyers Without disinformation and provide analytical tools with Borders but dedicated exclusively to defending which to define forms of communication. journalists, is long overdue.
Offshore: A network of stringers in offgers: Top-down censorship should be avoided. shore jurisdictions is needed to carry out deep But rival media, from Al-Jazeera to the BBC, Fox research into the financial holdings of Russian and beyond, need to get together to create a charter oligarchs and officials. of acceptable and unacceptable behavior.
It is in the interest ous debate and disagreement is of course to be of NGOs to enlist experienced bloggers, citizen encouraged—but media organizations that practice journalists or adept social media users to collaboconscious deception should be excluded from the rate on specific events or news stories that adhere community.
A similar code can be accepted by to the same standards of empirical rigor used bloggers and other online influencers. by traditional journalists.
We must ensure • Re-establishing Transparency and Integrity in that Kremlin-supported spokesmen, officials and the Expert Community: Self-disclosure of fundintellectuals are held to account.
Employees of ing by think tanks and a charter identifying clear think tanks, pundits or policy consultants with lines between funders and research would be a vested financial interests in the countries they first step in helping the sector regulate itself and cover need to disclose their affiliations in public re-establish faith in its output. statements.
A broad gathering should • Public Information Campaigns: Stopping all be convened to bring together think tanks, experts disinformation at all times is impossible.
Audiences exposed to policy; and systemic and intensive disinformation campaigns, engaging with “swing states” such as the BRICs and such as the Russian-speaking communities in others in the Middle East, Asia and South Amerthe Baltic states, need to be worked with through ica that are being courted by the Kremlin to join targeted online campaigns that include the equivits anti-Western Internationale. alent of person-to-person online social work.
The methods it pursues will be taken needs to be made available so that deep research up by others, and these counter-measures could can be carried out in the sensitive area where and should be adopted worldwide.
Lenin believed in spinPerhaps the most famous piece of disinformation ning the West against itself, “building Communism produced in the period was the Protocols of the Elders with non-Communist hands,” or the help of useful of Zion, the 1903 fabrication that purported to detail idiots and fellow travelers, while “using bourgeois the minutes of a secret meeting of Jewish leaders institutions for the purpose of destroying them.” plotting global domination.
The Protocols became part of the school curriculum in Nazi Germany and Western business was perhaps the easiest to manipuare still republished and taken as truth in parts of the late.
Hoover Institution Press, 1991. 8 “he Soviet Union did not engage in this battle against French president Charles de Gaulle by hardline primarily via simple advocacy or generals; and forging letters from the Ku Klux Klan positive propaganda,” writes Max Holland in the that threatened athletes from African countries.
One of International Journal of Intelligence and Counterinthe most successful dezinformatsiya campaigns was telligence, but used “n impressive…array of overt spreading the theory that the CIA was behind the murand covert psychological activities… der of President John F Kennedy.
The KGB sponsored ostensibly independent international peace congressstudies and popular books that fired up conspiracy es, youth festivals,…the deployment of agents of theories about the assassination.
A New Orleans ty alliances of all sorts, particularly NATO, to sow district attorney by the name of Jim Garrison picked up discord among allies, to weaken the United States in this misinformation, and, thinking it real, became ever the eyes of the people in Europe, Asia, Africa, Latin more convinced that Shaw had worked with the CIA to America, and thus to prepare ground in case the war organize the Kennedy murder.
The lines of fact, fiction and dezinformatsiWestern journalist or public figure and drip him “the ya have become utterly blurred, and few of the millions right” information over a period of many years so who have watched the movie are aware of the KGB’s that, without noticing, he would start to say things that influence on the plot.
You can just say anyPope John Paul II; blaming the United States for a coup attempt thing.
International Journal of Intelligence and Counterintelligence, volume 19, issue 1, 2006.
The point of any the “political technologists” who became the viziers statement is its effect rather than any notion of truth. of the post-Soviet system, he helped create a new type of authoritarianism that blended traditions of Kremlin This mindset was already evident in the mid-1990s, subterfuge with the latest in PR and media manipulabut after 2000 it became integral to the Kremlin tion.
While elites were secured through a “power wars of the Russian 1990s, where newspapers would vertical,” which traded corruption for loyalty, the be paid to run material accusing business rivals with political technologists helped create a simulacrum everything from cannibalism through pedophilia— of political discourse to keep the nation pliant.
Fake they then went on to use the same techniques on a “opposition” political parties were set up to make state-wide scale with the full weight of the Kremlin,” Putin look more reasonable by contrast; pseudo-inremembers Vasily Gatov, a Russian media analyst and dependent civil society organizations such as the Board Member of the World Association of NewspaCivic Forum created an imitation of civil society; pers and News Publishers. fake courts gave fake verdicts, fake journalists delivered fake news.
Up until 2012 the Kremlin Beginning in 1996, with Boris Yeltsin set to lose adopted a fluid approach to ideology, climbing inside the Russian presidential election, the political techmovements and social groups to manipulate them at nologists fabricated stories about a fascist-Stalinist will, taking on the language of whichever group the threat from Yeltsin’s opposition.
Afterwards they Kremlin needed to spin and rendering them absurd transformed Putin from an unknown “grey agent” to a through mimicry.
The border between “fact” and “fiction” has beIn this shape-shifting context, which endures today, all come utterly blurred in Russian media and public political philosophy becomes political technology, and discourse.
However it is worth keeping this domestic experience in mind when looking at the Kremlin’s international ideological messaging, which, as we shall see below, is dizzyingly supple.
When asked Russian television, one of the authors of this paper about the incident Deputy Minister for Communiwitnessed the cultivation of several other forms of cation Alexei Volin showed no embarrassment and linguistic practices aimed at breaking down critical indicated that all that mattered were ratings, arguthinking.
The Kremlin tells its stories well, hava Swedish children’s show about sex education is ing mastered the perfect mix of authoritarianism and taken as a sign that Europe is mired in sexual perverentertainment culture, but the notion of “journalism,” sion23; the fact that Russian opposition leader Alexey in the sense of reporting “facts” or “truth,” has been Navalny attended Yale “shows” he is working for the virtually wiped out.
Conspiracy theories are the perfect tool attempts to negotiate the international arena were for this aim.
But the political technologists’ collecat least a show of attempting a fairly classic soft powtion of media tricks, electoral fraud and corruption er approach with the setting up of the Valdai Forum failed as Yanukovych’s rigged election victory was to woo international experts, the hiring of PR compacanceled out by the Orange Revolution.
Pavlovsky nies to help with the Kremlin’s image,27 investment was declared a persona non grata in Ukraine and had by Russian oligarchs into culturally popular projects to flee the country in disguise.
In 2004, the Kremlin in the West, and the first attempts to set up a 24-hour found it could not amplify its message and technews channel, Russia Today, which would project a niques to the world. positive image of Russia.
But during the 2008 conflict over Georgia many in the Russian establishment again It was time to create a truly international influence felt the country had lost out in the information game. and propaganda machine.
The Kremlin was going to re-learn soft power and international propaganda—and As recorded by Timothy L Thomas of the Foreign would end up redefining it.
Military Studies Office, several ideas were tabled to reboot the Russian information and influence strategy.
Ministry’s Academy for Future Diplomats, sketched out From Soft Power to the a new management system for Russia’s “information war” that would include a presidential special advisor Weaponization of Information for information and propaganda activities who would oversee an international network of NGOs, information Vladimir Putin’s first public reference to soft power agencies and training institutions for personnel conductcame in a 2012 article called “Russia and the Changing information warfare.
Other proposals called for creing World,” in which he described it as “a matrix ating “information troops made up of state and military of tools and methods to reach foreign policy goals news media” who would be dedicated to “operational without the use of arms but by exerting information concealment measures and counterintelligence work.”28 and other levers of influence.
Regrettably, these methods are being used all too frequently to develop Increasingly, a more aggressive tone was struck.
Pirumov’s information is somewhat different from the Western conceptualinfluence techniques include “disinformation (decepization of soft power as described by Joseph Nye and tion), manipulation , propaganothers.
But It is often difficult to know how “genuine” these besince the United States had other forms of power in its toolkit —these alternaliefs are.
They might reflect a deep-seated worldview tive channels of power were not driving US in the Russian intelligence and military community, foreign policy.
And it is now part of the mainstream political discourse “Because the Kremlin is so paranoid,” says Mark in Moscow, not just among security and intelligence Galeotti, “it ends up being ahead of the game in cadres.
I would like to express my thanks to Professor Galeotti in the research for this paper and for alerting me to a phrase that became a cornerstone for the ideas here.
Likewise, the Kremlin has adopted the most Freedom of information and expression are sacrosanct unsavory PR tricks from the West.
They are key to any idea of globaltechnologists quote with admiration the 1990 fake ization based on liberal democracy.
The more freedom story about the murder of Kuwaiti children by Iraqi of information we have, the thinking goes, the greater soldiers, a story planted by the PR firm Hill and the debate, and the greater the common good.
In the words of Russian media analyst finance, NGOs, the expert community, and cultural Vasily Gatov, “if the 20th century was defined by the activities.
Kremlin Aim Kremlin Action Russia Today Buy up Western media Shatter DDoS attacks “RT is darkly, nastily brilliant, so much more sophisCommunications ticated than Soviet propaganda.
It reflects Putinism’s Paralyze journalism with resentment of Western superiority, resentment of threat of libel Western moralism, and indulges in what-aboutism.
British conspiracy theorist a sense of mission, labeling Georgia’s war in Ossetia Peter Eyre predictably saw the hidden hand a “genocide” and portraying Russia as the peaceof international Zionism at work in Damaskeeper.
But no one had been attracted to the chancus, explaining that the current crisis “was nel in the first place to hear the Kremlin line.
The planned back in 1997 by Paul Wolfowitz.” network’s editorial policy shifted.
News about Russia These deeply noxious claims are presented was minimized.
Instead of trying to Easy to sneer at, conspiracy thinking might be on promote Russia, RT now focuses on making the West, the rise in Europe.
RT has presented Holocaust denier Kremlin supports in Europe) are also the ones most “Ryan Dawson” as a human rights activist,36 and prone to believing in conspiracies.
As was quickly of alternative news, which are the users trying to pointed out on fora such as Storify, YouTube videos avoid the mainstream media ‘mass-manipulation,’ are date-stamped with California time; thus, they had are the most responsive to the injection of false an date stamp prior to the events in Syria.
Rather outbreak41—a modern echo of Soviet dezinformatsiya than inform or persuade the audience of “Russia’s about the CIA being behind the AIDS virus.
During point of view,” a perfectly respectable public diplothe Syrian conflict, when Russia backed Syrian presmacy aim, RT’s purpose appears to be to confuse, ident Bashar al-Assad during the country’s civil war, spreading forms of discourse that kill the possibility RT broadcast programs about an alleged massacre of debate and a reality-based politics, and abusing the by rebel forces at Adra—a massacre that appears ideal of freedom of information for the purpose of never to have taken place.
Miller has argued, RT did put some disclaimers on its reports that explained it had no access to Adra itself, One talk show on the network has reproduced the but it made no attempt to do any due diligence on formula nicely.
In Even as it became clear no massacre had been comitself this might be a perfectly laudable aim.
But RT’s mitted at Adra, RT newscasters continued to assert guests on the show have included John Laughland, the opposite, while RT experts discussed the Adra who helps run a think tank in Paris funded by Kremmassacre as reality. lin-connected figures 47; Sebastian Sass, a representative of a Swiss PR company who has represented RT and Voice of Russia43 also republished dubious Russia’s South Stream gas pipeline project 48; Al“proof” that Syrian rebels were behind sarin attacks in exander Mercouris, a British lawyer who has been East Ghouta, Damascus.
None of the guests’ Kremlin in Soviet times the KGB would have to work hard at connections were revealed on the show, which instead getting its “reports” in the Western press, the Internet complained of distortions in Western media. now provides an opportunity for spreading limitless fake photos and reports and then reporting them as The RT approach will only be ramped up in the “fact” in traditional media (see the following breakcoming months as it increases its foreign-language down of the Ukrainian crisis).53 offerings.
Since 2013 RT has also taken control of the Voice of Russia radio station and swallowed up the As Max Seddon’s investigative reports for Buzzfeed respected RIA Novosti news agency, creating one inhave detailed, the Kremlin employs an army of “trolls” ternational broadcasting network called Russia Today. to wage its online war in the comment sections and As a symbolic act of intent, Dmitry Kiselyov is now Twitter feeds of the West.
On an average working day, the Russians are to post on news articles 50 times.
Each Social Media blogger is to maintain six Facebook accounts publishing at least three posts a day and The Internet and social media are seen by Russian discussing the news in groups at least twice theorists as key game-changers in the weaponization a day.
On plenty of opportunities to undermine the credibility of Twitter, the bloggers are expected to manage the “free” Internet.
Similar to their views on traditional 10 accounts with up to 2,000 followers and media, Kremlin thinkers see Russia as under social tweet 50 times a day. media attack.
Kremlin license to increase Internet censorship at home, and to increase its own weaponization of the Internet.
If at the advent of the Internet age, online activity was seen as essentially politically liberating, a censorInternationally, social media has allowed the Kremship-busting tool that would undermine authoritarian relin’s traditional media to make their way into the gimes, it is quickly turning into a weapon for postmodmainstream.
RT claims to have a billion hits on Youern dictatorships like the Kremlin’s, which rely more Tube, where its clips can be even less associated with on manipulating societies from inside than on direct their original Kremlin source.
The underlying mindset of the Kremlin’s new video news agency, posts material online, which political technologists exploits the idea that “truth” is a might well turn out to be as important a target for it lost cause and that reality is essentially malleable, and as regular commercial sales.
The Russian Foreign the instant, easy proliferation of fakes and copies on the Ministry and missions abroad now use Twitter and Internet makes it the ideal forum to spread such ideas.
Other Kremlin approaches to negolanguage against it. tiating with Western media are more subtle.
Keen about ideas—funding and engaging with intellectual to distance itself from Russia Today, RBTH denies influencers, think tanks, political parties, and religious it is propaganda and argues that it exists to provide a and social movements across the world.
However, its side of Russia missed by Western journalists, stressing aim is less to further cultural understanding across common ties and battling stereotypes.
Redressing the borders, one of the pillars of liberal democracy, and perceived lack of balance was the subject of a 2014 more to use culture and ideas as tools to divide and conference organized by RBTH, where it brought torule, incite, corrupt and co-opt. gether foreign and Russian journalists to discuss how both sides misrepresent each other.
Holy Russia and Euro-Sodom The stress on balance is a virtue but can also be misSpeaking in 2004, the then chairman of the Duma used, allowing the Kremlin to inject dezinformatsiya Committee on International Affairs, Konstantin Koor slurs into any debate.
In the future the body will shift from supporting culture to Allies Left and Right acting more along the lines of USAID, promoting Russian influence through development programs During the Cold War the Kremlin cultivated ideologabroad.
Its head is the aforementioned former chairical links largely with leftist groups that preached a man of the Duma Committee on International Affairs, similar socialist message.
European In countries with a strong, Moscow-allied Orthodox right-nationalists are seduced by the anti-EU message; Church there is a wariness about religious leaders members of the far-left are brought in by tales of fighttaking on political roles.
In Georgia, where the ing United States hegemony; United States religious conservatives are conpatriarch has a 94% approval rating, the Church’s opvinced by the Kremlin’s stance against homosexuality. position to some EU principles puts it on a de facto It doesn’t matter that the Kremlin oppresses leftists collision course with EU-integration policy.
In 2011 and limits some religious freedoms inside Russia—the the Church opposed legislation that would give equal point is that its fluid approach to ideology allows it to legal and tax status to other religious groups and has promote an array of voices, all helping the Kremlin been outspoken in saying Georgians should not study feed divisions within the West. abroad.
In May 2013 tens of thousands of demonstrators, led by priests and Orthodox activists, threw Throughout Eastern Europe the Kremlin retains deep rocks at a small pro-LGBT rally.
In the media RT courts the anti-Western left has won two seats in the French senate; Jobbik is zealously, with long-running shows by Abby Martin, now Hungary’s second-largest party (one of Jobbik’s who campaigns against United States “capitalist-imperialism”; leaders, Béla Kovacs, has been accused of being a George Galloway, the British politician who supportRussian spy; his nickname in Hungary is KGBéla).74 ed Saddam Hussein; and, perhaps most spectacularly, In his essay “Putin’s Strategic Conservatism,” Melik Julian Assange.
It’s a weapon we have given Domestically the Kremlin is clamping down on him gratis.
He has sensed our confusion, our anti-capitalist, leftist groups and arresting ecological inability to define and preserve our traditions, activists, but its fluid approach to ideology means it to conserve our historical sense of nationhood can happily promote these causes abroad when they accrued over centuries, our conservatorship suit its interests. of a coherent civilization that after all begins with family, loyalty to the land and the larger On the right the Kremlin has built alliances with ethnos.
Everyone from Patrick Buchanan to French right-nationalist leader Marine Le Pen, Britain’s anti-EU But apart from the ideological games, a financial inpolitician Nigel Farage, Hungary’s anti-Semitic Jobbik centive is also involved.
Businessbut in reality their mere presence at the event means people close to far-right movements can be given they are already helping legitimize the Kremlin.” preferential treatment when dealing in Russia as “You end up being a puppet in the Kremlin’s thea return favor for political support.
He plans to build Russian historical theme parks in Moscow and Kremlin-connected figures have opened think tanks Crimea. to deliver pro-Russia positions abroad.
In Germany, for examhis partners when he no longer needs them to impleple, Putin hagiographer Alexander Rahr is one of the ment his political and economic agenda.
The Kremmost prominent Russia analysts and frequently takes lin’s ‘ideal version’ of the EU is not a homogeneously a pro-Kremlin position, with no acknowledgement of white, pious, socially conservative union, but more his relationship with the Valdai Club or his work as a of a corrupt, ‘Berlusconized’ Europe or, even better, a paid communications consultant for Russian-owned corrupt, ‘Bulgarianized’ Europe.”78 energy companies.
But financial lures are the simplest type of mechanism the Kremlin uses.
Slower, more patient work is Set up in 2004 to, in the words of Executive Direcemployed to co-opt experts over many years.
How Russia Fell In and Out on Anglo-Saxon experts, though currently Valdai is of Love with Vladimir Putin.
Notions of states reliant on its money, markets and trade. “market rules,” “rule of law” and “private property” are erratically practiced.
The lines between the state and the private granting of access to Russia’s natural resources, is ofsector are utterly blurred.
Bureaucrats join official ten the trump card in “asymmetric interdependence.” structures to have the opportunity of rent-seeking.
This Research by the Swedish Defense Agency shows 55 then becomes a source of power over them if they fall instances of energy cutoffs by Russia between 1992 foul of the Kremlin.
Reiding involves buying into a company and then ing elections or energy deals in Central and Eastern using any means possible (violence, bribery, blackEurope. mail) to take it over.
So set when dealing with the power of money in foreign when financial PR firms or influencers working for policy.
For the use of opaque shell companies and money-launcenturies, and especially during the Cold War and its dering schemes has allowed the Kremlin to covertafterglow, Russian dissidents spoke of the West as ly burrow into the political and economic core of the beacon that attracted and guided them.
Its favored ed from the center of Tallinn to a military cemetery. method is to divide and conquer.
In energy politics, for According to the Estonian Security Police, who claim example, Russia can be aggressive in Eastern Europe that the Russian secret services control most compatriot while going out of its way to be a reliable partner to NGOs, Russian agents were behind the instigation of Western European countries.
Soon after came a series of cyber-attacks on of the authors of this paper.
The attacks were and that makes building a unitary position difficult.” led by “patriotic hackers” from Kremlin youth groups.
Baltic States There is also a Russian presence inside Estonian political parties.
Media of Empire. includes PBK, a Russian-language television channel that has 4 million viewers in the region and receives Meanwhile, the Estonian security apparatus was low-cost, high-quality Russian programming and news rocked by the discovery in 2008 that Hermann Simm, from state Russian TV.85 “a middle-ranking civil servant in Estonia’s defense ministry,” was a Russian spy.
Since the start of and PBK is the second most-watched channel in the Putin’s second term in 2004, Russia has used history country.
When representatives of the Telegraf, which are owned by Russian billionaires, Chevron Oil Company arrived in Lithuania to promote the message that Russians are discriminated discuss a shale gas project, they were met against in Latvia, praise Russia’s domestic social policy with demonstrators, many of them carrying and support the Kremlin’s compatriots’ policies. signs in Russian.
Media and party politics aside, Latvia’s role as a center Central and Southeastern Europe for money laundering makes it highly dependent on financial flows from Russia.
Half of the country’s inThe accession of Central and southeastern European vestment comes from foreign depositors, largely from countries to the EU and NATO was assumed to have former Soviet states.
In the south, Cyprus and Greece consistently take up But the danger for a small country is that we become Moscow’s cause in EU debates on issues ranging from dependent on Russia.
Russia has raised the gas price in the country bassador to the EU has referred to Bulgaria as Russia’s by 450% over the last seven years, in what many per“Trojan Horse” inside the EU,97 while the German seceive as geopolitical punishment.
Keeping Lithuania cret services have expressed concern at how one-third from switching to shale gas appears to be a key Kremof Bulgaria’s output is controlled by Russia.
As Satter reports, the main daily coalition is closely aligned with Moscow and contains newspaper, Lietuvos žinios, carries anti–shale gas “former Communist party members, intelligence serarticles.
It is owned by Achema, a fertilizer producer, vice workers and Bulgarian oligarchs who do business 90 Satter 17.
The Kremlin's “South Stream has never been just an economically economic influence is supplemented by close associdriven project for Russia.
It is primarily geopolitical,” ations with parties on both the left and the right, and says Dr.
Andrew Foxall, Western Europe describing his study with Andrew Clark of Russia’s role in the region.
South Stream involves a selection of top supported the breakup of the UK.104 European energy companies, including Italy’s ENI , Germany’s Wintershall/BASF Russia cannot dominate the UK as it has Bulgaria— and France’s EDF .101 Circumventing Brussels, but it has sniffed out the country’s weak spots.
Russia has made bilateral deals with all the countries through which South Stream will pass, countries The London Stock Exchange, with its looser (relawhich, as Anton Shekhovtsov writes, tive to the US) regulations, is perceived as an easier place for Russian companies to be listed.
Bulgaria (pro-Russian government, Ataka), Serbia (pro-Russian govern$82. billion in London in the past two decades.5 ment), Hungary , Austria , But that’s just the transparent money.
According to the UK Financial between France’s far-right Front National and the RusStandards Authority, approximately one-third of UK sian government.
Front been slow to clamp down on these financial flows, not National “journalists” were involved in setting up the because the Russian money is such a huge amount, Kremlin’s first propaganda channel in France, ProRusbut because a clampdown would send a signal that siaTV.com.
ProRussiaTV.com is now off air, but RT London was surrendering its position as the financial is set to open a French-language station soon.
Front National polling at 20%, RT could find itself playing an active part in a Western European election.
Meanwhile, the Kremlin has been attempting to make inroads into Britain’s political establishment.
Elite Germany is Russia’s biggest trading partner, the most officials are hired as members of the boards of Russian important market for Russian gas and a partner on the companies, leading to a phenomenon referred to in Nord Stream gas pipeline project.
Petersburg while the crisis over Ukraine was at stopping British sanctions against Russian human cresting is a sign of how close to the Kremlin some of rights violators.
Not Economic interests aside, France’s alliance with since Schröder decided to use Iraq as a wedge issue in Moscow has traditionally been based around a mutual the 2002 federal election have German-American reanti-Americanism in international relations.
China and Russia Even as the Kremlin’s non-linear influence grows block pro-democracy moves in the UN; Russia, Iran worldwide, there seems to be complacency in the US and China push for greater control over the Internet in regarding the risks the Kremlin poses.
Organizations leadership continues to believe, does not deserve to such as the Shanghai Cooperation Agreement and the be taken too seriously.
Putin’s annexation of Crimea Eurasian Customs Union “mimic their liberal counand belligerence over Ukraine are, to quote Presiterparts but…aim…to institutionalize authoritarian dent Obama and Secretary of State Kerry, a sign of norms.
A further level of pressure is added by business racy, sometimes merely fanning anti-US sentiment can lobbies who oppose sanctions against the Kremlin. be enough.
The United States is certainly far less affected by the all be examples of how the Western model of liberal Kremlin’s influence and money than other countries. democracy can be more or less successful.
The “reset” policy, Presinial, anti-Western resentment in all three countries, so dent Obama’s signature attempt to build a positive all refused to condemn its annexation of Crimea and relationship with Russia, was based at least in part refused to back sanctions against Moscow.
This is why it represents such a chalin many cases, they have exceeded the power lenge for NATO, the quintessentially 20th-cenof force of weapons in their effectiveness. tury security alliance, built to deter and repel The focus of applied methods of conflict has a conventional threat—which is did and does altered in the direction of the broad use of very well—but without the powers, scope or political, economic, informational, humanieven mission to deal with these 21st-century tarian, and other non-military measures.
Tanks don’t prevent cyber-attacks; this is supplemented by military means of a you can’t respond to a propaganda campaign concealed character, including carrying out acwith a cruise missile. tions of informational conflict and the actions of special-operations forces.
BogdanIn its on-the-ground, military involvement in Ukraine, ov, writing in the Russian journal Military Thought, the Kremlin has generally sought to use a mix of argue that in 21st-century “hybrid war,” asymmetric covert troops directing local vigilantes.
As Professor momentously threatening when Putin invoked the Jakub Grygiel and A Wess Mitchell write in National term “Novorossiya” and urged talks on the statehood Interest, NATO, with its focus on extended deterrence, of southeastern Ukraine, leaving NATO stunned and has no way to respond to this sort of low-intensity “jab Kiev intimidated enough to agree to a ceasefire. and pause” approach.7 In the Kremlin’s war, information precedes essence.
But military maskirovka, the war of deception and Military maneuvers appear to be planned for Rusconcealment, has only been one small part of the sian cameras—with the primary aim of spreading Kremlin’s campaign.
In one incident, in mortal danger and the CIA is waging a war against journalists were gathered by pro-Russian separatists Moscow.
The political technologists’ bag of tricks is go over to the side of the ‘Donetsk People’s Repubgoing global.
Tragically, reality intervened, Putin has given to the large wedge of southeastern the Ukrainian soldiers fought back and a Russian TV Ukraine he might, or might not, consider annexing. cameraman was killed.
The term is plucked from tsarist history, when it represented a different geographical space.
Nobody who Playing to an international audience, RT initially folives in that part of the world today has ever thought cused on giving space to experts blaming the troubles of themselves as living in Novorossiya and bearing in Ukraine on the EU and its plans for expansion, allegiance to it.
Russian media are showing maps of its Western Europe,124 while also slurring the post-Ya“geography,” and Kremlin-backed politicians are nukovych Kiev government as a right-wing junta125 writing its “history” in school textbooks.
There’s a and spreading stories of Jews being frightened of the flag120 and even a news agency (in English and Rusupsurge in Ukrainian nationalism.
The fantasy the rabbi of Simferopol, Crimea, was edited in such a of Novorossiya is then used as a very real political way as to give the impression he was leaving Crimea bargaining chip.
In the final days of August 2014, an because of a wave of anti-Semitism from Ukrainian apparent Russian military incursion into Ukraine— nationalists.
Western sanctions against Russia and told The Times The RAND story was subsequently removed from the of Israel that he was actually leaving Crimea because news site proper (but not before it had been broadof Russian aggression.
MH17, RT spread conspiracy theories regarding the cause ranging from the flight being shot down by “The Maidan never managed to shake the impression Ukrainian forces aiming at Putin’s personal plane to it was inherently far right,” says Judah.
RT age looking for right-wing Nazis among the revolualso quoted a supposed air traffic controller named tion,” says the Wall Street Journal’s Matthew KaminsCarlos, who had written on his Twitter feed that ki.
UlRT has also been involved in reports that are remitimately, the handling of the Malaysian story led Sara niscent of classic KGB dezinformatsiya.
On July, 3, a Firth, a London-based correspondent for RT, to resign supposed RAND Corporation document was leaked because of the network’s “disrespect for the facts,”134 online, meant to show that the think tank was advising and the British broadcasting regulator, Ofcom, to open President Poroshenko to ethnically cleanse eastern an investigation into RT’s coverage.
Meanwhile, the Ukraine, bomb it heavily and place locals in internKremlin’s Internet-troll army also stepped up activity, ment camps.
An amended RT page is still available, which says that the Twitter account’s credibility has been put under question.
An article in Germany’s Der Tagesspiegel,141 to give a small exA Facebook post by a Dr.
Bukhardt found that of the 81 guests would make sure no pro-Russian fighters would invited, there was a “heavy lean towards pro-Russia avoid justice, replying that there could be a process guests,” with a sizable proportion of these having of filtration).139 These were not mere translation “economic ties to Russia.”142 27 of the 81 guests were mistakes.
In my city what has happened did not occur even during the fascist occupation.
Crimea, a British government advisor was seen walking into Downing Street carrying a note that I’d like to congratulate all Orthodox Slavs around the world on winning the Third Crimeaffirmed: “The UK should not support for now, trade an War and remind them that the Balkans sanctions...or close London’s financial center to Ruscome next.
Volin’s principle that ratings and fiction are more important than fact extends far beyond Russia.
Are they, consciously or have seen Greece, Italy, Finland, Hungary, Slovakia otherwise, allowing his firm to help wealthy and Cyprus oppose tougher measures on Moscow.
If countries abstained from voting against Russia, which international negotiations succeed…in bringMoscow spun as a sign of support. ing the country back into the international economic system, the unintended effect may Other rising authoritarian states are watching what be a significant expansion of Tehran’s use of happens carefully.
But as the Kremlin’s political Weak Spots technologists negotiate the international information space, they are working on fertile ground.
On a philosophical level, the West is having its own crisis with The Kremlin’s approach is based on searching out the ideas of “truth” and “reality,” while on an instituand exploiting systemic weak spots and soft underbeltional level, the space previously taken by journalism lies in the dominant liberal concept of globalization, is being increasingly occupied by PR. providing a sort of X-ray of the vulnerabilities of 21st-century liberal democracy.
For every working journalist in America, there The Menace of Unreality are now 4.
PR people, according to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, up from 3. a Russia’s approach to information takes advantage decade ago.
And those journalists earn on of the idea of freedom of expression in order to average 65 per cent of what their PR peers subvert it, replacing information with dezinformatare paid.
Once the norms In a 2014 paper for the Reuters Institute,156 FT associate of journalism are dismissed, a number of constraints editor John Lloyd looks at the impact of how PR has and assumptions fall away.”159 spread into the territory previously occupied by journalism.
The decline of the need for public debate threatened by a new and peculiarly American can transmogrify into the need not to tell the menace…the menace of unreality.”157 truth, while the Internet necessitates making flashy points more attractive.
He rejects objectivity, as a reality and nomics, and socialist realism.
The Russian Grab”—she meant Nagorno-Karabakh—explaining regime works from the opposite logic, playing inside that Shaffer had worked as an advisor for “strategic gray areas.
Failure to disclose this was a disservice Soon after, however, the Times found itself at the to readers. center of a similar story—though this time it was the subject of controversy.
The investigative spadework The FT responded that the affiliation had been left out done by Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty’s Robert accidentally.
The fact that the academic who made this statement A bunch of thugs even staged a small demonstration outside our office in Moscow a few is the aforementioned Professor Brenda Schaffer years ago, branding me as a traitor to Russia is perhaps indicative of an environment in which and asking President Putin to kindly have me the lack of transparency leads to an atmosphere of executed by firing squad.
According have learned to take these labels in stride. to Hans Gutbrod of Transparify, “think tanks should In the current atmosphere of information thrive on transparency—they live on research.
I see my own and my institution’s mission as objective analysis based on solid research and aimed at promoting internaThink tanks will always have funders—this paper, for tional peace.
I say and write what I how think tanks should prove the independence of their think, even if people here and there disagree. research would be first steps toward restoring faith in I have my values, and stick to them, as others the sector. stick to their guns.
Think The authors of this paper sincerely hope that Carnegie tanks can be involved in complicated games for Moscow will be able to live up to these virtuous, and high-level access and influence, while there can challenging, ideals in its future work. also be pressure for a think tank to retain its physical status in a country by avoiding strong criticism.
Since the end indictment.” of the Cold War, the United States especially has worked on the premise that the power of Western entertainment “The group instructed USIA overseas offices speand popular culture will be enough of a soft power cifically to report all disinformation media stories magnet to create a positive bond with the new deand forgeries that they came across,” write Fletcher mocracies and emerging authoritarian powers.
Liking Schoen and Christopher J Lamb in their thorough Taylor Swift would equal liking America.
The new Russia has shown it is arrived…in-house analysts as well as the CIA disinperfectly possible to have MTV, reality shows and formation experts analyzed it.
From Truth Squads work started to bring vociferous denials from senior Soviet officials, including General Secretary Mikhail to Stop Fake Gorbachev.1 Founded in the early 1980s, the Interagency Active Measures Working Group was a United States government body The UK also took on Soviet dezinformatsiya, with dedicated to debunking Soviet dezinformatsiya.
After the British Foreign Office launching an Information years of détente, it took no little persuasion from the Research Department in 1948.
The IRD specialized in the difference tude in the Department of State was, ‘We don’t want between rhetoric and reality in the Soviet Union, with to dignify that kind of stuff with a comment,’” recall subjects such as “Forced Labor in the USSR,” “The the heads of the Working Group.
A Historical Encyclopedia, most of tion campaign, claiming that the IRD’s material was “solidly based on fact and one Magnitsky had never complained about his health, of its slogans was anything but the truth is too hot to and that Magnitsky and the head of Hermitage, Wilhandle.
The Analytics Department Human rights abuses just aren’t a big media issue. was slashed after the Cold War, though its surviving We needed to tell what happened to Sergey as a story. remnant, the News and Current Affair, re-engaged Make it human-centered.
But Western media were too with past tradition during the Ukraine crisis with its scared to get deep into it for fear of litigation.” series Ukraine Unspun, which deconstructed dezinformatsiya and spin about the Ukraine crisis.3 Browder hired his own due diligence and investigative teams and created online movies about the But the question of how to counter dezinformatsiya perpetrators of the crime.
The films were executed in in a digital age, where lies are so easy to produce and a popular manner, much like a racy crime documentadisseminate, remains open.
For every myth busted, a ry on the National Geographic or Discovery chanthousand more can be created.
The reaction was astounding, with millions of people might not like being lied to, neither do the prohits.
Browder had essentially become his own media ducers of the falsehoods mind having their myths bustoutlet.
The Kremlin ramped up its information war, trying The Magnitsky Act as Information Browder in absentia and Magnitsky post-mortem for Campaign tax evasion and applying to have Browder extradited via Interpol.
The charges were viewed as politically Sergey Magnitsky was a Russian lawyer employed by motivated, and the Interpol request was rejected, but the investment firm Hermitage Capital who accused journalists still had to quote both the trial and the several Russian interior ministry officials of a tax Interpol charge in their reports.
Within the Council fraud worth hundreds of millions of dollars—the largof Europe, the Kremlin tried to use its good relaest such fraud in Russian history.
Leftists, including Stephen Cohen, opposed the act for being “prejudicial The information campaign around the Magnitsky case towards Russia.”175 highlights several key lessons.
Classic Magnitsky Rule of Law and Accountability Act was media are constrained, both in terms of the resources enacted in 2013.
In the UK, where Browder is based they can spend on investigative research and because and has citizenship, a cross-party motion unaniof fear of libel, but the Internet opens the opportunity mously backed the act, but the government refused to deliver independently produced, ratings-winning to make it law.
Though were frequently accused of bias, and in such a context, the case was thrown out, it still cost Browder a the need for facts “solid enough to get a grand jury million pounds in legal fees and further helped harm indictment” becomes even more necessary.
Gatov’s observation strikes at oration of public diplomacy by the EU and the United a core problem.
But The recommendations below are those that could be this dismissive attitude risks opening up the space for fulfilled by civic or public bodies operating on smaller the weaponization of information, making deception budgets. equivalent to argumentation and the deliberate misuse of facts as legitimate as rational persuasion.
We stand before a deluge of and Christoph Grozdev’s on Bulgarian coverage of disinformation—the Kremlin’s use of disinformation the MH17 tragedy, which would offer the public rigis, and will be increasingly, used by other states.
Modern “truth squads” need to media, from Al-Jazeera to the BBC, Fox and beyond, develop more strategic approaches, targeting not just need to get together to create a charter of acceptable disinformation but also the networks and influencers and unacceptable behavior.
Vigorous debate and diswho disseminate them, ensuring that Kremlin-supportagreement is of course to be encouraged—but media ed spokesmen, officials and intellectuals are held to who practice conscious deception should be excluded account.
A similar code should be acceptconsultants with vested financial interests in the couned by bloggers and other online influencers. tries they cover need to disclose their affiliations in public statements.
A few of these individuals have been Counter-Disinformation Editors mentioned already by name in this paper, but there are many more who turn up in broadcast media or in If the goal of active measures is to use Western op-ed sections of major broadsheets, their affiliations institutions such as news platforms to spread disinobscured.
There is an increasing amount of online work being Many newspapers now employ “public editors,” or done with violent extremists and other radicalized ombudsmen, who question their outlet’s reporting or groups by such initiatives as Against Violent Extremop-ed selections and address matters of public conism176 (a joint effort of Google Ideas and the Weidentroversy that these might entail.
NGOs such as Global Witness and Transparhigh-level influence is perhaps its most potent weapency International identify hundreds of suspect comon.
RT might provide the Sturm und Drang of propapanies, the banks they use to transact business, and the ganda, but it is the strategic use of corruption that has national or international legislation that can be brought the real clout.
But paradoxically corruption is also the to bear in publicizing their true owners.
Anti-corruption activist and opposition prioritized by established news outlets, perhaps workpolitician Alexey Navalny’s coinage of “the party of ing cooperatively.
Journalists are aware of this but have neither the time Crowd-sourced Investigations nor the resources to chase these stories, particularly with the added fear of costly litigation.
Editors will Because the 21st-century media landscape has been preemptively kill investigative features for similar revolutionized to allow anyone, anywhere, to do reasons.
Financial and institutional support needs to full-bore investigative work into stolen assets, war be made available so that deep research can be carried crimes, or diplomatic lies, combating Russian proout in the sensitive area where politics, security and paganda can be crowd-sourced.
It is in the interest corruption meet; this needs to be backed up by a fund of NGOs to enlist experienced bloggers, citizen for journalists who face potential libel litigation for journalists or adept social media users to collaborate the offense of doing their jobs.
A non-profit orgaon specific events or news stories that adhere to the nization based in Western capitals and modeled on same standards of empirical rigor used by traditional Lawyers Without Borders, but dedicated exclusively journalists.
A handful of analysts armed with Youto defending journalists, is long overdue.
The results of the research can be delivered to existing media, though, as the example of the Magnitsky case has shown, it is perfectly possible to deliver ratings-winning products directly online.
The aim has For Weaponization of Ideas to be both to conduct sensitive research and to make the consequences of the Kremlin’s weaponization of Re-establishing Transparency and money and use of strategic corruption compelling for Integrity audiences.
Offshore been undermined by the opaque nature of funding and the complex games Russia and other authoritarian A network of stringers in offshore jurisdictions is needregimes play in exchanging access for acquiescence, ed to carry out deep research into the financial holdings funding for friendship.
Cyprus, the British advocacy, lobby groups and “track 2” diplomacy have Virgin Islands, the Bahamas and the Seychelles are become blurred.
Self-disclosure of funding by think tanks and a charter These destinations, prized for their secrecy laws and tax indicating clear lines between funders and research havens, often make cameos whenever Russian corrupwould be first steps in helping the sector regulate itself tion scandals are exposed in the international press. and re-establish faith in its output.
The “Valdai Alternative” would to spur a published denunciation of the Boisto Group, strengthen the connection between religious thinkers signed by dozens of academics, members of think in the United States and in the countries in Russia’s near abroad, tanks, NGO heads, editors and former ambassadors. and help show that democracy can be a thriving Of course any peace initiative is to be welcomed, but environment for religion.
These are ica that are being courted by the Kremlin to join its important issues with which to engage, and the Valdai anti-Western Internationale.
Overall, the challenges posed by the Kremlin’s weaponization of information, culture and money have to be seen in the broader context of establishing the institutions to face 21st-century challenges.
Today’s Kremlin preys on the weaknesses, contradictions and blind spots of the Western system.
The battle against disinformation and strategic corruption, and the need to reinvigorate the global case for liberal democracy, are not merely Russia-specific issues.
The Kremlin acts as an avant-garde of malevolent globalization, pioneering and pushing approaches that risk being taken up by other actors—many of the recommendations suggested in this paper to deal with the Kremlin’s challenge can, and should, be extrapolated to other cases.
He is the winner of the SOPA award for writing about Mongolia and was a fellow of the “Russia in Global Dialogue” programme at the Institut für die Wissenschaften vom Menschen in Vienna.
His book about working inside Russian media, Nothing Is True and Everything Is Possible, is to be released in November this year by Public Affairs and Faber.
Michael Weiss is editor-in-chief of The Interpreter, as well as a columnist for Foreign Policy, the Daily Beast, and NOW Lebanon.
A longtime journalist, Weiss has covered the Syrian revolution from its inception, reporting from refugee camps in southern Turkey and from the frontlines of war-torn Aleppo.
He has broken several news stories for Foreign Policy, including how Iran has given virtually free oil to the Assad regime in Syria (based on leaked state documents), how Angola’s energy sector works closely with a Swiss commodities trader (and how an Angolan general profits from the relationship), and how Russia fired Grad missiles into eastern Ukraine.
He founded The Interpreter as a news and translation service in May 2013.
