Now the descendants of the Russian emigration live in the territory of many countries of the world, most of them in the USA and Western Europe.
They will tell about themselves and answer questions concerning Russia and the whole Russian world.
We will communicate with several representatives of the Russian diaspora living in the United States.
My mother's parents emigrated from Lithuanian Rus, when she was still part of the Russian Empire at the beginning of the 20 century, before World War II and before the revolution and the coup.
In November 2013, I arrived in Kiev, agreeing to accept the post of President of the American Chamber of Commerce in Ukraine.
It was only one day before the fateful Vilnius Summit, where the democratically elected President of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, refused to sign the Association Agreement of Ukraine and the resulting Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement , which precipitated an unprecedented political and social crisis in Ukraine.
President Yanukovych refused to resort to the use of force against the rebels.
The highlight of my stay in Ukraine was a visit to the Russian embassy in Kiev in early February, while the United States embassy in Kiev organized the Euromaidan revolution, and about two weeks before the coup, that would put the neo-Nazi junta, the controlling government.
The United States is trying to create a destabilized anti-Russian state with a center in the Mothers of Russian Cities.
Another thing I will never forget is that the ultranationalist shock troops in balaclava, armed with baseball bats, organized by the Right Sector after Saturday in the evening services at the Kiev-Pechersk Lavra of 15 in February of 2014.
In the evening of February 21 2014, President Yanukovych, believing that his life was in danger, fled from Kiev through Kharkov, then went to the Crimea before going to exile in Rostov-on-Don.
In subsequent interviews, President Yanukovych and Russian President Vladimir Putin stated that the Armed Forces are pursuing the President of Ukraine, and therefore his overthrow can only be viewed as a coup d'état.
I hoped and prayed that God would save us from the fascists who had come to power.
Therefore, when Russia responded by providing security to the Crimea on Saturday, February 22 2014, I was euphoric.
The incredulous President of the United States Barack Obama blamed Russia for the crisis in the region.
In my official capacity as President of the American Chamber of Commerce in Ukraine, I tried to maintain a balance between my Russian Orthodox beliefs and the expectations of pro-American, anti-Russian stakeholders.
The Chamber then decided to endorse our apolitical charter and remain politically neutral during the crisis.
However, as it turned out, even a simple attempt to remain apolitical was interpreted by some Ukrainian ultranationalist militants as a pro-Russian political statement.
I met regularly with United States Ambassador Payette and his officers, expressing my support for the democratically elected President Yanukovych and my opposition to the revolution they organized.
They refused to accept my opinion, and removed me from meetings between business leaders and the legal government of Ukraine.
I closely followed the actions on the streets on the most brutal days of the Euromaidan war, but decided to close the office only on 1 ½ days when people were killed on the streets and public transport was not fully operational.
It is also alleged that this military campaign was ordered by the United States government, as an attempt to prevent the Crimean scenario, that is, peaceful, bloodless self-determination and reunification with its original homeland Russia. and 11 May 2014, in referenda, residents of Lugansk, Donetsk and Mariupol voted for the independence of Ukraine from the Kiev junta.
Therefore, when the crisis broke out in Ukraine, it is not surprising that various interested parties were pushing me to try to serve as a peacemaker.
Accordingly, on May 30 of 2014, I wrote a letter to Prime Minister of Ukraine Arseniy Yatsenyuk in which I conveyed my readiness to work in an advisory capacity to help de-escalate the political and geopolitical crisis and in which I expressed my willingness to work in an advisory capacity to help de-escalate the political and geopolitical crisis in Ukraine at the moment and reconcile all parties to the conflict inside and outside Ukraine and restore diplomatic and economic relations between Ukraine and Sedna countries.
No one heeded my warnings about the dangers of Ukraine’s turning from Russia towards the EU, and now Ukraine’s economic and trade relations with its largest investor and trading partner, Russia, have worsened; subsidized gas and cheap loans exchanged for market gas and promises of IMF loans with socially disastrous conditions; de-industrialization has led to a decrease in gross domestic product, corporate profits and tax revenues to the budget.
Ukraine, which has become a raw materials appendage of the West, has not replaced the lost economy from de-industrialization; and even the main economic sector agriculture is crumbling.
The Kremlin no doubt recognizes that the Kiev regime will not comply with the Minsk Protocols on its own, unless the United States or the EU put pressure on it, and that the Kiev regime will continue to escalate the use of heavy artillery against the civilian population of Donbass.
The first anniversary of the October Revolution and creeping desovietisation in the Russian Federation.
I fully support the de-communization in Russia and the condemnation of the communist system and the restoration of the Russian empire, ruled by the King, the Anointed God.
Syria is another United States invasion of a sovereign state, using Islamist terrorists as proxies, and, again, our people, Orthodox Christians are being killed , and it is the democratically elected presidents Assad and Putin who are protecting us.
If he does not do this, then the Kiev junta, schismatic leaders and Ukrainian ultranationalist terrorists will undoubtedly be inspired by giving schismatics of canonical status and escalating their campaign to persecute the canonical Ukrainian Orthodox Church, including raider seizures of temples and monasteries, and their genocide war against the civilian population of Eastern and southern Ukraine.
This will further exacerbate geopolitical tensions between Russia and Ukraine and between Russia and the United States.
Nevertheless, I am comforted, knowing that the gates of hell will not overcome the canonical Ukrainian Orthodox Church, in which Orthodox Christians in Ukraine will not betray Christ, nor the canonical leader of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, Metropolitan Onuphrius of Kiev and All Ukraine, as St.
It is time to fully realize the potential of Russia's economic integration of the Pacific region with Japan and the rest of the APEC countries , whose potential has been appreciated since the participation of the future Tsar Nicholas II in the opening ceremony of the Trans-Siberian Railway in Vladivostok, and then in 1891 year went to Japan.
I myself have traveled extensively in Japan since 1990, and can testify to the potential contribution that Japan, which has developed the third largest economy in the world, despite the fact that it inhabits an island with limited natural resources, can contribute to the modernization and development of the Russian economy.
However, recognizing that the Tsar's trip was conceived partly as a spiritual mission to spread the Orthodox faith among the new peoples of the Asia-Pacific region, I consider the multi-billion dollar spending of the Russian government to attempt to turn Vladivostok into a Russian Las Vegas absolutely unacceptable.
I support the signing of a peace treaty between Russia and Japan, and I hope that the dispute with the Kuril Islands will be resolved peacefully.
