FILE A partially damaged billboard with a portrait of Russian President Vladimir Putin is seen on a roadside near Simferopol, in Russia-annexed Crimea, Jan., 2016.
Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny says President Vladimir Putin's decision to annex Crimea, which occurred five years ago this week, has come at a significant financial cost to Russian citizens and a large political cost to the president himself.
Russia invaded Crimea and annexed the Black Sea peninsula from Ukraine in 2014, following street protests in Kyiv that resulted in the ouster of pro-Russian Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych.
It marked the first forcible seizure of territory in Europe since World War II and triggered multiple rounds of U.S.and EU-led sanctions that have since wreaked havoc on Russia's economy.
FILE Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny is seen at his office in Moscow, March 18, 2018.
The strategically important peninsula had been Russian territory until it was ceded to the then Soviet republic of Ukraine by Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev in 1954.
Polling in 2015 by the private Moscow-based Levada Center shows the annexation of Crimea helped Putin recover from sagging approval ratings.
For months after the annexation, Putin enjoyed a record-high approval of nearly 90 percent.
FILE An image grab taken from AFP-TV shows Russian army vehicles on patrol in the area of Arimah, just west of Manbij, Syria, Jan., 2019.
Beyond conventional military commitments, recent reports also show Russia has expanded its portfolio of military training and commercial engagement, including arms sales, across the African continent.
Last fall, Reuters reported that Yevgeny Shabayev, head of a chapter of a paramilitary Cossack organization with ties to Russian security contractors, said there could be as many as 1,000 armed Russians based in Central African Republic alone.
One Russian private military contractor, the Wagner group, was thrust into the spotlight last summer when three Russian journalists were killed while investigating allegations of Wagner's presence there.
Shabayev said anywhere from 5,000 to 10,000 Russian paramilitary operatives are present across Africa, including in Sudan, South Sudan and Libya.
He added that the Kremlin's neglect of domestic problems explains Putin's record-low approval ratings, which have been dropping consistently since his 2018 reelection.
Although Putin used his annual State of the Nation address in late February to vow increased social spending and popular handouts in a bid to salve popular resentment over falling living standards, Navalny said the gesture may be too little too late.
In recent travels throughout Russia, Navalny said he saw an unusually diverse range of citizens expressing frustration with Putin even in third-tier cities and rural enclaves that have historically been pro-Kremlin strongholds.
FILE A protester wearing a hat depicting Russian President Vladimir Putin and reading 'Putin equals stagnation' is seen during a protest rally against a planned retirement age hike, in St.
Petersburg, which tend to attract the majority of publicly vocal opposition activists.
Navalny, who mounted a grassroots presidential campaign before he was officially barred from running in the 2018 election, said rather than continuing to seek office himself, he has instead chosen to focus on a ""demonopolization"" of the political power that Putin's United Russia party has over the electorate.
Called ""smart voting,"" the campaign to loosen United Russia's grip on power will involve supporting virtually any political minority candidate who appears to have a chance at unseating a United Russia politician.
The next round of regional legislative elections are scheduled for this fall.
