Kalb will present ""Imperial Gamble"" at Politics and Prose, Washington, D.C. on September 27, 2015 at 1pm.
When Russian president Vladimir Putin seized Crimea in late February 2014, in one stroke transforming the post–cold war diplomatic calculus, many Western statesmen and a good number of my colleagues, angry and disappointed, not only criticized him, bemoaning the return of a new harshness in East-West rhetoric; they also threatened economic sanctions and diplomatic isolation.
An international border was, after all, an international border, not to be violated by a powerful neighbor when it suited his interests.
More relevant, perhaps, ever since the Soviet Union and its creaky East European empire disintegrated in late 1991, Russia has signed a string of solemn agreements with the West guaranteeing the “territorial integrity” of all of the newly independent nations in Eastern Europe, those that were formerly component parts of Moscow’s communist empire.
Yet, despite these agreements, Putin gobbled up Crimea, and, in short order instigated a pro-Russian rebel insurrection in the southeast corner of Ukraine.
For a time, with the demise of the Soviet empire, many of us, in a blush of naivete, hoped that a new dawn in international cooperation was rising, one in which Russia would play a positive role.
But from the Russians, sadly, came only an occasional, and obviously reluctant, acceptance.
Putin built a kleptomaniacal autocracy, which he has ruled like a modern mix of Stalin and Peter the Great.
He cracked down on the media, narrowed the field of play for all foreign companies operating in Russia, and made it painfully clear that he would tolerate only gentle domestic criticism of his problematic policies.
He basked in the glory of the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics, and while strutting around the world like a spoiled Hollywood star, he yearned at the same time for Russia again to be recognized and respected as a global player.
His brash diplomacy was often a convenient cover for Russia’s traditional insecurities.
Massive anti-Russian demonstrations began to rumble in Kiev’s Maidan Square, threatening the position of Putin’s client, Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych, and posing an appealing, democratic alternative to his autocratic rule.
Then, in late February 2014, only a few months later, a frightened Yanukovych fled from Kiev, angry mobs barking at his heels.
Putin’s answer was to seize Crimea, a low-hanging fruit that had been a part of the Russian empire since 1783, when Catherine the Great took it from the Turks.
Actually, Crimea had been in and out of Russian hands for more than a thousand years; one of the out periods was from 1954 to 2014, when it officially was part of Ukraine.
Putin’s pretext was that the Russians who lived there, roughly 60 percent of the population, had to be protected from Ukrainian oppression.
Far more likely, though, Putin imagined that the coup leaders in Kiev, whom he described as “fascists,” were secretly plotting to occupy the Russian naval base at Sevastopol, Russia’s only warm water port.
And if the “fascists” did occupy Sevastopol, he feared, then NATO would not be far behind.
Sevastopol was, for Putin, as for any Russian leader, a vital national interest, and, like the Russians living in Crimea, it too had to be protected.
Suddenly, as though on cue, “little green men” operating in uniforms without insignia appeared at Crimean airports, railroad stations, and radio and TV stations, and, within a matter of days, took effective control of the entire peninsula.
A short time later, the same “little green men,” by this time identified as Russia’s elite special forces, showed up in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine, where many Russian-speaking Ukrainians lived.
The West pointed an accusing finger at the Kremlin, but Russian leaders pretended they had nothing to do with these rebel uprisings.
This all happened with an unSlavic efficiency, as though the Russians had miraculously become Prussians.
