Finally, it appears that there is realistic hope for an end to the brutal, far-right, regime that United States President Barack Obama, through his chief agent on Ukraine, Victoria Nuland, had imposed upon Ukraine, by means of an extraordinarily violent coup in February 2014, which replaced Ukraine’s democratically elected sitting President, by a rabidly anti-Russian imposed regime.
Although, until recent days, there were signs that none of the three leading Presidential candidates in Ukraine’s upcoming March 31st election would veer far off the coup-installed regime’s hard-right path, that has changed drastically in recent days.
He was, tactfully — so as not to be killed by the racist anti-Russians who had carried out the coup on behalf of Obama — asserting implicitly that he rejected the constant refrain by the other two leading candidates, Petro Poroshenko and Yulia Tymoshenko, that Ukraine must invade and conquer Crimea.
The far-right were passionate about restoring Crimea to Ukraine, which it had been starting in 1954, and up till the coup in 2014.
United States President Barack Obama was steadfast in his support of Ukraine’s far-right, to the extent even of overriding his Secretary of State John Kerry when Kerry ordered Poroshenko to stop promising Ukrainians that he would return to Ukraine the two territories that had rejected the coup-imposed regime, Crimea and Donbass.
Obama sided then with Kerry’s subordinate, Nuland, against Kerry, and told Poroshenko that invading Crimea and Donbass would be okay.
Zelensky was now saying that the restoration to Ukraine of the two rejectionist territories would require a change-of-government in Russia, and a change-of-heart in the residents of those two former Ukrainian regions.
He tactfully avoided noting that neither condition would be likely to be possible anytime soon, and probably never.
Any Russian Presidential candidate who would repudiate Putin’s support of those rejectionists couldn’t stand any chance of being elected as a President of Russia, and Zelensky knows this; but, perhaps, Ukraine’s voters don’t, and Zelensky needs their votes.
Zelensky himself had been endorsed on 21 February 2019 by NATO’s Atlantic Council, in an article “Why Zelenskiy Is the Only Decent Choice for Ukraine”, and this is despite the continuing insistence by 98%+ of both houses of the United States Congress — almost the entire United States Congress — to sanction Russia and to arm Ukraine however much will be necessary in order for Ukraine’s Government to conquer the two rejectionist parts of former Ukrainian territory.
Behind the scenes, there is now immense pressure from the EU against the United States regime’s insistence upon Ukraine’s conquest of those two former Ukrainian territories.
But now, with his clear break away from Kolomoyskyi’s political record, Zelensky is, at the very least, pretending to be decent.
And the EU and even NATO are clearly coming out against the virtually unanimous policy of the United States Congress to push Ukraine toward outright war against Russia, and are backing, instead, Zelenskiy — the only leading candidate who is against invading Crimea and Donbass.
The present international trend is toward a break-up of the Western Alliance.
There is bipartisan, near-100%, support in the United States Congress for that anti-Russia policy, and also for Trump’s anti-Iran policy; and, so, the tensions toward ending NATO are increasing, regardless of what the outcome of Ukraine’s Presidential election turns out to be.
This entry was posted in General and tagged fascism, neofeudalism, New Nobility, Obama, propaganda, Russia, Trump, Ukraine.
