Master’s Thesis Committee ________________________________ Scott Pegg, Ph.
Tijen DemirelPegg and Professor Jasper Sumner, for their support, advice and dedication.
Scott Pegg for his guidance and constant support throughout both my undergraduate and graduate studies.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization serves as a case study which can help answer this query.
Initially, it is important to explore what realist and liberal scholars broadly argue on the matter of IOs, peace and stability.
NATO as an organization is then examined, followed by the case study of the role it played in the Ukraine crisis.
Many international organizations exist today which deal with a wide variety of issues.
The League of Nations, though it failed to fulfill its mandate of maintaining worldwide peace, can be considered the first modern international organization and served as the model for its successor, the United Nations.
Realists—who argue that states are the principal actor in international relations and that they are self-interested and mainly concerned with security and power—look upon IOs skeptically.
Liberals, though, believe in cooperation among states and promote the proliferation of international organizations, extolling their virtues.
The heated debate between these two ideologies is evident in the case of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s eastward expansion.
NATO was originally designed to curb the Soviet threat and protect Western Europe from communist expansion.
When the Cold War ended and NATO’s original mandate had therefore expired, liberals championed the continued existence and expansion of the organization.
Realists, on the other hand, warned of negative repercussions, as they foresaw that eastward expansion of the alliance would be perceived as a threat by Russia. iv The 2014 Ukraine crisis provides a good case study which can help determine whether liberals or realists were right.
Liberals have claimed that Russian aggression in the region justifies NATO expansion.
Realists, however, have argued that it is the very fact of actual and prospective NATO expansion which has caused this aggression in the first place.
The horror wreaked upon the globe by the Second World War led to a strong and prevalent desire for peace among nations, which led, among other things, to the creation of the United Nations , the North-Atlantic Treaty Organization , the International Monetary Fund , European Union , World Bank, and many other such organizations.
The numerous international organizations today focus on matters as diverse as trade, human rights, defense, energy, health, aviation, agriculture and pretty much any topic one could think of.
Liberals, on the other hand, have a generally more optimistic view of human nature, which they argue is fundamentally good.
They believe that, through international cooperation, global progress, peace and stability are possible.
While liberals have championed the proliferation of IOs, realists have been far more skeptical of the benefits they might bring about.
This debate is significant in the realm of policymaking, as those Western leaders in power often follow liberal doctrine and support the proliferation and expansion of IOs.
The case of NATO expansion can help indicate whether or not IOs bring peace, democratization and stability to world politics and inter-state relations.
More specifically, the recent Ukraine crisis of 2014 is a telling case study of the risks expansion sometimes entails, which ought to encourage policymakers to think carefully before opting for liberal policies.
A Brief History of International Organizations First and foremost, it is important to note there are several types of international organizations.
Some, such as Doctors Without Borders, are nongovernmental organizations , which can either be for profit or non-for-profit.
The model for today’s international organizations can be found in the infamous post-World War I League of Nations.
From the very start, then, economic interdependency was deemed central to successful intergovernmental cooperation.
The League of Nations’ efforts to confront the Austrian famine and economic crisis reflect the importance of also having common backgrounds, cultures, histories or governments for successful intergovernmental cooperation.
The League, 3 contrary to what its mandate would have required, was very ethnocentric and racist.
The organization’s Intervention in Austria between 1919 and 1923 also reflected what were to become pronounced features of the approach of international organizations to intervention in the twentieth century.
In fact, economic concerns still guide many political moves and some international organizations are solely dedicated to economics and finance.
This is not surprising, given the important place economics hold in international relations and could further be considered necessary.
The occasional problem, however, is that some organizations sometimes end up putting profit ahead of people, or large economies ahead of poor ones.
In the end, however, no matter their successes and efforts, the League was unable to prevent the rise of men like Mussolini and Hitler, allowing, in part through inaction, World War II to break out.
Though a failure, as “the League of Nations’ founding claim which promised to make the world anew and to guarantee peace” did not achieve success , the League was at least an attempt to secure peace, and it highlighted the desire for cooperation among nations.
The League would serve as a template for the future of international organizations.
Intergovernmental Organizations and Their Functions Most individuals have only a vague idea of what intergovernmental organizations are and of what they do.
Satoshi Machida establishes the importance of IGOs, stating that international institutions have exerted a significant degree of influence on international political processes.
It is therefore important to establish how scholars define and conceptualize IGOs and related attributes.
These are not true of all international organizations and IGOs may only serve some, all, or none of these purposes, but at least one of these traits can generally be found in IGOs.
International Regimes According to Krasner International regimes are an integral part of international relations, and in order to fully grasp the critiques of IOs, it is important to establish what these are as well.
To take the global climate change regime as an example, the regime’s norms include cutting global greenhouse gas emissions, developing new ‘green’ technology, slowing deforestation, utilizing and improving drought-tolerant farming, and other such initiatives.
The Kyoto Protocol is perhaps the most well-known global climate change regime, which is an internationally binding agreement that commits its signatories to reduce their carbon emissions.
There is no clear-cut answer whether or not they are successful in doing so.
Thomas J Volgy, Elizabeth Fausett, Keith A Grant and Stuart Rodgers, in “Identifying Formal Intergovernmental Organizations,” argue it is important to recognize formal intergovernmental organizations.
They then turn to the thresholds set for IGOs’ bureaucratic organization and autonomy.
After establishing their measures and variables, the authors constructed their database.
The Formal IGOs database has data for three different points in time, 1975, 1989, and 2004.
The timing of the creation of the majority of these organizations demonstrates faith in intergovernmental organizations and their ability to maintain peace and stability in the world.
Support and Legitimacy of IGOs Support for international organizations is not uniform across the world—far from it.
In “Globalization and the Legitimacy of Intergovernmental Organizations,” Machida explores how democracy and inequality across the globe affect the legitimacy of IGOs and the support for globalization across states.
Throughout the years, there have been protests against the proliferation of IGOs.
To have support, IGOs require a fair degree of legitimacy, which can affect “the effectiveness of IGOs in globalization processes” and which some institutions do not seem to possess in sufficient amounts, at least according to their opponents.
Trust by not only great powers themselves, but their citizens as well, is therefore of the utmost importance as it relates to IGOs’ effectiveness.
If great powers do not trust that IGOs can achieve what they set out to, it is unlikely they will invest the time and resources into them.
Likewise, if citizens of participating states do not trust that IGOs work for their benefit, they are unlikely to support that organization, perhaps pressuring their governments to leave or scale back participation in said-organization.
It is not easy for IGOs to garner legitimacy, especially in a world with no international government, where some argue individual states’ selfish aims are likely to be deemed more important than international cooperation.
This means that as IGOs gain authority, the impression among citizens that they have less opportunity to influence policy and to participate in their government can alienate them from these international institutions and inhibit the latter’s perceived legitimacy.
Although they might be 10 intended to provide stability, humanitarian aid or health care services, or to try maintaining peace, some IGOs may lack legitimacy and effectiveness because of the democratic deficit.
Democratic deficit is not the only factor which stands in the way of legitimacy.
Johnson, like many authors, starts by emphasizing the prevalence of IGOs and how they pervade world politics.
There is no denying the importance and impact of IGOs on the world has been and continues to be significant.
However, the extent of that influence and whether it has had positive outcomes and is desirable is up to debate.
Realism and the Limits of Cooperation Generally speaking, realists across the board hold some common assumptions about international organizations.
Realists argue states do cooperate based on shared interests, but they do so only to the extent they can benefit from cooperation.
There is no certainty that states which successfully cooperate today will continue to do so tomorrow, if their situations were to change.
Indeed, IGOs are institutions, which Mearsheimer defines as “a set of rules that stipulate the ways in which states should cooperate and compete with each other,” and one significant shortcoming of IGOs, in the realist view, is that “although rules are usually incorporated into a formal international organization, it is not the organization per se that compels states to obey the rules.
Susan Strange criticizes regime analysis and international organizations on five counts.
Although in the 1970s the balance of power between the two superpowers, the United States and U.S.S.R., was still very much in place, the power of the United States was, and is, in no way, shape, or form infallible.
Reality does not show nearly as dramatic a decline as some Americans perceived.
This realist critique, though harsh, holds some unfortunate truth to it.
It did not authorize the 2003 United States invasion of Iraq, however the country still went ahead, ignoring the UN and international community’s wishes.
This undermines the authority of IGOs, especially since the United States suffered no real consequences.
Perhaps this represents the greatest challenge to IGOs yet, as “a rule that is riddled with exceptions no longer makes a clear statement and cannot be taken as a serious predictor of state conduct.
Certainly this reinforces realist claims that IGOs have little to no true power and are instead at the mercy of great powers’ actions and decisions.
Not only is it wooly, but the term regime is also value-loaded, the third problem Strange warns against.
As the author points out, regime is a French word with two main meanings.
There is no world government, no single international regime, in that sense of the term.
Indeed, “Above all, a single, recognized locus of power over time is the one attribute that the international system so conspicuously lacks.
And despite the Bretton Woods system, economic and monetary matters were also 16 subject to instability and change, often guided by national interests.
The assumption that regimes are fairly stable and static is simply unwarranted, says Strange.
The issues which governments must address domestically and which they care most about are not necessarily those they deal with in international organizations, and these matters are often not those the public regards as important either.
As such, “Attention to regimes…accords to governments far too much of the right to define the agenda of academic study and directs the attention of scholars mainly to those issues that government officials find significant and important,” potentially leading academics to “abdicate responsibility for the one task a philosophy of international relations or international political economy that will not only explain and illuminate but will point a road ahead and inspire action to follow it.
Regime analysis leads scholars to ignore important aspects of international relations.
Hence regimes have no stand-alone power and are merely tools at the service of great powers.
Without great power backers, international regimes or institutions are impotent.
For instance, unless the 5 permanent members of the Security Council agree on something, the UN is powerless.
Only when they do agree can the UN act; when they fail to do so, it is foolish to blame the UN, given it is great powers who are unwilling to cooperate, not the IGO itself.
Mearsheimer is one of the most well-known realists in the field of international relations.
Obviously, with a mentality such as this, Mearsheimer is bound to be skeptical of international organizations.
Mearsheimer allows for the possibility of cooperation, he is simply, as all realists are, dubious as to how successful it can be.
This means that “States contemplating cooperation must consider how the profits or gains will be distributed among them,” thinking in terms of relative gains means each side not only considers its individual gain, but also how well it does compared to the other side.
Because states in a realist world are concerned about the balance of power, they must be motivated primarily by relative gains concerns when considering cooperation.
He summarizes the realist mentality in just a few words, “Realists maintain that institutions are basically a reflection of the distribution of power in the world.
They are based on the self-interested calculations of the great powers, and they have no 19 independent effect on state behavior.
One of the main issues, according to Grieco, is that of relative gains versus absolute gains.
While liberals seem to suppose states care only about absolute gains, Grieco argues this is a faulty assumption.
Notably, “These cases illustrate that institutions have mattered rather little in the past; they also suggest that the false belief that institutions matter has mattered more, and has had pernicious effects.
Liberalism and Support for IGOs Liberals have a very different, much more optimistic view of humankind and international relations.
This, of course, does not mean actors always choose cooperation, even if it is beneficial to everyone.
There are a number of strategies and conditions, such as those which lengthen the shadow of the future and economic interdependence, which the liberal paradigm suggests make cooperation more likely and longer-lasting.
This posits that democracies do not go to war with one another and are more likely to cooperate with each other.
This is fundamentally different from the realist idea that a country’s form of government has only a limited effect on policy, or to put it more bluntly, that states’ 21 internal characteristics do not matter.
Indeed, Liberals are responsible for the very creation of international organizations.
Their belief in and desire for cooperation among states worldwide led to the successful establishment of numerous IGOs.
Liberal proponents of international institutions, as optimistic as they might be, are not blinded either.
IGOs have been and continue to be successful, in many liberals’ eyes, and they remain relevant, especially as an instrument for peace, freedom and prosperity.
He points out that perhaps regimes deserve more credit than realists give them.
He also notes the historical formation of international regimes is important to their study and scholars’ understandings of IGOs.
The United Nations has been around since 1945 and still plays a significant role in world politics.
Whether or not one agrees with its policies, or whether it does too much or not enough, the United Nations indisputably does have some impact on the world stage, and if it has lasted seventy years, despite its issues and lack of power, one can hope this means the UN is doing something beneficial on the world stage.
It is legitimate to claim that, in some form or fashion, international regimes and organizations do matter.
To once again take the global climate change regime as an example, although the Kyoto Protocol failed to meet its stated goals, it was successful in reducing certain countries’ carbon emissions.
There have been some notable failures, such as China, but overall there are more successes, as the sum of CO2 emissions from Kyoto signatory nations has declined.
Robert O Keohane writes that, even though imperfect, there are mechanisms in place which promote compliance by member states with international regimes.
He admits “Decentralized enforcement of 24 regime rules and principles is neither swift nor certain.
Sometimes, governments even comply with international rules when it is not in that state’s self-interest.
According to Franck, this is in part explained by the principle that, “In any society, but especially among states, the compliance pull of law is based on the expectation of each participant that most others, most of the time, will obey the law—all of it, not just some subsets, and not only when it is in their immediate interest to do so.
And while this belief is fragile and its wavering can lead to chaos, there is nonetheless a prevailing trend of compliance, even when the law does not necessarily benefit a state.
This apparent deviation from egoism offers some evidence that realists’ pessimism might be at least slightly exaggerated.
Mearsheimer asserts policymakers, particularly idealistic American ones, are deluded.
Mearsheimer also tends to exaggerate how much faith liberals have in institutions.
Assessing IGOs Helen V Milner concentrates on three economically-focused international organizations to demonstrate their flaws as well as the positive effects these have had.
That claim has been challenged by anti-globalization activists, leading 27 Milner to combine normative and empirical studies in search of an answer.
The three economic institutions she examines are in need of reform, Milner concludes, but they should not be abolished.
As previously noted, international institutions are not static and do evolve over time.
Milner finds that these institutions are in need of reform, but are likely to have been more beneficial than harmful.
Whether or not these countries would have been better off without these organizations’ support, however, is a counterfactual question which cannot be definitely answered.
Even so, these institutions have not had as beneficial an effect as expected of them.
The WTO, IMF and World Bank have not been nearly as beneficial for developing countries as many would have hoped.
It is also possible their problems “lie in the pressures exerted by the large, developed countries and private producers and investors.
Still, it remains important to give due credit to these IGOs for their accomplishments, namely in giving the developing world access to markets which could otherwise have been unattainable, and for providing economic aid to them—though perhaps not as generously as they could have.
While reform may be overdue, it is not time to abolish these institutions, which have helped, in some—perhaps limited—capacity, developing nations.
Though the WTO, World Bank and IMF are plagued with issues, it is important to move forward.
Despite their flaws, therefore, it is imperative that these institutions are not dismissed but rather allowed to reform and change in order to better fulfill their mandates.
There is undeniable value to be found in international 30 organizations, just as there are inevitable shortcomings attached.
IGOs have impacted the world, sometimes in beneficial ways, other times not.
States often are self-interested, it is true, but many individuals are capable of empathy and this is sometimes reflected in the realm of international relations.
Whether, as realists claim, cooperation only works—and barely so—to the extent that states stand to benefit from it, or whether it stems from a common desire for peace and the desire to promote freedom and rights across the world, international organizations and regimes do and will continue to exist.
Some IGOs, such as the World Health Organization, give credence to liberal claims that they provide benefits worldwide and have a generally positive impact on the global population.
The case of NATO illustrates the necessity to be cautious and take heed of realist warnings.
The expansion of the organization has led to violent conflict in Eastern Europe—Georgia and Ukraine—and heightened tensions between Russia and the West.
The Good, the Bad and the Ugly Introduction The North Atlantic Treaty Organization was originally designed to curb the Soviet threat and protect Western Europe from Communist expansionism.
Some scholars, generally of the liberal persuasion, have viewed this as a positive sign, one of the West’s triumphs and a vibrant sign of transnational solidarity.
Others of the realist school of thought, though, believe the Organization’s expansionism is dangerous and threatening—they argue NATO is a source of tensions between East and West, particularly where Russia is concerned.
Examining Russia’s interests in the former Soviet bloc, and its reactions to NATO’s expansionist policies and actions in Eastern Europe can help indicate which of these two views might be more accurate, or at least, more relevant in today’s political context.
Writing in 1992, Charles L Glaser stated that, since the end of the Cold War brought “The collapse of the Warsaw Pact, the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Eastern Europe, and the dissolution of the Soviet Union,” the military threat facing the West was greatly reduced; moreover, it was “widely believed that Russia is uninterested in attacking the West.
Given the prevalence of such views that proved drastically mistaken, it is important to explore why NATO survived, who its opponents were and why, why alternate organizations did not successfully replace the alliance, and what effects NATO’s expansion has had on east-west relations.
In 1995, Kaplan therefore predicted that NATO would not 34 disintegrate, and two decades later he has been proven correct.
Liberal Support For Expansion Liberals defend expansionism of NATO based on several arguments.
First, there was and still is a widespread belief that this move will deter Russian aggression.
Justification for expansion overwhelmingly came from liberal American voices.
Talbott also claimed “that collective defence remained an imperative and should be extended to the newly independent democracies.
This clearly indicates a fear of a resurgent Russia which liberals believed an expanded NATO that included former Warsaw Pact countries would be better able to counter were it to become a threat.
Aside from the general liberal belief in the importance and benefits of international institutions, the spread of democracy and the fear of a resurgent Russia are the two most significant hallmarks of liberal support for NATO extension.
In fact, the democracy argument was touted by all advocates of enlargement and the main justification for it.
First and foremost, the prospect of membership could serve as a tantalizing carrot which would prompt democratization in NATO-aspiring countries.
If member states adopted democratic reforms and subsequently reverted to authoritarian rule, NATO should be able to credibly threaten them with expulsion.
On all these points, the historical record shows little to no evidence that NATO itself is responsible for bringing about democratization.
In actuality, it appears as though the alliance does not care about reverting to authoritarianism, as demonstrated by the historical record.
NATO membership, he writes, “has exerted only minimal influence on democratization.
Regarding civil-military relations, NATO membership has generated disparate results is little support for either the carrot or stick arguments.
This fact lends credence to the realist idea that NATO is a rational actor which is much more concerned with strategy than ideology.
In these cases, it appears as though democracy was the driver for seeking NATO membership, not vice-versa.
Similarly, the military did not seriously threaten democracy in these states, also casting doubt unto the claim that NATO membership can democratize countries by improving civilian control of their militaries.
Reiter notes that the countries seeking membership in 2000 were all fairly democratic already.
Dan Reiter concludes “that NATO membership has not and will not advance democratization in 4 This can be confirmed by delving into Freedom House’s ratings for these countries.
In 2015, the country was still only partly free, its score having improved only slightly, to a 3.0.
Estonia, Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia were already considered free as early as 1999.
Other IGOs, particularly the EU, are seen as more powerful forces for democratization, whose eastward expansion appear less injurious to Russia than NATO’s,5 which would allow for both the spread of democracy in the region while maintaining fairly healthy relations between Russia and the West.
Pursuing Expansion Regardless Despite all of the contentions, protests and prospects for conflict expansion posed, NATO chose to pursue this policy.
NATO was one of the many institutions that the West could build upon to expand its influence throughout the world, and the West seized this opportunity.
Charles A Kupchan writes that, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, “The United States and Europe promptly teamed up to integrate their former adversaries into the Western order.
While it is often believed that the West’s main goal was to “integrate the 5 It is important to note that Russia does oppose Ukrainian membership in the European Union.
Three countries acceded to the alliance at the end of the twentieth century.
This move was largely guided by the United States, which some saw as having too much influence in post-war European affairs.
Of course, nations wanted to join the alliance, independent of the United States’ desires.
This is why, although the United States shares the greatest responsibility for NATO expansion, it is important not to discount the role new or prospective members played themselves.
In March 1999, they officially joined as NATO’s newest members, which some argued insured lasting peace for twentieth and twenty-first century Europe.
Russia is often treated as a special case, but some liberals insist that the Russian government should instead be encouraged “to apply for NATO membership,” and the alliance “should help Russia carry out the far-reaching political and military changes that would eventually qualify it to enter the alliance.
Though Russia joining the alliance was always a far stretch, which has proven too optimistic, it is still laregly believed that NATO is a force for peace and cooperation.
Next Up…The Baltics When the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland officially joined the alliance, in 1999, this invited backlash in Russia.
After those three 41 nations were accepted, nine more countries applied for membership in 2002.
Russia had, from the very start, unequivocally stated its opposition to the accession of the Baltic states to the alliance.
Unlike Hungary, Poland and the Czech Republic which “are buffeted by other nations from the Russian boundaries…Estonia and Latvia border directly upon Russia and a third , Lithuania, is adjacent to Kaliningrad, an important Russian Baltic Sea outlet.
The September 11th, 2001 terrorist attacks were partially responsible for a rapprochement between Russia and the west.
This move toward greater acceptance of NATO, though it had started around 1997, was ‘helped along’, so to speak, by Al Qaeda’s September 11th attacks.
Russia 9/11, as terrible an event as it was, also provided an opening for improved eastwest relations.
Neither Russia nor NATO and its members are ready for the political leap of granting the former 44 memberhsip in the alliance, and it would be a particularly hard sell for member states which are former Soviet sattelites.
The fact that Russia and the rest of the western world have converging interests, in the form of stability in south-central Eurasia, particularly the Middle East, could also have been, and for a time was, a force for cooperation.
Important to liberals’ ideas is the notion that Russia has been and remains a serious threat.
Harvey Waterman asserts, that some states, “especially the Baltic countries, still face Russian bullying in the form of overt military threats as well as threats to do economic harm…Indeed,” Waterman insists, “for some the failure to achieve NATO membership may itself be a source of destabilization, because they think that membership in Western organizations might help them resist the Russians.
Realists challenge this claim that NATO expansion has the potential to deter future Russian aggression.
Russian ambitions in the immediate post-Cold War were rather limited, and aside from a few ultranationalists, there was no impetus for aggression toward the country’s neighbors.
Furthermore, “The breakup of the Soviet Union left it…without the military strength to confront the west.
Russia in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries had lost its great power status, and having limited capabilities, it posed no serious military threat to its former satellites.
Realist Critique of Expansion Realists offer a wide set of counterarguments which dispute liberals’ optimistic predictions about the effects and benefits of NATO expansion.
Reiter offers but one antienlargement argument when he writes that “The weakness of the democratization argument, coupled with the costs and risks of further enlargement, caution against pursuit of this policy in the near or medium term.
Instead,” he suggests, “the West should rely on the European Union to spread democracy, an approach that is more likely to foster democratization yet less likely to alienate Russia” 7.
Moreover, realists are skeptical, at best, about the veracity of Democratic Peace Theory, making the democratization argument all but worthless in their eyes.
There are scholars who would argue this has already happened, or that this trend is currently underway.
But even if one were to dismiss these arguments, the real financial costs associated with NATO expansion are significant, and it was unlikely (and some would argue this has largely proven true) that new members would contribute much to the alliance.
Additionally, having more members complicates the decision-making process and renders reaching a consensus more difficult.
The cultural aspects of the problem should not be underestimated either.
Although they may not be as significant a hurdle nor a pressing potential problem, the desire to socialize prospective and actual member countries—their population, but their militaries especially—into Western norms might be both naïve and, in a sense, dangerous.
This can lead to clashes between the old and young generations of a country or region.
There are many cautionary historical tales of the problems westernization of cultures may entail, 9 and these ought to be considered, even in Eastern Europe, despite the apparent will of some, perhaps even many, to adopt western norms.
Despite popular opinion, realists do not favor aggressive and belligerent policies, rather they emphasize caution, often referred to as prudence.
Ideologically, pushing NATO’s borders eastward would represent the strength and unity of democracy, and establish long-lasting peace through the spread of western values against Russian authoritarianism and repression.
Practically speaking, however, it is prudent to halt the Organization’s eastward push, because it aggravates the Russian government and anti-Western sentiments in the country, heightening tensions and therefore the risk of conflict.
Reiter similarly cautions that further enlargement is likely to cause greater damage to RussiaWest relations than previous rounds of expansion.
While liberals firmly believe that “Should intervention be called for again, a prior commitment to NATO can be expected to facilitate cooperation by the countries of the region” , realists would argue this intervention might only become necessary because of NATO and the perceived threat it poses to Russia.
This potentially dangerous move was decried by some in American politics.
Gorbachev even called “for a new post–Cold War pan-European security structure.
And yet, MccGwire 50 wrote in 2008, “It is officially accepted that there is no Russian threat to the [Central and Eastern European] states for the next decade or more.
In the long-run, it can be assumed such a partnership would have been more advantageous, as the eastern giant would, or at least could, have been more thoroughly included in the post-Cold War order, perhaps leading to less resentment.
Although it is up for debate whether Russia truly had an interest in such an alliance, the fact that Gorbachev supported a pan-European security alliance and that Russia later sponsored an expanded Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe—as detailed below—indicates the country did have an inclination for a combined east-west defense system.
The resulting greater inclusion could potentially have led to a rapprochement of values and to the creation of common, rather than conflicting, goals.
Indeed, “Russian leaders emphasize the necessity for a joint Russian-Western role in devising and maintaining a framework for European security into the twenty-first century.
But, Mearsheimer notes, instead of pursuing this route, Recognizing that Russia’s weakness would preclude any retaliation…the United States ignored Russia’s concerns and pushed NATO to accept the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Poland as new members.
Russia has also opposed United States policy in the Balkans over the past decade, especially NATO’s 1999 war against Yugoslavia.
While it is understandable why neither side was ever too enthusiastic about the prospect of a U.S.Russia defense alliance, it is also unfortunate, as such an alliance would not only be powerful, but could have avoided some of the conflicts which have arisen between these two nations in the twenty-first century.
There would certainly have been significant obstacles in the way of this happening, notably a probably inevitable divergence of interest between east and west.
But events, such as 9/11, can lead to a convergence of said interests, as was observed in the early 2000s.
The difficulty in both creating and 10 Commonwealth of Independent States 52 maintaining such a prospectively far-reaching alliance are not to be underestimated, as noted below.
Prospects for a coalition that included Russia and satisfied both east and west were not always so bleak.
There was reason to be hopeful as an equal NATO-CSCE partnership could have enhanced peace and stability in Europe.
This could have satisfied Russia’s desire for an alternative form of security expansion across Europe.
Furthermore, it could have allowed for pooling and optimized utilization of each organization’s resources, also helping in burden-sharing and tighter integration of states.
In actuality, NATO’s power has generally grown, while the CSCE has been marginalized.
Whether NATO expansion has actually helped stability in the region of Eastern Europe is debatable.
Multiple events since the Cold War’s end have demonstrated the potential for contention that NATO can sometimes exacerbate.
Two subsequent and fairly recent Russia-NATO crises include the Russo-Georgian War of 2008 and the Ukrainian civil war of 2014.
Five years later, a similar scenario played out in Ukraine, another NATO candidate state.
Troublesome for Russia was the 2008 Bucharest Summit which “became a cornerstone for the membership process.
Leaders ‘welcomed Ukraine’s and Georgia’s Euro-Atlantic aspirations for membership in NATO and agreed that these countries will become members of NATO;’” this decision “pushed the limits of Russian flexibility.
But these worries seemed to wane as the western world grew more confident and relations with Russia improved.
Unfortunately, it was this caution, which fizzled out at the 2008 Bucharest summit, that allowed for more relaxed relations.
The mere possibility of extending 55 NATO’s sphere into Georgia broke this cycle, leading to reactionary rhetoric and actions.
Frustrated and on guard, “Russia, based on the lessons learned in Kosovo, declared Georgia as part of its sphere of interest and as one of its red lines in reference to NATO’s expansion.
Georgian President, Mikheil Saakashvili, is far from innocent in causing the war, and Georgia’s use of violence in South Ossetia was deemed unjustifiable by the international community.
Russia found the defense of its ethnic population abroad warranted intervention.
Despite Georgian violence, the organization maintained its commitment to help move the country closer to membership.
The situation devolved rapidly, “President Dimitri Medvedev issued a statement emphasizing that Russia will provide effective assistance to South Ossetia and Abkhazia because of NATO’s decision.
Russia-West relations did slowly and progressively improve again, until 2014, when Russia invaded Crimea.
These types of prospective offers worry Russia—after all, had Robertson been right, Ukraine could have contemplated NATO membership as early as 56 2007.
Unfortunately, there seems to be some inability on the part of the western world to recognize that Russia views NATO as an actual and legitimate threat to its security.
Although most western liberals find it unpleasant to admit this, strategically speaking, it makes sense for Russia to be worried.
As Glaser warned two and a half decades ago, 57 “whatever benefits might provide must be weighed against the risk of increasing Russian insecurity.
In 2012, Charles A Kupchan seemed optimistic about the prospects of improved East-West relations.
Unfortunately, such a path to peaceful relations seems dreadfully damaged, if not destroyed, in the wake of the 2014 Ukraine Crisis.
Conclusion It is unfortunate the situation has devolved to such a point that reconciliation with Russia seems even more difficult to achieve than after the 2008 Georgian War.
Unfortunately, the symbolism and fear of a real invasion of this sphere appear to have been stronger than scholars, such as Waterman expected, especially in light of both the 2008 war with Georgia and the 2014 crisis in Ukraine.
It is much too late today to do away with NATO, and it is unlikely at most that it will cease to exist any time soon.
Limited expansion14 that satisfied both the west and quelled Eastern European states’ fears while simultaneously avoiding stepping on Russia’s toes would have been optimal.
This could have pleased all sides or, at the very least, would not have angered and ‘threatened’ Russia.
As such, NATO’s expansionist policy was responsible, in part, for initiating the Ukraine crisis.
These come in the form of cultural, linguistic, regional and ethnic cleavages and it can be easily argued that they are partly responsible for the country’s struggling or failing democracy.
In the aftermath of the Soviet Union’s collapse, the west of the country used nationalistic pride and pro-west tendencies to rebel against their former ‘master’ while in the east and Crimea, which belonged to Russia from the 18th century until 1954, the people expressed strong Russian nationalism.
This situation means that Ukrainian politics is heavily divided along those same ethnic and linguistic cleavages.
Not only are there significant internal divisions, but the country is also caught between two giants, the West and Russia, vying for power and influence.
Both have used economic, historical, political and ideological means to try to secure their goals.
The military alignments of Ukraine and the defensive alliances seeking its membership are paramount.
In particular, the relationship between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Russia and Ukraine has been a contentious subject which was partly responsible for the recent annexation of Crimea by Russia and the separatist rebellion in eastern Ukraine.
The Crimean peninsula was the flashpoint of the Ukraine crisis, in part due to its ethnic, cultural and linguistic ties to Russia, but especially because of its strategic value—which is the main reason it seems doomed, historically speaking, to be caught in the midst of wars, fought over, torn apart, traded and invaded.
In 2010, the Kharkov Accords were signed between 60 Yanukovych and then-Russian President Dmitry Medvedev—these renewed and extended the agreement allowing Russia’s Black Sea Fleet to be stationed in Sevastopol from 2017 to 2042.
Given the prevalent anti-Russian leaning of the new government, and its pro-EU and pro-NATO nature, it seems likely the Accords would have been rescinded, posing a serious obstacle to Russia’s access to its Black Sea base in Sevastopol.
It is therefore possible that, perhaps, fear of losing this strategic asset it what encouraged Russian President Vladimir Putin to annex Crimea.
Although the crisis began over whether the Ukrainian government should sign an economic deal with the EU or Russia, NATO’s role in the crisis is more telling and significant than the European Union’s.
Mainly, this is due to the nature of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
While the European Union represents a real and serious economic competitor for Russia, especially were Ukraine to join this institution, NATO is a military alliance which has been Russia’s adversary since its very conception in 1949.
The EU has no army and a poor track record on taking effective military action.
Russia has real practical, tactical and strategic reasons to fear NATO encroachment into its sphere of influence, as a NATO-aligned Ukraine would expand this hostile military threat and bring it to one of Russia’s most important borders.
Ukraine’s Political Pendulum In 2004, electoral fraud led to the election of pro-Russian candidate, Viktor Yanukovych.
Ukraine was then swept up in a nation-wide peaceful protest against government corruption, which later became known as the Orange Revolution.
It was successful in bringing to power the more progressive, pro-western candidate, Viktor Yushchenko.
However, despite high hopes from his constituents, Yushchenko was not proactive and accomplished very little.
He failed to successfully bring Ukraine closer to NATO or EU membership, and two years later, his opponent, Viktor Yanukovych, was elected, putting an end to such pursuits.
The country is heavily divided along regional lines regarding whether Ukraine ought to form deeper ties with the West or with Russia.
In 2014, during Yanukovych’s second term, another movement, Euromaidan, took root, but this one was led by only a minority, and violence spread along with it.
The instability created as pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovych was forced to flee the country led to a series of events, centered around Crimea and eastern Ukraine, which have negatively impacted relations between Russia and the West.
For years, the Crimean peninsula has been predicted to be a point of contention.
Following Yanukovych’s overthrow and the introduction of antiRussian language laws, Russia annexed Crimea, the peninsula which was transferred to Ukraine by former Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in 1954.
This created an international uproar as Russia violated Ukraine’s territorial integrity and international norms of non-intervention and sovereignty.
The actual and planned eastward expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization has been accused of either being a cause for or hailed as a solution to the Ukraine crisis.
Some argue NATO must expand to deter Russian imperialism while others view the organization as a source of Russian fears which can lead to greater insecurity and, consequently, aggressive defensiveness.
According to Barry Posen, because Relative power is difficult to measure and is often subjectively appraised what seems sufficient to one state’s defence will seem, and will often be, offensive to its neighbours.
Because neighbours wish to remain autonomous and secure, they will react by trying to strengthen their own positions.
States can trigger these reactions even if they have no expansionist inclinations.
Cooperation among states to mute these competitions can be difficult because someone else’s ‘cheating’ may leave one in a militarily weakened position.
In order to determine which view, liberal or realist, is more applicable or correct, and what actions should be taken in order to maintain peace and stability in the region and among the West and Russia, several factors must be considered and examined.
First, the motivation behind Russia’s actions is important to try to discern what its intentions and capabilities were and are regarding plans in Ukraine and the rest of Russia’s sphere of influence.
Second, one must consider what factors indicate risks of further Russian hostilities and what indicates the contrary.
Then it becomes crucial to determine whether 63 NATO expansion and greater military activity on Russia’s borders will deter Russian aggression or make it more likely by heightening tensions and stoking existing fears.
The Kremlin does not appear to have plans, desires, or most importantly, the capacity to invade all of Ukraine or any NATO member country at this juncture in time.
The invasions of Georgia in 2008 and of Ukraine in 2014 did not have for an end goal the occupation of the entire countries, as some western pundits suspected, instead, the RussoGeorgian war and operations in eastern Ukraine were smaller-scale wars with a heavy reliance on propaganda and widespread use of information warfare rather than traditional modes of engagement.
Also important in these cases are the domestic separatist elements, to which the conflicts have been largely confined.
Russia’s annexation of Crimea was largely a strategic move, but with deep historical and cultural ties which are often neglected but are actually primordial in understanding Russian foreign policy.
NATO’s eastward expansionism is an aggravating factor for Russia, and cooperation between the two should therefore be encouraged, with an easing of tensions and, on one end, respect for existing boundaries, principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity, and on the other, a scaling back of military activities and the termination of eastward expansion.
Russia, Ukraine and the West—“It’s Complicated” Relations between Russia and the West have always been complicated.
Since the fall of the Iron Curtain, they have been fighting for control and influence over Ukraine.
The ethnically diverse country, and the Crimean peninsula in particular, have been widely identified as possibly explosive points of contention.
Russia and the West (mainly through the EU and partly via NATO) have both tried to push and pull Ukraine to imitate them.
On an ideological level too, Russia offers a very different model than Europe.
On the one hand, Ukraine and Russia share a Soviet and communist past and have similar historical experiences.
The West offers a more progressive and human-rights and rule of law-based approach.
This is an internally divisive issue as well, split along east-west lines.
As with political and economic choices, the ideological courses Ukraine can choose from seem antithetical and mutually exclusive.
As such, many of Ukraine’s nation-building decisions represent zero-sum games, whereby either Russia, or the West gains influence, power and money but seldom—if ever—can both prosper simultaneously.
The potential of Ukrainian membership in NATO is perhaps the most controversial and zero-sum decision to face not only the country itself, but Russia and the West as well.
It is widely recognized that Russia views the North Atlantic Treaty Organization as a threat and an enemy force.
Russia obviously does not accept the argument that its powerful nuclear retaliatory force provides it with absolute security” This is partly explained by the realist notion, also expressed by Mearsheimer, that great powers, due to the fundamental insecurity of their status as such and the constant threat of being outmatched and out-powered, are never satisfied with existing borders, which in Russia’s case have dramatically shrunk since the Cold War’s end.
States therefore constantly seek to expand 66 their spheres of influence and to expand surrounding buffer zones in order to increase their security, hence why Russia seeks Ukraine’s alliance, or at least its neutrality.
In sum, Russia feels NATO is a serious threat which it would be unable to combat successfully, and the country believes an attack by the Organization is not unbelievable or out of the question.
It is also common knowledge that Russia is highly territorial, so to speak, and is uncomfortable with western encroachments into its sphere of influence, as explained above, particularly as it concerns both Georgia and Ukraine, two countries with which Russia has had rather violent disagreements in the recent past.
Although it would be easy to say it was the Kremlin’s ambition alone that drove Russia to act as it did in the Georgian war, the annexation of Crimea and the Ukraine crisis, this would be an unfair and reductive statement.
There are many other confounding variables aside from imperialist ambitions.
Indeed, Ukraine has many more, stronger, and longer-standing historical, linguistic, economic, social ties to Russia than any other former Russian republic.
Public opinion polls conducted in late 2004 confirm that roughly half of Ukrainians…are saddened by the Soviet Union’s demise.
According to Andrew T Wolff, the current rift between Russia and the West is “a result of a complex mixture of economic, political and historical factors, but one of its more curious antecedents is a disagreement over an alleged promise [not to expand NATO eastward] made over 20 years ago.
This should lead rational political actors to move forward cautiously with NATO expansion.
Blame and Ambitions Of course, the West has a different take on the crisis.
According to realist doctrine, however, ‘liberal reforms’ are a façade.
Regime type does not matter, as international relations are about power and capabilities, so whether Russia is liberal or conservative is actually irrelevant.
As Mearsheimer writes, “the international system creates the same basic incentives for all great powers.
The West in concerned about power plays just as much as Russia, and NATO is an instrument it can use to flex its diplomatic and military muscles.
Poast and Urpelainen find that “while IO membership can promote democratic consolidation through external support for institutional development, it cannot directly prevent authoritarian reversals in transitional democracies.
Additionally, the United States has pursued policies abroad where they encourage the formation of group rights along ethnic and religious lines.
Although “Individual political rights and civic national identity lie at the core of American democracy…When mediating ethno-religious conﬂicts…US foreign policymakers often eschew their own country’s foundational values in favor of rigid, group rights-based regimes.
Indeed,” these so-called “‘ethnocratic’ regimes enjoy a poor track record in terms of forwarding democracy and self-government.
In Ukraine, the government which the United States currently backs is ethnically divisive.
Whether the U.S. pursues anti-democratic policies by design or whether they stem from a genuine intention to democratize and liberalize nations is up for debate, though realists would argue this really does not matter.
That is to say that states must prioritize politically successful over moral actions, because “There can be no political morality without prudence, that is, without consideration of the political consequences of seemingly moral action.
What is clear is that evidence is present which demonstrates two crucial elements policymakers either ignore or are unaware of.
First, pressuring countries to join international organizations, such as NATO, does not necessarily lead to long-term democratic reforms, as previously demonstrated .17 Furthermore, since NATO is a military alliance, the implications to Russia, should Ukraine or Georgia join the organization, are fundamentally different than if it were the World Health Organization or the International Air Transportation Association, for instance.
Unlike these, NATO does not just facilitate cooperation, reduce transaction costs and lengthen the shadow of the future (Keohane and Martin 1995, 42; Drezner 2011, 50), its status as a military alliance whose original historic purpose was countering the Soviet Union makes it a fundamentally different 17 Albania represents such a case, where despite joining NATO, the country remains only partly free. 70 matter.
His political base mostly comes from the east and south of the country, which holds a generally negative view of NATO and favors building ties with Russia instead.
One particular poll found that “in October 2006, only about 17 percent of the Ukrainian population supports NATO membership.
There is also significant reluctance among some NATO members themselves to admit Ukraine into the alliance.
As 18 It should be noted this critique applies equally to Russia, which simply backs a different ethnocratic regime.
In 2003…the shadow economy reached half of Ukraine’s GDP,” and this figure “did not decline in the Yushchenko era” . 71 aforementioned, this is something realists foresaw at the end of the Cold War and it has proven to be a valid concern.
The prevalent view among Americans is that “the door to NATO membership should be kept open.
Putin and his government have been dedicated to stalling or stopping Ukraine’s westward pull.
Although the current government,20 headed by Petro Poroshenko, may be western-focused, the same cannot be said of the population at large.
The regions in the east, particularly Donetsk and Luhansk, were already angered by the overthrow of Yanukovych and, many of them are ethnic Russians or Russian speakers, afraid of the changes the new anti-Russian government would bring.
Where NATO is concerned, the lack of popular support in Ukraine itself makes joining the Organization unlikely, however, just as eastern Ukrainians worried, it is possible Russia also saw in the new 20 This government, it should be noted, is comparably undemocratic as Yanukovych’s. 72 government elite the potential for such a move, no matter how unpopular it would have been.
The constantly changing political leadership, low approval ratings and rampant corruption of Ukraine indicate the contrary.
For instance, “On April 10th, , after weeks of vacillation, the prime minister, Arseniy Yatseniuk, whose popularity had plummeted along with Ukrainians’ living standards, offered to resign…his administration was tarred by corruption scandals and stalled reforms.
Mr Yatseniuk’s offer of resignation was followed by dissension and backroom horse-trading.
The truth, then, is that Ukraine is incredibly divided, especially along regional, linguistic and ethnic lines.
To state that Putin is solely responsible for destabilizing the country fails to take into account how the crisis started and the cultural cleavages that exist.
Ukraine’s Civil War There are several factors that influence the likelihood of civil wars.
Ukraine is fundamentally unstable due to the type of ethnic inequalities present in the country which makes it prone to civil conflict.
As is often the case, the initial breakdown of democracy in Ukraine came with a sudden and undemocratic regime change which deposed the established government, not with a civil 74 war.
But the new regime was more discriminatory, and at least as undemocratic, as the one that preceded it.
Rebels and governments often calculate the chances of receiving international aid before launching into a civil war.
Depending on the circumstances, international aid can lessen the likelihood of war breaking out or enable it.
In the case of Ukraine, the latter occurred, as both sides received international support.
The Ukrainian government obtained non-lethal military aid and the West’s political and financial support.
Meanwhile, the separatists were backed by Russia, which provided training, weapons and professional soldiers.
Perhaps it was the expectation that the Kremlin would back them which encouraged the separatists to declare themselves an independent republic.
In general, these kinds of rebellions, start with an attempt to solve differences diplomatically, which the Donbass rebels initially tried to do.
But in the event that this failed, as was eventually the case, the separatists could feel reassured they would have, with Russia’s help, the capacity to engage in an armed conflict with a reasonably good chance of success.
The Russian Threat According to Liberals Liberals find reason to worry about the possibility of Russian imperialist ambitions and therefore encourage NATO to take on a more involved role in Eastern Europe.
They focus on the weakness of Russia’s neighbors and on its repeated air and naval incursions into foreign territory.
Since 2014, there has been a worrisome increase in Russian military activity.
Mearsheimer, who himself opposed NATO expansion, notes that “NATO expansion was predicated on the belief that Russia might someday try to conquer territory in central Europe” .21 Liberals therefore feel vindicated in their push for expansion.
Sweden is particularly concerning to some, because of its weak military.
The Swedish government apparently bought into the concept that the End of History had come and perpetual peace had descended upon Europe.
In the post-Cold War era, Sweden opted for defense cuts and against NATO membership, although it did join the European Union.
Many in the West have opined that Sweden and Finland ought to reconsider and take steps to join the defensive alliance.
Given negative public opinion toward NATO membership, however, it is unlikely Sweden or Finland will soon join the alliance.
The Baltic states, on the other hand, are constantly wary of Russia and have built up their militaries instead.
As such, they are comparatively better equipped to deal with an aggressive Russia.
Russia and NATO even cooperated on missions in 77 Afghanistan, but when the 2008 war between Georgia and Russia came, the Baltic states found their suspicions vindicated.
While the Baltic states saw 2008 as the turning point in their relations with Russia, it took the 2014 Ukraine crisis for the rest of the West to embark on the same boat.
This was partly because, even though “the international setting which led to the 2008 war between Russia and Georgia should have…spurred further politicomilitary integration” on both sides , the energy dependence of Europe upon the eastern giant led to continued cooperation.
NATO member countries, including the United States, have agreed to provide Ukraine with non-lethal military aid following the annexation of Crimea and rebellion in Donbass.
This is a cautionary move, as Russia is likely to view a significant and permanent foreign presence near its border as a threat.
Unfortunately, the prevailing mood lately has been inflammatory, as evidenced by more frequent and large-scale NATO exercises near Russia’s borders since 2014, though so far, cooler heads have prevailed, on both sides.
However, realists can and do convincingly portray the Kremlin as rational.
Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization states that an attack against one of its members is an attack against all, and therefore, all member states are tasked with protecting each other in the event of war.
Realists, as expressed below, view this as a safeguard against Russian aggression, as a matter, not of intentions or desires, but of military capability.
Some worry that “within five years Russia could run multiple Ukraine-sized operations in Europe.
Even though Russia is and will keep building up its military forces, so will Poland, the Baltic states, and most significantly, the United States, NATO’s leading country.
Article 5 means Russia would probably not attack a member of the organization, regardless of its improved capabilities.
Regardless of these actual military capabilities, whether they be strong enough in a few years to confront NATO or not, liberals have begun to worry that Ukraine might be changing the game in a way that makes the application of Article 5 murky.
This is cause, certain policy-makers and scholars contend, for an expanded and more permanent NATO influence and presence in Eastern Europe.
While troops permanently based in Eastern Europe serve as a deterrent against conventional warfare, they will not stop cyber-attacks, propaganda campaigns, the funding of subversive groups and similar non-conventional means of waging war which are the most prevalent methods in this case.
The Realist View—Don’t Poke the Bear Realists have a much different opinion regarding the Ukraine crisis, the role NATO has and should play, and what the West’s response should be.
Realist thought offers a more prudent approach, one that still values military preparedness but advises against rash and alienating actions.
While it is important for NATO, the EU, and the U.S. to offer Russia a united front which opposes the latter’s aggressiveness, there are some issues with the West’s reactions.
First and foremost, there is a lack of cultural understanding and an inability or unwillingness to understand Russia’s reasoning.
There is a mainstream alarmist trend that contends Russia’s actions in Crimea were the beginning of a renewed imperialist dream, and potentially the first step in pan-European conflict with Russia as the conquering aggressor.
For any scholar who understands Russia’s motivations, this is a questionable claim.
As a rational actor, the Kremlin is aware it would not be able to win a war against 80 NATO, and since an invasion of one member country represents an invasion of all NATO members, it is extremely unlikely Russia would attack such a nation.
Furthermore, if Russia had intended to invade all of Ukraine, as some believed—“Some observers believe Russia could use widespread violence in eastern Ukraine as a pretext for military intervention” —it would have already done so.
Military experts agree Russia does not have the capacity to occupy the entire nation state of Ukraine.
Other time frames of opportunity have come and gone without a wide-scale Russian invasion which would extend beyond Crimea.
Although, as realists often stress, it is impossible to be certain of countries’ intentions, especially when they are hostile, it appears as though Russia did not and does not wish to invade or occupy all of Ukraine.
Realists, however, would focus more heavily on the fact that Russia does not possess the military capability and capacity to successfully occupy Ukraine beyond Crimea’s borders or to invade any NATO member country.
Cooperation and Lack Thereof The United States has been actively cooperating with its NATO partners in the east following the 2014 crisis.
Even prior to this, though, the United States had been working closely, particularly with Poland, to improve defense in that region.
Despite non-lethal military aid which the United States has provided to Ukraine and significant American contributions to eastern European defense, some believe those still fall short.
Critics have argued “that more should be done to support Ukraine, reassure allies in Central and Eastern Europe, and counter Russian aggression.
McCain has even argued in favor of sending lethal military aid to Ukraine, criticizing President Obama for refusing to do so, “Since the crisis in Ukraine began nearly a year ago, President Obama has stubbornly refused to provide lethal military assistance that would help Ukraine defend its sovereign territory and determine its own political future free of Russian coercion.
While intra-NATO cooperation has benefited from the crisis, relations with Russia have taken a serious hit.
This is a point some realist scholars have argued, quite convincingly at times.
Even before the Ukraine crisis arose, NATO’s eastward expansion was a point of contention.
Expansion would be a grave mistake, as the prospect of eastward NATO enlargement is one of the main causes for the 2008 Russo-Georgian war and one of Russia’s predominant concerns with Ukraine.
A geopolitically-motivated NATO would mean altering some of the alliance’s current trajectories.
Rather than “evaluating countries for membership on the basis…of normative criteria,” which Ukraine does not currently meet regardless, NATO would take 23 It should also be noted that Russia itself has not always lived up to its post-Cold War commitments.
This would mark a dramatic departure from the current mentality, but it is not the only change necessary.
The geopolitical NATO would encourage the creation of buffer zones which would reduce “tensions between the West and Russia through the creation of separating space.
This would mean greater stability in Europe and lead to improved East-West relations.
In Ukraine too, there is strong opposition to joining the Organization, which makes Ukrainian membership unlikely.
This, evidently, suited Russia, which perhaps feared that the new and more radical government which forced its way to power in 2014 would seek membership once more.
It is unlikely this will happen, though, for the same reasons it was abandoned previously.
As aforementioned, the majority of Ukrainians do not favor NATO membership and it is an issue that is highly divisive and split along regional lines.
Ukraine has struggled to establish successful democratic government and has been fairly consistently unstable throughout the past two decades, whether under more pro-Western or more pro-Russian leadership.
As easy as it is for governments in the West to point to Russia’s destabilizing influence and illegal actions toward its little brother, it is important to recognize that mistakes have been made on all sides, not just the easternmost one.
The most notable error the West has made is the continued eastern expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Russia sees this defensive military alliance as an enemy force and a real and serious threat.
As the Cold War was drawing to a close, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev was given top-level assurances NATO would not expand further east.
This promise was broken, leaving the Russian Federation bitter and betrayed.
The paternalistic ‘Motherland’ has always viewed Georgia and Ukraine as part of its own sphere of influence and, ergo, as ‘off-limits’ to western powers.
Since all great powers seek to achieve regional hegemony, it is logical and by no means atypical that Russia seeks to maintain its superiority and influence in the region, impeding the West’s attempts to encroach upon this territory.
By annexing Crimea, Russia behaved as a rational actor, seeking to protect its geostrategic assets and drawing on deep cultural ties to obtain what it wished without much bloodshed.
Russia’s support of the separatists in Ukraine can also be viewed as rational, since the new government they were rebelling against was, at the minimum, pro-West, and could be feasibly considered anti-Russia.
Liberalism can be commended on its pursuit of human rights and democratization, but in the Ukraine crisis, the paths which its proponents recommend incite warmongering.
Perhaps in the future it will be possible for Russia and NATO to view each other as peaceful neighbors, but for now, the best option is to halt eastward expansion.
The League of Nations, though not the first IGO, served as the template for modern-day IGOs.
Its failures highlighted the importance of strong state commitment, economic interdependence, cultural ethnocentrism and perceived legitimacy.
Successful subsequent organizations have learned from the League’s shortcomings, and today, they occupy an important place in international relations.
IGOs have come to cover a wide range of subject matters, from aviation, to economics, health and defense.
Although they do not all serve the same purpose, fundamentally, IGOs strive to help governments improve cooperation on common issues which affect them.
Although they have their limitations, IGOs will continue to play a significant role in international relations for the foreseeable future.
Efforts should therefore be directed at how to best reform and improve IGOs in order to maximize their utility, efficiency and beneficial impact.
One of the most important defense alliances of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries is the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, which was formed in 1949 in order to defend Western Europe from the Soviet Union.
When the Cold War ended, there was much heated debate about what ought to happen to the organization, given it had outlived its initial mandate.
Liberals champion the proliferation of IGOs, believing them to be effective means of cooperation, and hence a force for peace and stability.
As such, liberal voices strongly favored the continued existence and the eastward expansion of NATO in the post-Soviet world.
Realists, on the other hand, foresaw many potential problems arising from this expansionist path.
Realist thought offers a more prudent approach to 88 international politics.
Since the world is anarchic, states are self-interested actors who value power above all else, as that affords security.
Although a more pessimistic view than liberalism, realism prescribes a more prudent approach to international relations.
While they view the world as constantly subject to discord, they tend to advocate for policies which make war less likely.
In the case of NATO, realists favored either the dissolution of the alliance, or at least, they counseled against the organization’s expansion.
Correctly, they assumed pushing NATO’s borders eastward would create instability and lead to heightened tensions between the west and Russia, which would fear western encroachments into its backyard, thereby upsetting the fragile balance of power.
Liberal predictions argued NATO would be a force for democracy, peace and stability, however it could be argued the 2008 Russo-Georgian war and 2014 Ukraine crisis may have demonstrated the contrary.
Fears that the organization, which Russia views as a hostile military force, would encroach upon Russia’s sphere of influence led to retaliatory rhetoric and action.
It is not too late, however, to stop or restrain eastward expansionism and halt the growth of the defense alliance.
It has also become unlikely at best that early liberal hopes that Russia would one day be incorporated into the organization will be realized.
Instead, it appears as though other means of west-Russia cooperation ought to be pursued, perhaps with the eventual goal of a NATO-like defense alliance which includes both the United States and Russia.
Liberals support these organizations’ proliferation in the world based on the premise and widely-held belief that they can help democratize nations and create more cooperative, and hence peaceful, relations between states, leading to greater stability in an anarchic system that is naturally volatile.
The case of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s expansion seems to indicate that, at least where this particular IGO is concerned, liberals are incorrect.
In fact, where the 2008 Russo-Georgian War and 2014 Ukraine crisis are concerned, NATO seems to have partial responsibility for stoking tensions and inciting conflict.
Given that NATO is a military alliance and therefore somewhat of a special case, being the only IGO of its kind, this does not mean that all IGOs are prone to such conflict-inducing behavior, however, it should lead scholars and policymakers to move forward cautiously with IGO expansion.
The Liberal Rationalist Solution to the Problem of War in International Relations.
Progress, Human Freedom and Rationality in the Peace Theories of Norman Angell and David Mitrany.
The Austrian hunger crisis and the genesis of international organization after the First World War.
Preventing Civil War How the Potential for International Intervention Can Deter Conflict Onset.
The Link between States’ Influence and the Legitimacy of Intergovernmental Organizations.
Re-Examining the Role of NATO and the EU in Light of the IntraAlliance Security Dilemma.
Hellenism, Liberalism, and International Intellectual Cooperation as a Path to Peace.
