Created for this seemingly never-ending war, even if some would prefer to forget.
Numbers source ATO HQ reports, including only Ukrainian army regular soldiers, 1 attack could be ""Half day non-stop fighting"" Amasingly rare, high standard of journalism.
Russia invades a eastern Ukraine town; sends in Putin's ""LPR""/""DPR"" terrorists.
Ukraine liberates a town; sends in civilian police with only pistols and a smile and a 1-800 local number to call with local problems.
Aeroflot just begs to get into @EU sanctions by opening daily plane route from #Sochi to #Crimea.
Numbers source ATO HQ reports, including only Ukrainian army regular soldiers, 1 attack could be ""Half day non-stop fighting"" Thanks for these and Happy New Year.
Research into nuclear weapons policy indicates that American and Russian/Soviet nuclear doctrine was and is almost wholly dependent upon their conventional power relative to one another.
Even when Kennedy's administration turned away from Eisenhower's New Look/First Offset/Massive Retaliation doctrine, not much changed operationally until the Nixon era, because it took decades for the United States to develop a credible Flexible Response.
Only during the late 1970s did it become apparent that technological advancement could allow United States conventional forces to ""fight outnumbered and win"" against quantitatively superior Warsaw Pact, Chinese and North Korean forces.
Despite Reagan's confrontational rhetoric, he was the first United States president not dependent upon nuclear weapons when it came to the Soviets.
Irrespective of one's moral views regarding the United States and the Soviet Union/Russia, the fact is that both saber-rattled when they felt on the defensive and unable to challenge the other.
Removed from the context of the Soviet Union being a genocidal and aggressive power, Eisenhower's deployment of nuclear weapons was not only provocative but bordering on lunacy.
Galeotti noted that no Russian general believes that ""nuclear de-escalation"" is even feasible.
It's all part of Putin's show; his brinkmanship that mimics what United States presidents did in the 1950s-1970s.
Unfortunately, Mlechin serves as an unwitting mouthpiece to convince the West that Putin is a ""madman"" and therefore cannot be confronted anywhere lest he set off the bomb.
Nixon did nothing but pass information to the Soviets in the form of sat photos...the nuclear threat came directly from the Israeli side...and then vice versa later in Yom Kippur.
This was the IDF calling up their strategic reserves scattered around the world to come home and merge with the IDF...and a number of United States Army tank officers suddenly left their United States units in Germany......took emergency leave and departed Europe to fight in the IDF tank units.
Rumour has it #Ukraine hackers have got hold of #Russian army satellite intel database of their presence in Ukraine.
Le Pen's office reacts to possible ban on entry to Ukraine for her comments that the Russian actions in Crimea were legal.
Russia's #RVSN #РВСН added 2,000 contract soldiers in 2016; now has 18,000 contractees in its ranks.
UCA hackers got data on payments to these soldiers. Russian Ministry of Defense financing terrorism.
Not ""soldiers on their own"" World renowned @InformNapalm completely obliterates @CrowdStrike Android malware report by fact-checking.
I am referring specifically to Nixon’s decision to go to DEFCON 3, which was about deterring the Soviets from intervening.
I am aware that Israel threatened to use nuclear weapons against the Egyptians and Syrians in order to obtain United States aid.
I understood that Israel was serious about using nuclear weapons given Dayan’s initial shock, and that the satellite reconnaissance only confirmed what Tel Aviv had communicated verbally to Washington.
Malofeev, #Russian orthodox billionaire, in 2014, bankrolled #Crimea annexation & Eastern #Ukraine campaign.
Sen Sessions in 2009-10 built a pro-VVP, racialist, anti-liberal network.
Russia is setting up two new divisional #artillery brigades in Southern MD this year.
How @rianru covers a poll saying Americans fear WWIII, versus how @RT_russian covers the same poll.
If you have been following the Ukrainian thread since Crimea....the initial Russia invasion of Donbass was well on the other side of 15,000 troops all taken from their professional contract side of the house...some estimates placed the number closer to 17,000.
Russian state propaganda mock Baltic states on getting status of Northern Europe by asking will living standard raise or just taxes.
Russian propaganda screams Ukraine pushing civilians to the front as human shields.
Overall, I would expect that Russian regulars, irregulars and mercenaries combined total some 15,000 to 17,000, or ~38% of the total insurgent fighting strength.
I also agree that the insurgents are incapable of mounting a successful major offensive without direct and obvious Russian intervention, particularly with airpower and artillery support.
Yet the insurgents seem more than capable of blunting a Ukrainian offensive until clandestine Russian reinforcements arrive to shore up the front.
The power outage in Ukraine last month has now been confirmed as a cyberattack.
Once again we are witnessing an alarming escalation in fighting in Ukraine.
Tu154 crash has made different siloviki clans on war footing by accusing via scapegoats each other in the accident.
More Russian soldiers during the 2014 offensive inside eastern #Ukraine.
Russian Yuriy Krupnov #Russia more likely will use nukes against @NATO persistent threats.
Y/day 78 attacks on Ukr pos., w all types of guns from small arms to heavy.
Russia's 76th Air Assault Division base in Pskov 20km from Estonia houses over 10,000 troops.
Fascinating to track how the #fakenews story about 3,000 extra tanks spread online.
Russian army 136th Motorized Rifle Brigade T-90A tank crew member who got killed in #Luhansk in 2014.
Pro-)#Russian forces attacked an Ukrainian army position near Novoaleksandrovka wit an ATGM causing 1 KIA & 1 WIA among Ukrainians.
Moldova new president, whose campaign was warmly supported by Kremlin as he said Crimea is Russian, now says it's Ukrainian.
Training tempo of the Russian army is intensifying every year. snap exercises bigger, faster, harder.
In Dec., #OSCE Observer Mission reported high # of ambulances & funerary vehicles, incl. w/ signage that Russian mil casualties on-board.
Moscow continues to arm, train, and fight alongside separatists in eastern Ukraine.
Kremlin operative Vladislav Surkov fired chief of staff Aleksandr Pavlov over #SurkovLeaks, reports @Vedomosti.
Kremlin official linked to emails on destroying Ukraine resigns, saying he's tired after 3 years of work.
He keeps the war in #Ukraine from being forgotten. 19 violations of the ceasefire over the past 24 hours.
Yesterday, Russia's MoD Shoigu inspected the #Kadamovskiy training ground where the new 150th division is deployed, 40 km from #Ukraine.
In this article LNR/DNR Kremlin puppets want Ukraine to sign new deal with Russia, want to attack Kyiv.
All you need to know about Russian Information Warfare from a @NATO point of view.
The battlefields in Eastern Ukraine represent part of a new era of warfare, or so we are regularly told.
Analysts, pundits, and military leaders point to cyber warfare, hybrid warfare, and the gray zone.
But look away from these shiny new concepts for a moment, and it becomes clear the Russian–Ukrainian war’s conventional character is far from new.
While the new aspects of this war have generated discussion within the defense industry as to the evolving character of war, an acknowledgement of the conflict’s conventional character is largely missing from the discourse.
To be sure, Russia’s actions in Ukraine have revealed several innovations, most notably the employment of the semi-autonomous battalion tactical group, and a reconnaissance-strike model that tightly couples drones to strike assets, hastening the speed at which overwhelming firepower is available to support tactical commanders.
However, even these innovations are being used within a form of warfare that looks strikingly like that of a century ago.
The July 11, 2014 strike at Zelenopillya is perhaps the most noticeable example to emerge from the war of the combined effects of tactical drones with the battalion tactical group—a task-organized force designed to achieve tactical overmatch against opponents—and its organic fires capabilities.
The attack was a preemptive undertaking against Ukrainian brigades, postured in assembly areas, which were preparing to conduct offensive action against Russian and partisan forces.
The buzzing of tactical drones and cyber-attacks targeting Ukrainian communications preceded the strike.
An onslaught of rockets and artillery fell on the Ukrainian position shortly after the drones arrived, leaving thirty Ukrainian soldiers dead, hundreds more wounded, and over two battalions’ worth of combat vehicles destroyed.
This strike created anxiety within the United States Army, specifically in relation to the sophistication of Russian cyber capabilities and the effectiveness of the new Russian reconnaissance-strike model.
This strike also highlights the disparity in artillery and rocket munitions between Russia and the United States Army.
Russia still possesses and employs a variety of munitions, to include dual-purpose improved conventional munitions and thermobaric munitions, that the United States Army elected to eliminate from its arsenal.
The Battle of Ilovaisk followed on the heels of the strike at Zelenopillya.
Ilovaisk, a city on a critical highway linking the Donetsk People’s Republic with Russia, was held by DPR partisans and Russian forces.
In early August 2014, Ukrainian forces fed approximately eight battalions into the city, attempting to dislodge Russian and partisan forces from Ilovaisk.
Their effort achieved moderate success—enough so that by the end of August, Russia dispatched multiple battalion tactical groups from its Southern Military District in Rostov-on-Don to regain control of the situation.
These Russian forces encircled the town, isolating the Ukrainian forces at Ilovaisk, and began to lay siege to the city.
Many Ukrainian soldiers reported hearing the distinctive buzz of Russian drones prior to the deluge of rocket and artillery fire—an indicator of Russia’s emerging tactic of using drones, linked directly to battalion tactical groups, to facilitate indirect fire.
Ukrainian forces attempted to break out of their beleaguered position several times, but were never successful.
By the end of the month, the critical situation forced the Ukrainian government to seek a political solution, which led to the Minsk Protocol on September 5, 2014.
The agreement allowed for a peaceful withdrawal of Ukrainian forces along a corridor back to Ukrainian-held territory.
However, Russian forces opened fire on the Ukrainian forces as they withdrew.
The carnage from the battle and the shooting gallery along the withdrawal corridor killed over 1,000 Ukrainian soldiers, wounded hundreds more, and destroyed scores of combat vehicles.
The Battle of Ilovaisk was the bloodiest battle of the war for the Ukrainian army.
The Minsk Protocol did little to inhibit combat operations, and Russian siege operations continued.
The next major Russian siege was at the Second Battle of Donetsk Airport—or “Little Stalingrad” to its Ukrainian defenders—which occurred from September 2014 to January 2015.
During this battle, Russian forces sought to capitalize on Ukrainian initiative by allowing them to invest a considerable amount of force at the airport, before deploying multiple battalion tactical groups to encircle the facility.
Once isolated, Russian forces and partisans began a slow, concentric squeeze on the Ukrainians controlling the airport, much of which consisted of incessant artillery and rocket bombardment.
As their grip grew tighter, Russian and partisan forces entered and cleared terminals, hangers, and other facilities in which Ukrainian forces were located.
The combined Russian–partisan team employed tanks in an infantry-support role throughout the clearance operation, providing covered movement from objective to objective and using mobile, protected firepower to achieve local overmatch against Ukrainian infantry.
The Battle of Debal’tseve was the last major siege of the Russian–Ukrainian War.
Like the Battle of Ilovaisk, the two sides fought for strategically important highway links.
The city of Debal’tseve, with 25,000 inhabitants, was the furthest east piece of Ukrainian-controlled territory.
The city formed a salient into Russianand partisan-controlled territory, which offered Russia an enticing opportunity to shore up its front lines.
On January 14, 2015, Russian and partisan forces attacked, aiming to collapse the shoulders of the salient and cut off the Ukrainians in the city—a pincer movement reminiscent of the Battle of the Bulge.
Once isolated, Russian forces launched massive salvos of rocket and artillery fire at Ukrainian forces and on the city’s infrastructure.
They also cut power and utilities in the city, creating a humanitarian crisis within Debal’tseve.
By the end of January, Russian offensive action, coupled with the harsh Ukrainian winter, led to the death of 6,000 civilians.
The battle triggered the Minsk II agreement on February 11, but fighting continued until February 20, when the city fell to Russian and partisan forces.
All told, the battle saw approximately 8,000 Ukrainian soldiers defeated by over 10,000 Russian and partisan forces.
However, the siege’s benefit is its ability to transfer military power into political progress, while obfuscating the associated costs.
A rapid, violent, decisive victory in which hundreds of Ukrainian soldiers are killed in a matter of days is counterproductive to Russia’s political goals, whereas the incremental use of violence over time accomplishes the same objectives with less disturbance to the international community.
They can quickly get to an objective by driving full-throttle, but in doing so they kick up a large amount of dust, making the formation and its direction of travel observable to any onlooker.
However, a formation of tanks moving slowly through the desert produces a much smaller dust signature, making its presence less noticeable and its intentions less discernible.
This is a key consideration in understanding Russia’s proclivity for the siege.
As the Russian–Ukrainian War illustrates, the battalion tactical group has proven to be a uniquely responsive and effective tool for conducting siege warfare.
Additionally, professional soldiers will staff the formation, whereas conscripts will be assigned to rear-echelon formations—which will likely yield more effective battalion tactical groups.
As a result, the United States Army can expect to find Russian battalion tactical group continuing to emerge in areas in which Russia employs ground forces to achieve political objectives.
New #MinskMonitor from @DFRLab with a pre-Minsk history of the Donbas War, with some new satellite imagery.
REMEMBER the ultra secret NSA internet company ""The Equation Company"" that worked for 15 or so years undetected on the internet was ""discovered"" by Kaspersky Labs...when even United States companies had not discovered them.
Ruslan Stoyanov, Chief of Cyber Crime at Kaspersky, arrested along with FSB Cyber Security Deputy Chief Ser.
There is possible tie in back to the top former FSB General who was found also in DEC dead in the backseat of his car in Moscow.
Kaspersky's Stoyanov convinced FSB top internet sec officer to share data on RU hacking.
Russian propaganda footage of Putin's proxy forces in Donetsk, Ukraine shows modernized Russian army BTR-80.
Russia's militants used rocket-propelled grenades & artillery systems in 55 attacks on Ukrainian positions.
To provoke #Ukraine-#Poland tensions, vandals paint Nazi graffiti at #Polish graves in #Ukraine.
In Dec 2016, #Ukraine lost 22 soldiers on east. front line, deterring Russia-sponsored proxies from more land grabs.
Current Russian exercise Zapad-2017 is #Russian full scale war practising military exercise with it's consecutive results & actions.
My report from Novoluhanske on the dangers of Ukraine's ""creeping offensive"" in the gray zone.
Bolotov, separatist leader who recently blew whistle on #Russia shelling residential areas around #Luhansk, suddenly dies in #Moscow.
Read our latest report ""The Dynamics of Russia's Information Activities Against Ukraine During the #Syria Campaign"" Putin's and #Trump's phone call is correlated with the number of violent uprising of #Ukrainia`n KIA/WIA:s.
Staunton, January 30 – Valery Solovey, one of the best connected and most thoughtful of Moscow’s foreign policy commentators, says that the telephone call between Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin was the “first step toward ‘a big deal’” between the two not only over bilateral ties but also over a re-division of the world that will leave many countries at Russia’s mercy.
The MGIMO professor outlines what he sees as the seven most important aspects of such a deal in a Facebook post that subsequently has been picked up by other outlets.
There are simply too many players in both Russia and the United States to be certain of that.
But they do point to two disturbing possibilities in the former Soviet space.
On the one hand, if Solovey is right, Trump is prepared to leave the 11 former Soviet republics to face Russian power on their own, something that will represent a betrayal of what has been American policy since 1991.
Moscow apparently is prepared to recognize that the Baltic countries are out of its zone, but any Putin promise to not try to take Ukraine is worthless.
And on the other, in the MGIMO analyst’s view, Trump and Putin are prepared to launch a major military campaign against ISIS not because it would really defeat Islamist radicalism – the experience of Syria shows how unlikely that is -than because it could serve as a means for Trump to marginalize critics in the Congress of his all-too-obvious tilt toward Russia.
Given the gratitude that Trump would likely have for such additional Russian assistance in United States domestic politics, it would be most unlikely that the United States president would do anything to block Putin’s authoritarianism and imperial pretensions in Eurasia, guaranteeing not only more violence there but destroying what is left of United States credibility more generally.
And tragically, if Solovey is right, Trump apparently is only concerned about containing Islamic radicalism and China and is prepared to yield to Russia on everything else.
Overnight russian forces made another attempt to storm UAF positions near #Avdiivka, again repelled.
We have a written guarantee from the Russian side to cease attacks from 10:00 17:00 on #Avdiivka.
Fighting barely stopped overnight with multiple launches of GRAD rockets.
Unusually blunt statement from OSCE, almost but not quite directly blaming Russian-backed armed group in Donetsk for flare up in Avdiyivka.
Pro-Russian proxies send anonymous war propaganda SMSs to #Ukraine's troops in #Avdiivka to undermine their readiness to fight.
Russian Hybrid Army tried to storm Ukrainian positions in #Avdeevka tonight and this morning but were repelled.
Denmark's Foreign Minister wanted to visit the contact line in eastern #Ukraine.
A Russian hybrid army spokesperson claims, another 15 Ukrainian soldiers got killed & 30 wounded in #Avdeevka this morning.
The ""DNR defence minister"" #Basurin now claims, he has info on 78 Ukrainian soldiers' bodies in local morgues from fighting on Sund & Mond.
Jan31 #Donetsk @GirkinGirkin ""MLRS Putin's way, hiding behind 9-story building"" There's a war going on in #Europe.
Germany and Ukraine along with the United States which is still ongoing.
A barrage of GRAD's landed in #Avdeevka this morning, 20 homes damaged, one civilian wounded.
At least 1500 shells fired at Ukrainian positions from separatists territory since Putin-Trump call.
Today #Ukraine bids farewell to Oleg Burets, who died in the last days from Russia's onslaught around Avdiivka.
According to journalist Christopher Miller, former editor at Kyiv Post, the Ukrainian Army has been engaged in a “creeping offensive” since mid-December by advancing into the no-man’s land between the Ukrainian and insurgent front lines.
The insurgents finally became aware of the situation and have launched massive artillery barrages at Ukrainian lines and have launched at least two failed counter-offensives.
This boldness on the part of Kyiv seems to be due to Ukraine’s improving military position as well as frustration with the stalemate, and there are calls for another attempt to liberate or reconquer all of Donbas.
The violence is an early test of Donald Trump’s stated desire for better United States relations with Russia.
Kiev has watched nervously as Trump has repeatedly praised Vladimir Putin and floated the idea of lifting sanctions.
The conflict in Ukraine has raged for nearly three years and cost more than 10,000 lives.
A ceasefire was agreed in Minsk two years ago, and although little progress has been made since on a political solution, large-scale clashes have been rare over the past year.
However, in the last few days both sides have accused the other of using Grad systems, imprecise weapons that rain down multiple rockets over a wide area.
On Wednesday the Ukrainian military said three soldiers had died overnight, and separatist authorities claimed four civilians had been killed.
In a clear sign that United States policy towards Russia could indeed be heading for a sharp change of course under Trump, the state department made no criticism of Russia or the separatist side, in contrast to most of its statements in response to similar spikes in violence in the past.
The state department statement was markedly different in tone to comments from the United States mission to the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe , which is staffed by career diplomats and may be out of step with the new mood in Washington.
There are several rounds of United States and EU sanctions on Russia over its annexation of Crimea and actions in east Ukraine.
Trump has suggested it could be time to lift them, and has spoken of the potential for a grand deal with Putin.
The two leaders spoke by telephone at the weekend and agreed to meet soon.
In Moscow, officials accused Kiev of provoking the fighting to derail the rapprochement between Putin and Trump.
Fighting has centred on the town of Avdiivka, which lies a few miles from the separatist capital, Donetsk, but is controlled by Ukrainian authorities.
Also on Wednesday, Ukraine’s defence minister, Stepan Poltorak, claimed a Ukrainian military cargo plane had been shot at from a Russian-held gas rig on the Black Sea.
Reports suggest Russia engages in psychological warfare in Avdiyivka media In a disturbing echo of the battle for Debaltsevo two years ago, there are reports that SMS text messages are being broadcast to Ukrainian soldiers and residents in Avdiyivka, containing threats and warnings, according to Interpretermag.com.
Examples of such threats have been posted on social networks, Interpretermag.com reported.
During daily attacks in January–February, the Russian-sponsored terrorists used portable cell transmitters to deliver fake and provocative text messages to our mobiles, in order to instigate anger or panic among our troops and destabilize order in our units.
Indeed, the terrorists had been taking control of our cell phones for up to 5–10 minutes, in order to deliver their propaganda messages.
Many times our unit commanders banned the use of cell phones in the battle zone, but our servicemen’s wish to reach relatives was so strong that they often ignored the ban and tried to catch any signal as best they could.
Russian RB-314V Leer-3 electronic warfare systems have been documented in Donetsk and, according to the Russian Ministry of Defense, working in conjunction with Orlan-10 drones, are able to jam GSM mobile communications and broadcast SMS messages.
Ukrainian President Poroshenko's office confirms Russian attack on Ukraine AN26 over the Black Sea.
Putin has already stole coal, factories dissembled/shipped out and UA kids.
The Ukrainian army is now one of the most battle hardened in the world.
Fighting in eastern Ukraine between pro-Russian rebels and Ukrainian armed forces is escalating, officials have warned.
A higher number of ceasefire violations were reported between Sunday and Monday evenings, compared with the previous 24 hours, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine said Monday.
The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry said eight Ukrainian soldiers were killed in the Donbass region in two days.
Battles and shelling pretty much everywheare at #Donetsk northwest-west-southwest.
The thinking seems to be that the UAF may have bitten off more than it can chew, and that while it has improved significantly, particularly in terms of quantity, qualitative reforms have been difficult to enact.
Pro-#Russian police men in #Donetsk evacuate elderly people from the northern city quarters.
Contrary to claims in certain media outlets, none of #OSCE SMM UAVs have been targeted recently.
Alchevsk 20:30 Huge convoy of Gvozdika self-propelled guns on move towards #Stakhanov , 36 pieces.
Having said that, it would be considered an offensive, just as Russia invaded Chechnya in 1994 and 1999, and Georgia invaded South Ossetia in 2008.
Dokuchajevsk horrible night GRADs, artillery, incomings, outgoings, destruction in city centre.
Yet Kiev accepted the loss of Debaltsevo and other deviations from Minsk II for 2 years, before launching an offensive.
Moscow has gone to great lengths to convince Kiev that it does not have a military solution.
To my mind, this offensive was an attempt to keep the conflict front and center in EU and NATO thinking, but it seems to be a roll of the dice in the manner of Tbilisi.
Moscow can claim an egregious violation of Minsk II and note that the Russian Air Force can pound the UA to death before any Javelins, TOWs or Patriots can be supplied and deployed.
Russia may well decide that the loss of Kharkiv or Mariupol would suffice as a lesson.
Defending this town ... is not a provocation"" ""Kremlin says it hopes pro-Russian Ukrainian rebels have enough ammunition"" Since last week, 3 #NATO members report evidence of #cyber attacks from #Russia.
Tanks have entered Bulavin village between Vuhlehirsk and Yenakiieve, DNR held territory.
According to some locals, thursday's big explosion in Donetsk was an ammo depot, while others say it was a rocket salvo.
Humanitarian situation in #Avdiivka has stabilized but fighting continues.
More evidence of #Putin's henchmen, shelling the population in occupied #Donetsk city to blame #Ukraine.
With these impact angles, it is impossible, Ukrainian artillery fire was responsible for the impacts. 13931kHz Another E06, '305', start 0930z.
Russian soldiers from Far East stealing beer from a warehouse in Donbas.
