Strife over Ukraine’s Donbas region remains the single most intractable political problem in contemporary Europe, says U of A historian.
It’s been four and a half years since tensions between Ukraine and Russia erupted.
Despite an uneasy truce negotiated two years later that remains in place, there is no sign the underlying causes of the conflict will be resolved any time soon.
In November 2013, Ukrainians poured into the streets of Kyiv to demand closer ties with the European Union.
By the following spring, Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych, who ultimately opted not to sign the EU Association Agreement, fled.
He resurfaced in Russia, declaring that he had been deposed in a coup by right-wing insurgents.
Russian president Vladimir Putin was in Sochi at the time, attending the Winter Olympic Games.
There followed a dubious referendum, conducted under close military control, to incorporate Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Shortly thereafter, armed pro-Russian groups took over government buildings in a number of eastern cities, sometimes assisted by locals, but led by outsiders who had been involved in Crimea.
Putin and others spoke of the establishment of Novorossiya , a reference to the new territories annexed by Catherine the Great in the 18th century.
The armed conflict that followed, however, was largely restricted to two Russian-speaking regions of Eastern Ukraine, Donetsk and Luhansk.
All other cities of Eastern Ukraine soon ejected the militants and restored their governments.
The militants set up base in the city of Sloviansk under the leadership of a maverick Russian intelligence officer, Igor Girkin.
Ukrainian troops advanced on Sloviansk at the start of July after two earlier failed attempts to recapture the city.
Girkin was dismissed as “defence minister” on August 14, 2014, but Donetsk remained the militants’ new headquarters.
Russia then took a more direct role, supplying the anti-Ukrainian forces with advanced military technology, material supplies and “volunteer” troops.
Ukrainian forces entered Ilovaisk on August 18 but were promptly encircled by militants and a massive contingent of Russian forces that had crossed the border starting August 24.
After a five-day siege, Putin assented to a peaceful retreat by the Ukrainian army, but the Russians fired freely upon the government forces, killing about 1,000 and taking prisoner a further 500.
The initial agreement in September was followed by a second meeting in February 2015, supervised by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and attended by the leaders of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine.
It called for an immediate ceasefire, the removal of heavy weaponry, a 50-kilometre security zone between the two sides, amnesties and the release of prisoners, elections with a temporary law of self-governance in the occupied regions, and Ukrainian control of the state border by the end of 2015.
The summit gave some credibility to the leaders of the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic , Aleksandr Zakharchenko, and Luhansk People’s Republic , Igor Plotnitsky.
Three years later, the ceasefire technically is in place but fewer provisions of the Minsk Protocols have been followed.
About 11,000 people have died, and a further 1. million have fled the region, to other areas of Ukraine or to Russia.
There are daily casualties in the conflict zone, mostly by shelling and rifle fire.
Girkin left in August, Plotnitsky fled Luhansk in November 2017 and Zakharchenko was killed by a bomb on August 31, 2018.
There is ample evidence to suggest that Russia became disillusioned both with Girkin and Zakharchenko.
Putin favours the use of UN peacekeeping forces in Donbas but insists that Ukraine must communicate directly with the leadership of the two republics.
The future of this region, the heartland of Ukrainian industry, remains in doubt, not least because of the lack of clarity in the policies of the major actors involved.
It remains the single most intractable political problem in contemporary Europe.
David R Marples is a professor of Russian and East European history in the Department of History and Classics.
A version of this opinion-editorial appeared Oct. in the Edmonton Journal.
