In the other 93 percent of Ukraine, however, things have not gone in the Kremlin’s favor.
For Ukrainian politicians focused on consolidating their country’s independence and national identity—and that includes Poroshenko and most of the country’s political class—the status quo is tolerable.
They would prefer to get Crimea and the Donbass back, yet Russia’s ongoing occupation has its benefits too.
In seizing those areas, Russia chopped off the two regions with the least developed sense of Ukrainian identity.
And with them gone, no pro-Russian candidate could win a Ukrainian election.
Long gone are the days when candidates such as former President Viktor Yanukovych, who was openly sympathetic to Russia, could win a majority of votes.
The ongoing confrontation with Russia reminds Ukrainians daily why they want to build a nation wholly separate from Moscow.
Even if formal membership in NATO and the EU is still distant, the occupation of the Donbass has accelerated Ukrainian integration with the West.
But even if formal membership in NATO and the EU is still distant, the occupation of the Donbass has accelerated Ukrainian integration with the West in other ways.
Ukrainians received the right to visa-free travel to the EU in 2017, something that Russians can only dream of.
And NATO countries are training Ukraine’s military, which is now the strongest it has ever been.
A third rationale for Russia’s ongoing occupation of the Donbass might be to cause problems for Kiev in the hopes that Ukrainians would cast off their Western-oriented government and try to rebuild ties with Moscow.
The Kremlin long hoped that time was on its side, considering the deep fractures within Ukrainian society and the inability of Ukraine’s political class to address them.
And sure enough, Russia’s occupation of the Donbass does exacerbate all of Ukraine’s problems.
But Ukrainians have not cast out their leaders and opted for a government that is friendlier to Russia.
So, too, does the West, which looks no more likely to change course than the government in Kiev.
Western countries have seen momentous political shocks over the past five years, but support for keeping sanctions on Russia until it leaves the Donbass is as strong as ever.
In the United States, Congress enshrined sanctions on Russia into law in a nearly unanimous vote in 2017.
Europe has seen major political transitions since the EU imposed sanctions on Russia in the summer of 2014.
François Hollande, the French president who along with German Chancellor Angela Merkel negotiated the 2015 cease-fire in Ukraine, left office in 2017 with historically low approval ratings, but his successor has kept France’s policy toward Russia unchanged.
Merkel was buffeted by a political crisis over refugees and the rise of the far-right Alternative for Germany party.
But her center-right political party remains resolutely in favor of sanctions.
In Brussels, the consensus in favor of sanctioning Russia looks as durable as ever.
Well, Russian President Vladimir Putin couldn’t leave Crimea even if he wanted to.
The Russian government has formally annexed the territory, and Putin has staked his political career on forcing his country into a confrontation with the West over the issue.
True, some Russians are beginning to question whether the annexation of Crimea has brought as many benefits as promised.
Russia pointedly chose not to annex the territory, hoping Kiev could be coerced into taking it back as a Trojan horse, in a way that would give the Kremlin leverage in Ukrainian domestic politics.
Yet with Ukraine’s presidential election proving that there is no scope for pro-Russian policies in Ukraine’s capital, all the reasons for continuing the Donbass occupation look increasingly stale.
Ukraine is united against Moscow, NATO is rebuilding Kiev’s military, Russia still faces revolutions along its borders, and sanctions are here to stay.
Yet having staked everything on a confrontation with the West over Ukraine, the Kremlin shows no sign of changing course.
