And from overwork, sometimes I already catch states, as if all this is not real.
We are scolded for analytics this is very in my profile, so I will explain what is wrong.
Recently, we have been increasingly pressed to customize reports to the requirements of management I once touched on this topic.
All these political consultants, politicians and their retinue, influence teams all this created chaos.
Most importantly, no one knew that there would be such a war, they hid it from everyone.
TOTS at owioHanan Qiipanisdd ima calculations, nothing like this will happen.
You understand that the report will be just for show, but create neyopasiee@) tosyntaxdaniquages ¢ / tools / night mode no agu@dbtoapi) thssyasiag, apilyjdat spoapimavapso/ mews / pro privacy stateheein&dodipriyacy rafebyent) rk domtkigs. padhicyg@decatgolaies_ policy) / terms of service / dmca / report abuse (/reportabuse) /weortack(/eortacthing to eliminate the consequences, we are great, everything is fine.
And you concentrate on By using Pastebiticam you agreé to ave aiokiés paliey éidocgboekiesngolicy) to enhance your experience.
Site desigm8wago @Ma)2eheastetiidenly they really throw meteorites and expect that everything will be according to your analytics, which was written from the bulldozer.
That is why we have a total piz_ets I don’t even want to pick another word.
No one knew that there would be such a war, so no one prepared for such sanctions.
They were covered there on the march in a terrible way, they had not yet begun to fight, but they were simply torn to pieces in some places.
They wanted to return Tsarev, so even our pro-Russians turned against him.
If we say that it is impossible to occupy, then any of our authorities will be killed there in 10 minutes, as we leave.
And there is a rule that by covering the poor quality of management with quantity, you only spoil everything.
And this, I repeat, would be with the ideal option, which does not exist.
Our roads simply won't be able to handle such supply caravans everything will come to a standstill.
And these two reasons fall out at the same time, although even one is enough to break everything off.
For the first two days there was still control, now no one knows what is going on there.
And there, even the commanders may not know how many of them are running around somewhere nearby, how many died, how many are in captivity.
There is Chechnya in terms of LOGIN SIGN UP above, because we were Ape that there Wats be no FAQ PASTEBI Niess we YB EC aA BAC Ked.
Bepaiss they paste CO vcietnca that it was necessary to create the most 17.
Because we were initially preparing protests within Ukraine against Zelensky.
Further civilian losses will go exponentially and resistance to us will also only increase.
They already tried to enter the cities with infantry out of twenty landing groups, only one had a conditional success.
Remember the assault on Mosul after all, this is the rule, so it was in all countries, nothing new.
According to the experience of military conflicts in the same Europe in recent decades , cities can be under siege for years, and even function.
By and large, next week there will be a turning point in one of the sides, simply because the situation cannot be in such an overstrain.
There are no analytics it is impossible to calculate the chaos, here no one can say anything for sure.
Rates will rise, in the hope that suddenly some option will shoot through.
The trouble is that we, too, can now miscalculate and lose everything in one move.
It’s just that there is no option for a possible victory, and defeat is everything, sailed at all.
They 100% repeated the beginning of the last century, when they decided to kick weak Japan and get a quick victory, then it turned out that the army was in trouble. then they started the war to the bitter end, then they began to take the Bolsheviks for ""re-education"" into the army after all, they were outcasts, uninteresting to anyone in the masses.
And then, the Bolsheviks, who were not really known to anyone, picked up anti-war slogans and it started like this LOGIN SIGN UP PAS i FS ss.
Largely for this reason, the Donbass of 2014 began it was necessary to divert the attention of Westerners from the topic of the Russian spring in Crimea, so the Donbass crisis, it seems, should have drawn all the attention to itself and become the subject of bargaining.
Then they decided to push Erdogan into 4 pipes of the South Stream and entered Syria this is after Soleimani gave deliberately false inputs in order to solve his problems.
If we were given real introductory information, we would at least indicate that the original plan is controversial, that we need to double-check a lot.
Now it remains to be seen that some fucking adviser will convince the top to start a conflict with Europe demanding to reduce some sanctions.
You can’t even make a “dirty” bomb imperceptibly, but the fact that their old nuclear power plants can produce weapons-grade plutonium (plants like REB-1000 produce it in minimal quantities as a “by-product” of the reaction) so the Americans introduced such control there with the involvement of the IAEA, that sucking on the topic is stupid.
Now it will cover us so much that we will start to miss the hungry 90s.
While the auction was closed, Nabiullina seemed to be taking normal steps but this is all like plugging a hole in a dam with a finger.
Kadyrov beats his hoof for a reason they have their own adventures there.
He created for himself the image of the most influential and invincible.
Turkey blocks the straits to transport supplies there by planes, it's like heating an oven with money.
Notice that all this is happening at the same time, we don’t even have time to bring everything into one heap.
Here we rushed with the Ukrainian question, as if we were running a hundred meters, and fit into a cross-country marathon.
From the cynical, I will only add that I do not believe that VV Putin will press the red button to destroy the whole world.
Firstly, there is more than one person making a decision, at least someone will jump off.
Secondly, there are some doubts that everything is functioning successfully there.
Experience shows that the greater the transparency and control, the easier it is to identify shortcomings.
And where it is not clear who controls and how, but always bravura reports everything is always wrong there.
Thirdly, and this is the most vile and sad thing, I personally do not believe in the readiness to sacrifice oneself of a person who does not let the members of the Federation Council, but his closest representatives and ministers, come close to him.
And from overwork, sometimes I already e time at work, my head is a little floating, catch states, as if all this is not real.
