Artem Rybchenko, Ambassador of Ukraine in Switzerland, comments on the latest conflict with Russia near the Sea of Azov.
Since Russia's annexation of the Crimea in 2014, there have been armed conflicts in eastern provinces bordering Russia.
The latest crisis between Russia and Ukraine took place on November 25th.
Russian ships rammed a Ukrainian tugboat and opened fire on two Ukrainian gunboats that were trying to reach the Ukrainian port of Mariupol through the Kerch Strait.
Nevertheless, some media pointed out that the crisis was not entirely unwelcome for Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko.
After the recent incident, the Ukrainian president, dressed in camouflage uniform, demanded a 90-day period of martial law for the entire country.
In his office in Bern, the Ukrainian Ambassador to Switzerland, Artem Rybchenko, who personally knows President Poroshenko, discusses the current crisis gripping his country.
Because of the latest crisis in the sea of Azov and our forced focus on this hot spot, Russians could exploit the situation and start entering in our country anywhere.
President Poroshenko initially wanted to declare martial law for the whole country for 90 days.
The election law requires that 90 days before the elections there is no martial law in power.
Parliament decided that the martial law will be in place for 30 days so there is no conflict with our election law.
The martial law is implemented in most of the regions bordering Russia.
It allows our leadership to organize the necessary level of preparation for all of the army.
If, by the end of the year, it proves necessary to extend the martial law, it is possible to so.
The Kremlin has been increasingly aggressive since summer, since the new bridge between Crimea and Russia was opened.
We know this because our ships were stopped for controls, and procedures took up to seven hours.
NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said Russia had ""no justification"" for seizing the Ukrainian ships.
Everyone understands this is the first official open Russian aggression since the occupation of the Crimea in 2014.
Before, whenever Russia was involved in aggressions towards us, they said, “It is not us.
There is video footage from one of the Russian ships capturing the moment it is ramming into an Ukrainian ship.
As far as I know one of the Russians taped the scene and sent it per Whatsapp to his girlfriend.
Russian state television has broadcast footage from the interrogation of three of the Ukrainian captives, including an officer.
The Ukrainian prisoners say their ships had deliberately ignored Russian requests to stop.
You will see that the captives were reading their statement from a screen.
It took some time for our lawyers to get in touch with our imprisoned fellow citizens.
Experts say they are pretty sure that those are not regular prisoners but Russian agents who spy on our arrested men.
The only life line for Ukrainian ports of Berdjansk und Mariupol is the Strait of Kerch.
Our ports in the Sea of Azov are threatened to be cut off from the world since Russia controls the Strait of Kerch.
Apart from a few countries, the international community condemns the Russian occupation of Crimea and considers it a violation of international law.
Nevertheless, Russia has since built a bridge 17 kilometers long to connect Crimea and Russia.
The bridge cost the Russians around 10 billion dollars and it was deliberately built low so the big sea ships can’t pass under it.
Small ships can still run under the bridge, but big ships can’t pass anymore.
Russia is protecting the bridge with its military, and warns that Ukraine might blow it up.
Regardless what conflict we talk about, Donbass, Crimea, or the Sea of Azov, now, our priority are political and diplomatic measures.
If we have the NATO ships close to the strait of Kerch to safeguard the passing of the ships that could put Russia under pressure.
For years Russia has been alarmed by NATO’s growing incursion into the region.
Three nearby states, Turkey, Romania and Bulgaria, are members of the alliance.
NATO conducts air policing operations out of Romania helping them to defend their territory by intercepting Russian jets approaching their air space.
Russia with their weapons can reach NATO members such as Bulgaria, Rumania, Turkey.
We bring our country to a new European, NATO standard, which is normal.
When the new government took power after the “Revolution of Dignity” in 2014, the army was in a poor state.
Some Russian agents and people were in the ministries of our government.
The daily conflict makes us stronger and I am proud of our highly professional army.
Last year, the United States naval construction battalion began building a marine operations control center for the Ukrainian Navy in the city of Ochakiv at the shore of the Black Sea.
If they want to reestablish the Soviet Union, and if they want to control the whole region, it’s not going to work.
The latest move of President Trump cancelling a direct meeting with President Putin at the G-20 summit after the escalation in the Sea of Azov was a very good signal.
First of all, as the Ambassador of Ukraine to Switzerland, I want to mention that we have very good relation with the Confederation.
The Federal Councilor and Foreign Minister Burkhalter was very forthcoming when Switzerland had the leadership of OECD in 2014.
In addition, today there is a clear cooperation in humanitarian and technical assistance from the Swiss side which is highly appreciated.
Of course, the European Union and all the leaders of the G7 countries are big friends of Ukraine and it is also thanks to personal friendly relations of President Poroshenko with other leaders.
And one of the ideas our president put forward is to implement sanctions for Russian trade ships coming out of the Sea of Azov entering international waters.
While there is strong support for Ukraine, Western sympathies have suffered.
Reforms that the West called for are protracted, namely, regarding corruption.
According Transparency International, Ukraine ranks as the most corrupt country in Europe after Russia.
But it is not so easy to do everything at the same time with warfare going on along the eastern border, with the situation on the Crimea and other economical issues.
I am saying that the military engagements in Donbass takes a lot of resources.
Ukraine is ranked by the International Monetary Fund as the poorest country in Europe even though you get a lot of support from the West.
But try to become a member of the team which works 24/7 to bring an over 45 Million people population country back to a normal and stable life.
For example, if Ukraine earns one million dollars from our agricultural sector, we can’t use it for pensions and the stabilization of some funds.
We have to use it to make our Donbass region stronger, not for the development project.
It is a deliberate strategy to make us weak and to keep us from prospering.
Regardless, we have a much stronger economy compared to 2015 which means that the strategy of my country is working.
Artem Rybschenko, 35, has been Ambassador of Ukraine in Switzerland since August.
