The Russian strongman, who is directing a protracted war against Ukraine, is “a bully” and “a person who represents the greatest threat to peace and security in Europe of our time,” Alexander stated in a telephone interview.
On Nov., the Russian Coast Guard attacked three Ukrainian naval vessels in the Kerch Strait, ramming a tug boat and firing on the other two vessels.
The Russians then seized the Ukrainian vessels and took 23 Ukrainian sailors prisoner, three of whom were wounded.
The Kerch Strait is the passage between the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
Under international maritime convention, the strait is considered an international waterway through which ships have the right to pass freely.
Russia is attempting to assert total control over the Kerch Strait and all waters off the Russian-occupied Crimea peninsula, which rightfully belongs to Ukraine.
Crimea was taken by Russia in a 2014 stealth invasion and subsequently annexed by Moscow in contravention of international law.
Earlier this year, Putin tightened his grip on Crimea, opening a newly constructed bridge across the Kerch Strait, providing a physical link between Russia and Russian-occupied territory.
In addition to the invasion and annexation of Crimea, Moscow launched another front in its war on Ukraine in 2014.
Providing military support, weapons, and even soldiers to Russian-speaking rebels in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine, the Putin regime has been using insurgents — the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic — to destabilize and disassemble Ukraine.
Addressing the Ukrainian parliament, President Petro Poroshenko characterized the incident in the Kerch Strait as “a bold and frank participation of regular units of the Russian Federation” in an assault on Ukrainian forces.
And the Ukrainian leader declared that the Russian attack in the strait represented “a qualitatively different threat” to his country.
And this raises issues about freedom of movement on international waterways and in waters governed by bilateral agreements between Ukraine and Russia, he said.
Third, Alexander contends that Putin is using the incident to distract Russians from domestic problems.
He alleges that Putin is using “patriotic fervour” to keep his approval rating high and prevent domestic protests.
Given that the bridge goes right over the Kerch Strait, Alexander said it is in the Russians’ interests to assert complete control over the international waterway.
And he correctly asserted that the annexation of Crimea by Russia, a permanent member of the UN Security Council, is unprecedented in international relations.
And he pointed out that 10,000 people have been killed in the conflict.
And the UNHCR reports that 1. million people have been displaced since the outbreak of the conflict in eastern Ukraine in 2014.
Having observed Putin for decades, the former Canadian ambassador concludes that the Russian leader will not be deterred by anything except military force.
