As we write, oil and gas billionaires in Texas are clinking their champagne glasses.
They are giddy over the price-gouging on gas and oil and the resulting avalanche of profits lining their pockets.
Ditto for the United States arms dealers, who drool over the destruction of weapons stockpiles and the rise in their stock prices.
Biden’s State of the Union address before Congress turned into a frenzied war party, including the shameful chanting of “Fund, fund, fund the police” — their bipartisan answer to the Black Lives Matter movement’s call for defunding murderous police departments across the country.
And while they weep in their media about the tragic deaths of workers and misery of refugees in Ukraine, not a word was said about the 14,000 people murdered by Ukraine in the Donbass region since the 2014 U.S.-sponsored coup, let alone the rest of the world.
But be assured that through their manufactured tears, they are finding time to celebrate, regardless of how many lives are lost.
Ask the people of Yemen, Palestine, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Western Sahara, the Phillippines and others who have suffered bombings, sanctions, destruction and death at the hands of the United States and the Pentagon — either directly or through proxies.
Sanctions have choked and strangled workers and children in Cuba, Venezuela, Nicaragua, Zimbabwe, Iran, North Korea and dozens of other countries.
This is not the same United States imperialism that emerged triumphant from the Second World War, but rather an imperialism with a contracting capitalist economy that faces a new world situation.
The potential for this war to become broader should not be lost on anyone.
What is celebrated today, in an economy marked by runaway inflation, may usher in a more significant global capitalist recession.
There is a tipping point where sanctions will become deleterious to Western capitalism, especially if they strengthen the relations between those struggling against the stranglehold of the United States dollar on the world market.
Today may become a turning point for imperialism and the world’s working class.
Lessons of Iraq War forgotten As for the mainstream anti-war movement, it has forgotten the lessons of the Iraq War.
When the first Gulf War started in 1990-1991, with its attendant lies and demonizations, the anti-war movement was split.
Significant sections called for “sanctions, not bombs,” wanting to distance themselves from the embattled Iraqi government.
It turned out that as murderous as United States missile strikes were, more people died from the decade of sanctions that followed, designed to bring the Iraqi people to their knees.
It would take a more expansive and continuing war, fueled by the lies of “weapons of mass destruction,” to ultimately accomplish that.
SLL PHOTO murderous United States bombings and the use of depleted uranian weapons.
This writer clearly remembers speaking at a debate against the Gulf War organized by Congressperson Kweisi Mfume, who at that time was a TV host.
In the adjoining room sat a member of the royal family of Kuwait, who was being prepared to go on in a separate broadcast to build up the false narrative of herself as a nurse who witnessed Iraqi troops turning over baby incubators and throwing babies on the floor.
There are similarities but also important differences between that war and the current one.
The imperialists’ goal is to plunder Russia’s vast resources, just like in Iraq.
But it soon became apparent that the capitalist West had no intention to allow another competitor into its ranks; rather they viewed Russia’s oil, gas and mineral resources as loot and Russia as a vassal state.
President Vladimir Putin, who followed Yelstin, represented a block to these plans in the same way that Saddam Hussein did in Iraq, regardless of the capitalist character of Russia.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization was established as a military alliance to contain and threaten the Soviet Union.
There are a couple of simple proverbs that have borne the wisdom of their meaning through the ages.
Everyone who has experienced the evil machinations of a boss who destroys unity between workers understands that the boss needs to “divide and conquer” in order to maintain dominance.
Think of the sabotage of last year’s union drive of Amazon workers in Bessemer, Alabama.
The militarization of the United States took root well before the United States Constitution was written.
These settlers are still honored for stealing the homes of the Indigenous peoples.
The old colonial empires spanning the globe maintained their rule by creating divisions.
In India, the seeds of the division between Hindus and Muslims were cemented by British colonialism.
When the British were finally driven out, they left their former colony partitioned, with tens of millions displaced and more than a million killed.
In modern times, an endless list of United States imperialist wars have ravaged the world.
Beginning in 1980, the CIA-run contra war was designed to crush the liberation struggle in Central America.
Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North — a member of Ronald Reagan’s National Security Council — was found to be one of those orchestrating this.
Those drugs flooded the streets of US. cities in an attempt to stifle the progressive movements fighting for jobs, housing, medical care and education.
Think of how the United States media portrays each new United States intervention as a “just fight” in wars where the social structures of the targeted countries are totally devastated.
By Stephen Millies Rents are going through the roof while a tidal wave of evictions has begun.
Rents jumped by 28% in Dallas, 26% in Phoenix, 25% in Las Vegas and 24% in Cincinnati.
Neither broken supply chains nor rising wages — which were canceled by skyrocketing prices — can be blamed for this rent-gouging.
Even the idiots at Fox News can’t claim the People’s Republic of China or Russian Federation President Vladimir Putin are responsible.
A quarter of families had to pay their landlords more than half of their income.
Most visible are hundreds of thousands of human beings forced to live on the streets of the wealthiest country on earth.
Much more numerous are the millions of families who have to double-up with relatives.
International Leonard Peltier fense Cammittee u. whoisleonardpeltier.infal the Census Bureau estimated there were 43 million families living in these conditions.
This overcrowding is a big reason why Black, Indigenous and Latinx people were two and three times as likely to have died from COVID-19 as whites.
Banksters are committing wholesale robbery by raising interest rates on mortgages.
The investment bank BlackRock wants to get in the action by gobbling up homes.
This outfit has $10 trillion in assets under its control to play around with.
That’s more money than the economies of every country except the United States and China.
Fighting back against evictions Landlords want to start mass evictions.
Kathy Hochul, joined with Re“L was authorized todo everything hat | did” — Dliver North itary expansion benefited the United States economy.
Those who gained small privileges as a result were encouraged to support, or merely ignore, United States imperialist wars.
The Crown Heights Tenants Union in Brooklyn, N.Y., successfully fought the eviction of the Robinson | family.
Queen Afua Helen Robinson speaks at a rally outside the home. publicans to end the bans on throwing families out of their homes.
These measures were enacted in 2020 at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Congress and state legislatures only did so because they were afraid of what 20 million suddenly jobless people might do.
It was millions of people who marched demanding “Black Lives Matter” that kept these bans in place.
In California’s Santa Clara County — home to San Jose and Silicon Valley billionaires — just 34% of households that applied for help got it.
These outfits have a total stock market value of $5. trillion, yet 244,000 of the county’s children live in families who can’t afford basic needs.
Issa Smith was evicted over a disputed lease with her landlord in Kalamazoo, Michigan.
She now lives with her two children in a motel room that doesn’t even have a refrigerator.
The $1,800 amonth that Issa Smith has to pay for the tiny place eats up almost all of her disability assistance benefits.
In most places tenants don’t even have the right to a lawyer like criminal defendants do.
Families can be evicted for almost any reason, with landlords trying to steal the security deposit.
Families shouldn’t be evicted just because the landlord doesn’t like them.
The Crown Heights Tenants Union and other organizations stopped the Robinson family home from being stolen.
They were victims of an attempted “foreclosure rescue scam” in which they unknowingly signed away the title to their home.
Even before we talk about racist police murder in the United States we have to say that that is an outrageous number in itself.
It’s an indication of repression against working people in general, to discourage any protest against injustice, wage slavery and exploitation and the destruction of our environment.
When you add the fact that Black people are killed at twice the rate of white people we see an even greater problem relating to racism and genocide against Black and Brown youth.
The Washington Post began taking the numbers of killings by police when it realized that the FBI’s numbers were only half of the actual shootings in 2014.
The study confirmed that police violence has been grossly underreported for at least four decades.
So, the problem with police reporting was exposed to the world and to the administration of Barack Obama in 2015 by the Washington Post, yet nothing was done to correct it, and it still persists here in 2022.
That parallels the crisis of police killings since 2015 — from the Obama administration through the Trump administration and now the Biden administration — where it has remained steady at nearly 1,000 per year.
Since racism is an integral part of capitalism, it doesn’t matter whether a Democratic or a Republican regime is in power.
Racism and racist repression are primary tools in maintaining this system.
They are primary tools used to keep the working class divided and weak.
The answer is to come together, police and communities,” Biden said at the NYPD headquarters.
Most importantly, it inherited nuclear weapons from the Soviet Union and has developed formidable defenses.
Without these differences, the Russian Federation would likely have already shared the fate of Libya and Iraq.
War is continuation of politics by other means Imperialism forces other countries to defend their borders.
Russia not only shares a border in Eastern Europe with Ukraine, but it also shares an extensive 2,615-mile border with China.
To weaken Russia, potentially overthrow Putin, in the guise of putting in a more “democratic regime” , would place China in an untenable military situation.
This also cannot be divorced from the Sept., 2021, trilateral security agreement between the U.S., Britain and Australia, referred to as AUKUS, which included the delivery of a nuclear-powered submarine fleet for Australia.
At the same time, the United States Africa Command, AFRICOM, was busy involving itself in coups from Mali to Guinea and, more recently, Burkina Faso.
Flooding the continent with billions of dollars in military hardware and training through AFRICOM is United States imperialism’s answer to China’s “Belt and Road Initiative,” which has taken up building needed infrastructure in Africa.
Mayor Adams has made reactionary statements in regard to hiding racist police killings, pushing rightwing buttons.
The report highlighted four areas All of this speaks to the global nature of United States imperialism’s war in Ukraine.
It is aimed not just at Russia and Donbass but at China, Venezuela, Cuba, Iran, Nicaragua and any people on any continent struggling to determine their destiny for themselves.
The unintended consequence is that this may strengthen the ties between China, Russia, Iran and others.
This is of no concern in the myopic vision of the imperialist rulers, who are driven by the inner workings of their own capitalist system to expand or die.
Fascism, Russia and Ukraine It is an error to forget the history of fascism and the Nazi advance into the Soviet Union.
Hitler’s war — World War II — is etched into the psyche of the Russian people and all former Soviet peoples.
Hitler’s forces were not only bent on exterminating Jews, Roma people and queer people, but also communists and leftists.
It was aimed straight at the heart of the fledgling Soviet socialist revolution.
March 14, 2022 Page 3 to prioritize to end systemic racism and the violations by law enforcement against Africans and people of African descent.
STEP UP: Stop denying and start dismantling PURSUE JUSTICE: End impunity and build trust LISTEN UP: People of African descent must be heard REDRESS: Confront past legacies, take special measures and deliver reparatory justice Nothing that Biden is proposing with his friend, Mayor Adams, addresses these points — just the opposite.
It was no accident that Biden, Obama, and especially the fascist former president Trump, have done nothing but enable police murder.
Biden and Kamala Harris refused to even consider taking funds from the police or reorganizing the police to make them less lethal, especially against Black and Brown communities.
Barack Obama, during his administration, was approached by Black Lives Matter activists pleading for him to take the military weapons, like assault weapons and tanks, away from local police.
He offered only to make sure all cops would have cameras instead — and we’ve seen how that has not slowed down the murders by cops.
The Democrats and Republicans are given their marching orders from the super-rich who put them in power.
Stopping police violence threatens their vital tool to keep in place the status quo of exploitation and racism, so it is not allowed to be discussed in any real way.
It will take amovement specifically against police murder, prioritizing the issue of how racism is used to murder Black and Brown youth, to make any real changes.
The heroic resistance and sacrifices of the Russian people and their partisan communist allies are undeniable.
There is not a single person in Russia today who does not have members of their family tree who died in the fight to stop the Nazis.
The Soviet Union bore the brunt of casualties — over 15% of the population.
The United States is at the very bottom in terms of World War II casualties.
Seldom mentioned is that China lost over 20 million people, far exceeding United States losses.
The sympathy of the Russian people for the people of the Donbass republics, Odessa and others repressed inside Ukraine is not contrived but deeply felt.
And the mass pressure on Putin on this issue should not be shoved aside.
It is a form of cynical, opportunist intellectualism for some who call themselves anti-imperialists or anti-war to dismiss the fascist threat inside Ukraine.
One does not even Continued on page 4 Page4 March 14, 2022 By Lallan Schoenstein Standing up against war fever Rosa Luxemburg, born in 1871, was a Polish and naturalized German revolutionary socialist.
After the Russian Revolution of 1905, she and other leaders had tremendous prestige among the workers on the European continent.
Lenin and others on the “Basel Manifesto” that was addressed to the Extraordinary International Socialist Congress held in November 1912.
A key part of the manifesto was the one about using the crisis created by imperialist war to struggle for the abolition of capitalism.
As a result, Luxemburg and Liebknecht were imprisoned in June 1916 for two and ahalf years.
After their release, Luxemburg and Liebknecht were captured and executed in Berlin on Jan., 1919, by the Rifle Division of the Cavalry Guards of the Freikorps.
For a number of years she fought by the side of Simon Bolivar in the revolutionary war against Spanish colonialism.
In 1819, when Simon Bolivar took part in the successful liberation of New Granada, Manuela Saenz joined in a conspiracy to oust the Spanish viceroy of Peri.
Saenz and other pro-independence women conspired to recruit colonial troops from the Spanish royalist defense arsenal in Lima.
The action was a success, with United States imperialism unleashes global war on workers Time to declare war on capitalism Continued from page 3 have to go back to 2014, despite that being a mere eight years.
Days ago, on March2, the United States puppet and created folk hero Zelensky named the fascist Aidar Battalion’s commander governor of Odessa.
One month before Russia’s intervention, the United States sent a specially-equipped satellite phone to allow Zelensky direct access to President Biden and, by extension, the Pentagon.
Even the shameful, racist sight of African and Indian medical students being blocked and abused by Ukrainians at the border did not stir the kind of protests it should have.
Imperialist-installed dictators and their murderous policies in oppressed countries, the growth of the repressive state apparatuses (the police and military, courts and prisons), including in the U.S., and the growth of neo-Nazi movements internationally, are all intertwined.
Ukrainian fascism, which is not only neo-Nazi but shares a lineage with the original Nazi movement through Stepan Bandera, is real and dangerous.
Lenin and Second International In the early years of the 20th century leading up to World War I, the socialist and communist workers’ movement, which was strong in Europe, was staunchly anti-war. much of the regiment, including ¥ Manuela’s half-brother, defecting to the anti-Spanish arm of José de San Martin.
After proclaiming #N Peru’s independence 2 in 1821, José de San Martin awarded Manuela Saenz with the, highest distinction in ss the campaign against the Spanish Royalists, the title of “Caballeresa del Sol” — the Order of the Sun of Peru.
During her years of collaboration with Bolivar, Saenz supported the revolution against Spain by gathering information, distributing leaflets and protesting for women’s rights.
Saenz did not feel constrained by gendered conventions of feminine behavior.
Bolivar named her “Libertadora del Libertador” (“The Liberator of the Liberator”) after she saved his life on Sept., 1828, by confronting assassins intent on killing him.
Radical abolitionist John Brown characterized Tubman as one of the bravest persons on this continent.
She was five feet tall, commanded others with unflagging strength, had brilliant intelligence and carried a rifle.
Tubman was born into slavery on a plantation in Dorchester CounBut when war was actually declared, it collapsed.
The political agreements and resolutions for comrades to oppose their imperialist governments dissolved under the war fever and patriotic jingoism.
Lenin’s slogan, “Turn the imperialist war into civil war,” originated during this period.
It was not an abstract slogan, but rather a pragmatic preparation for 1917.
Without that preparation, the Bolshevik Revolution likely would not have succeeded.
On this International Working Women’s Day, it’s essential to recognize Clara Zetkin, its founder, and Rosa Luxemburg.
They played critical roles along with Lenin in opposing the capitulation of the social democrats.
Both were theoretical leaders in oe General Harriet Tubman @\ty, Maryland.
In 1849, when the owner of her plantation died, she was aware that all of the slaves could be sold away from their families to the cotton plantations of the Deep South, where life expectancy could be as short as two or three years.
When she reached Philadelphia, Tubman was, under the law of the time, a free woman.
But the passage of the Fugitive Slave Act in 1850 gave legal cover to those who could be paid for her recapture, so she operated with caution.
Because of the Fugitive Slave Act, Tubman was forced to guide her passengers on the Underground Railroad all the way to Canada.
In addition to her trips to Maryland to help freedom seekers escape, Tubman developed oratorical skills at abolitionist meetings and, later, at women’s rights gatherings.
During the United States Civil War against slavery, she earned the title of General Harriet Tubman.
She fought as a Union soldier, a scout, a spy, a nurse and a leader of Black and white troops fighting for freedom.
Rewards were offered for Moses’ capture — at one time as high as $40,000, an unimaginable bounty in that era.
Zetkin later became a fighter against the rise of Nazism, and Rosa Luxemburg and her comrade Karl Liebknecht were executed during an uprising of German workers.
United States war on world’s people This is not a Russian war on Ukraine — or even a war by the fascist-sympathizing oligarchs of Ukraine — but a war by US. imperialism on the world’s working class.
We dream of a world where people can lay down their swords and where borders separating humanity will dissolve.
But it will take the dismantling of imperialism and capitalism and the building of revolutionary socialism to make that dream a reality.
Imperialism is not a policy chosen by one government and dropped by another.
The First World War was the outcome of imperialism, Lenin wrote, an imperialist war waged for the political and economic exploitation of the world, export markets, sources of raw material, spheres of capital investment, etc.
The imperialist powers raised huge armies and navies, not only to forcibly subjugate oppressed people in the colonies, but to make war against other imperialist countries competing for control.
According to Lenin, the world was already divided among the great capitalist powers when he wrote “Imperialism” in 1916.
The war resulted from inter-imperialist rivalries to redivide the world.
And World War II signaled a turning point in world imperialist relations.
The United States emerged from WWII as the world’s most powerful imperialist country, gaining control of former European empires in Asia and Africa.
The overturn of the socialist Soviet Union and the breakup of the Soviet republics into individual nation states was a dismantling of a planned economy, resulting in capitalist economies that are under-developed.
There has not been a sudden, almost magical appearance of an imperialist Russia.
Lenin thought that there were a few characteristics of imperialism, including the rise of finance capital and the export of capital, not just commodities.
The U.S., for example, exports not just commodities but capital — mostly in the form of loans or investments.
Russia’s economy almost neocolonial Today, capitalist Russia’s GDP is smaller than that of South Korea or India.
Russia’s economy is almost neocolonial, dependent on the exchange of raw materials such as oil and ores.
This is the classic economic relationship of acolony to imperialist finance capital.
During the Soviet period, Russia and the other republics that formed the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics made remarkable industrial progress.
Indeed, between 1921 and 1988 there were no years of negative economic growth — no recessions — except for the World War II years.
The Soviet economy fell into recession only in1989 as the Gorbachev government began to dismantle the planned economy.
Under Gorbachev and then even more drastically under the openly anti-communist, anti-socialist government of Boris Yeltsin in the Russian Federal Republic, and in the new non-Russian former Soviet republics including Ukraine, socialist industry was dismantled. @truecie « LA LUCHA Yeltsin finished the job of dismantling the Soviet economy that Gorbachev began.
The years of Yeltsin are now remembered as perhaps the worst period in Russia’s 1,000-year history.
This was the greatest economic disaster any country has seen in modern times, in war or peace.
By the end of 2020, some 45% of the population were in the poor category, according to a study by the Ptukha Institute.
The deep poverty has created the conditions for fascist gangs to emerge.
Po Putin’s role Putin, who was Yeltsin’s prime minister and chosen successor, took a more protectionist direction, unlike Yeltsin and Gorbachev, who had fawned on the West.
Under Putin, there has been little growth of Russia’s manufacturing production that had been demolished by the “perestroika” reforms.
Yet, under Putin, Russia continues mainly as an exporter of raw materials.
Russia now accounts for about 6% of the global aluminum supply, 3.5% of the copper supply, and 4% of the cobalt supply.
And Russia is the world’s largest producer of crude oil and second-largest producer of dry natural gas, after the United States Russia is in the top 10 exporters of grain crops, including barley, corn, rye, oats and especially wheat.
From 2017-2019, it was the biggest exporter of wheat, accounting for about 20% of the world market.
The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have taken over the economies of the world.
Today almost every country is capitalist, and most of those are exploited by imperialism, by finance capital.
Russia, too, is an exploited country in relation to imperialism, like Mexico.
NATO targets Russia Russia is the primary provider of gas and oil to much of Europe.
That’s put Russia in competition with the U.S., the biggest producer of gas in the world.
The United States has been on a drive to control the world market in oil and gas.
This can be seen in its attacks, actually acts of war , against Iran and Venezuela as well as its war on Iraq.
These are countries that had sought national sovereignty over oil and gas.
Russia, too, has been a target, especially its Nord Stream 2 pipeline, but not just for that.
The countries put under NATO include Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, Croatia, Albania, Romania, Bulgaria.
In 2008, NATO put the inclusion of Ukraine and Georgia, both bordering Russia, on the table.
NATO war on Yugoslavia Despite the war propaganda that’s presented as news these days, the first war in Europe since World War II didn’t just start.
That war was launched by the United States and NATO against Yugoslavia in 1999.
For 78 days, from March 24 to June 10, 1999, NATO bombers hit Belgrade, Pristina in Kosovo, Podgorica in Montenegro and several other cities.
The United States directly bombed the Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Belgrade, killing three Chinese reporters.
Russia understood the lesson of Yugoslavia and told the United States and NATO “no” to expansion to Ukraine and Georgia, on Russia’s borders — 10 minutes by missile to Moscow.
The former United States ambassador to Russia, William J Burns, who is now director of the CIA, said in a February 2008 embassy cable that Ukraine joining NATO constituted a security threat for Russia.
March 14, 2022 Page 5 Maidan coup In Ukraine, the so-called Maidan coup in 2014 that was openly supported and financed by NATO put ina government that made NATO membership a policy mandate.
Actually, many Ukrainians resisted the Maidan coup, particularly in the working class.
In the Maidan civil war, fascist gangs emerged as a force for the coup.
Resistance to the coup was strongest in the eastern section of the country.
In Odessa, a neo-nazi pro-Maidan gang targeted the Odessa House of Trade Unions, near the center of the resistance.
The building was firebombed and at least 48 anti-fascists and labor activists were burned alive.
The independent Donetsk People’s Republic and Lugansk People’s Republic were created when the people there voted overwhelmingly (89% and 96%) to secede from the Maidan regime.
They have been subjected to continuous attack since then, particularly by the Ukrainian National Guard’s Azov regiment, a neo-nazi stormtrooper-like operation.
More than 14,000 have been killed in Ukraine’s war on Donetsk and Lugansk.
As United States Ambassador Burns predicted, Russia was pushed into a corner by the unrelenting drive for NATO entry to Ukraine as well as the growing buildup of neo-nazi militias and the war on Donetsk and Lugansk.
Ukraine had promised in the Minsk agreements it signed in 2014 and 2015 there would be a ceasefire, an end to all fighting, withdrawal of heavy weapons, release of prisoners of war, and the recognition of self-government in Donetsk and Lugansk.
Putin may not be an anti-imperialist leader, but the Russian military operation to “demilitarize and denazify” Ukraine and recognize the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Lugansk People’s Republic is a move against imperialism, United States and NATO imperialism.
The United States military-industrial complex and Western media have pushed a narrative that any Russian incursion into the Ukraine is an invasion.
As we have previously written, Russia is not the true aggressor in this situation.
Since an alliance of fascists and military brass couped the popularly elected government in 2014, Ukraine and its imperialist allies have waged literal and economic warfare against the two Donbass republics.
Struggle-La Lucha has thoroughly covered the real reasons behind this aggression.
Any Russian military operation in the Ukraine is really an act of self-defense against nearly a decade of war and provocation from NATO and the Ukrainian government.
In recent weeks, in addition to the fever-pitch saber rattling, another disturbing trend has developed in the media in regard to the Ukrainian Jewish community.
The United States and their allies have used this war crisis as an opportunity to push Zionist ideology and muddle history.
The aim of this media blitz has been to falsely compare Russia and Nazi Germany, with the hopes of pushing more Jews towards Zionism.
What makes this propaganda beyond despicable is the long history of Ukrainian nationalist collaboration with Nazi Germany and the present alliance between the government and neo-Nazis.
Jacob Goldstein, Anna’s father, decided it was time to move his family after pogroms devastated his village.
Ukraine was part of the Russian Empire at the time, where anti-Semitic pogroms were as common as the Qteruecie « LA LUCHA Imperialist propaganda and Ukrainian Jews cae i Members of Ukrainian National Guard’s fascist Azov Battalion and Right Sector rally on ‘Defender of Ukraine Day’ on Oct., 2016. sunrise.
Fewer than 15 years after my great grandmother left her small village in the Ukraine, the Bolshevik Revolution led Russia into a new era.
It is important to realize that the Tzar’s oppression of the Jewish community was a significant contributing factor to the Bolshevik Revolution.
It was for that reason that many Jews took up arms against the Tzar in the revolution of 1917.
That Revolution led to the formation of the USSR, a socialist state that fought for the rights of all oppressed people inside and outside of its borders.
Less than 40 years after that revolution, the vile specter of fascism and hatred would haunt Ukraine and the surrounding area again.
Eventually, it would be the troops of the USSR that destroyed that specter and liberated Jews from Nazi concentration camps.
Ukraine and the Holocaust In 1941, there were just under three million Jews living in what is now known as Ukraine.
That same year, Nazi Germany gained control of most of the western part of the USSR as part of Operation Barbarossa.
This offensive was a violation of the non-aggression pact between the two countries and resulted in the Nazi occupation of Ukraine.
Almost immediately after Nazi forces occupied the western USSR, Adolf Hitler ordered the formation of SS death squads.
These death squads were called “einsatzgruppen” and were particularly brutal in the Nazi-occupied regions of Eastern Europe.
These death squads went to work immediately, targeting the Jewish community, as well as all other Soviet citizens in Ukraine, with confinement, torture, and murder.
Starting on Sept., 1941, Nazi forces commenced an extermination campaign against the city of Mykolaiv, Ukraine.
Within two weeks, over 35,000 people were murdered, the majority of them Jewish.
Towards the end of the Mykolaiv massacre, the most infamous Nazi massacre of Jews occurred.
Ina single day — a single day — Nazi forces killed 33,771 Jews in the Babi Yar ravine outside of Kiev.
This author’s extended family were some of the many who fell at Babi Yar.
The Babi Yar massacre was followed by a violent campaign of terror against all Soviet citizens in the area that resulted in approximately 150,000 deaths.
It would be dishonest to discuss these atrocities without discussing Ukrainian collaboration with the Nazi occupiers.
German Nazis were unforutnately not the sole perpetrators of these crimes against humnanity.
In fact, many Zelensky, Babi Yar and Aidar By Lev Koufax On March 2, Western corporate media reported that the Russian military launched a missile strike that damaged the Babi Yar Holocaust memorial in Kiev.
Supposedly this memorial was damaged when Russian missiles destroyed a TV tower used by the Ukrainian government to push anti-Russia propaganda.
While Russia did launch an attack on a Ukrainian TV tower, the Babi Yar memorial was not damaged.
Reporters from Ynet News visited the site personally and discovered there wasn’t a dent in any of the structures.
Ynet News is the online publication of Yedioth Ahronoth, the largest newspaper in Israel.
Photographs clearly show that all statues are intact and the site remains unscathed from the military conflict.
Nonetheless, the corporate media continue to circulate Ukrainian President Volodomyr Zelensky’s false claim that the Russian military targeted the Holocaust memorial.
Aidar soldiers captured In the first days of March, combined Russian and Donetsk People’s Republic forces launched a successful offensive against the Ukrainian nazi Aidar Battalion.
These attacks resulted in the dismantling of Aidar’s high command and the destruction of Aidar headquarters.
During this offensive, DPR forces captured many Aidar Battalion soldiers.
Armenian and Ukrainian independent media were able to take pictures of one soldier.
Every Jew, Roma person, LGBTQ2S person, communist or anyone else who entered Buchenwald saw that slogan.
Aidar Battalion’s commander was recently named governor of Odessa by President Zelensky.
Odessa is home to one of Ukraine’s largest and most historic Jewish communities.
Nazi commanders and soldiers donning concentration camp slogan tattoos. of these massacres were carried out by Ukrainian Nazis.
Large movements of Ukrainian Nazis branding themselves as “nationalists” enacted constant horrors against Jewish, Ukrainian, and Russian people in the region.
Both of these organizations espoused fascist and anti-Semitic ideology, and openly collaborated with Adolf Hitler’s forces.
Tens of thousands of Jews, Poles, and Russians were slaughtered at the hands of these groups.
This included the massacre of 6,000 Jews in Lviv by the Ukranian People’s Milita, a wing of the OUN, immediately after the city fell to Nazi forces.
The horrors inflicted by these groups and their leaders cannot be understated.
When the Holocaust ended, the Nazis and their Ukrainian allies had killed over one million Ukrainian Jews.
Unfortunately, and inexplicably, today the Ukrainian government lauds many of the OUN and UPA’s leaders as national heroes.
In 2010, outgoing right-wing Ukrainian President Viktor Yushcenko awarded UPA leader Stepan Bandera the “Hero of Ukraine” award.
Yuschenko’s successor, Viktor Yanukovych, officially repealed the award.
However, the Ukrainian parliament has attempted twice, in 2018 and 2019, to reinstate the award.
The 2019 attempt was championed by Servant of the People, current President Vlodymyr Zelensky’s political party.
As recently as Jan., 2022, various Ukrainian nationalist organizations led mass marches through Kiev in celebration of nazi-collarborator Bandera’s birthday.
By Greg Butterfield To hear the United States corporate media tell it, the entire world has joined Washington in condemning Russia’s recognition of the Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics in Donbass and their joint anti-fascist military operation in Ukraine.
It’s a fact that NATO allies and dependents have repeated the lies of an “unjustified Russian invasion” verbatim from United States State Department news releases.
What’s being carefully hidden from workers and oppressed people here is the opposition of many countries and movements to NATO expansion.
This is especially true in the case of the many countries that are themselves targets of United States war, sanctions and slander campaigns.
BOLIVARIAN VENEZUELA Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro has faced down many U.S.-instigated coups and assassination attempts.
On Venezolana de Television Feb., Maduro announced his government’s support for Russia’s decision to recognize the Donbass republics.
This resulted in the Minsk agreements that were established to guarantee peace.
SOCIALIST CUBA On Feb., on the eve of the anti-fascist military operation, President Miguel Diaz-Canel and a large, high-level Cuban delegation met with visiting chair of the Russian Federation’s State Duma, Vyacheslav Volodin.
They have written to us, sending us messages explaining why they are waging this struggle.
And meanwhile Ukrainian troops are looking for ways to overcome them, to liquidate them, to murder them; there have been thousands of deaths there over all these years.
Former Bolivian President Evo Morales was the victim of a U.S.-backed coup in 2019, after an election marred by Washington’s interference.
Fortunately, the militant people’s movement, led by Indigenous workers and peasants, returned the Movement Toward Socialism to power and Morales was able to come home in 2020.
The action was in response to a call by the World Federation of Democratic Youth to take action to save the lives of the Kononovich brothers.
Both are accused, without any basis whatsoever, of alleged collaboration with the secret services of the Russian Federation and the Republic of Belarus.
RASIKA RUWANPATHIRANA “This is why we want to express our demand for their immediate release.
Any harm to the lives of Aleksandr Kononovich and Mikhail Kononovich will be the responsibility of the Government of Ukraine.
Pavlenko was personally responsible for the murder of Jews during World War II and eventually commanded an SS battalion.
Khasevych was a leader in the OUN and one of the most famous Nazi propagandists of the time.
It should be noted that Vitali Klitschko, the Mayor of Kiev who championed these proposals, is still in office.
As can be seen, the Ukrainian government has continued to honor fascists, particularly since 2014.
This has not changed even with the election of a Jewish president, Viodymyr Zelensky.
Contemporary neo-Nazi movements Corporate media today would have us believe that Russia is an inherent threat to Jewish life.
There is no doubt that at the turn of the 20th century, the Russian Tzar and his empire were a grave threat to Jewish life.
The only threat to Jewish life in this conflict is the fasicst Ukranian government filled to the brim with Nazi collaborators.
As if the incessant historical praise of World War II-era Nazis wasn’t enough, the Ukrainian government has continued to support various neo-Nazi militas and political parties in the present day.
Ever since the Euromaidan of 2014, the Ukrainian government has been heavily influenced, if not controlled, by the fascist movement.
Just three years ago, The Nation published a telling exposé on the growing nature of the fascist movement in Ukraine.
The article describes large scale neo-Nazi marches with thousands of tiki torches and Nazi flags.
However, the level of neo-Nazi infiltration in the current government coupled with NATO funds and arms getting to neo-Nazi militas is even more concerning.
Since 2014, NATO has consistently trained and equipped the Azov Battalion, a fascist militia operating in the Donbass republics.
This presumably includes Jews, Russians, and even progressive Ukrainians.
In 2019, the Azov Battalion was officially integrated into the Ukrainian National Guard.
As if that wasn’t enough, the current leader of the Ukrainian National Police, Vadim Troyan, is a veteran of the Azov brigade and a known neo-Nazi collaborator.
Troyan consistently encourages his troops and deputies to study Stepan Bandera and carry on the proud tradition of “Ukrainian nationalism,” which is really just Nazism.
It would seem that the current Ukranian government is simply a revival of the pro-Nazi organizations of the 1940s.
These rabbis include the Chief Rabbi of Israel and a prominent Rabbi in Odessa.
It should be noted, both of these rabbis are IDF veterans and support right-wing Zionist ideology.
The implication of these articles is that Vladimir Putin is built in the mold of Adolf Hitler and that the fascist state of Israel is the only safe place for Jews.
Given all of the historical and present connections between Ukrainian nationalists and the fascist movement, that assertion is far from the truth.
It is from the fascist aligned Ukrainian government and _ its neo-Nazi militias.
These are organizations that openly wave swastika flags and call fornew pogroms against the Jewish community.
There is also a sick irony in that idea because Israel is this place where war is as common as the air we breathe.
The Israeli government commands one of the most aggressive and vicious militaries and police forces on the planet.
There is no better demonstration of this than the Israeli military offensives against innocent Palestinian people in 2014 and 2021.
To this day, Israel continues to launch unprovoked attacks on countries like Syria, all on behalf of the United States ruling class.
As if this warfare on the Arab world wasn’t enough, there is Israel’s constant disdain for its own people, whether it be 18-year-old Israeli communist Roman Levin who refused to continue serving in a military that enforced apartheid against Palestine, or Ethiopian Orthodox Jewish teenager Solomon Tekah, who Israeli police brutally murdered in 2019.
Neither of these two countries care about the welfare of the Jewish community, or any other oppressed community for that matter.
That means questioning the use of Israel as a cudgel to turn us against our brothers and sisters in the Donbass and Palestine.
That means analyzing the true nature of past Ukrainian nationalist movements and the current fascist-friendly Ukrainian regime.
World condemnation for NATO, solidarity with Donbass and Russia Continued from page 7 aggression proves it.
PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA In numerous official statements, articles and social media posts, the government and people of China — the world’s most populous country and another target of the United States New Cold War — have made it crystal clear that Washington and NATO are responsible for the unfolding crisis in Eastern Europe.
Then she mentioned the three journalists who were killed in NATO’s bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade in 1999, a tragic incident that prompted widespread antiUnited States protests in China.
The hashtag, created by the state-run People’s Daily newspaper, has been viewed more than a billion times.
LEBANON’S HEZBOLLAH The Lebanese resistance movement Hezbollah rejected a statement by the country’s Foreign Ministry that condemned Russia’s actions.
During a Feb. cabinet session in Beirut, Minister of Labor Mustafa Bayram, a member of Hezbollah, said the statement violated the principles of neutrality espoused by the Lebanese government.
In a March 1 televised speech, Hezbollah Secretary General Sayyed Hasan Nasrallah slammed the West’s “double standards” and _ stressed that the United States is not trustworthy.
And how did it react to Russia’s Continued on page 9 By Scott Scheffer Among the statements from numerous countries and left organizations around the world that condemn the United States manipulations that cornered Russia into carrying out military action in Ukraine is one from the Foreign Ministry of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or socialist North Korea.
The statement referred to the way that the United States empire employs every means from manipulation of proxies to direct military assault as it chases profits and leaves a path of destruction from one side of the globe to the other.
Although the hypocritical outcry over Russia’s intervention in Ukraine has disoriented many in the anti-imperialist and left movements, North Korean leaders understand full-well that military readiness is the only guarantee of survival against imperialism.
Based on their own history, having survived the brutality and experienced the treachery of United States imperialism, they know that the blame for the current crisis belongs at the doorstep of the White House.
In the 1950-1953 war that left the Korean peninsula divided in half, North Korea endured one of the most brutal military assaults of the 20th century.
Millions of North Ko@teruecie « LA LUCHA Why North Korea resists United States threats with military readiness rean people lost their lives.
Civilians were trapped in buildings set ablaze by the United States military.
It was a great military feat that North Korea and its allies not only withstood the assault but drove the imperialists back to the U.S.-imposed division at the 38th parallel.
Since 1953, the United States has refused to sign a peace treaty with North Korea, and has maintained bases, tens of thousands of troops and at times nuclear weapons in South Korea.
United States Navy warships patrol the waters nearby and nuclear-capable B-52 bombers are stationed in Guam.
Origins of Songun policy On Feb., North Korea celebrated Army Day, marking the foundation of the Korean People’s Army in 1948.
SYRIA Hezbollah, along with the governments of Syria and Iran, form the Axis of Resistance against United States imperialism in Western Asia.
Together with Russia, they have fought to free Syria from the ultra-right Daesh movement and other Western allied “rebels,” and from United States occupation troops, in a war that has gone on for more than a decade.
Syria was among the first countries to welcome the news of Russia’s decision to recognize the Donbass republics.
That is, the issue is related to geopolitics and not to politics in the simple sense of the word.
Students dance during a celebration of the 74th anniversary of the Korean People’s Army, Feb.. tary Foundation Day on April 25, that commemorates the day in 1932 when a brilliant Korean anti-Japanese resistance leader named Kim II] Sung founded its predecessor, the Korean People’s Revolutionary Army.
Songun is rooted in that 1910 to 1945 period when Koreans fought Japanese imperialism to gain selfdetermination.
Kim I] Sung’s family were activists in the struggle and had to flee to Manchuria to escape heavy repression when he was a child.
Kim joined and fought alongside guerrillas associated with Chinese revolutionary leader Mao Zedong.
But it was apparent by the close of World War II that the USS. was the new imperialist colonizer.
IRAN On March 1, Iran’s religious leader Ayatollah Seyyed Ali Khamenei blamed the United States for the crisis in Ukraine, saying the Islamic Republic of Iran has always opposed war and destruction anywhere in the world.
The people didn’t get involved because they didn’t approve of the government,” he said.
According to Press TV, “As an example, the leader pointed to the United States formation of the Daesh Takfiri terrorist group, denouncing Washington for plundering oil resources March 14, 2022 Page 9 Washington held the southern half of the Korean peninsula hostage. i] In the five years preceding the Korean War, United States imperialism brutalized the people’s movement of the south, murdering hundreds of thousands, arming a brutal new regime and readying itself for the attack on the north.
After the north’s astonishing victory, the people of the DPRK rebuilt their cities and industry.
With strong friendships with the USSR, China, the socialist countries of Eastern Europe and later Cuba and Vietnam, North Korea thrived for decades.
But the horrible economic sanctions imposed by the United States began to take their toll, and after the downfall of the USSR, the United States ruling class was confident that North Korea would collapse.
Bill Clinton’s nuclear extortion Unable to obtain fuel for industry and home heating after the loss of its Soviet trading partner, North Korea turned to improving its nuclear energy capabilities.
The United States demanded the DPRK stop processing plutonium, claiming that it was stockpiling weapons-grade plutonium from the nuclear energy by-product.
In response, the north, desperate to end the punishing sanctions, announced it would withdraw from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Agreement unless the United States ended the sanctions and stopped its war threats.
The United States media banged the war drums louder, much the same way they have whipped up sentiment against Russia today.
President Bill Clinton’s Coninued on page 11 in eastern Syria, stealing Afghanistan’s assets, and supporting Israeli crimes against Palestinians.
TURKISH MOVEMENTS Turkey’s repressive government, a NATO member, has been waging war on Syria.
It is also arming Ukraine with deadly drones and threatens to block Russian access to the Black Sea by closing the Dardanelles Strait.
The revolutionary music group Grup Yorum has suffered greatly from repression by Turkey’s government.
Not only is it banned from giving concerts, but several memContinued on page 12 Page 10 March 14, 2022 @truecie « LA LUCHA Cuba announces seminar to abolish United States bases and NATO By Cheryl LaBash Friends in solidarity with Cuba are invited to come to Guantanamo for a two-day conference May 4 to 6 to abolish foreign United States military bases and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , says the call by the Cuban Institute of Friendship with the Peoples and World Peace Council.
At a moment when the United States seeks to add Colombia to the ranks of NATO, this conference will “reiterate the importance and full validity of the Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace” approved by all the heads of state and government of the region who met at the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States 2014.
Held in Guantanamo City in Cuba’s Guantanamo province, the conference program includes a visit to Caimanera, a small town on the edge of Guantanamo Bay in view of the United States military base illegally occupying Cuban territory.
Delegates will meet with Caimanera residents in a social engagement hosted by the local Committee for Defense of the Revolution.
Y LA ABOLICION DE LAS BASES MILITARES EXTRANJERAS after 20 years are finally released.
The NNOC is organizing United States participation in the XV International Voluntary Work and Solidarity Brigade from April 24 to May 8.
The United States military-industrial-media complex is working overtime on Ukraine.
Unreported or hidden by the USS. media, for example, is the fact that civilian casualties in Ukraine are relatively few.
The Ukrainian health ministry, after the first week of the Russian “demilitarization and denazification” operation, put the number of civilian deaths at around 200.
By contrast, when the United States launched George Bush’s “shock and awe” invasion of Iraq in 2003, some 7,186 Iraqi civilians were killed in the first weeks of the murderous assault.
On March 2, President Biden was asked whether Russian forces are deliberately targeting civilian areas in Ukraine.
CARLOS LATUFF / MINT PRESS NEWS this was an outright lie, picked up and transmitted by the United States media without comment.
Readers and viewers of the US. media are being fed propaganda that’s meant to whip up an anti-Russia, anti-Putin war frenzy.
Like all United States war propaganda, there is an underlying white supremacist theme.
This also means there is no understanding of what is happening, including the actual events now taking place in Ukraine.
Probably the most important one is the one around Mariupol where the main concentration of Azov, the principal nazi force, is.
Washington can create solitudes far away, but Moscow cannot create them nearby.
My guess is they will surround most cities and hope that Zelinsky & Co. come to their senses.
A significant proportion of the Ukrainian Armed Forces is now surrounded and, as is usual (see Sun Tsu’s ‘The Art of War’) the Russians have left them an exit.
By Stephen Millies While landlords are raising rents by 40%, the capitalist media wants you to hate Russia.
They are trying to turn Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky into a folk hero.
He was selected to be an actual president because United States imperialism needed anew lookin Ukraine.
He was cheated out of winning El Salvador’s 1972 presidential election by vote fraud.
None of this prevented him from being the face of a bloody military regime that carried out the orders of the Pentagon.
The Reagan administration desperately needed the atrocity to be covered up.
They remembered how the My Lai massacre in Vietnam turned millions against that war.
Because of their truthful reporting, Raymond Bonner at the Times and Alma Guillermoprieto at the Washington Post were viciously attacked by the right wing.
They’re much more influential in winning liberals and progressive people to NATO’s war drive than Fox News ever could be.
The killing of over 14,000 people in the Donbass republics by the Ukrainian regime is hardly ever mentioned by the media.
Duarte defeated the openly fascist Roberto D’Aubuisson in El Salvador’s Why North Korea resists United States threats Contiuued from page 9 cabinet was already gathered in the White House war room with the generals, when another faction of the United States ruling class — led by those around former President Jimmy Carter — negotiated a deal that they thought would bring about North Korea’s collapse without a costly war.
With the cooperation of other imperialist countries, the United States offered to construct two lightwater nuclear energy reactors and send shipments of fuel oil to help North Korea get through the harsh winters until the reactors were completed.
Washington also offered to incrementally dial back the punishing economic sanctions.
Fuel for the new reactors would have to be provided by countries that were already nuclear powers.
In return, the DPRK would remain part of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and stop processing nuclear fuel of its own.
The Clinton administration retreated from its war plans — not beQTRUGGLE La Lucna — nee EEN. tt Aftermath of Philadelphia police bombing of MOVE house on May 13, 1985. 1984 presidential election.
Zelensky is allowed to stay in Kiev’s Mariinsky Palace because of cause it hoped to resolve the crisis peacefully, but because the deal that Carter’s people negotiated was a ruse.
The US. and other imperialist countries involved did not intend to live up to the obligations of the agreement.
It was only after this betrayal that North Korea unequivocally developed its nuclear defense program.
The imperialist treachery of today looks familiar to Kim Jong Un and the rest of North Korea’s leadership.
The DPRK’s statement on the Russia-Ukraine conflict shows that they recognize the machinations that began with the fascist coup in Ukraine in 2014, and that it was the United States that greenlit the new Ukrainian attack on the people of Donbass, forcing Russia to intervene. his usefulness to Wall Street and European banksters.
Millions of Ukrainians voted for Zelensky in 2019 because they thought he would stop the fascist gangs terrorizing Ukraine.
The fact that Zelensky is Jewish is used as alleged proof that fascism in Ukraine isn’t a big problem anymore.
After Barack Obama was elected United States president, many media commentators claimed racism in the United States wasn’t much of a problem either.
Obama was put in the White House because a large section of the ruling class felt they needed a new brand for their empire.
Tens of millions of people rejoiced when the first United States Black president was elected.
It also made it easier for the Pentagon to attack the African country of Libya than if some obvious racist had been in office.
While Zelensky is the figurehead seen on TV, fascists like those in the Azov Battalion and Right Sector have been brought into the Ukrainian army and police.
One of the factors that allowed JFK’s assassination was that half of the Dallas cops were Ku Klux Klan members.
Milley responded to Trump’s attempted coup by saying “we’re the ones with the guns,” he was expressing a Marxist truth.
March 14,2022 Page 11 yor Goode The Odessa and Philadelphia massacres Five years before Zelensky assumed office on May 20, 2019, at least 48 people at the House of Trade Unions in Odessa were murdered on May 2, 2014.
It shows he fascist character of the Euromaidan movement’s leadership that the union hall was attacked.
None of the criminals who carried out this atrocity have been prosecuted.
Zelensky has done nothing to seek justice for the victims of this massacre, just as he has allowed the deadly shelling of the Donbass republics.
Justice will only be carried out by Ukrainian leftists assisted by soldiers of the Russian Federation.
Six adults and five children were killed by Philadelphia police when the MOVE house was bombed on May 13, 1985.
The cops were assisted by FBI agents and the Pentagon in dropping the bomb from a helicopter.
When Wilson Goode — Philadelphia’s first Black mayor — got up that morning, he wasn’t thinking 11 Black people would be killed along with the burning of four city blocks.
It was Philadelphia’s police chief who gave the order to “let it burn,” preventing the fire department from putting out the fire.
The entire imperialist metropolis led by the United States has issued severe sanctions against Russia.
These include seizing Russian assets and cutting off Russian banks from the SWIFT financial clearing system.
Sincere pacifists may condemn all wars, but revolutionaries know that some wars are progressive and indeed necessary.
For socialists and communists to condemn “both sides” in the current crisis is a cop-out.
But some wanted to blame one of the victims, MOVE leader John Africa, for this terrorist act.
These liberals also refused to defend Mumia Abu-Jamal, a revolutionary who has been imprisoned for 40 years and whom the capitalist state wanted to execute.
Soviet socialism was tragically overthrown and Russian Federation President Putin is no Lenin.
Yet right now Russia’s armed forces are playing an indispensable role in rescuing the Donbass republics and Ukrainian workers from fascist terror.
Por Berta Joubert-Ceci Hoy quisiera rendir homenaje a una gran luchadora por los derechos de la mujer, la abogada y profesora Maria Dolores Fernés Lopez-Cepero, mejor conocida como Tati Fernds quien fallecié de cancer esta semana.
En los 75 afios que esta increible mujer vivid, pudo lograr lo que otras personas necesitarian siglos para poder concretar.
Gracias a su trabajo, las mujeres en Puerto Rico hemos podido adelantar nuestras luchas en muchos aspectos abarcadores de género, laborales, y de equidad en general.
Entre sus muchos logros, esta la creacion de leyes para la Prevencion e Intervencién de la Violencia Doméstica, y en contra del Hostigamiento Sexual en el Empleo.
Creo la Oficina de la Procuradora de la Mujer en el afio 2001 que presidi6 por 6 afios y desde la cual se pudieron lanzar muchos proyectos en defensa de la mujer.
Ayudo a crear organizaciones como Matria, que adelantan programas para el desarrollo econdmico de las mujeres.
Como anticolonialista tuvo también que batallar contra las acciones reaccionarias de los enemigos de la independencia.
Y aunque el proceso colonial con administraciones de gobierno local que entorpecen y hacen retroceder los logros de la mujer, las estructuras que Tati Fernos ayudo a crear, sientan las bases de lo que ultimamente nos dara la victoria.
Desde Puerto Rico, para Radio Clarin de Colombia, les hablé Berta Joubert-Ceci.
Cuba aboga por una solucion que garantice la seguridad y soberania de todos Declaracion del Gobierno Revolucionario El empeno estadounidense en continuar la progresiva expansion de la OTAN hacia las fronteras de la Federacion de Rusia, ha conducido aun escenario, con implicaciones de alcance impredecible, que se pudo evitar.
Son conocidos los movimientos militares realizados por los Estados Unidos y la OTAN en meses recientes hacia regiones adyacentes a la Federacion de Rusia, precedidos de la entrega de armas modernas a Ucrania, lo que de conjunto equivale aun cerco militar progresivo.
No resulta posible examinar con rigor y honestidad la situacion actual de Ucrania, sin valorar detenidamente los justos reclamos de la Federacion de Rusia a los Estados Unidos y la OTAN y los factores que han conducido al uso de la fuerza y lano observancia de principios legales y normas internacionales que Cuba suscribe y respalda con todo vigor y son referencia imprescindible, particularmente para los paises pequefios, contra el hegemonismo, los abusos de poder y las injusticias.
Cuba es un pais defensor del Derecho Internacional y comprometido con la Carta de las Naciones Unidas, que siempre defendera la paz y se opondra al uso 0 amenaza de la fuerza contra cualquier Estado.
El pueblo cubano ha tenido y tiene una relacion entrafiable con el pueblo ucraniano.
La historia exigira responsabilidad al Gobierno de los Estados Unidos por las consecuencias de una doctrina militar crecientemente ofensiva fuera de las fronteras de la OTAN, que amenaza la paz, la seguridad y la estabilidad internacionales.
Se refuerzan nuestras preocupaciones con la decision recién adoptada por la OTAN, de activar, por primera vez, la Fuerza de Respuesta de esa alianza militar.
Fue un error ignorar durante décadas los fundados reclamos de garantias de seguridad por parte de la Federacion de Rusia y suponer que ese pais permaneceria inerme ante una amenaza directa a su seguridad nacional.
El proyecto de resoluci6n sobre la situacion en Ucrania no aprobado en el Consejo de Seguridad el 25 de febrero, que sera presentado ala Asamblea General, no fue concebido como una contribucién real a la busqueda de soluciones a la actual crisis.
Por el contrario, se trata de un texto desbalanceado, que no toma en cuenta las legitimas preocupaciones de todas las partes involucradas.
Tampoco se reconoce la responsabilidad de los que instigaron o desplegaron acciones agresivas que precipitaron la escalada de este conflicto.
Abogamos por una solucion diplomatica seria, constructiva y realista de la actual crisis en Europa, por medios pacificos, que garantice la seguridad y soberania de todos, asi como la paz, la estabilidad y la seguridad regional e internacional.
Los Estados Unidos y algunos aliados han utilizado la fuerza en multiples ocasiones.
Invadieron Estados soberanos para provocar cambios de régimen e intervienen en los asuntos internos de otras naciones que no se pliegan a sus intereses de dominacion y que defienden su integridad territorial e independencia.
Son también los responsables de la muerte de cientos de miles de civiles, que denominan «danios colaterales»; de millones de desplazados y de vasta destruccion en toda la geografia de nuestro planeta como resultado de sus guerras de rapina.
Granma “If this operation ... against Ukrainian fascism and which bers are imprisoned, and some have died after torture and hunger strikes.
At a news conference in Moscow Feb., visiting members of Grup Yorum declared their support for the people of Donbass in their fight against NATO imperialism and the far-right Ukrainian regime.
Members said they would like to perform a solidarity concert there again, as they did in 2015.
Actions in support of Russia’s recognition of the Donbass republics and the joint military operation have been held by movements in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Italy and Serbia.
