Photographic analysis, however, reveals the truth—it is the same woman in all three cities.
It was clear that the invaders who the Ukrainians dubbed “Little Green Men” were neither.
Russian Unconventional Warfare in Ukraine, 2013–2014 • Historical Context §§ Ukraine’s historical, cultural, religious, and economic ties to Russia make it a vital interest to Moscow.
He celebrated the campaign’s Key Principles of Russian success in avoiding armed violence and Unconventional Warfare preempting American interference.
The purpose of this document is to provide a primer on Russia’s unconventional warfare operations in Ukraine.
His main thesis was that the wars of princes and ideologies were in the past and that new conflict would be between civilizations.
The division between the Latin Church and Orthodoxy was exemplified by the 1472 marriage of the Grand Prince of Moscow Rus Ivan III to Sophia Paleologue, claimant to the throne of the Byzantine Empire, at the recommendation of Pope Paul II in an unsuccessful attempt to join the two civilizations.
Ivan III began to refer to himself as Tsar, the Russian derivation of Caesar.
Moscow’s post-Cold War incursions into the peripheral states and regions surrounding the Russian Federation occurred within this historical context that, since tsarist times, has featured concern, obsession, and paranoia about the defensive buffer.
Cossack bands, agents masquerading as tradesmen or explorers, and conventional military units were the primary means of securing Russian control over the vast swaths of land incorporated across Asia.
Russian expansion in the sixteenth through nineteenth centuries By the twentieth century, tsarist Russia was in its last throes, but the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 replaced the anachronistic regime with a vigorous, ideological power.
Russian methods of intervention evolved from one conflict to the next as leaders sought the most efficient methods of bringing weaker powers to heel while avoiding the stigma of outright imperialism, invasion, and war with the West.
Intervention in Lithuania, 199111 When the Baltic states each declared independence from the Soviet Union and deprecated Moscow’s former annexation as illegal, the Russian government under Mikhail Gorbachev responded by attempting to crack down on Lithuania.
It aims at affecting the consciousness doctrine, information is of the masses, both at home and abroad, and a dangerous weapon.
At its roots, the theory is weapon, it has unlimited military and nonmilitary, technological and range, it is easily social.
It links directly to geopolitics in service to the state and the Russian civiliza—Jolanta Darczewska tion.
Main Phases of Conflict Development Neutralization of military conflict Military Localization of military conflict conflict Crisis reactions Immediate military threat Intensifying contradictions Direct Differences transform into conflict. military threat Military-political leaders become aware of this change.
Sharing ethnic and cultural roots with Russia in the Kievan Rus’, Ukraine has been dominated by Poland to the west and the Russian Empire to the east since the Middle Ages.
But Ukrainian ten-hryvnia note featuring Ivan Mazepa in 1704 another Cossack hetman, Ivan Mazepa, threw in his lot with Charles XII of Sweden against the tsar.
Centuries later, these two figures elicit both praise and condemnation from Ukrainian nationalists on the one hand and the pro-Russian population on the other.
Russian and Soviet narratives point to the Treaty of Pereyaslav to illustrate the perpetual union of the Ukrainian and Russian peoples.
Map of Ukraine Ukraine’s borders stabilized as the territory of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic was expanded at the end of World War II to encompass territories taken from Poland and Romania.
Recent Russian propaganda points to the artificial nature of Ukraine’s borders and decries the mixture of West-leaning populations with pro-Russian eastern Slavs.
Russia rankled under the threat of losing more of its East European buffer states to the EU and NATO.23 The Orange Revolution 23 The new administration, led by prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko, brought hopes of political and economic reform, but political corruption and infighting led to the dissolution of the Orange coalition and the dissipation of popular idealism.
Cultural relations likewise deteriorated as President Yushchenko enacted symbolic measures that many in Russia and Russian speakers in Ukraine considered “anti-Russian,” including recognition of the Holodomor as genocide and official hero status for Ukrainian nationalists who fought the Red Army during World War II.24 Viktor Yanukovych was elected president of Ukraine in February 2010 in a narrow victory over Yulia Tymoshenko, and he shaped a majority government of mostly ethnic Russian parties with power bases in eastern Ukraine.
Political Framework Leading up to Euromaidan In describing the political context of Russia’s intervention in Ukraine it is tempting to reduce the complexities into a bipolarity of pro-Russian and pro-Western blocs.
The Rada featured intense political conflict in the months leading up to Euromaidan.a Viktor Yanukovych attained the presidency in 2010, and soon after his associate Mykola Azarov formed a government as the new prime minister.
Languages in Ukraine In early 2013 opposition parties, including UDAR, Fatherland, and others, blocked access to the podium in an attempt to protest the direction of the government’s policies and the practice in which party deputies could vote for absent members of the parliament.
Euromaidan President Yanukovych and Russian president Vladimir Putin moved quickly in an attempt to calm the opposition.
The passage of a series of laws on January 16—which the opposition referred to as the Laws of Dictatorship—swelled the ranks of the protesters, including the violent Pravy Sektor.b The interior minister authorized police forces to use physical force b Pravy Sektor was a far-right Ukrainian nationalist group that emerged as a paramilitary during the November 2013 protests.
Amid all these efforts to intimidate the demonstrators, cries for the ouster of Yanukovych grew stronger.
After the expulsion of Yanukovych, Sergei Aksyonov, leader of a large paramilitary force in Crimea, appealed to Putin for help.
Other Ukrainian forces simply lacked the combat power to overcome the Denis Pushilin Russian-backed resistance.
In late April, Vyacheslav Ponomaryov, the pro-Russian mayor of Slovyansk, threatened to kill hostages, including an American journalist, if his forces were attacked.
On May 22, rebels from the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts declared the establishment of New Russia, an area including southern and eastern Ukraine.
The presence of Russian-made antiaircraft weapons neutralized the Ukrainian government’s air advantage and resulted in the downing of an Ilyushin Il-76 transport in mid-June, killing forty-nine troops who were aboard.
Most major governmental figures with influence in Russia are close associates of Putin’s, and many share earlier experiences in the KGB.27 Minister of Defense Sergey Shoygu was reportedly appointed to his position because he was politically neutral, and Putin wanted to avoid strengthening the “St.
Of the military officials involved in the campaigns in Ukraine, the most notable is general Valery Gerasimov, who outlined Russia’s new methods of warfare, highlighting the nonmilitary factors as the most decisive.
Key to understanding Russia’s foreign policy is understanding the role of the oligarchs—the super-rich Russian businessmen who are close to Putin.
Western sanctions targeted the oligarchs because they are viewed as both influential with Putin and vulnerable to economic and financial pressure.
Dmitry Medvedev, former law professor and president, now prime minister of Russia; 3.
Russian expansion into the Black Sea basin in the seventeenth century was driven by both imperial ambitions and hopes to open significant maritime trade routes.
The fleet and its affiliates own high-value assets, including resorts, real estate, and War furnishes the best profitable businesses, many of which opportunities to distract operate outside of Ukrainian tax regimes domestic public opinion and and significantly below market rates.
These nonmilitary activities integrate the destroy the remnants of the Black Sea Fleet and affiliates into regional political and intellectual politics, business, and crime. opposition within Russia itself.
An undemocratic Maintain Buffer of Russian Influence in Peripheral regime worried about the States against the West prospect of domestic economic Russia has historically maintained a ring social and political crises— of nations within its sphere of influence such as those that now haunt to compensate for its lack of geographic barriers to invasion.
The policy of mainRussia amid recession and taining a buffer zone of friendly states falling oil prices—is likely to was most explicitly expressed by Joseph be pondering further acts of Stalin after the devastation of World aggression.
War II, a policy meant to ensure that —Andrei Illarionov (former economic Russia could never again be invaded by a adviser to Vladimir Putin) Western force.
The persistent orientation of Georgia toward EU and NATO membership despite the 2008 Russo–Georgian War and the decisive steps toward an Association Agreement between Ukraine and the EU were premonitions of a collapsing Eastern European buffer of friendly or vassal states, which would leave the Russian mainland vulnerable to Western influence and military action.
Strengthen EEU in the Former Soviet Sphere of Influence Losing Russian security and economic influence in central Europe jeopardizes Putin’s geopolitical aspirations for the Russian state, and Ukraine’s westward shift through Euromaidan constitutes a devastating blow.
The Russian Army organized eighty-five brigades through 2009, including forty combined-arms brigades as well 41 as specialized brigades for missiles, artillery, rocket artillery, air defense, engineers, electronic warfare, reconnaissance, and special forces.
In the summer of 2014, at least thirteen BTGs and elements of five SPETSNAZ units were poised on the Ukrainian border.
The main military operations in Ukraine were commanded through Russia’s Southern Military District with its headquarters in Rostov-on-Don.
Russia’s use of SPETSNAZ evolved since its involvement in Georgia in 2008.
When deployed, agents initially confine their efforts to political agitation and other nonkinetic methods aimed at creating a political environment favorable to Russian policies.
They also employ sympathetic paramilitaries, such as former members of the Chechen “Vostok” Battalion.
A paramilitary group called 43 the Russian Orthodox Army began operating in the Donetsk region after the ouster of Yanukovych.
The Night Wolves motorcycle club is a proxy group of Russian nationalists founded in 1989.
Chetnik Guards commanded by Bratislav Zivkovic formed an irregular unit in Crimea, and they operated in coordination with Cossack paramilitaries there.
Mozgovoy has been seen traveling Alexey Mozgovoy openly in Moscow, where he enjoys celebrity status including requests for autographs.
Alexander Mozhaev is a Cossack militia leader operating in eastern Ukraine at the behest of the Putin regime.
Military-political leaders become de-escalate the situation, but they aware of this change. had the opposite effect.
Emergence of differences of interest • The start of conflict activities was relatively sudden and brief, quickly transitioning to the next 1.
This suggests intensive and activities peace QQ Dec.91 QQ Feb., 2014 QQ Feb., 2014 QQ Mar.–18, 2014 deliberate planning designed to Ukraine declares Protests in Kyiv against QQ Feb., 2014 Russian troops seize Referendum and QQ Late Mar.14– preempt any embryonic resistance independence.
President Victor YanuUkrainian naval Crimean border crosssubsequent treaty leads Present forming against Putin’s designs.
IL-76 aircraft begin to Russian annexation United States and EU • The crisis stage featured nearly Russian factions form. blockaded; proflying Russian troops of Crimea into Russian impose sanctions, but QQ Feb., 2014 Russian gunmen seize into region.
Federation. annexation remains in flawless execution of Russia’s new QQ 2004–2005 Yanukovych flees government buildings in effect; popular approval information-based warfare, culmiOrange Revolution Kyiv.
QQ Mar., 2014 QQ Mar., 2014 in Crimea and Russia nating in a staged referendum and brings pro-Western interim pro-Western Russia formally authoRussia formally annexes boosts Putin’s political political decision.
President Yushchenko government. rizes use of Russian Crimea. fortunes.
Focus of con• During the resolutions stage, to power. troops in Crimea. flict moves to eastern QQ Feb., 2014 Kirovske air base QQ Mar., 2014 Putin’s autocratic government Ukraine.
Ukraine orders troops to rapidly sealed the annexation with Pro-Russian President Sevastopol, supported withdraw from Crimea. a legal form.
QQ Mar., 2014 firmly in control of Crimea, he was Under Russian pressure, Russian navy blockable to present the world with a QQ Feb., 2014 he abandons deal with ades Ukrainian navy fait accompli.
OSCE ing Maidan protests. recon in Kherson inspectors turned away • The restoration of peace stage isthmus. at border crossing. was facilitated in part by the QQ Dec.13 upswing of conflict in eastern Putin responds with QQ Mar.–22, 2014 Nonmilitary measures Ukraine, so as to divert attention trade and financial Russian troops seize away from Crimea.
Military measures deals intended to calm additional sites and protests and bring consolidate positions.
Intensifying contradictions • During the escalations stage Direct military Differences transform into conflict.
Putin took actions calculated to threat Military-political leaders become aware of this change. de-escalate the situation, but they Potential Emergence of differences had the opposite effect.
The March military of interest 2014 annexation of Crimea led to an threat upswing of unrest in eastern Ukraine.
Restoration of peace • The start of conflict activities activities QQ Dec.91 QQ Feb., 2014 QQ May 1, 2014 QQ Sep., 2014 Conflict continues. was framed by Russia’s deceptive Ukraine declares indepenProtests in Kyiv against Ukraine resumes conscription OSCE helps negotiate QQ Mar.–Apr.14 diplomatic agreement at Geneva— dence.
Pro-Western and President Victor Yanukovych Russian agents organize, in face of ongoing aggression cease-fire. setting the stage for Putin’s sustained pro-Russian factions form. become violent. lead, and cooperate with in east and south.
QQ Sep.14 unconventional warfare campaign in QQ 2004–2005 QQ Feb., 2014 protesters in major cities and QQ May 2, 2014 President Poroshenko eastern Ukraine under an umbrella of Orange Revolution brings Yanukovych flees Kyiv. port of Mariupol.
Pro-Russian ~40 pro-Russian activists die promises greater autonomy in pro-Western President Putin condemns interim crowds and “little green men” in a fire in Odessa. eastern Ukraine. persistent denial. seize government buildings.
QQ May 11, 2014 Russians use bribery, QQ Sep., 2014 • The crisis stage came to a head with QQ 2010–2013 QQ Mar.–21, 2014 Luhansk and Donestsk US-led NATO peacekeeping intimidation, and subversion the downing of Malaysian Airlines Pro-Russian President Referendum and subsequent to neutralize government referenda on independence; exercises commence in Flight 17, which fueled growing Yanukovych elected.
Under treaty leads to Russian officials, police, and some alleged results strongly favor western Ukraine. international condemnation of Putin’s Russian pressure, he annexation of Crimea into military units. separation from Kyiv and annexation by Russia.
QQ Mar., 2014 Putin and Poroshenko late 2013, sparking Maidan government signs Association QQ May 25, 2014 Russia expelled from G8. negotiate natural gas deal.
Poroshenko elected. instead saw surprising political QQ Apr., 2014 QQ Oct., 2014 QQ Dec.13 QQ Mar., 2014 QQ Jun., 2014 Geneva agreement (US, Ukrainians elect pro-Western– resilience from the Kyiv government Putin responds with trade Protesters in Donetsk call for Russia cuts off natural gas to Ukraine, EU, Russia) calls for majority parliament. and people of Ukraine against and financial deals intended referendum on integration Ukraine. to calm protests and bring with Russia. de-escalation, disarming miliQQ Nov.14 Russian aggression.
QQ Jun., 2014 Separatists in Luhansk and NATO support, along with Russia’s Poroshenko signs trade QQ Apr., 2014 Donetsk hold elections agreement with EU. severe economic downturn and Russian agents and militias condemned by Kyiv.
More President Poroshenko’s sustained seize television station in QQ Jul., 2014 Russian troops enter Ukraine.
Despite cease-fire, fighting counteroffensive, led Russia to resort media with Russia Today.
QQ Summer 2014 continues, at times escalating to increasingly explicit invasion.
During this phase the Russian objective was to create the political conditions necessary for later decisive military and paramilitary action.
In a move calculated to grab the attention of Western leaders, on March 8 Russia announced that it was considering ending START inspections in response to US and European agitation concerning Ukraine.
Ukraine’s troops departed without violence, and the Russian flag was raised over captured 57 installations.
Similarly, in Dnipropetrovsk, oligarch Igor Kolomoisky formed a private army composed of fighters from as far away as the United States to thwart Russian aggression.
Valery Gerasimov, “The Value of Science in Prediction,” Military-Industrial Kurier, February 27, 2013.
Adrian Karatnycky, “Ukraine’s Orange Revolution,” Foreign Affairs, March/April 2005.
Albina Kovalyova, “Meet the Russian Orthodox Army, Ukrainian Separatists’ Shock Troops,” NBC News, May 16, 2014.
Alexander Marquardt, “Night Wolves Join Pro-Russia Side in Southern Ukraine,” ABC News, February 28, 2014.
