The initiative is likely to anger Petro Poroshenko, the Ukrainian president, who has explicitly ruled out ""swapping"" Crimea for Donbas and says Russian Federation must stick to the Minsk peace agreement, the existing peace plan he negotiated with Vladimir Putin two years ago.
Poroshenko has been fighting a war against Russia-backed separatists in Eastern Ukraine since replacing his ousted pro-Russia predecessor, Viktor Yanukovych, in 2014.
Demonstrators on Monday also filled the streets of Kiev to honor the victims of violence on February 20, 2014, when snipers shot dozens of protesters pushing for the ouster of then-President Viktor Yanukovich.
Fighting has recently escalated in the conflict between the Ukrainian government and Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine, refocusing global attention on a simmering conflict that has strained relations between Russia and the West.
In turn, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin said that the decision of Moscow to recognize documents issued by certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk regions disagreed with the logic of the Minsk agreements.
After Russia sent in troops to the Ukrainian region of Crimea, a vote on Ukraine's annexation to Russia was held, however, never recognized by the worldwide community.
The United States will continue to hold Russian Federation accountable, even as we search for new common ground, which as you know President Trump believes can be found"", the Vice President said.
Artemenko's initiative has been disavowed by both the Russian and Ukrainian governments.
The possibility that Flynn gave Pence misinformation about what he told a long-standing United States adversary raises troubling questions.
He said following his first meeting with President Obama that Obama had asked him to consider keeping the policy in place.
The process of withdrawal lasts one year and, in the case of South Africa, would take place this October.
And I feel that this country is made up of all immigrants, and it belongs to all immigrants.
The stock witnessed 2.59% gains, -2.13% declines and -5.97% declines for the 1-month, 3-month and 6-month period, respectively.
The company had revenue of $129.75 billion for the quarter, compared to analyst estimates of $130.22 billion.
Weaver also tweeted the claim on Monday evening in response to stories about Kasich and the president meeting this Friday.
Our Kasich sources also say the governor is in the dark on the objective of the meeting.
Therefore, they continually heighten editorial and journalistic standards to make independent and exciting news for everyone.
Tuko.co.ke team works all day round to create many innovative features for its readers.
Dhoni had stepped down as India's limited-over captain at the start of 2017, ahead of the ODIs and T20s against England.
An exchange of fire followed for about 30 minutes, during which one militant was killed.
Other terrorists escaped taking advantage of undulating hilly terrain and jungle cover.
Sports Media Consultant Lee Berke told Reuters that Facebook would aggressively go after sports content to up the competition.
Both representatives for Facebook and Major League Baseball remained silent as to the status of the spreading rumor.
She continued, 'Motherhood has been heavily on my mind because I am going to be a mother soon.
