I will begin with two quotations from the works of the Russian humanist writer Viktor Astafiev, who predicted, already in 1995, in a jubilee year of the Great Victory where the fostering of this heroic myth could lead.
As Victory Day approaches, the running routine associated with it is annoying me — people tugging at my sleeves are tearing them off and the telephone is never silent.
Everybody needs patriotic talk about the war — I defend myself as best as I can.
God, what kind of nation are we, after all, ready to drown everything that is most sacred in an irrepressible and irresponsible glossolalia.
Without thought nor conscience, they do not even comprehend the blasphemy of decorating oneself, jutting out one’s chest, and the playing with medals.
And yet You reaquire that courage in wartime and massive suffering be extolled, and forget as you do so, that the more you lie about a past war, the more quickly you will draw a future war nearer.
Twenty years ago, this writer prophetically remarked how the Great Lie about the Great Patriotic War prepared the ground for the current Russian aggression against Ukraine.
Despite the fact that the Allies first signed the act of German capitulation on 7 May 1945 at the Staff Headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander, Gen.
Dwight Eisenhower, in Reims, France, and only two days later was an analogous act signed at the Soviet HQ in Berlin-Karlshorst, in the presence of Marshall Georgiy Zhukov, Stalin ordered that celebrations be established on 9 May as the day of “the Victory of the Soviet people,” and not of the Allies in general.
For Soviets, the Second World War became a foreign war, while the GPW became a native one.
In 1946, the marking of the anniversary included a procedure of awarding the personnel who participated in the fixing of the “Victory flag” on the Reichstag in May 1945 – five men all told.
However, in 1947, 9 May was declared to be a working day, and the single day off in the USSR became 1 January.
Actually, the only common attribute of the early celebrations of victory were the salutes.
And so, apart from the fact that the cult of memory of war and victory was born during the times of Stalin, it actually did not become truly widespread at that point.
Stalin exploited it selectively in order to solidify this own cult as a wartime political genius and did not seek to remind Soviet society of its traumatic wartime experiences. needlessly.
The revival of the might and greatness of the Soviet Union and the infallibility of the Generalissimo himself were extolled instead.
Although Stalin did not permit Nikita Sergeyevich, despite the latter’s requests, to establish attendant official medals, it should be noted that apart from those orders created to award Russians, only Ukrainians were granted the creation of a separate “national order” — the Order of Bohdan Khmelnytskyi.
Until 1961, only Leningrad, Sevastopol, Stalingrad , and Odessa had been so designated.
Khrushchev secured this measure only after considerable effort, given the circumstances with which the defense of Kyiv had become associated in the minds of Stalin’s former marshals.
It involved the largest encirclement of a Soviet force and the biggest defeat of Soviet armies during the war.
Over a half-million men were taken prisoner, and the commander of the defenses of the Ukrainian capital had been Andrei Vlasov — Traitor Number 1 of the Stalinist empire.
For that matter, Moscow itself did not become a “hero city” until Leonid Brezhnev’s tenure — in 1965.
The city itself was not, since Berestia had been the location of an anti-Soviet uprising in the first days of the war.
The myth of the GPW was given new life during the Brezhnev period, when, after the brief “thaw” under Khrushchev, the neo-Stalinists came to power.
In any case, it was as they directed the political life of the USSR from the mid-1960s to the 1980s, a period that came to be known as the period of stagnation, that the memory of the war was transformed into a veritable cult.
It also became one of the foundations and means of legitimization of the myth of the superiority of the Soviet system.
Gradually, under pressure of a powerful propaganda machine, Soviet society found itself in the grips of this grandiose myth.
Soviet veterans became, volens nolens, both active agents and passive cogs of a massive falsification.
In 1965, the day of the Great Victory was re-established as a day off, as was the practice, briefly discontinued during the period of disavowal of the cult of personality, of wearing medals and orders.
Veterans who had been completely neglected under Khrushchev once again felt the euphoria produced by a strong dose of emphatic celebration and civic recognition.
And yet, in the end, Soviet society itself came to pay for this demonstration and artificial “rehabilitation of memory” with another round of severe prohibitions of the truth.
After the collapse of the USSR, attitudes to the GPW became fundamentally different in Ukraine and Russia.
It was no accident that the in the polls conducted in the 1990s, 78% of Russians listed the victory in the GPW as the most important determinant of Russia’s fate in the 20th century.
In the Kremlin’s current politics of memory, the GPW and the Victory remain the key myths and the core content for the creation of a new Russian identity.
Its affirmation is programmed as a dimension of an exceptionally victorious, heroically patriotic, triumphant, and positively loaded history.
In such a history there is no place for defeats, nor mention of crimes committed by the Soviet leadership against its own people and against other peoples.
However, the unwillingness of Russian society to recognize its responsibility for the crime of totalitarianism inevitably leads to its solidarity with the present undemocratic regime.
In Ukraine since 1991, there have been ongoing debates about the relevance of the term “the Great Patriotic War” , as well over the celebration of the Day of Victory, and also over the manner in which this war was explicated in textbooks, official memorializations, etc.
While presidents Leonid Kravchuk and Leonid Kuchma talked quite a lot about the importance of a renovated historical memory, a return to the sources of national identity, and a revival of national traditions and so forth, in practice they did very little in this respect.
Instead of institutionalizing traditional Ukrainian holidays and traditions, their regimes sought to adapt Soviet ones to them.
Kuchma reinstated the Day of the Defender of the Fatherland of 23 November.
In 2003, Kuchma also revived the tradition of official 1 May celebrations.
This was marked on 22 September, deliberately set as prior to the Day of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army , 14 October.
These circumstances significantly influenced a turn of the political orientation of Ukraine’s government towards Russia.
An emphasis on Russo-Ukrainian military brotherhood during the war and the common Soviet past became commonplace.
The crowning of this policy was the arrival in Kyiv, in the fall of 2004, of Russian President Vladimir Putin “for the celebration of the 60th anniversary of the liberation of Ukraine from the Germano-fascist invaders” at the height of Ukraine’s presidential election campaign.
The politics of memory underwent a change during Viktor Yushchenko’s term as president.
As a whole, according to the new model, the Stalinist USSR was seen as an empire which caused Ukraine considerable harm.
Accordingly, the president spoke about Ukraine’s former colonial status, describe its status as a post-colonial, post-totalitarian, and post-genocidal country.
As for the memory of the Second World War, the Ukrainian model remained crippled.
The term “Great Patriotic War” was fostered as before, as was the Day of Victory of 9 May , and Soviet-Russian symbology was still in evidence at each event.
Into this mnemonic system, elements of Soviet heroic rhetoric about the GPW were firmly implanted, elements quite distant from anything that might be considered an objective apprehension of historical events.
This was manifested, in particular, in his conferring of the designation of Hero of Ukraine to Oleksiy Berest, the Ukrainian political officer who, together with the Georgian Meliton Kantaria and the Russian Mikhail Yegorov, took part in the “raising of the Red Banner” on the Reichstag in 1945.
According to president Yushchenko’s edicts, Soviet symbols were to be treated as official during commemorations of 9 May.
George’s banner and Russian songs were also in evidence during the commemorations of 2008.
It also seemed paradoxical that it was actually after the Orange Revolution that the term “Great Patriotic War” reappeared in Ukraine’s primary and secondary school textbooks.
All of this notwithstanding, objectively speaking, the politics of memory that Yushchenko pursued led to a straining of relations with the Russian Federation.
Apart from exercising its economic hegemony , Russia clearly sought to re-establish its political and cultural dominance in the post-Soviet space, and the GPW played a significant role in this respect.
After Yushchenko’s defeat, an attempt at revanchism in the sphere of political memory was made by the new president, Viktor Yanukovych.
His public refusal to recognize the Holodomor as a genocide, the juridical stripping of the status of Hero of Ukraine from Stepan Bandera and Roman Shukhevych, the revival of celebrations of Victory Day with military pageantry, the civic conflict over the controversial Law on the Red Flag of 2011, the Verkhovna Rada’s silent abetting of the erection of a monument to Stalin in Zaporizhzhia — all not only did not bring calm to Ukrainian society, but roiled it.
Yushchenko’s admittedly flawed but somewhat consistent policy of distancing the country’s officium from communism and the condemnation of the crimes of the Stalinist empire against a background of a revived Ukrainian national narrative began to be eclipsed by a policy of reanimation of a heroicized Soviet legacy against a background of attempts to blur distinctions between Ukrainian and Russian identity.
As mentioned above, Victory Day celebrations under Yanukovych once again included a military component.
In fact, for the first time since Ukraine’s declaration of independence, military hardware reappeared on the streets of Kyiv on 9 May 2010.
The streets of Lviv also witnessed an alternative gathering, whose participants insisted that on this day those who perished in World War Two should be remembered and prayed for, but that it should not be turned into a festival.
A scandalous event took place during Yanukovych’s presidency in connection with the celebrations, in 2011, in Lviv on 9 May that turned into a street fight.
Some of the country’s legal experts suggested that the “Law on the Flag of Victory” was a direct borrowing from legislation promulgated in the Russian Federation, an exploitation of veterans, and an act which would cause the intensification of civic confrontations.
The city councils of Ivano-Frankivske and Lviv passed ordinances prohibiting the exhibition of any flags bearing Soviet symbols on Victory Day.
All of this led to the first instances of outright physical violence on the streets of that city since independence.
According to an opinion poll conducted in 2013, 75% of respondents declared they would mark the occasion.
It appears that this is less connected to ideology than it is to the fact that almost every single family in Ukraine suffered during the war.
For example, my own grandfather and paternal uncle were killed in the fighting, and my father fought in the ranks of the Red Army throughout the war.
As such, this was not viewed as a celebration, but a tribute of memory to those who perished, and a gesture of respect to those who survived.
After the Revolution of Dignity in Ukraine, Victory Day was first commemorated on 8-9 May, as it is in most of Europe.
The official ceremonies were organized as a day of remembrance of the dead, and a memorialization of the physical ruination caused – that is, a marking of the horrors of war in general.
George’s banner, which had become, in the interim, a clear symbol used by the separatists of the Donbas.
This symbol was also used, for the first time, as a logo of the conference titled “World War II and the Creation of Historical Memory in Contemporary Ukraine” held annually since 2009 under the auspices of Fulbright Program in Ukraine.
In 2014, 9 May was commemorated under conditions created by the Russian occupation of Crimea and the beginning of events in the Donbas, which prompted the local authorities of the majority of Ukraine’s cities to cancel any major ceremonies in order to avoid provocations, including in Kyiv, Kharkiv, and Odessa.
And yet, a triumphant parade was held in Russian-occupied Sevastopol, with the personal participation of Russian President Vladimir Putin.
A logical consequence of the Russo-Ukrainian war of historical memory, as well as of the hybrid war being conducted by Putin in the Donbas, is that Ukraine has fundamentally rejected its Soviet heritage.
Also in 2014, President Poroshenko issued an edict abolishing the Day of the Defender of the Fatherland, which had been marked on 23 February.
However, Ukraine’s chief executive instituted a new holiday – the Day of the Defender of Ukraine, which will be marked on 14 October, to coincide with the Feast of Mary the Protectress, UPA Day, and the Day of the Ukrainian Kozak.
One of them was the law “on the Immortalization of the Victory over Nazism,” which stipulated that 8 May will be marked as a day of remembrance and peace.
In 2016, 9 May will be officially commemorated not as Victory Day, but as the Day of Victory over Nazism in the Second World War.
