In Davos address, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy calls for “maximum” sanctions against Russia, including an oil embargo.
A Kyiv court sentences a Russian soldier to life in prison for killing an unarmed civilian in Ukraine’s first war crimes trial since Moscow’s invasion began.
Russian Abramovich put the club up for sale in early March following his country’s invasion of Ukraine.
The British government demanded assurances that Abramovich, who was sanctioned following the invasion – which Moscow calls a special operation – will not benefit from the sale.
Habeck warned, however, that an embargo would not automatically weaken the Kremlin as rising prices were enabling it to rake in more income while selling lower volumes of oil.
Therefore, one consideration was to no longer pay “any price” for oil, but to agree on upper limits, he said.
Russian soldiers and Ukrainian authorities both have said they will clear landmines from various locations in Ukraine amid the ongoing Russian invasion.
The experts from Colombia, which is a NATO partner, were invited to give the training by the US, Colombian defense minister Diego Molano said in a statement.
Zelenskyy, addressing by video link an audience at the World Economic Forum in Davos, also said that arranging any sort of talks with Russia was becoming more difficult in the light of what he said was evidence Russian actions against civilians under occupation.
He also said that any notion of recovering by force the Crimea peninsula, annexed by Russia in 2014 would cause hundreds of thousands of casualties.
The agreement, widely known in Ukraine as the Kharkiv Pact, allowed Russia to keep its Black Sea Fleet in the Crimean port of Sevastopol.
Yanukovych, who fled to Russia in 2014 after mass protests, has already received a 13-year jail sentence in absentia for treason.
That case was related to a letter he sent to Russian President Vladimir Putin on March 1, 2014, asking him to use Russian army and police forces to restore order in Ukraine.
The Ukrainian prosecutor general’s office said a Kyiv court had ordered Yanukovych’s arrest because the Kharkiv Pact had enabled Russia to increase the number of troops it had in Ukraine and to seize and annex Crimea in 2014.
He said, “We are fighting, first of all, for values” and to be part of the democratic world.
The United Nations estimates that some 6. million Ukrainians have left their country since the Russian invasion started on February 24th.
Most of them, some 3. million, have entered Poland, and almost a million went to Romania.
We are asking for some additional funds, which would be helpful in this situation,” she said.
The virtual meeting, dubbed the Ukraine Contact Group, was attended by officials from 40 countries and is set to reconvene in June on the sidelines of a NATO defence summit in Brussels, Austin said.
Those who announced new packages included Italy, Denmark, Greece, Norway and Poland, Austin told reporters.
Denmark would provide a harpoon launcher and missiles to defend Ukraine’s coast, he said.
Despite an economic crisis prompted by the conflict in Ukraine, the rouble has surged about 30 percent against the dollar this year, and on Monday hit a near seven-year high against the euro.
That has raised concerns the strong currency could hurt Russia’s budget revenues from exports.
The Baltic country’s move comes after it expelled Russia’s envoy on April 4.
The Lithuanian government said at that time it intended to lower the level of diplomatic representation between the two countries.
Many United States Republicans have been following the lead of former President Donald Trump – the party’s leader – toward a more nationalist foreign policy.
Trump accused NATO allies of not spending enough on their own defence and excessively burdening the United States.
In the Senate, 11 Republicans voted “no” last week against legislation providing $40bn to help Ukraine, with some saying they wanted the funds directed to Americans.
Russia has repeatedly denied targeting civilians and accusations its forces have carried out war crimes during what it calls a “special military operation” in Ukraine.
By 13:38 GMT, the rouble had gained 6. percent to trade at 58.75 versus the euro, its strongest point since early June 2015.
It was also 4. percent stronger against the United States dollar at 57.47, not far from 57.0750, its strongest mark since late March 2018, hit on Friday.
Overall, the rouble has firmed about 30 percent against the dollar this year despite a full-scale economic crisis in Russia.
That makes it the world’s best-performing currency – albeit one that is artificially supported by controls imposed in late February to shield Russia’s financial sector from sweeping sanctions imposed by Western powers.
The UK said the declaration would build on the defence cooperation the countries share as NATO allies and would increase resistance to threats, including from Russia and China.
Since Russia launched its invasion in late February, Baltic countries such as Lithuania, a former Soviet state, have become increasingly concerned they could be next to face aggression from Moscow.
Zelenska warned the ‘consequences’ of Russia’s war would last for ‘decades’ 23 May 2022 13:50 GMT Starbucks to exit Russia as foreign firms exodus continues Starbucks has said it will exit Russia after nearly 15 years as the coffee chain joins an exodus of Western firms from the country.
The company, which in early March shuttered its stores and suspended all business activity in Russia, did not provide details on the financial effect of the exit.
However, it said it would continue to support its employees in the country, including paying them for six months.
Boris Bondarev, 41, confirmed his resignation in a letter delivered on Monday morning at the Russian diplomatic mission after a diplomatic official passed on his English-language statement to The Associated Press news agency.
The resignation amounts to a rare public admission of disgruntlement about Russia’s war among Russian diplomatic corps, at a time when Putin’s government has sought to crack down on dissent over the invasion.
The yellow arches stood on the ground outside the restaurant in Khimki, a town near Moscow, Reuters reported.
It was not clear if work to remove the logo from other branches across the country was already under way.
The world’s largest burger chain is selling its restaurants in Russia to one of its local licensees, who will rebrand them under a new name that has yet to be announced, ending more than 30 years in the country.
AJE correspondent Al Jazeera’s Dorsa Jabbari, reporting from Moscow, says there are “conflicting reports” over the fate of Ukrainian fighters who surrendered at the Azovstal steelworks in Mariupol.
Jabbari said it was also unclear how many of the 2,478 fighters reportedly evacuated from the steel plant were members of the Azov Battalion – a fighting force whose far-right origins have been seized on by the Kremlin as part of its effort to cast the invasion as a battle against Nazi influence in Ukraine.
At a televised meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin, his longtime ally, Lukashenko said Kyiv would eventually have to ask for help in preventing the seizure of western Ukraine.
Moscow has in the past suggested that Poland seeks to establish control over historical Polish lands in Ukraine, a claim that Warsaw denies as disinformation.
Poland is one of Ukraine’s firmest supporters, having sent weapons to its neighbour and taken in more than three million Ukrainian refugees.
Lukashenko has publicly supported Putin during Russia’s offensive 23 May 2022 11:35 GMT Germany announces currency conversion scheme for Ukrainian refugees Refugees who have fled the war in Ukraine can change their Ukrainian hryvnia into euros in Germany starting from Tuesday, the finance ministry in Berlin and German banks have announced.
The ministry agreed to the exchange programme together with the central banks of Germany and Ukraine as well as the German Banking Industry Committee, the organisations said in a joint statement.
The agreed exchange volume has been initially set at 1. billion hryvnia and the scheme is to stay in place for at least three months.
Under the agreement, refugees can exchange up to 10,000 hryvnia into euros at participating German banks at current exchange rates.
The conversion, which can be made in several instalments, is to be free of charge.
The Ukrainian leader’s claim, which he made while addressing the World Economic Forum gathering in Davos, came after local authorities said last week that eight people were killed in the strike in the northern Ukrainian region of Chernihiv.
German minister German economy minister Robert Habeck has warned Hungary against blocking efforts to impose a European Union-wide embargo on Russian oil imports.
Budapest, Moscow’s closest ally in the EU, has said it wants compensation from the bloc to mitigate the cost of ditching Russian crude or some exemptions from the suggested embargo.
The EU needs all 27 states to agree to the measure for it to take effect.
Shishimarin, a 21-year-old tank commander, pleaded guilty last week to killing the 62-year-old man in the northeastern Ukrainian village of Chupakhivka on February 28 after being ordered to shoot at him from a car.
Kyiv’s Western allies have imposed several waves of sanctions on Russia over its offensive, but Zelenskyy said the international community needed to go further yet to stop the Kremlin’s aggression by cutting off all trade with Moscow.
He called for all Russian banks to be blocked as well as the complete withdrawal of foreign companies from Russia and said Kyiv needs at least $5bn of financial support per month as it attempts to defy Moscow’s offensive and rebuild Ukraine.
Report The leader of eastern Ukraine’s self-declared Donetsk People’s Republic has been quoted as saying that the Ukrainian fighters who surrendered at the Azovstal steel plant in Mariupol will face trial in the breakaway region.
Russia’s air force hit four command centres, a communications point, an anti-aircraft missile system and 87 areas where troops and Ukrainian military equipment amassed as well as seven ammunition stores, the ministry said.
The ministry said Russian forces had also shot down three Ukrainian Su-25 jets and struck military supplies headed for eastern Ukraine at the Malin railway station in the country’s west with sea-launched long-range missiles.
There was no immediate response to the claims from Kyiv and Al Jazeera could not independently verify the Russian defence ministry’s report.
The EU suspended its public spending rules for national governments in March 2020 as the 27-nation bloc sank into its deepest recession since World War II because of COVID-19 restrictions.
Known as the Stability and Growth Pact, the EU rules limit deficit spending to three percent of a country’s overall economy and debt to 60 percent.
It’s a record that should never have been set,” Filippo Grandi, the UN’s High Commissioner for Refugees, said in a statement.
A milestone we hoped we’d never have to mark. million people have now fled their homes.
We always knew that Gazprom was not a reliable partner,” Anna Moskwa tweeted.
Report Russia’s defence ministry has claimed its forces destroyed a Ukrainian unit of US-produced M777 howitzers, a type of artillery weapon, according to a report by the RIA Novosti news agency.
Ukraine has deployed many of the M-777 howitzers supplied by Washington at the front lines, with the United States claiming to have delivered all but one of the 90 artillery pieces they were due to send to Kyiv.
The M-777 howitzer consignment is part of a huge outlay of weapons from the White House to help Ukraine fend off Russia’s invasion and is seen as particularly significant because of its long range and accuracy.
Al Jazeera could not independently verify the Russian defence ministry’s report.
Russia must pay ‘long-term price’ for Ukraine invasion President Joe Biden said that Russia “has to pay a long-term price” for its “barbarism in Ukraine” in terms of sanctions imposed on Moscow by the United States and its allies.
Governor Russian shells hit more than 70 residential buildings in the Luhansk region on Sunday and killed one person in Lysychansk, the region’s governor has said.
Serhiy Haidai said the person died when their apartment was hit by a shell in the evening.
He added that a child injured in the town of Pryvillya, when it came under fire on May 7, died in intensive care.
Ukraine’s forces are still holding Severodonetsk and Lysychansk, the Zvezda TV channel, run by the Russian defence ministry, said on Sunday.
UK In three months of the war in Ukraine, Russia has suffered a similar death toll as the Soviet Union did in nine years of war in Afghanistan, the UK’s defence ministry has said.
The ministry suggested that because the Russian public has been sensitive to casualties suffered in “wars of choice” in the past, the rising death toll in Ukraine may “fuel public dissatisfaction with the war” and a willingness to speak out against it.
Serhiy Haidai said on Sunday that the Russians were “engaging in a scorched-earth approach” in Severodonetsk and the sole working hospital has only three doctors and supplies for 10 days.
He said the Russians had occupied several towns and cities in Luhansk after indiscriminate, 24-hour, shelling and that Moscow was concentrating forces and weaponry there, bringing in forces from Kharkiv to the northwest, Mariupol to the south and from inside Russia.
Doctor Ivan Mozhaiev attends to a patient during morning rounds at Pokrovsk hospital in eastern Ukraine, Sunday, May 22, 2022.
Oleksandr Sytaylo also said another four people had been injured and were in hospital.
Ukraine army Ukraine’s army says Russia is strengthening its position in the Black Sea with a new addition to its fleet, the Admiral Makarov frigate.
Ukraine says the ship has left the Crimean port of Sevastopol and is heading towards Odesa.
Russia’s news agency TASS had previously reported a source from occupied Crimea’s intelligence agency saying the Admiral Makarov would be the new flagship of the Black Sea Fleet, replacing the Moskva, which sank in mid-April after Ukraine said it hit it with two missiles.
Ukraine’s army said with the Makarov entering the fold, the risk of missile attacks from the Black Sea had increased.
Ukraine’s Operational Command “South” said on May 22 that the warship made its way to Russian positions in the Black Sea, increasing the probability of missile strikes on Ukraine. — The Kyiv Independent May 23, 2022 23 May 2022 03:38 GMT Biden says United States fully committed to Japan’s defence Biden has assured his “good friend” Prime Minister Fumio Kishida of Japan that the United States is fully committed to Japan’s defence, amid simmering tension with China and the ramifications of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
Soldiers walked through the compound and swung mine detectors over roads littered with debris, while others checked under objects for the explosive devices, video footage showed.
So we’ve got some two weeks of work ahead of us,” said a Russian soldier who only gave his nom de guerre, Babai, Reuters reported.
The war in Ukraine is expected to be a prominent topic in this year’s Davos discussions to which Russian companies and representatives have not received invitations.
As well as a special format of communication with the political and expert communities of Indonesia,” Zelenskyy said in his nighttime address.
Official Imports into Russia have fallen to 2020 levels due to “measures from unfriendly states”, which have led to logistical difficulties, a deputy head of Russia’s customs service has said, state agency RIA news reports.
Ruslan Davydov said deliveries from the northwest had seen the highest decrease due to port closures and bans on Russian ships, while imports had increased from countries to Russia’s east and south, in particular China and Kazakhstan.
Displaced Ukrainians on a Poland-bound train bid farewell in Lviv, western Ukraine, March 22 23 May 2022 01:57 GMT Ukraine ends taxation agreement with Russia Ukraine’s parliament has voted to end a double taxation agreement with Russia, which had been in place since 1995 and in which Russian residents operating in Ukraine were exempt from paying Kyiv’s taxes and could be taxed by their home country only, Interfax has reported.
Ukraine’s finance ministry said that now “all income of residents of the Russian Federation received from sources in Ukraine will be subject to a general tax rate of 15% established by the Tax Code of Ukraine,” instead of preferential rates established by the double taxation agreement.
The ministry also said Ukrainian residents operating in Russia will equally no longer be able to pay Moscow’s taxes.
Toryanik said the areas subject to the most severe shelling were the Kharkiv suburbs of Severnaya Saltovka, Pyatikhatki and Gorizont, as well as the villages of Zhukovsky and Rohan.
Vladimir observes his damaged house in Malaya Rohan, a village retaken by the Ukrainian forces, in the Kharkiv region,May 19 23 May 2022 01:14 GMT US and 6 others say they support APEC after Russian invasion protest Representatives of seven nations, including those who walked out of the APEC meeting in Bangkok to protest Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, say they support the organisation and host nation Thailand.
Representatives from Australia, Canada, Japan and New Zealand joined the Americans, led by United States Trade Representative Katherine Tai, in walking out of the meeting on Saturday, while Russian economy minister Maxim Reshetnikov was speaking.
All this will not stop the conflict but intensify and prolong it, instead,” one protestor, Ota, said.
Biden is set to attend a summit on Tuesday where he will meet Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese to promote the “Quad” mechanism.
Think-tank Russian forces continued ground assaults around the major Luhansk city of Severodonetsk on Sunday but made only minimal gains in the east of the country as it seeks to capture the last Luhansk stronghold, the Institute for the Study of War has said.
But it added that there had been confirmed reports Russia seemed to have broken through Ukrainian defences around Popasna.
Russian forces have secured advances to the north and west of Popasna since at least May 20.
Russian forces likely seek to push further west toward Bakhmut and north to support the encirclement of Severodonetsk.
The 21-year-old sergeant, who has admitted to shooting a Ukrainian man in the head in a village in the northeastern Sumy region on February 28, could get life in prison if convicted.
Ukrainian Prosecutor-General Iryna Venediktova said her office was prosecuting war crimes cases against 41 Russian soldiers for offences that included bombing civilian infrastructure, killing civilians, rape and looting.
Ukrainian President Zelenskyy, right, and Polish President Duda, shake hands during a news conference after their meeting in Kyiv, May 22 22 May 2022 21:44 GMT UK’s Johnson discussed Russia’s blockade of Odesa with Zelenskyy UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson on Sunday discussed with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy Russia’s blockade of Ukraine’s shipping port Odesa, a Downing Street spokesperson said.
Johnson resolved to redouble efforts to provide vital food and humanitarian aid to the people of Ukraine and ensure the country was able to export to the rest of the world, the spokesperson added.
Zelenskyy had vetoed an earlier version of the bill and called for the two symbols to be allowed in displays in museums, libraries, scientific works, re-enactments, textbooks and similar instances.
They have been widely used, particularly on Russian military vehicles and equipment, to promote the aims of the conflict.
Kyiv’s stance has become increasingly uncompromising in recent weeks as Russia experienced military setbacks while Ukrainian officials worried they might be pressured to sacrifice land for a peace deal.
Hello and welcome to Al Jazeera’s continuing coverage of the war in Ukraine.
