All historical events are, first of all, related to people who are directly involved in them.
So, we want to present the timeline of events in Crimea through the portraits of heroes and anti-heroes of the Crimean crisis.
Tamila Tasheva is a co-founder and coordinator of the “Crimea SOS” voluntary organization.
Tamila is a Crimean Tatar, her family came back to Crimea in early 90s.
Since February 27, 2014 she is a co-founder and coordinator of “Crimea SOS” foundation, which became an executive partner of the UN refugee agency.
This NGO provides relief for internally displaced persons from Crimea and the Eastern regions of Ukraine, affected by warfare.
During the last year “Crimea SOS” rendered almost 50 thousand consultations, took in and distributed humanitarian aid for more than 1,4 million UAH, supported the internally displaced persons in getting 85 grants for initiation of private businesses and housing improvements, organized training courses to raise job chances of internally displaced persons and implemented a lot of other projects.
Tamila Tasheva and “Crimea SOS” represent a huge wave of charity activities which spread across Ukraine after the Crimean Crisis.
According to the latest surveys, despite economic crisis and lower incomes, almost 80% of Ukrainians were involved into charity projects.
During the Revolution of dignity and Crimean Crisis he supported Ukraine.
Yuri Smelyanskiy, together with another Crimean economist in exile Andrii Klimenko and other experts of the “Maidan of Foreign Affairs” are currently working on the strategies of Ukrainian policy towards the occupied Crimea.
In December 2014 they presented their “Crimea Regain Strategy” which was the first extended analysis of the Ukrainian policy towards Crimea.
On one hand, Yuri Smelyanskiy represents a large group of Crimean scientists and high-level experts who were forced to leave Crimea because of their political beliefs.
On the other hand, his story is an example for a new generation of Ukrainian experts and NGOs, who explore the problem of the Crimean Crisis and the annexation of Crimea by Russia.
These researches will be helpful for the Government of Ukraine to improve its policy towards the occupied Crimea and to develop and implement the plan for regaining the peninsula.
Usyk was born and lives in Simferopol where he bears “a citizen of honour” title.
Roughly one month after the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation Usyk declared he would never exchange his Ukrainian citizenship for a Russian one and that he considered Crimea a part of Ukraine.
Annexation of Crimea made it impossible for most professional sportsmen to participate in global championships as Russians.
International sports associations do not admit Crimean sports clubs under Russian flag to competitions.
In August 2014 UEFA officially refused to recognize the results of any matches played by clubs from Crimea in competitions organized by the Russian Football Union.
Colonel Yuliy Mamchur became a symbol of stoutness and fidelity to duty of Ukrainian armed forces during the Crimean crisis.
Since March 4, 2014 he has refused to abandon his post in Belbek, Crimea amidst the Crimean crisis while surrounded and outnumbered by pro-Russian forces.
Crimean separatists then cut the brakes in the family car, death threats he has received and in Sevastopol posters had been put up demanding his execution for treachery.
On March 23, Mamchur’s base Belbek was overrun by Russian regular troops, being the last Ukrainian base to fall.
Mamchur was verbally abused by Russian armed forces, pro-Russian militia and cossacks, but he refused to be provoked, and ordered his men to resist non-violently and sing the Ukrainian national anthem.
Mamchur was elected to the Ukrainian parliament after being in the top 10 of the electoral list of Petro Poroshenko Bloc.
Sentsov was born in 1976 in Simferopol, Ukraine, and took courses in film directing and screenwriting in Moscow.
Its success in this and other festivals helped secure him funding for a forthcoming feature “Rhino,” the production of which was postponed by his work with the Euromaidan movement.
After the November 2013 breakout of the Euromaidan protests, Sentsov became an activist of AutoMaidan and during the following 2014 Crimean crisis helped deliver food and supplies to Ukrainian servicemen blockaded at their Crimean bases.
After holding them without charges for three weeks, the four Ukrainians were accused of being “part of a terrorist community,” meaning membership in Ukraine’s nationalist paramilitary group, Right Sector – a claim that both Sentsov and Right Sector deny.
Since 19 May 2014, Sentsov is being detained in Moscow’s Lefortovo prison.
He has never accepted Russian citizenship, but is considered to be a Russian citizen, under the new Russian laws.
His case is an example not only of repressions, but of the impossibility remain Ukrainian in Crimea in practice.
Together with a part of Ukrainian territory Russia illegally captured two million Ukrainians in Crimea.
Many Russian and European directors like Agnieszka Holland, Ken Loach, Mike Leigh, and Pedro Almodóvar have appealed to Vladimir Putin calling for Sentsov’s release, without any success.
Ukrainian authorities are being prevented by their Russian counterparts to contact or help Sentsov and other activists.
The EU and United States have condemned their detention and have called for their release.
Ethnic Crimean Tatar Reshat Amedov was the first civilian victim of the Crimean crisis.
On 3 March 2014 Reshat took part at the peaceful protest against the occupation of Crimea by Russian troops.
During his protest in front of the Crimean Council of Ministers building on Simferopol’s Lenin Square, he was abducted by three unidentified men in military uniform from the so-called “Crimean self-defense detachments” who led him to an unknown destination.
On 15 March 2014 Reshat’s body has been found by police in a forest near the village Zemlyanychne about 60 kilometers to the east of Simferopol.
The body was bearing clear marks of violence and torture, with his head bound with tape and his legs shackled.
Reshat was buried on 18 March 2014 in the Abdali Muslim Cemetery of Simferopol.
Reshat Ametov’s death was the first one of numerous murders, arrests and repressions against pro-Ukrainian activists in occupied Crimea.
Repressions against Crimean Tatars and pro-Ukrainian activists are still going on, which recently was a topic for a discussion at the 28th regular session of the UN Human Rights Council.
Mustafa Dzhemilev is former Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People and a member of the Ukrainian Parliament since 1998.
He is a recognized leader of the Crimean Tatar National Movement and a former Soviet dissident.
At 18, Dzhemilev and several of his activist friends established the Union of Young Crimean Tatars, beginning the long struggle for the recognition of the rights of Crimean Tatars to return to their homeland.
Dzhemilev was arrested 6 times for anti-Soviet activities and served time in Soviet prisons and labor camps.
In May 1989, he was elected to head the newly founded Crimean Tatar National Movement.
The same year he returned to Crimea with his family, a move that would be followed by the eventual return of 250,000 Tatars to their homeland.
After the Euromaidan revolution Mustafa Dzhemilev was an active supporter of the new Ukrainian government, leading numerous peaceful pro-Ukrainian actions in Crimea.
He denounced Russia’s Crimean “referendum” as illegal and claimed that the results were manipulated by Russia.
In April 2014, at the border between mainland Ukraine and Crimea, Dzhemilev was handed an unsigned typewritten document stating that he is banned by federal law from entering Russian territory for five years.
He is a Member of Ukrainian Parliament and a Representative of the President of Ukraine for the Crimean Tatars.
The figure of Mustafa Dzhemilev demonstrates the tragic fate of Crimean Tatars who, just 25 years after returning to their motherland, now often are forced to leave the peninsula.
As for today there are more than 20000 forced migrants from Crimea to continental Ukraine.
In May 2014 Russian occupation authorities banned any mourning events in Crimea on the 70th anniversary of the deportation of Crimean Tatars from the peninsula by Stalin.
In January 2015 Crimean occupation authorities erected a Stalin monument in Yalta.
Nataliya Poklonskaya is the “Prosecutor General” of the self-proclaimed Republic of Crimea.
She was born and grew up in Ukraine, got Ukrainian secondary and higher education, made a brilliant career at the Ukrainian public prosecution service, took an oath to the people of Ukraine, and even publicly wore Ukrainian national costumes, as shown on the picture.
Poklonskaya created a great picture for the Russian occupation authorities, which should show the involvement of Crimeans into the governance of the peninsula.
All key positions are held by newcomers who have just recently arrived from Russia.
For example, only one of four “Deputy General Prosecutors” at Poklonskaya’s office is from Crimea.
There is proof that in the mid 1990s Aksyonov was a member of the Crimean organized criminal gang Salem with the nickname Goblin and was involved in numerous cases of racket, arms and drugs trafficking, contract murders etc.
Later some members of Salem had taken offices as local deputies and got legislative immunity.
After sealing the doors and confiscating all mobile phones, the MPs who had been invited by Aksyonov to enter the building , elected Aksyonov as “Prime Minister” by 55 votes of 64.
Various media accounts have disputed whether he was able to gather a quorum of 50 of his peers before the session convened that day.
Some Crimean MPs who were registered as present have said they did not come near the building.
Others denied being even in the city, claiming that duplicate voting cards stolen from parliament safe were used in their name.
Opposition deputies have avoided speaking out publicly out of fear of reprisal, and due to threats received.
Crimean legal Prime Minister Anatolii Mohyliov was barred from attending the session.
Sergey Aksyonov exemplifies the criminal and unmoral character of today’s regime in Crimea, as he is just the tip of the criminal iceberg of the new self-proclaimed “government” of the self-proclaimed “republic” of Crimea.
Refat Chubarov is the Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People, Ukrainian politician and public figure.
He has never accepted Russian occupation of Crimea, calling the Crimea “referendum” a circus and a tragedy, illegitimate government with armed forces from another country.
On February 26, 2014 during the massive pro-Ukrainian demonstration in Simferopol he managed to avoid violence by calming down Crimean Tatars.
Mainly due to his efforts, Crimean crisis went on without many casualties.
Russian occupation authorities are proud of that but in reality it was not their achievement at all.
Nevertheless, it didn’t prevent Russian occupation authorities to ban Refat Chubarov from entering Crimea in July 2014.
In September 2014, Mejlis was forced to leave its office in Simferopol which had been the headquarters of the Organization for the last 15 years.
Liza Bogutskaya is a freelance designer and blogger from Simferopol who became famous for her active pro-Ukrainian position during and after the Crimean crisis.
She was publicly wearing Ukrainian national costumes, decorated her car with Ukrainian symbols and wrote in her blog about the absurdity of the decisions of the Russian occupation authorities in Crimea.
On September 8, 2014 Russian Federal Security Service arranged a house-check and interrogation of Liza Bogutskaya which lasted 6 hours.
She is going to come back to Simferopol after Crimea becomes Ukrainian again. young Ukrainian activists were arrested for laying flowers in front of the Taras Shevchenko monument.
Businessmen, students, ITand finance specialists, artists are moving to the continental Ukraine from the total lawlessness of the regime of Russian occupation authorities.
He is also under arrest as a Russian citizen although he never applied for Russian citizenship and has always been Ukrainian.
On January 29, 2015 a Crimean court officially refused to accept Kolchenko’s Ukrainian citizenship.
The case of Alexander Kolchenko is not only an example of hard repressions and the new law of serfdom in Crimea.
It demonstrates Russian occupation authorities’ paranoic fear of the “Right sector” movement, which never was active in Crimea.
Due to the lack of real “Right sector” activists Russian occupation authorities arrest such people as film director Sentsov or even anti-fascist Kolchenko accusing them of being right-wing radicals in order to intimidate local Crimeans and at the same time neuthralize peaceful pro-Ukrainian activists.
In February 2015 Russian occupation authorities reported that a “Right sector” arms cache was found in Crimea.
Now further repressions and arrests of innocent people as anti-fascist Kolchenko or film director Sentsov should be expected.
Like most of Crimean Tatar people, Jamala was born in Central Asia where her ancestors have been forcefully resettled to.
During the Crimean crisis Jamala clearly declined to accept the annexation of Crimea by Russia.
She participated in numerous fundraising projects for internally displaced persons from Crimea and Donbas.
Almost all Crimean stars, such as Jamala, Zlata Ognevich, Maria Yefrosinina, condemned the occupation of Crimea by Russia.
The peninsula used to host world famous music festivals “KaZantip” and “Koktebel Jazz festival” as well as many other global cultural events.
Today Crimeans can only enjoy the performances of Russian military orchestras.
Obviously, these were not only political reasons which made music stars to leave Crimea and to condemn its Russian occupation.
