Using the theoretical approach developed by Joseph Nye, this article seeks to examine Russian Orthodox Church as a soft power tool of Kremlin along with discussing conservative ideology in Russia itself.
In addition, the consequences of autocephaly for Russia and ROC are analyzed.
The article argues that annexation of Crimea by Russia and the war in Eastern Ukraine facilitated nationalistic mobilization in the country that resulted in the election of an anti-Russian candidate Poroshenko.
Poroshenko was the one who promoted establishment of an independent Church despite his political interests.
The article also argues that tomos seriously undermines the stability of the Russian World, erected by means of the educational and cultural institutions and deteriorates the position of ROC in Ukraine.
The method of content-analysis is used to examine legislation, official speeches on religious issues in Russia and Ukraine, statements of the Churches’ representatives, as well as media coverage of the issue in both countries.
RUSYA UKRAYNA’DAKİ YUMUŞAK GÜÇ ARACINI NASIL KAYBEDİYOR Öz Bağımsız Ukrayna Ortodoks Kilisesi’nin 2018 yılı sonunda kurulması, Kilise’nin Rusya ve Ukrayna’nın iç ve dış politikalarındaki rolü hakkındaki tartışmaların önünü açmıştır.
Bu makale, Joseph Nye tarafından geliştirilen kuramsal yaklaşımı kullanarak Rus Ortodoks Kilisesi'ni Kremlin'in yumuşak güç aracı olarak incelemeyi ve Rusya'da muhafazakâr ideolojiyi tartışmayı amaçlamaktadır.
Ayrıca, otosefalinin Rusya ve ROK için doğuracağı sonuçlar analiz edilmiştir.
Makale, Rusya’nın Kırım’ı ilhakı ve Doğu Ukrayna’daki savaşın milli seferberliği kolaylaştırdığını ve bunun sonucunda 2014’te Rus karşıtı bir aday olan Poroşenko’nun seçildiğini savunmaktadır.
Poroşenko, her ne kadar siyasi çıkarları için de olsa bağımsız Kilise’nin kurulmasını teşvik eden kişidir.
Makale ayrıca, tomosun eğitim ve kültür kurumları tarafından tesis edilen Rus Dünyası istikrarını ciddi şekilde sarstığını ve ROK'un Ukrayna'daki konumunu kötüleştirdiğini savunmaktadır.
Makale, mevzuatı, Rusya ve Ukrayna'daki dini meselelerle ilgili resmi açıklamaları, kiliselerin temsilcilerinin beyanlarını ve konunun her iki ülke medyasında nasıl yer aldığını analiz etmektedir.
Introduction For Russia Ukraine relations, the year 2018 was marked with the escalation of tensions.
The first crisis stemmed from the decision of Constantinople Patriarch to grant * Asst.
This conflict resulted in Russia's break-up with the Constantinople Patriarchate in October.
The second crisis was the incident concerning the seizure of the Ukrainian ships in the waters of the Kerch Strait illegally controlled by Russia following the annexation of Crimea in 2014.
This article aims to discuss, first of all, the role of the Russian Orthodox Church in Russia’s domestic affairs, its institutions abroad as well as Kremlin's use of ROC as soft power leverage.
Secondly, the article seeks to examine the meaning of the Ukrainian Church’s autocephaly for Russia.
It is argued in this paper that ROC is a tool of Russian soft power along with the Russian-speakers abroad.
Loss of Ukrainian laity and attractiveness is a logical outcome of the Russian aggression.
Seeking for the second presidential term, anti-Russian president Petro Poroshenko used mobilization and anti-Russian mood of Ukrainians to promote new Church.
The author also argues that the autocephaly undermines the Russian World established in the post-Soviet space through the institutions of education and culture.
Under the newly adopted legislation on Church in Ukraine, ROC appears to be a victim of Kremlin’s policies since it loses the communities as well as properties in Ukraine.
Finally, for Ukrainian president Poroshenko, establishment of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine was an effort to secure his victory in 2019 electoral campaign.
However, the election of Vladimir Zelensky creates the situation of uncertainty for Kremlin.
For the analysis of ROC, author embraces the soft power theory of Joseph Nye as a framework.
Author uses method of content-analysis to analyze official documents of the Russian Federation and Ukraine related to Church, speeches of the leadership, and statements of the clergy.
Additionally, content-analysis of the media content related to Orthodoxy is utilized.
Although this article covers the period between 2008 and 2019, the particular focus is on the post-annexation policies since the sanctions imposed on Russia determined the need for more active use of the soft power tools.
The article starts with the introduction of the soft power theory and review of the literature on the Russian Orthodox Church.
It proceeds with the discussion of the conservative ideology in Russia, particularly the role of Church in its establishment and development.
The discussion of the soft power of ROC is followed by the analysis of the Orthodoxy in Ukraine and its lust for an independent Church.
Russia uses her soft power tools in the post-Soviet republics and in the countries of the West.
On the other hand, as this article shows, the soft power of Russia includes Russian language and Orthodox Christianity that secure the support from abroad.
Besides, Fiona Hill argues that the soft power of Russia goes far beyond the energy, but includes culture, consumer goods and job opportunities.
He is trying to compare Russia to the United States and accuses Putin who knows nothing about soft power and fails to attract rather than coerce.
At the same time, he stresses that grassroots soft power should be preferred to the state-led soft power.
Comparison itself does not seem correct if the only standard is the Western liberal model.
Criticizing propaganda in China and Russia, Nye fails to take into consideration the securitization rhetoric as to terrorism and extremism in the United States in early 2000s, for instance.
Comparative analysis of China and Russia by Jeanne L Wilson shows that the soft power of Russia is an attempt to impede and weaken the Western discourses on democratization, in this way it is a response to the new challenges.
Both states are preoccupied with the establishment of the soft power that will express their national identity that is 'enlightened conservatism' in case of Russia.
In comparison with China, Russia's budget allocated for the soft power is limited, while its programs are regional.
More detailed analysis of ROC as a soft power tool and its role in Russian foreign policies is accomplished in the empirical studies presented below.
The literature on contemporary Russian Orthodoxy in political space is represented by three broad approaches.
Finally, sociological analysis of the laity and attitudes of the citizens towards religion and Church constitute the third group of the works on the topic.
It is anti-global and critical as to contemporary Russian society and reforms.
Mihajlov , in his turn, stands against the general idea that the Orthodox Church is homogenous.
According to him, there are different groups in it, represented by, first of all, conservative and modernist wings.
Papkova argues that the position of ROC in Russian politics had changed since 1991.
Kathy Rousselet examined the Christianity in Russia as the soil for the daily patriotism of Russians noting that the Church and believers are in the service of the country.
Her analysis of the Church publications, interviews with priests and laity accompanied by the observation of religious events allows her to conclude that the Church and laity are in the state of combat.
In the foreign policies, ROC is acting to support a construct defined as a Russian World by Patriarch Kirill.
Blitt discusses the role of ROC in the foreign policy distinguishing between ideological and practical components of it.
As a basis of the Christian civilization, Suslov says, it has an appeal to Messianism and fundamentalism and proposes criticism of the existing social order along with the revolutionary instruments for its change.
However, it is hard to agree with the author on the fact of rejection of the rational dialogue with the secular power by ROC as well as on the idea of the proposed radical changes.
Fundamentalism is not also a very pragmatic position as soon as Russians are not familiar with the dogmas of the Church, and Russia is still a secular state.
It is actually the basis for the idea of the Moscow – Third Rome and the Russian World, where Russia is seen as a leader or messiah.
The Orthodox Church is an instrument of Kremlin, therefore, ideologically and rationally accepts the existing authority.
CONSERVATIVE IDEOLOGY AND ROLE OF CHURCH IN RUSSIA When Vladimir Putin occupied the post of the President for the first time, his primary task was to restore sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.
However, curbing of the Chechen extremism, re-election and, particularly, the rise of the oil prices in the end of 2000s allowed him not only to promote new nationalist policies but to introduce new conservative ideology.
This ‘practical’ or populist ideology is based on respect to the statehood, authority, order, traditions and Orthodox Christianity.
At the same time, the religiosity of Russians is superficial, not supported by knowledge of the holy texts and dogmas.
How Russia is Losing its Soft Power Tool in Ukraine Instead, the cultural rituals are in priority.
It can be explained by the lack of professional clergy and theology academicians during the Soviet years accompanied by the weak institutions of the Church.
Russian constitution declares the separation of state from Church but this article seeks to show how Putin deliberately used the Orthodox Church, especially following the opposition rallies of 2011 – 2012.
Abroad, following the Ukrainian crisis Russia feels the need to use the Orthodoxy as a unifying factor for the Russian World and as a tool to cushion position of the West and decrease the isolation of Russia.
He called for the greater role of the ROC in promotion of the institution of family, in education and in provision of social care for the insecure Russian citizens.
For instance, an elective course titled “Basics of the Religious Cultures and Secular Ethics” has been introduced into the syllabi.
The role of the ROC in social politics and family issues can be seen through the prism of its attempts to criminalize abortions.
Although position of the government is to keep the procedure legal, the representatives of ROC believe they can at least achieve the exclusion of the abortions from the social security system.
In February 2017, activists of ROC prepared a document that provided a list of the social indications for abortion in the context of compulsory health insurance for up to the 12th week.
However, Ministry of Health, was in no hurry to agree with the position of the Church on this issue.
Its activists, for instance, are founders and volunteers of the organizations providing support and consultancy for women.
In 1991, Patriarch Alexiy II blessed the creation of the Holy Dimitriy sisterhood, the community of the sisters of mercy.
The traditional family values are represented in ROC's position on homosexuality.
According to Mihajlov, who analyzed different streams within ROC, the position of the Church on the issue is not homogeneous.
Along with the attempts to safeguard traditional Russian values, ROC is also active in securing the 'official' version of history.
In this regard, 2017 movie Matilda, presenting the love story of the last Emperor Nicholas II and ballet dancer Matilda Kshesinka was criticized by the representatives of the Church.
In 1981, Tsar Nicholas II as well as his wife and five children assassinated by the Bolsheviks were canonized as martyrs.
Therefore, the story of an affair between the Saint Tsar and catholic ballet dancer undermines the authority and innocence of the Church, while questioning the significance of Romanovs' contribution to the Orthodoxy, as it was proclaimed.
Nicholas II is known as the Emperor who facilitated the canonization of some activists of ROC, including Serafim Sarovsky, donated significant amount of money for the construction of churches and monasteries, focused on educating Muslims in the Russian Empire.
Film's producer Andrey Uchitel was accused of manipulating history , insulting religious feelings of Russians (""Delo «Matil'dy»"", 2017) and undermining family values , among others.
Although representatives of the Moscow Patriarchate spoke against the film, they abstained from the demands to ban it, suggesting that the ban would only raise the popularity of the movie.
In accordance with the law, by 2018, approximately one thousand buildings were transferred to the Russian Orthodox Church.
Thus, about 80% of the remaining religious monuments nationalized during the Soviet period remain the state property.
Property transfer is carried out exclusively by the Federal Agency for State Property Management.
If the object is a historical and cultural monument the consent of the Ministry of Culture should be obtained.
Nevertheless, 2010 Law provoked negative responses of the different groups within the Russian society, including Communists and Ministry of Culture.
In its turn, as it is stated in the Fundamentals of the Social Concept of the Russian Orthodox Church , ROC demonstrates its loyalty to Kremlin.
Thus, in 2012, when a punk band Pussy Riot used the Cathedral of Christ the Savior in Moscow for their live performance that criticized Church and Putin, five members of the band were sentenced to 2 years in colony.
Between 1997 and 2013, insulting religious feelings was an administrative offense.
Despite the significant role of ROC in Russia, one should not overestimate the influence of the Church on politics in Russia.
The firm position of the government as to the abortions shows the limits in the influence of the Church on the Russian leadership.
At the same time, the bigger part of the property remains a property of the state that prevents ROC from the financial growth.
Petersburg the transfer of which from the ministry of culture to ROC is still unclear.
Since 1928 the cathedral is one of the biggest museums of Russia and attracts significant number of tourists.
The transfer of it to ROC may result in closure of it for the tourists and loss of the museum.
As to the position of people towards Church and its role in the politics, Russians, in general, support the role of the Church in the society.
Thus, according to Levada Center surveys, more than 56% of Russians approve the size of impact of ROC on politics.
However, the share of those who stands against the intrusion of Church into the public affairs is steadily growing from 11% in 2013 to 15% in 2015.
At the same time, Russians positively evaluate the contribution of the religious institutions in promoting moral values and educating the youth.
In the foreign affairs, Russian Orthodox Church aims at serving the goals of Kremlin that is the control over the area of primary importance,e. the former Soviet republics, and softening the Western countries’ position towards Russia.
Putin managed to plait the religious ingredient of the Russian ideology into the foreign policy, along with the emphasis on the Russian-speakers abroad.
These two are the constituting columns of the Russkiy Mir , its spiritual and cultural content (Russkiy Mir, 2009) that together with the Eurasian economic cooperation projects oppose the Western liberalism and unilateralism.
If the latter deals with the political and economic institutions, the former seeks to facilitate cooperation in the cultural and spiritual spheres under the guidance of Moscow.
So it covers the post-Soviet space including the Baltic countries, except the Caucasus and even has institution in the Western Hemisphere.
The working group meets annually to discuss the most important issues of the Russian foreign policy and international relations.
Establishment of the relations with the ROCOR headquartered in the Western Hemisphere, the US, means not only the status of the autonomous unit of the ROCOR within ROC but a tool of influence on the Russians living in traditional Catholic and Protestant countries.
Putin was positioned as a unifier of the churches that reinforce his image in the eyes of the Russians.
That is why following the announcement of tomos2, ROCOR released a statement about the break-up of the relations with Fener.
Hilarion, Metropolitan of Volokolamsk and Chairman of the Department for External Church Relations of the Moscow Patriarchate, is the member of the Board of Directors.
The Russkiy Mir foundation focuses on youth exchanges and promotion of academic ties with Western universities.
The place and role of the Orthodoxy in the foreign policies of Kremlin were evaluated by the Russian leadership repeatedly.
With the clear references to the works of Aleksandr Dugin on Eurasian civilizations, during 2013 conference of the Valdai Discussion Club, Putin elaborated on complexity of the Russian civilization-state and underlined the role of the Orthodoxy in it.
Military, technological and economic strength of the state stems from the moral and spiritual strength of the society, he said mentioning the priority of spirituality before the materialistic issues.
During the same discussion, Russian President referred to the civilization based on the Orthodox religion, while mentioning the multicultural nature of Russia.
Bringing spiritual and moral component to realpolitik is a very pragmatic step of justification of numerous acts of aggression.
One should remember that the Kievan Rus' Prince Vladimir was baptized in Crimean city of Khersones near Sevastopol.
The adoption of Crimea and Sevastopol into the RF was not only a strategic and 2 Important decision in the Orthodox Church.
How Russia is Losing its Soft Power Tool in Ukraine security act but a spiritual move that raise the importance of Russia in establishing leadership in the Orthodox world.
Not deprived of some mystic content, Putin’s speech, among others, characterized Prince Vladimir as a warrior that probably had a goal of justifying Russian policies in Georgia, Ukraine and Syria.
ROC not only approves but also actively contributes to the Kremlin’s policies.
Patriarch Kirill attends the headquarters of the Russian army on different occasions (Russkaja Pravoslavnaja Tserkov', 2019c) and gives motivating speeches to the soldiers as well as diplomacy students giving a message that both, hard and soft powers of Russia are backed by the Church.
Russian Orthodox Church enjoys active support in the post-Soviet states.
During the religious crisis over the decision of Constantinople to grant autocephaly, the Belarusian Orthodox Church called on the Patriarch of Constantinople Bartholomew to 'rethink' the process of granting tomos to Ukraine.
During the Ukrainian crisis of 2013 2014, position of ROC and its affiliate in Ukraine, Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Moscow Patriarchate , was modest.
The UOC MP criticized the Euro-Maidan and the Kyiv Patriarch for his support of the mass rallies in Kyiv and biggest cities of Ukraine.
The leaders of the UOC MP even announced their acceptance of Crimea as a part of Ukraine.
Moscow Patriarch was also afraid of losing Ukrainian laity and abstained from active engagement into the conflict.
The representatives of the Church did not attend the ceremony of signing agreement between Crimea and Moscow in March 2018.
In fact, the Ukrainian Orthodox Church in Crimea reregistered itself in accordance with the Russian legislation.
Following the autocephaly, anti-Ukrainian stance of the Crimean leadership became even stronger and led to the cleansings against the Ukrainian priests.
However, Russian Orthodox Church is active not only in the neighboring countries.
In Europe and the US, the main goal of the Russian soft power is to cushion position of the Western countries and decrease Russia’s isolation by means of the educational and cultural institutions.
This function of the Church has been particularly important after the annexation of Crimea.
As Marlene Laruelle admits, French Russian bilateral relations are quite strong, including cultural relations because of the Russian diaspora in France.
Besides, she points out the strong position of the Orthodoxy in France that can be used by Putin in his relations with Macron who is not as Russiafriendly as Sarkozy.
No less important is the proximity of ROC to Papacy in the process of softening of the West.
Thus, on 12 February 2016, during his visit to Latin American countries, Patriarch Kirill met with the Pope Francis on Cuba.
For Russian side that initiated the meeting, it was a chance to demonstrate that Russia is not isolated from the West.
Pope Francis is sympathetic to Kirill because of his Argentinean origin and young years spent in an authoritarian state.
However, the relations between the Holy See and Moscow have not always been void of tensions.
The main problems were the Catholic proselytism in Russia and other CIS countries, as well as the conflict of the Orthodox and Greek Catholics in the Western Ukraine.
New escalation of the conflict between the two confessions occurred in 2002.
Its main reason was the decision of the Pope John Paul II to raise the status of the administrative structures of the Roman Catholic Church in Russia to the level of dioceses.
The unfriendly to Russia demarche caused a corresponding reaction of the state, the church and the public.
A statement was made by Alexiy II and the Holy Synod, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the State Duma of the Russian Federation, a number of influential public organizations, politicians, public and religious figures.
The position of the Orthodox Church was supported by representatives of other religions for Russia.
During the 2016 Latin America tour, Kirill I also visited Paraguay and Brazil, followed by the Antarctica Waterloo Island's visit where he prayed for humankind.
Also, in October 2016, Kirill met Her Majesty Elizabeth II as a part of his journey of commemoration of the 300th anniversary of Christianity on British Islands.
British monarchy positively reviews the development of the conservative values in Russia.
Although ROC has been very active in the foreign affairs it could not impede the anti-Russian mood growing in the closest neighbor.
The nationalistic mobilization determined the negative outcome for Russian religious institutions in Ukraine.
However, this process has historical roots as well as affected by the pragmatic aspirations of the Ukrainian president.
The Orthodox Kyiv Metropolis was transferred to the Moscow Patriarchate through a charter issued by the Ecumenical Patriarch Dionysius and his synod in June 1686.
Prince Gideon Chetvertinsky was the first Kiev Metropolitan of the Moscow Patriarchate.
In 1688, his title was changed to Metropolitan of Kyiv, Galician and Malorossiya3.
From the beginning of the 18th century, Little Russian eparchies were directly subordinated to the Russian Synod; Kiev metropolitans became ordinary diocesan bishops, who nevertheless had the title of Metropolitan.
After 1991, Orthodoxy in Ukraine has been represented by three institutions.
The first one is the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Moscow Patriarchate, a self-governing body within the Russian Orthodox Church that operated in Ukraine, including the Crimea.
The second one is the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Kyiv Patriarchate , institution self-proclaimed in 1992 acting under the jurisdiction of Constantinople Patriarchate.
The third one is the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church , a non-canonical church established in 1917 following the October Revolution and that accounts for 0.4% of the Orthodox of Ukraine.
Some measures for gaining autocephaly by the Ukrainian Orthodox Church were undertaken during the presidency of Viktor Yushchenko that came to office as a result of the Orange Revolution.
Orange Revolution itself was a significant contribution to the mobilization process in Ukraine and became an impetus for changes in national policies in Ukraine.
However, the efforts of Yushchenko regarding Orthodoxy in Ukraine appeared to be ineffective.
In 2005, he initiated a dialogue between UOC KP and Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church that failed.
One of the main omissions of the Ukrainian president was the identification of the Church unification idea with himself and Orange Revolution, therefore it had a short-term nature.
The appointment of his elder brother Petro Yushchenko as a chairman of the organization For Manorial Ukraine that stood behind all actions of the UOC KP was very promising.
But the organization did nothing to facilitate the independence of the Ukrainian Church.
Petro Poroshenko, former president of Ukraine, facilitated the process.
This provoked a conflict between Ukrainian church and ROC that reached its culmination in late 2018.
The formation of the separate church was an important step insofar as starting from the 17th century, Ukrainian Church was controlled by the Russian Empire.
In the 19th and 20th centuries when Ukraine was divided between Austro-Hungarian Empire and Russia the differences in the nature of Orthodoxy in two different parts of Ukraine started to form.
Besides, civil society was more active and developed in the Western Ukraine that defined the nature of political activism in these regions even in the independence period.
However, it is also important to understand that the establishment of the independent Ukrainian Church was the result of Russia’s invasion into Ukraine in 2014 and nationalistic mobilization of the Ukrainians.
Russia’s imperialist policies determined the outcome of the 2014 presidential election, first of all.
Poroshenko stood for closer relations with NATO and the EU, strong army, diversification of the energy supplies and return of Crimea.
Among his main achievements were the visa-free travel to Schengen countries, stronger army and amendments to the Constitution proclaiming Ukraine’s pro-Western course.
Nevertheless, corruption, high inflation rates, longlasting war in Eastern Ukraine and huge emigration were the obvious impediments for the second presidential terms.
The only trump card could be gaining more independence from Russia and laying down the basis for new pro-European Ukrainian identity consequently he chose to promote independent Church.
The support of Poroshenko in Ukraine shortly before the election was low.
For Kremlin, Poroshenko appeared to be a very convenient figure due to his nationalist anti-Russian stance that allowed Russian policy-makers to develop discourse on ‘illegal revolution’ and ‘Nazi regime’ in Ukraine.
Under such conditions, Ukraine and Russia have been mutually constituting countries.
Newly elected president Zelensky may not be that radical so would complicate Russia’s propaganda on the issue.
Additionally, Zelensky has been ironic on the issue of the independent Church comparing tomos to thermos in his speeches.
Apart from recognizing tomos as a victory, Zelensky avoids discussions on religious issues that makes him difficult to predict.
He will definitely pay less attention to the issues of Church since parliamentary election and formation of pro-president majority will be the most important tasks of the president in the near future.
Besides, Zelensky seems to be modern and pro-European young man in comparison with Poroshenko therefore he will probably diminish the role of Church in the politics.
Establishment of an independent Church, although it has been accomplished with the pragmatic goal, is still an important stage of the self-determination for Ukraine.
But it is no less important for Russia considering the threat to the Russian World and growing isolation of the country.
Besides, Russian Church itself, and more importantly, its Ukrainian affiliate, appears to be a victim of Kremlin’s policies.
For Russia, tomos, first of all, means the failure to play a leading role in the restoration of the 'Holy Rome' by means of the Moscow Patriarchate.
Since 1453 when Constantinople was seized by the Ottomans, the competition between Moscow and Constantinople for leadership in the Orthodox world has been going on.
Independence of the UOC is a failure of Russia to secure succession of the Byzantium heritage and its inability to secure moral rebirth of the Orthodox Christians.
At the same time, Russia has understood its deficiency in the spread of moral and cultural values over the closest neighbor and another biggest Eastern Slavic country, Ukraine.
Before, Russia's decisiveness to protect Russians abroad was based only on the factor of language.
But the threat to Russophones in the near abroad provoked invasion into Georgia and Ukraine.
Ukrainian Church is not the first religious institution that has achieved independence from Moscow.
In 1996, Estonian Autonomous Orthodox Church was established upon the decision of Constantinople as the exiled Orthodox clergy had come back to the country.
But the patriarchs managed to settle down the conflict through the lease agreement over the properties.
Unlike in case of Estonia, in Ukraine, Orthodoxy is dominating religion and its independence is much more significant.
Tomos emphasized and increased the level of Russia’s isolation, political, economic and now spiritual.
Eurasian civilization theorized and designed by Dugin and constructed through the EurAsEc and Customs Union as well as Russkiy Mir as a contrast to Western liberalism and unilateralism is now falling apart.
After the annexation of Crimea, Russia is losing Ukraine not only politically and economically.
In 2017, Ukraine passed a law that banned teaching in languages other than Ukrainian beyond the primary school level.
The Ukrainian nationalistic euphoria can be traced in mass culture and everyday life.
Establishing its own religious institution with the support of the Constantinople Patriarchate is a step that followed rally-round-the-flag.
On the other hand, Belarus is willing to use this historical chance in order to get more through the bargains.
Annexation of Belarus, would create a serious threat to the Northern border of Ukraine.
And this exceeds the framework of the soft power proving the fact that Russia prefers to reinforce the former with the tanks.
Under these conditions, ROC should not be treated as an institution identical to the Russian government.
As it was shown in the previous parts of this article, ROC is used by government wisely and deliberately, but they both have their own interests.
Thus, in this crisis, Moscow Patriarchate not only loses the believers from Ukraine, but also breaks the relations with Constantinople that increases isolation of Russia.
ROC MP has already been losing its adherents because of the war in Eastern Ukraine.
Moscow Patriarchate, very popular during the Presidency of pro-Russian Viktor Yanukovych, loses supporters in the aftermath of Russia’s invasion.
New Church is very much pro-European that will become a basis for a new identity of the Ukrainians.
ROC is no longer attractive for the Ukrainians since instead of moral values it supports the ‘aggressor state’ and gives motivation to its army (Russkaja Pravoslavnaja Tserkov', 2019a) fighting in Donbass and Syria.
ROC itself, and first of all its affiliate in Ukraine, is a victim of the aggressive Russian policies.
Thus, on December 20, Ukrainian parliament voted for the law that obliges the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate possessing the status of a self-governing part of the Russian Orthodox Church, to change its name.
In this way, the location of the religious center on the territory of the ‘aggressor state’ would be clearly represented in the title.
Such decision provoked negative response of the UOC MP since they consider their Church to be independent from Moscow but connected spiritually.
The protests of the believers proved the reluctance of the Russian Church to deal with the consequences of the Kremlin’s policies in Ukraine.
How Russia is Losing its Soft Power Tool in Ukraine law on religious communities.
A number of monasteries and churches which were either leased to UOC MP by the government or belonged to it, are to be transferred to Constantinople upon the decision of Poroshenko.
Such transfer was a condition of the agreement between Poroshenko and Bartholomew.
One of them is the monastery in Mezhigor’ye, the residence of the former president Yanukovych.
The official list of the buildings has not been published though and bears the declarative character.
Additionally, new President Zelensky may not be as radical as his predecessor on the issue of property.
As to the reaction of Kremlin, Russia did not leave the decision of the Constantinople Patriarch without response.
Immediately following the announcement of tomos, Russia broke up relations with Patriarch of Constantinople announcing that Russian believers can no longer pray at Mount Athos.
Besides, the incident in the Kerch Strait occurred when the crews of the Ukrainian boats were arrested and accused of violating Russia’s territorial waters.
Additionally, recently Russia stopped supplies of coal, crude oil and oil products to Ukraine in April.
As to the Catholic Church, Vatican preferred to stay neutral during the conflict.
At the same time, the establishment of the relations with the Moscow Patriarchate had taken time and effort, so Vatican did not want to provoke a conflict with Moscow.
Through these narratives Russia is trying to impose the responsibility for the schism in the Orthodox world on the ‘Nazi regime’ of Poroshenko, accuse him of manipulating the religious issues and undermine the legality of Constantinople’s decision.
As it was mentioned above, Zelensky most probably will not be a suitable figure for such manipulations and totally new image of Ukraine would be worked out by Kremlin for the sake of propaganda.
To sum up, Russia loses its soft power over Ukraine since its institutions and values are no longer attractive.
Church, instead of dealing with spiritual and moral values, has sunk deeply in politics and conflicts.
Soft power here is rather a zero-sum that contradicts to Nye’s definition of it.
For Kremlin, only one ideology can exist in Ukraine, so it should be Kremlin’s ideology.
The analysis of the Church proves that it bears state-led character and has a propaganda goal, rather than desire to attract people.
Although the clergy abstains from the direct involvement into the conflicts, like one can see in the case of Crimea, the speeches of churchmen and media narratives of Kremlin show that Church is a tool of the government.
Moscow, for centuries, has been using religion for the sake of political decisions.
The activation of the role of ROC can be seen during Medvedev's presidency due to the change of the Patriarch and necessity to establish a dialogue with the people.
The standoff of ROC is populist, since it acts in different spheres, including political and economic, but lacks professional cadres and educated laity.
As to the foreign policy, ROC is dealing not only with spiritual matters, but education, culture, politics.
Church exceeds the borders of the former USSR, especially following the imposition of sanctions against Russia.
Therefore, ROC cannot be treated as a regional soft power, despite the discussion of Wilson about its regional character.
Also, Russia faced the need to move beyond the Soviet Union’s practices of the sport or youth events and appeal rather to traditional conservative values of family, social responsibility, respect for authority.
Discourse of the Church contains mystical and utopian component, as Suslov notes, and differs by Messianism pragmatically used by Kremlin as a smokescreen.
Annexation of Crimea by Russia and the war in Eastern Ukraine facilitated nationalistic mobilization in Ukraine that resulted in the election of an anti-Russian candidate Poroshenko in 2014.
Poroshenko was the one who promoted establishment of the independent Church although for his political interests.
The article also proved that tomos seriously undermined the stability of the Russian World, erected by means of the educational and cultural institutions and deteriorated the position of ROC in Ukraine.
The Growing Influence of the Russian Orthodox Church in Shaping Russia's Policies Abroad.
Problemy I Perspektivy Razvitija Religioznogo Turizma V Regionah Juga Zapadnoj Sibiri.
Russian Orthodox Christians and their orientation toward Church and state.
Structural problems and contradictory relations with the Government, 2000–2008.
Beijing and Moscow are trying their hands at attraction, and failing—miserably.
Zakon ob ugolovnoj otvetstvennosti za oskorblenie religioznyh chuvstv verujushhih.
Svjashhennyj Sinod Russkoj Pravoslavnoj Cerkvi priznal nevozmozhnym dal'nejshee prebyvanie v evharisticheskom obshhenii s Konstantinopol'skim Patriarhatom.
Svjatejshij Patriarh Kirill provel tradicionnuju vstrechu so slushateljami Vysshih diplomaticheskih kursov.
Prinesenie glavnoj ikony Vooruzhennyh sil Rossijskoj Federacii v voinskie chasti i soedinenija voennyh okrugov nachalos' s Juzhnogo voennogo okruga.
The Geopolitical Imagination in the Contemporary Russian Orthodox Church.
