The United States yesterday condemned once again Russia’s Crimea annexation, vowing to maintain sanctions until Moscow returns the Black Sea peninsula to Ukraine.
The EU prolonged personal sanctions and the European Parliament passed a resolution supporting the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
The United States again condemns the Russian occupation of Crimea and calls for its immediate end,” said acting United States State Department spokesman Mark Toner in a statement marking the three-year anniversary of Moscow’s takeover of the peninsula.
Russia annexed the Ukrainian peninsula on 18 March following a military intervention and a hastily organised referendum, which was rejected by the international community.
In the statement, the United States also called on Russia to “cease its attempts to suppress freedom of expression, peaceful assembly, association, and religion” among Crimean Tatars, ethnic Ukrainians, pro-Ukrainian activists and journalists.
The United States move is likely to dispel fears that the administration of Donald Trump is likely to lift the sanctions against Russia imposed over its intervention in Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea.
The European Parliament passed a resolution yesterday, expressing equal concern about the deteriorating human rights situation in Crimea, condemning the discriminatory policies against the Tatar minority and the infringement of their property rights.
MEPs also called on Russia to release immediately all illegally and arbitrarily detained Ukrainian citizens, both in Russia and in the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine, and to provide for their safe return.
These include Mykola Karpyuk, Stanislav Klykh, Oleksandr Kolchenko, Oleg Sentsov, Oleksiy Chyrniy, Oleksandr Kostenko, Serhiy Lytvynov, Valentyn Vyhivskyi, Viktor Shur, Andriy Kolomiyets, Ruslan Zeytullayev, Nuri Primov, Rustem Vaitov, Ferat Sayfullayev, Akhtem Chiyhoz, Mustafa Dehermendzhi, Ali Asanov, Inver Bekirov, Muslim Aliyev, Vadim Siruk, Arsen Dzhepparov, Refat Alimov, Zevri Abseitov, Remzi Memetov, Rustem Abiltarov, Enver Mamutov, Artur Panov, Evheniy Panov, Roman Suschenko and Emir-Usein Kuku, among others.
EU lawmakers also urged Russia to allow all the above-mentioned people to travel freely, including Mykola Semena, who is being prosecuted for his journalistic work for Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
On Russia-related issues there is a tradition of MEPs voting against the instructions of their political group leaders.
According to VoteWatch.eu those who voted against are mainly leftwing MEPs , Eurosceptics from Nigel Farage’s EFDD group and right-wingers from Marine Le Pen’s ENF group.
Among the EPP rebels are big names such as former European Parliament President Jerzy Buzek and former European Commissioner Viviane Reding.
In recent years ALDE leader Guy Verhofstadt has elevated himself to the position of being the main critic of Vladimir Putin’s policies.
Also yesterday the European External Action Service published a wrap-up of the EU’s restrictive measures in response to the crisis in Ukraine.
On 13 March, the Council prolonged these measures until 15 September 2017.
Russia annexed Crimea because it was part of Russia for two centuries, had been “donated” to Ukraine by Khrushev in 1964, is inhabited by Russian and there was a referendum that approved of the move.
The only reason why the West keeps sanctions against Russia is because it wants a more pliable leader than Putin.
The West preferred the drunkard in chief, Eltsin, which allowed its firms to loot Russia’s natural wealth and transformed Russia from a superpower into a basket case.
The Soviet Union chose to administer the autonomous Crimean region through Kiev because Crimea was not physically connected to the Russian Soviet Republic and Crimea received most of its water, electricity and food from Ukraine.
The coup that resulted in Crimea being annexed by Russia was initiated when the parliament of Crimea was surrounded by armed men and the parliament voted at gunpoint to hold a referendum.
President Putin claimed personal credit for planning and leading the execution of the seizure of Crimea.
Clearly, this was not a spontaneous initiative of the people living in Crimea.
The sanctions were initiated because of Russia’s actions that threaten the security of Europe.
In the 2012 parliamentary elections pro-Russia parties secured less than 4% of the vote.
The elite that the Soviet Union produced chose to steal from the country rather than to build the country.
If the oligarchs had chosen to build their country instead of exploiting it for their personal gain Russia by now could have had one of the highest GDP per capita in the world.
Petersburg and Moscow remains to finish as do many projects that would boost economic performance.
Oligarchs are the legacy of America’s beloved Yeltsin. the real coup was not that which separated Crimea from Ukraine, but that which led to the dismissal of Yanukhovich.
When they saw that a coup engineered by the West would have deprived them of the right to participate meaningfully in their country’s politics, they took up arms.
Insofar as Russia threatening Europe’s peace, please, a minimum of common sense.
For Russia to invade the EU would be like me picking up a fight with Tyson.
