PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER Congressional Research Service,The Library of Congress,101 Independence Ave, SE,Washington,DC,20540 9.
Last year, the Obama Administration requested $95.271 million in United States bilateral aid for Ukraine for FY2014.
However, on November 30, Ukrainian special police attacked and viciously beat peaceful protestors in Kyiv’s central Maidan Nezalezhnosti, or Independence Square.
It has drawn its support from that quickly resulted in the regime’s own eastern Ukraine, where suspicion of Ukrainian demise.
Elite “Berkut” riot police attempted to nationalism is high and support for close ties with Russia is strong.
It defends the economic interests of powerful clear protestors from the Maidan and other oligarchic business groups.
Since the collapse of the areas of Kyiv, with the support of roving Yanukovych regime in February 2014, scores of deputies gangs of street thugs hired by the government. have fled from Kyiv or left the party, with most of the 88 persons, mostly protestors but also some rest apparently unwilling or unable to offer serious police officers, were killed on the 18th, 19th resistance to the new leadership, at least for now. and 20th.
Founded by Yuliya Tymoshenko, Fatherland Many casualties were caused by firearms, has run on a populist, anti-corruption platform.
It draws its support from western and central Ukraine, where mainly used by the police, including by Ukrainian nationalism is strongest.
The government reportedly had plans the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, Fatherland to use snipers much more extensively and also effectively became the leading faction in Ukraine’s unsuccessfully tried to order the army to join parliament. the crackdown.
A party espousing extreme Ukrainian Kyiv to their bases and a ban on the use of nationalism and economic populism, Freedom receives firearms.
Once the police and military its success to disillusionment with the Fatherland and complied with the resolution, groups of other opposition groups rather than a surge in support for extreme Ukrainian nationalism.
Its activists played a protestors seized key government buildings. key role in fighting against riot police in the Maidan Yanukoyvch and scores of his supporters in protests.
It continued into Russia. opposes market economics and favors strong ties to Russia.
However, the current Ukrainian government is disbanding the Berkut, and the perceived weakness of the authorities in Kyiv could potentially be exploited by Crimea and Russia.
His failure to do so touched off a popular revolt that led to the collapse of his regime three months later, and the emergence of what is likely to be a pro-EU, pro-Western government.
The assistance covers such areas as energy cooperation, strengthening border controls, bolstering the judiciary and the rule of law, and addressing environmental concerns.
This amount would be in addition to any macrofinancial aid that may be provided by the EU as part of a possible emergency program to stabilize Ukraine’s finances.
Global Health funding helps Ukraine fight its HIV/AIDS crisis, which is the most severe in the region, as well as Ukraine’s serious tuberculosis problem.
Other Legislation The 113th Congress has considered legislation in response to the current political crisis in Ukraine.
