In this setting, the other countries of the former Soviet Union, not just Ukraine, are simply geographical neighbours, rather than “little brothers” in an extended family run from Moscow.
For more than two decades prior to it, Russia did not take its largest post-Soviet neighbour very seriously.
Many in Moscow viewed Ukraine’s 2004–2005 “Orange Revolution” primarily in terms of a new political technology of “colour revolutions” launched by Americans in order to expand their geopolitical influence.
Vladimir Putin made Ukraine’s integration with Russia a centrepiece of the foreign policy program as he prepared to return to the Russian presidency in 2012.
Despite all its dangers and complications, the actual situation today is far more favourable for Russia than what the presumed “successes” of its policies would have offered.
This article was first published by Carnegie Moscow Centre on the 21st of March, 2018.
Dmitri Trenin, director of the Carnegie Moscow Center, has been with the centre since its inception.
He also chairs the research council and the Foreign and Security Policy Program.
I share the basic observation that Russia has shot itself in the foot geopolitically speaking with respect to Ukraine, alienating an ancient ally.
I think this was less inevitable than the writer suggests, but I agree that it is probably to the benefit of world stability in the longer run.
It leaves Russia with an economy smaller than that of Australia and a population smaller than Pakistan.
I see from Tony’s reply above, and the O’Neill piece earlier, that the cold war warriors are still among us, seeing the nefarious hand of Washington everywhere.
I think they are paranoid and that Dmitri is essentially right about the key sources of the changes in Ukraine, ie strife between powerful families in Ukraine.
I would only add a number of extra observations to the essential historical and political context O’Neill provides.
There are also many that come together again after war or political hostility,g.
Union and Confederate USA, East and West Germany, North and South Vietnam , maybe in future North and South Korea.
Tremin’s basic assumption that Russia’s and Ukraine’s geopolitical separation is already permanent – and he throws Byelorussia in for good measure – is not justified by comparative political history.
Many Ukrainians would not see Russia as a predator, rather as a loved elder brother, if they were allowed safely to express their feelings.
I agree with O’Neill that Ukraine is now a fascist state in the making.
The only happy alternative future for Ukraine,as Richard Sakwa eloquently writes, is as a liberal multicultural state that gives guaranteed rights to all its minorities.
The odd question is who he would now publish such an abstract piece, as civil war continues t0 rage in the Eastern Ukrainian areas under implacable attack from central Kiev forces, many of whom are avowed Nazis.
