The attacks on Thursday came as weeks of intense diplomacy and the imposition of Western sanctions on Russia failed to deter Putin, who had massed between 150,000 and 200,000 soldiers along the borders of Ukraine.
It moved to shed its Russian imperial legacy and forge increasingly close ties with the West.
A decision by Kremlin-leaning Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych to reject an association agreement with the European Union in favour of closer ties with Moscow led to mass protests that saw him removed as the leader in 2014.
Russia responded by annexing Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula and throwing its weight behind a separatist rebellion that broke out in Ukraine’s east.
Ukraine and the West accused Russia of sending its troops and weapons to back the rebels.
Moscow denied that, saying the Russians who joined the separatists were volunteers.
According to Kyiv, more than 14,000 people have died in the fighting that devastated Donbas, Ukraine’s eastern industrial heartland.
For its part, Moscow has strongly criticised the United States and its NATO allies for providing Ukraine with weapons and holding joint drills, saying that such moves encourage Ukrainian hawks to try to regain the rebel-held areas by force.
Furthermore, Russian President Vladimir Putin has repeatedly said Ukraine’s aspirations to join NATO are a red line, and expressed concern about plans by some NATO members to set up military training centres in Ukraine.
For a more detailed analysis of what is behind the conflict, click here.
Russia does not want Ukraine in NATO – and has said as much in its list of security demands which were sent to the United States last December.
Many of these ultimatums have been slammed as non-starters by the West.
Putin, who denied for months that he was planning an invasion, has also called Ukraine an artificial creation carved from Russia by enemies, a characterisation Ukrainians call shocking and false.
Ukraine’s admission to the alliance would require the unanimous approval of the 30 states that make up the body.
Before being considered for membership, NATO says, Kyiv needs to root out scourges such as corruption.
NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg in December rejected Russian demands to rescind a 2008 commitment to Ukraine that the country would one day become a member.
Analysts however say that NATO allies, mainly the US, are reluctant to expand their military footprint in the region and further jeopardise their relationship with Moscow.
While United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken has voiced support for Ukraine’s membership in NATO, President Joe Biden has been more ambiguous on the question.
Shelling in the Donbas region had intensified since Monday when Putin recognised the two breakaway regions of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent and ordered the deployment of what he called peacekeepers, a move the West called the start of an invasion.
On Wednesday, the separatists issued a plea to Moscow for help to stop alleged Ukrainian aggression – claims the United States dismissed as Russian propaganda.
Russia launched a full-scale invasion on Thursday shortly after Putin said he had authorised military action to defend itself against what he said were threats emanating from Ukraine.
Russian missiles hit multiple Ukrainian cities, including Kyiv, as Ukraine reported columns of troops pouring across its borders into the eastern Chernihiv, Kharkiv and Luhansk regions, and landing by sea at the cities of Odesa and Mariupol in the south.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy declared martial law and appealed to world leaders to impose all possible sanctions on Russia, including on Putin, who he said wanted to destroy the Ukrainian state.
The full scope of the Russian military operation was not immediately clear.
Zelenskyy called on all citizens who are ready to defend the country from Russian forces to come forward, saying Kyiv would issue weapons to everyone who wants them.
The United States has predicted that a Russian attack to take Kyiv may cause up to 50,000 civilian casualties, along with that of thousands of Ukrainian and Russian soldiers.
European countries have been preparing for the likelihood of hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians fleeing an assault.
EU foreign affairs chief Josep Borrell also promised the toughest financial sanctions the bloc had ever imposed.
Washington and London have previously spoken of personal sanctions targeting the Russian president in the event of a major escalation in military action.
Cutting Russia out of the SWIFT financial system, which moves money from bank to bank around the globe, would be one of the toughest financial steps they could take, damaging Russia’s economy immediately and in the long term.
The move could cut Russia off from most international financial transactions, including international profits from oil and gas production, which accounts for more than 40 percent of the country’s revenue.
The United States also holds one of the most powerful financial weapons against Putin if he invades Ukraine – blocking Russia from access to the United States dollar.
The currency still dominates in financial transactions around the world, with trillions of dollars in play daily.
The United States is considering imposing export controls, potentially cutting Russia off from the high tech that, among other things, helps warplanes and passenger jets fly and powers smartphones.
Russia has a war chest of more than $600bn in foreign exchange reserves and gold that it can use to prop up the currency and absorb the shock of sanctions.
The prospect of war and sanctions disrupting energy and commodities markets posed an immediate threat to a global economy barely emerging from the pandemic.
Stocks and bond yields plunged, while the dollar and gold rocketed higher.
