The unending crisis and bankruptcy of the imperialist system does not calm.
In the past two months there have been new and important events of the class struggle in which the immediate fate of millions of exploited is decided.
Revolutionary Marxism should be at the level of these real acid tests raising before the proletariat a program to conquer victory conditions, regroup its ranks internationally and expose the opportunist liquidators of Marxism which lead to defeat and destroy the best 2 I International Workers' Organizer of the vanguard of the working class.
This edition of the International Worker Organizer is dedicated to this.
Great Britain, smothered by Germany and the United States, seeks to again go it alone at the world... to the Atlantic World, but also to the Pacific one.
The partnership of US-UK imperialism and that of the European imperialist powers is in question.
The powers that came out victorious from the global crash of 2008, as the United States and Germany seek to encircle Russia and China to finish semi-colonizing them.
The world market has shrunk and imperialist banks only try to hide their bankruptcy by means of false balances and securities without backing in goods.
There is instability in the regime of imperialist domination that prevents this from settling its counter-revolutionary offensive that attacked and encircled the bastions of world revolution, as yesterday, Athens, and today Syria and rebel Donbass.
The global workingclass is resisting with heavy fighting and, as in France and Bolivia -and more recently in Syriahappen to conquer heroic mass offensives.
The events of early May in Khantoman showed that the resistance, the exploited masses of Syria, could march on Damascus and ""cut the head of the Snake"", i.e. of genocidal Al-Assad.
The insurrections of masses in Aleppo in June/July confirmed this notion categorically.
However, manipulation of generals-without-battles of the bourgeois leaderships, mounted over the resistance, prevented this... for the moment.
You will see in this brochure the definition of the current time of the revolution and the counter-revolution in Syria, as well as multiple reports of the correspondents of the Leon Sedov Brigade from the same battlefield.
Readers will also find the work of our correspondent in Greece from the heart of the refugees who are under repression of the Government of New Left’s Syriza.
We develop the international conditions that caused seizures in that country.
Crossed by all the contradictions of the revolution and the counter-revolution in the Middle East, determined by the Maastricht crisis and the place that the world economy gives to it, Turkey has become an encircled sub-imperialism, seeking a sphere of influence, after an expansive cycle of 10 years, for eluding a new crisis and outburst.
The military coup, which Erdogan allowed to unfold, and the backlash of this are but an evidence that the larger fractions of the Turkish capitalist oligarchy seek to impose centrality manu militari inwards of Turkey, against its own working class, since they try to leave the closure and have new opportunities for their business in Middle East, the Caucasus and Europe.
In our statement on Turkey we are opposed to the fallacy that the Turkish working class would have been which stopped the military coup.
The reformist left is unable to distinguish the working class in the processes of civil war and military political clashes.
It is a utterly parliamentary left corresponding to the upper layers of the working class.
The Turkish working class was crushed under bombings and brutally repressed in the large actions of this year’s May Day.
The Kurdish fraction of the working class of that country is bombarded daily by Erdogan’s troops, while the Syrian working-class there, amounting 3 million refugees, is strangled and working as slaves.
The coup was stopped by Erdogan with his majority in the armed forces and the bourgeois fractions and the modern rich middle class, on which he sustains to launch a real backlash against the Turkish working class before this erupts into political mass struggle against the economic crisis that has begun.
Therein we tackle the core issues of the world situation, Syria, and clashes between revolution and counter-revolution, separating the waters between reform and revolution.
Our current, the FLTI, is in the middle of a hard match regrouping the internationalist and healthy forces of the world working class.
With the Marxists of Japan we have conquered a front of international struggle with regard to the issue, in the battles that we have fought together against treacherous leaderships and also in the internationalist struggle for the freedom of political prisoners in the world.
Our readers may as well see it in this letter, which is presented as editorial in this material.
One of them is with regard to the decline of the Bolivarians in Latin America, attacking the masses on account of the IMF and Wall Street, supported by the reformist left, in moments in which the American working class engages in battle, yesterday fighting for $15 International Workers' Organizer 3 the hour with marches and strikes across the country and today with the young black workers rebelling slums against Obama murderous police.
The American working class, together with Mexican masses is the vanguard of the fight of the workers in the continent.
Further to the South, the manufacturing workers of Bolivia have rebelled against the Government of Evo Morales, setting the path to the whole of the exploited of the sub-continent to confront and defeat the Bolivarians in their decline, while the Chilean working class and youth return to combat, thousand times betrayed by Stalinism and small groups of Renegades of Trotskyism, which are trying to legitimize and sustain the former so that they submit the workers and people of Chile to the infamous Pinochetista regime.
We are witnessing extremely harsh struggles of the working class and great betrayals of its leaderships and the reformist left which have subordinated to ""Socialist"" Sanders in the United States; that is, to Clinton whom all their votes will go to.
Submitting the working class to one of the bourgeois camps, as the Latin American and world lefts do through the PT in Brazil means to kneel the exploited before one of its torturers, while Temer Dilma s former partnercontinues the attack on the working class.
In Brazil, imperialism selects its agents at the beginning of the economic crash, and the working class must select their leaders for combat, but now at half of the road and under the thick fire of the enemy.
The new left -as yesterday the world Social Forumonly seeks disorganizing the left wing of the working class in the Americas.
Before the English Brexit, this left told the proletariat its ally was not in the new ""French May"", in raising the struggle of 35-hour working week for all European workers as demand unifying the whole of working-class from Portugal to the Russian steppes... they told the working class that the alternative was to support their own British bourgeoisie either voting ""stay in the EU"" or ""being independent"" under the single command in London.
This transforms the enemies the local bourgeois imperialist gang into “workers’ allies” and the class brothers and sisters from the rest of Europe in their enemies.
It is the greatest cynicism of treacherous directions which, as they showed in the two world wars of the 20th century, subjected the working class of the imperialist powers to their own bourgeois gang and led to physical clashes among them while their heads were scrambling for the areas of influence of the colonial and semicolonial world.
The English SWP is a real center of organization of the forces of the world reformist left.
It has transformed the flag of ""UK independence"" on a matter of principle of its program.
We are facing a real focus 4 International Workers' Organizer of enemies of socialism and lackeys of the City of London and the Queen of England.
The London bourgeois gangs treat the British working class equal or worse than Hollande treats the French working class.
In France the capitalist gang is trying to snatch the 35 hours a week from workers.
In the Spanish State and the rest of southern Europe, huge swathes of workers are unemployed and suffer chronic unemployment.
In England, the ""zero hour contracts"" mean that the worker is 24/7 at the disposal of the company... and is paid only the hours worked.
These scoundrels, betrayers of socialism have called for its own working class to vote in favor of the Brexit... the rupture of England with Maastricht.
They have submitted it to its imperialist bourgeoisie’s business, rather than call it to join French, German, Spanish, Greek, Ukrainian, workers for finishing with imperialist Maastricht’s Europe and the banditry of the City of London’s looters of the oppressed peoples of the world.
Other ""Socialists"" in Great Britain called to vote to stay in Maastricht.
These undoubtedly defend the interests of transnational corporations and bankers in Paris.
None of the social-imperialist currents has called to break ties with their bourgeois gang and go to a common fight alongside their class brothers and sisters in Europe.
In UK’s Brexit of England the rottenness of this new social-imperialist left was displayed; it picked up the policy and practice of Stalinism, after sustaining for years the World Social Forum in bankruptcy, which promised ""socialism of the 21st century"" with Chavez, Castro, Morales and the Chinese mandarins... who today handed out broken Nations, with hungry and slave workers... and the conquests of socialism, to United States imperialism, as in Cuba.
We publish in this very IWO statements on the fighting waged by the French working-class to open the road to a new ""French May"" to stop the offensive of the France Government, great businessmen and bankers, and face vicious betrayals by the bureaucracy of trade unions and the social-traitor parties.
Here we present also the persistence in the struggle of the working class in Ukraine.
If in Paris the flags of the Paris Commune returned to wave (although today they want to hide that), the Donbass miners continue to resist to a counter-revolutionary offensive and siege by NATO, Kiev-Fascist forces, plus the Russian-Stalinist fifth column that tries to surrender them from the inside.
However, ""besieged"" Donbass today receives forces from the uprising of workers and miners in the rest of Ukraine, who take to the streets and openly confront the Government of Poroshenko, IMF and NATO's plans.
The international conditions of new knockouts of the imperialist crac create objectively pre-revolutionary conditions internationally.
The treacherous leaderships the masses have at their head are which prevent again a mass offensive internationally widespread.
In the case of Syria, amid the civil war, the rebel masses of Aleppo and Idlib were which in Khantoman defeated the forces of Al-Assad; they were which took the center of Aleppo and had in their hands the possibility to expropriate the big banks of the bankers of AlAssad and imperialism... a real insurrection, to which the generals of the ESL and Al Nusra imposed the withdrawal.
This led to the imposition of the siege of AlInternational Workers' Organizer 5 Assad to Aleppo.
The masses returned to erupt against this siege, and before these could empty arsenals of the bourgeois generals and ended up defeating the forces of Al-Assad, Turkey and Qatar, under the orders of imperialism, the false bourgeois leaderships pooled their forces to ""launch a counter-offensive"", and break the siege with a corridor of 21km in Aleppo.
This modus operandi of imperialism and the treacherous leaderships of the masses as evidenced by France, Bolivia, the civil war in Syriais just looking for re-legitimizing those same treacherous leaderships when they are surpassed by the masses, so that they come again to control and disrupt the latter’s offensive.
A modus operandi that works when the masses break the fences with which the bastions of revolution are besieged... fences like that you see in Ukraine, or around the masses of Syria, Libya, Palestine, Athens.
It is in moments of greatest offensive of masses when they break the control of treacherous leaderships.
But to seize that moment, which is what the manufacturing workers of Bolivia tenaciously sought, what Paris young and workers vanguard and the rebel young workers of Syria conquered, it is necessary to set up, in the previous processes, bodies of direct democracy and self-determination and coordination of the masses in struggle.
Without this, the bourgeois opposition and the bureaucracy can return to take the control of the masses, both with demagoguery and manu militari.
For this end we Trotskyists promote tirelessly a fight for setting up bodies of direct democracy of the masses in struggle, where they enforce their weight, where all currents and organizations that say to speak on their behalf have to submit.
Struggles for workers councils, for militias with direct democracy is what guarantees, along with a fierce revolutionary leadership conquered in combat, that nobody will expropriate the struggle of the exploited.
All the brochures of this IWO are dedicated to this fight, to draw lessons and raise a sharp program to defeat reformism and help the masses conquer victory conditions.
After destroying, betray and expropriating huge struggles of the first years of the 21st century, the old WSF leaderships are falling in the swamp of history.
The ""New Left"", composed of the old Stalinist leaderships and the Renegades of Trotskyism, comes to take its turn to prevent Socialist Revolution.
This revision of equating Trotsky and Gramsci is a cynicism similar to Leninism counterfeiting Stalin carried out to show himself as Lenin’s successor.
Trotsky and the left opposition leaders were the leaders —until 1924 / 1925 of the Third International.
From the start Gramsci and the entire Italian Stalinism joined the gang of Stalin against Trotskyism and the Bolshevik Leninists.
The combat and the fundamental obligation that this Congress has before it is the fight against revisionism and forgery to Trotskyism which the reformist left has relentlessly peaked.
All of this is amalgams, inconsistencies, fabrications to lure hundreds and thousands of young people who are looking for a way to the proletarian revolution to enter a supposedly Trotskyist party, but actually making them enter a Stalinist one.
Gramsci was a militant soldier of the Stalinist fraction, the bureaucracy choking the conquests of the October revolution and the Third International.
And it completed the Stalinist program to support the ""democratic stage"" in support of the bourgeoisie with which Stalinism and its popular fronts strangled hundreds of proletarian revolutions in the world.
The Renegades of Trotskyism, with their open passage to a neo-Stalinism and its national-socialist program for sinking the proletarian revolution, are looking for the ""progressive Stalinist"" with whom hundreds of thousands of revolutionary workers and young people are fooled.
Already we could see in the aftermath of World War II those who spoke on behalf of the IV International subordinating to Tito and Mao, who were sexed up to be the new ""revolutionary""; later in the 1960s and ' 70s Yalta ""Trotskyists"" supported,"" Castro and Ho Chi Minh... as ""new Jacobins of the Socialist Revolution.
Today, the liquidators of Trotskyism are still looking for their 'good' Stalinist... but all of them have already handed out the worker States to imperialism.
Therefore the Renegades of Trotskyism have dusted a dead Stalinist, Gramsci, and want to “merge"" him with Trotsky.
Trotsky faced Stalinism by grouping and organizing all the revolutionary resistance forces in the world, to combat the degeneration of the Soviet Union and treason to the III International.
Trotskyism, in the ' 30, travelled all across the world organizing revolutionary forces left in the III International and then working on the centrist forces of the Socialist movement worldwide that were turning to the left to found a new revolutionary International,e., the Fourth International, before the open passage of Stalinism to the camp of world bourgeoisie after the defeat of the German revolution in 1933.
Trotskyists founded the IV International and provided it with the theory program of permanent revolution,e., of the international character of proletarian revolution.
With this program the Trotskyists intervened and drew lessons from the events in Italy and in the troubled Europe of the interwar years.
The Transitional Program was held by thousands of revolutionaries in the world, where Trotskyism sought to regroup them, from Nazi Germany where he organized revolutionary cells up to Stalin’s Soviet Union, where the Russian section of the IV fought in concentration camps and in the resistance against Stalinism.
International Workers'Organizer 7 The IV International organized their forces in China -occupied by Japan and English imperialism.
Having started the Second World War, he organized the resistance in France occupied by Hitler.
Trotsky discussed with and struggled to organize Italian internationalists, followers of Bordiga and the Prometheus Group.
Never had Trotsky left him abandoned to the falsification and the siege of Stalinism in jail, if he had had even 1% of expectations about the possibility to converge with him.
The battle against revisionism, which threatens not to leave stone on stone of Marxism, becomes crucial.
To do this we are preparing a brochure which will be released in the coming days.
The III Congress of the collective by the Re-Foundation of the IV International/FLTI is all about this; in it also various organizations and currents will feature that promote with us a front of international struggle to face treacherous leaderships and break the fences around revolutionary processes that are underway.
A debate inside the internationalist currents of the world working class even with those that have with us enormous theoretical and programmatic differences becomes decisive.
An international grouping of the cream of the cream of the vanguard workers and the youth around the world becomes essential.
For us, who are confident in the program of the fourth international and its historical validity, it becomes necessary to face this perfidious policy of national-socialism of treacherous new and old left currents that submit the proletarians to their own bourgeoisies.
A new KienthalZimmerwald of the internationalist forces of the world working class becomes again necessary.
Breaking the siege of imperialist attacks on the bastions of revolution and confronting those who betray the latter would be the starting points for this international grouping.
The implementation of the ""International Network for the Freedom of World Political Prisoners and Justice for our Martyrs"", the joint defense of the Leon Sedov Brigade of Syria by fractions of internationalist anarchist currents that openly confront Stalinism, and the JRCL of Japan, as well as Trotskyist groups from Italy, Greece, Turkey, Spain , etc. , open the historic opportunity to step forward to help break the chains of the treacherous leaderships tying the hands of the workers and preventing them from advancing in their fighting.
The workers vanguard and future generations deserve a healthy and open debate of the internationalist working class forces.
That would be a serious blow against revisionism in Marxism, a trend which is settled in the worst decomposition with which capitalism corrupts autocracies and worker bureaucracies.
Combatting the latter is a decisive condition that we Trotskyists raise to advance to a fight-front and a debate among all currents that promote it.
Towards the III Congress of the Collective for the Refoundation of the IV International / FLTI we will make public all debates and discussions in our own ranks, because without this there is not and will never be life in a revolutionary movement.
Let Stalinist and Social-Democrats parties suffocate the critical thinking of their militants and their revolutionary personalities.
That's the history of Bolshevism about, a history that is nothing but as Trotsky saidthe struggle of its tendencies and fractions.
We affirm and that strengthens and unifies our forces both theory and program of the Fourth International have passed the test of history.
The working class has given one and a thousand opportunities to the revolutionary movement.
As the manifesto “The Fourth International and the War” held in 1940, it is not about preparing for only one revolution, but for a whole period of wars, crises and revolutions.
This historical period will give revolutionary Marxism one and a thousand opportunities, as already it has been given and has wasted.
It is necessary to group 10 smart men, said Lenin, and not 10 thousand morons, though he apologized for calling the latter as such.
Editorial Board 8 International Workers' Organizer August 2 2016 Statement of the Collective for the Refoundation of the Fourth International FLTI to the 54th Antiwar Assembly of the revolutionary Marxists of the Pacific The international conditions of the Syrian revolution and the international obligations of the revolutionary Marxists From the trenches of the Syrian revolution to the Executive Committee of the 54 Anti-war Assembly in Japan In Hiroshima and Nagasaki, United States dropped two atomic bombs.
In five and a half years of Obama, Putin and Bashar the-dog massacre, they have murdered, in a real genocide, 600,000 oppressed and exploited in Syria... the equivalent of 4 nuclear bombs thrown by the United States in Japan.
Comrades, From the International Trotskyist Leninist fraction and from the Leon Sedov Brigade, we Trotskyists of the Fourth International in Syria greet this 54 Anti-war Assembly.
Today once again we are, as we have always been, with you fighting together against imperialism, its regimes and Governments that starve, massacre and torture the world working class.
We fight all over the world against Stalinism, the Renegades of Trotskyism and all the Union bureaucracies on whose shoulders the rotten capitalist system in bankruptcy is supported.
As in 2008 (with the crash of Wall Street), today the world crisis tsunami beats China and is deepening the bankruptcy of the Europe of the Maastricht Treaty.
The capitalist system shows the State of decomposition that it is in, and how it survives by throwing all its crises to the masses.
In Ukraine again Kiev working-class has taken the streets to face the looting of the IMF, and puts back to the order of the day the unity with the working class of the Donbass, the fight to reInternational Workers' Organizer 9 cover Crimea and the struggle for a united, independent, and Soviet Ukraine to be the bastion to recover the USSR from the Stalinist scourge that sold it out long ago.
In Greece, tens of thousands of refugees struggle to enter Europe and there received the solidarity of thousands of young rebels who are fighting for their rights and by pulling them from concentration camps that the sinister smoke-vendor left of Syriza has held them to.
Black Lives Matter movement, workers and youth take the streets in the U.S., while they fight for USD 15 an hour minimum wage.
The fight against the Transpacific Treaty of United States and Japan to enslave all the oppressed peoples of that region, driven by the Japanese workers, is the same fight the international working class is waging against the imperialist beast.
In Africa and Latin America people is confronting the native bourgeoisie, partners to imperialism in the sacking of oppressed peoples.
In Latin America the lie and the infamy has already dropped and collapses of the Bolivarian bourgeoisie, which like the Castroes, Lulas, Kirchners, Morales, etc., were announcing the development of ”21 st century socialism"" though the only thing they have left in their withdrawal is more hunger, looting and repression on the working class in the continent.
So they show and have proven to be “left” lackeys to the imperialist powers.
Comrades, From the FLTI, we want to send you on this occasion a message of solidarity and support to your struggle from the trenches of the workers and peasants who in Aleppo and all Syria face one of the worst genocides and massacres by the forces of the world counterrevolution.
At the moment, when this letter reaches you a revolt of the masses is being developed in Aleppo, the capital of Syria’s resistance, to break the siege of the mercenary troops of Bashar.
From 11 July, and earlier in Khantoman in early May, now fighting to regain the fenced Aleppo, the revolutionary masses have irrupted in real insurrectionary processes as in 2011 / 2012.
This boiling of the masses is threating -and creating the conditionsto deliver more defeats to murderous Bashar, the policeman of the property of capitalists, banks and oil companies in Syria.
Our struggle overflows to every step and breaks the control of the FSA generals and the entire Sunni bourgeoisie, which are sent to the liberated areas"" to lock up our revolution and prevent us from reaching Damascus.
In Syria, and in Aleppo in particular, a new intifada has started after years of massacre against the masses.
Bashar the dog and gunman Putin are doing the dirty work of crushing the Syrian revolution on account of all the imperialist powers.
In this country they try to give a lesson to the world working class and all the peoples of the world who ""dare"" stand up against the plans of hunger and looting of the imperialist gang against oppressed peoples.
They try to prevent the fights of yesterday in Tahrir square in Egypt, those of the Palestinian intifada and the Syria today from arriving or unifying in a same fight along with European workers.
Hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees, struggling to enter the Europe of Maastricht, are spokespersons to the massacre and genocide suffered by the oppressed masses to South Mediterranean.
We have now almost 5 and a half years of a hard revolution, and no less cruel counter-revolutionary blows 10 International Workers' Organizer against the Syrian masses, as before it was the military coup and dictatorship in Egypt, the Saudi invasion of Yemen, the restoration of the rule of Ben Ali regime in Tunisia, and military coups and imperialist attacks -against the revolutionary masses of Libya.
This counter-revolutionary offensive seeks to crush the masses in Maghreb and the Middle East, so then imperialists have their hands free to attack their own working class.
Thus we saw them in France tearing the conquest of the 36 working hour week.
Imperialists now cannot survive in the middle of the slump and the crisis of the world capitalist system without snatching fundamental conquests from the world working class (starting from the workers of the own imperialist powers), and arming themselves and leading to new wars of aggression.
Comrades, The WSF and the so-called ""New Left"" around the world have announced that the so-called enemy in Syria is ISIS, while it is nothing more than the keeper of the hydrocarbons of United States imperialism in the areas in which AlAssad s troops have been defeated.
But al-Assad, Putin, ISIS and the same Kurdish bourgeoisie with its YPG and Stalinism are which hedge today Aleppo’s rebel masses.
ISIS is the ""perfect enemy"" who all want to have in order to justify their killing and slaughtering the Syrian masses.
It is a perfect excuse for shielding the imperialist powers against their own working class.
We write to you and greet this 54 Anti-war Assembly next to the Syrian exploited.
Together with you, we want to pay a tribute to all the fallen of this blood-stained Syria of workers and peasants, and to our fellow Mustafa Abu Juma'a and Hamza al Twil, recently killed in the most advanced trenches in the combat against dog Bashar.
As you can see, today already in the streets of Aleppo, the masses have begun to raise red flags.
They are painted in the blood of their martyrs, as the working class thus did since the 19th century, by lifting them up as a banner of the blood that the working class spilt in the struggle fortheir liberation.
They have betrayed and handed over to the bourgeoisie any attempt of the masses to pave way for the revolutionary struggle against imperialism and its Governments.
All of us revolutionary Marxists are honored to carry them to victory on our backs and our fists.
We still remember that we were with you in the Anti WarAssembly 4 years ago.
There we gave the same cry that we are giving today for breaking the fence to the heroic Syrian revolution and putting all the forces of the world working class to the task of stopping the war machine of counter-revolutionary Putin, Obama and Bashar the dog which has massacred all the revolutionary processes in Maghreb and the Middle East to iron and fire.
The working class and the poor people of Syria are being subjected to a counter-revolutionary fascist attack by imperialism and its minions, amounting to genocide and a real Holocaust against the exploited.
This must not go on being silenced, and much less, hidden before the world working class, as does the left of Obama, real traitors to the world working class.
We know that attacking the interests of the capitalists, the war Lords, bankers and big business men well mark the way to the exploited and the resistance to conquer victory.
There are riches that the looters of the work and the riches of our country have robbed our people iron and fire causing 600,000 killed and 10 million refugees.
We know that our revolution has huge obstacles mounted by imperialism in its way.
But, as we say here in Syria, people kill the snake by cutting off its head.
This is in Damascus... it is AlInternational Workers' Organizer I 11 Assad and is surrounded by all the counter-revolutionary forces in the planet.
There are the funds to conquer bread and weapons, to march to Damascus, rebelling the exploited for bread, decent work, land, housing and freedom.
They are to boldly develop the expropriation of the capitalists to strengthen the Alliance of workers and peasants, and revolt all the exploited of the Maghreb and Middle East.
You, comrades of Japan, should know that they are not only attacking our positions in martyred Syria with AlAssad’s barrel bombs and Putin the butcher’s aircraft and its cluster bombs, but also that when we move forward and break the ranks of Bashar's mercenary troops, United States drones attack us, which are ultimately the support of Obama and NATO, who have sent AlAssad to do the dirty work on account of all the imperialist powers.
And when we fight against them and against United States drones we know that when you face United States bases in Okinawa, you are fighting against the same murderous Japanese and American generals who, from the Mediterranean fleet, command these drones massacring our women and children.
When we see you encircling United States bases in Okinawa and the American masses fighting against the murders of black youth, against the war and for their wages, we celebrate in the Syrian trenches, because we know that there the decisive forces are that must be set in motion to break through the fence to the Syrian revolution and end with martyrdom and massacre of the masses of Maghreb and the Middle East.
Comrades, Four years ago our representatives attended your anti-war Assembly; we gave you our fighting banner that was looking for solidarity and a common international struggle to break through the encirclement to the Syrian masses.
Along these years we have fought together the imperialist powers and all the executioners of the masses of the world.
We have been part of an international fighting front against the imperialist domination of the planet.
However, comrades, we want you consider a reflection and are insisting on a proposal that we advanced 4 years ago; because we are still in time.
Imperialism has concentrated its forces and its agents with counter-revolutionary agreements on the planet, as the Geneva Conference, to encircle and slaughter the Syrian masses.
It s time for the working-class to centralize their forces to hit as a single fist the imperialist bandits and their agents where the fate of all workers of the world is betted on in revolutionary processes.
Pacific and Atlantic world won’t be the same with a martyred, crushed Syria and its defeated revolution, as it was not after the victory of Franco in Spain in the ' 30, which opened, together with the triumph of Hitler, the road to war.
Super weapons of the United States, Japan, France, England already is being shot recklessly in great numbers.
China and Russia, which also make ostentation of their military power, shell their bombs and are arming armies that do not clash among themselves or with imperialism.
Everyone, from a long while, do unload their weapons against the revolution and the oppressed peoples of the world that rise up.
No doubt if they crush the international working class, the vultures will peck each other for a new redivision in the world.
Meanwhile, among the imperialist gangs it has opened a huge political and trade war in a world market that is shrinking.
The Southern European powers are already vassals, such as Italy, Greece, Portugal and Spain.
There is Turkey, which United States does not allow it to take one square meter of territory in Syria or anywhere in the Middle East, since the imperialist powers have drawn their influence zone in the first and second world wars ... and there is no place for a new Ottoman empire.
The victorious imperialist powers of the 2008 trade war, as USA or France, Germany and England in Europe have been beginning to compete for a world market that does not stop dangerously shrink again.
They look greedily to China and Russia, which inherited powerful military apparatus of the former workers’ states, as they laid their sources of raw materials and millions of slave workers to produce for the world capitalist system.
Thither, to Russia, China, Vietnam, Cuba aim to leave their catastrophe imperialist gangs.
They are looking to start a semi-colonization process and looting of these new capitalist states, to keep their banks, their state companies and their domestic markets.
This is what the current situation of the world capitalist system bankruptcy poses.
There is no place for all, except for new semi-colonies or wars, which will come if the proletarian revolution does not prevent it.
That's the plan of war and political, economic and military offensive of the imperialist superpowers and financial capital.
They make blocks to the Atlantic (as USA with Germany to corner Russia) or towards the Pacific.
England did not agree to be subjected to Europe of Maastricht, as England also considers itself a Pacific power, with its financial and military bases in Singapore and Hong Kong.
Huge commercial and political clashes have already started, deepening the bankruptcy of the world capitalist system.
There is a speed race to see what imperialist gang manages to give hardest blows to its own working class to keep the hands free for new adventures to oppressed and plunder the world.
Comrades With the capital crisis, the imperialist gangs will not stop recruiting new agents in the labor movement that defend them against the proletarian revolution.
The emergence of a ""New Left"" as Podemos, Syriza, with the Stalinist and renegades of Trotskyism lifejacket, has recreated a huge social-chauvinist poisonous propaganda.
Socialists in words and traitors in deeds of the self-called ""socialist"" left in England openly supports the exit of this imperialist country to Europe, while labor aristocracies and bureaucracies of France and Germany tied the workers to the forces of the imperialist powers grouped in Maastricht.
The support of ""socialist"" in words and traitors in deeds to their own imperialist gangs is a crime against the world working class.
The way out of the catastrophe for the Germans, British and the workers across Europe today is with the workers of France fighting for the defense of the 36 hours per week, with banners and with the war cry of ""Let’s the Commune return!"", which pose in the agenda the fight to destroy the imperialist Europe of Maastricht in the West and the return of the USSR and the socialist revolution in eastern Europe.
Imperialism needs this greening of an old cancer in the world labor movement, which is the social-chauvinism where labor aristocracies and bureaucracies live of the crumbs falling from the exploitation of the colonial and semicolonial world by the imperialist bandits.
For this the renegades of Trotskyism and Stalinism disguise as ""socialist"" Podemos, supporters of the Bourbons monarchy, the expropriators of the revolutionary struggles of the Spanish State outraged.
Before, and even today, they are defending and covering up the anti-worker government of Syriza, agent of the bankers in Greece.
Reformism has turned into social-imperialism, socialchauvinism... and has turned into the biggest enemy of the international proletariat revolutionary struggle.
Comrades, From the FLTI, we salute your courageous conference of workers and young revolutionary internationalists.
This is an struggle example and program for the whole working class of the imperialist countries.
It's crystal clear that reformism, expressed as social-chauvinism and those who sold out the world proletarian revolution, has been recruited by the big capital to divide the international combat of the working class.
Every immediate demand for our class to survive in this capitalist system in bankruptcy pushes more and more to an open fight against the oppressors’ regimes and states.
The limit the combat of masses have is the treacherous leadership they have at the head.
The objective conditions for the revolution are already more than mature, they are getting rotten.
These leaderships want to make exploited believe that it’s possible to live and raise the standard of living under the conditions of such rotten system.
Evidence of this, of the lies and disgrace of reformism, are the tens of thousands of political prisoners and condemned fighters in all the jails of the capitalist governments and regimes all across the world.
They are hostages in the jails of the oppressors to contain the revolutionary offensives of the exploited.
We call on you for fighting together to do justice for the disappearance of the 43 students from Mexico and the miners killed in Marikana.
We call on you from Aleppo, the capital of the Syrian resistance, to raise together the red banners, that is, the one of the martyrs of our revolution and the entire world working class.
The head of the snake is in Wall Street, London City, Frankfurt and the Tokyo bank.
I n early July, the masses from Kiev fought in the streets once again, with demonstrations and protests against the increases of taxes on basic services (water, electricity and gas), which will start in September and will affect the already low wages of the workers and exploited masses.
The whip of capital keeps punishing the masses, in the East and the West.
However the Ukrainian masses show that their forces have not been exhausted yet.
The protest against retrenchments was organized by the Union Federation of Ukraine, miners and steel workers unions, with the Federation of Independent Unions.
Unions of education and science workers from the regions of Kiev and Vinnitsa endorsed the protest.
They demanded that starting on October 1 st the minimum wage must be equal to the consumptions, estimated in 3067 grivnas , when today it is not even U$50.
Other demands are related to the increase of pensions for retired people and students.
On the other hand, in the Rada, the fraction of the Opposition Block warned on Wednesday that the accumulation of citizen’s unhappiness and vital problems of the populations will lead to social uprisings.
It is the same fight headed by miners and workers of Donbass who defend the mines and their jobs that imperialism wants to steal from them.
In order to defend them, they set up militias disorganizing Kiev murderous army that attacks and bomb them, destroys their hospitals, schools, etc., and also by winning privates with their fight.
The resistance of the masses in Donbass, despite the brutal fence, isolation and the betrayal of Minsk pacts that divide the Ukrainian working class; and the demonstrations of the masses of Kiev who came back to the fight in the streets against Poroshenko and Rada show that the forces of the Ukrainian masses are not exhausted at all.
They are willing to fight against the plans imperialism and its puppet Poroshenko.
The tragedy is the huge betrayal of the leaderships, which imposed a divided fight and weakened their forces against the enormous enemy they are confronting.
Unfortunately, the Ukrainian workers have been divided in different unions depending if they work in Kiev or Donbass.
And even if they have the same sufferings, attacks or increase in the cost of living in the entire territory, the leaderships refuse to organize a joint struggle to confront the same enemy.
Ukraine will not have way out favorable for workers and exploited masses unless they unite their fight from Donbass to Kiev and if they defeat the hated Poroshenko government in the capital.
This demand for better wages and against the increase in the cost of living unifies the exploited from all over Ukraine.
It is the demand that links their fight with the one of the French, Greek and European workers.
ELIZA FUNESAND NADIA BRIANTE August 15th, 2016 The last chapter of the revolution has not been written yet.
While the miners and exploited people keep resisting the imperialist offensive.
Road blocks, refusing to work on the mines, leaders and miners going on hunger strikes are the ways that workers are using to fight for collecting the owed salaries and against closing and privatizing mines.
On August 3 rd miners’ wives of Krasnoarmeyskugol organized a demonstration of “empty cups” claiming the wages owed to be paid to their husbands.
On August 5 th miners of Chervonohrad protested in Lviv and blocked the international road Lviv-Rava-Ruska.
Despite suffering burns in 12% of his body, he kept his hunger strike to protest.
On August 11th the workers of mine Stahanova, the biggest of the state complex Krasnoarmiiskvuhillia, in Oblast of Donetsk controlled by Poroshenko’s government, started a spontaneous strike.
In their assembly they decided not to work in the mine and stop the production.
When this happened, the workers of Lvivvuhillya were on their 8 th day of hunger strike in front of the Ministry of Energy and Coal Industry of Ukraine.
The plans of IMF, World Bank and EU for Ukraine are to make it a colony controlled by imperialism... this is the “way out” and this is the fate that capitalists prepared for this country of Eastern Europe.
Imperialism dragged the nation to suffocation since it cannot pay the fake foreign debt and the payment plan includes privatization, closing or reconverting all mines.
The miners of Donbass rebelled against this plan and in defense of their lives and work; they rose as the head of the fight and for that they set up militias and soldier committees.
Kiev and the west controlled by Poroshenko; the region of Donbass under control of pro-Russian oligarchy and Putin, who got Crimea as payment for the services provided to imperialism.
The tragedy of Ukrainian revolution is that the treacherous leaderships have managed to impose the division among workers.
Workers of Donbass and workers of Kiev refuse to surrender without fighting.
Their demands are the same as those of the French workers who are confronting Hollande’s government attempt to steal the 35 working hours a week.
In this brutal crisis and economic bankruptcy, Imperialism has decided that workers and exploited people must pay for the crisis.
International Workers' Organizer Ukraine 17 GREAT BRITAIN July 13, 2016 3REXIT Referendum SWP, defender of AN ""INDEPENDENT"" IMPERIALIST GREAT BRITAIN ""Socialism in words.
All across Europe left currents also discussed at the same time than the bourgeoisie if England should or shouldn’t leave the EU, carrying the UK exploited right to the trap of the referendum.
Both ""stay"" in and ""exit"" from the European Union, are two policies of imperialist bands; at the end of the day the workers always pay for the costs of the crisis.
None of these currents declared war against the trap of the referendum, against the deception it meant for theworkers.
Not a word was said about the breakthrough from the hardship suffered by the UK workers being a fight like and alongsidethe French youth and workers following thesteps of French May, of the Paris Commune,whohad gone to the streets with their factory and action committees in their thousands facing the labor precarization and the slashing of their conquests that the Government of Hollande wanted to impose.
French workers and youth showed the way, taking the solution of their problems in their own hands.
I.e. social base that support ""British"" bourgeois policies so that Britain can go to the world to dispute against the other imperialist powers with which it is in a trade war.
What is to come will not be more health and education for the British people and immigrants as the SWP says, but more exploitation, plundering and misery in the colonies and semi-colonies, and worse life and work conditions for the British working class.
The SWP wants the British and global working class to forget that the policy of their' British bourgeoisie, which with his Queen and all of their transnationals, super exploit the world workers and plunder entire Nations in Africa and all over the Pacific, is part of NATO, and has one of its military bases in the Malvinas Islands, that is a territory in the Argentina occupied by British imperialism.
To give just one example, when the heroic miners in Marikana in South Africa rose in 2012 and 2014, the SWP and its sister parties throughout southern Africa, did not raise that the Anglo American should be expropriated at ""home"" in London, and that pulling down the Queen of England the oppressed peoples would be liberated.
We are not speaking about a colonial or semi-colonial country, but of an imperialist power that plunders and exploits other Nations.
Both those who called to stay in the EU and those that called to vote to leave the EU are encouraging British nationalism and saying that the breakthrough for the British is within Great Britain lining up with a sector of the bourgeoisie.
The bourgeoisie does not defend the homeland, but markets, the foreign concessions, sources of raw materials and spheres of influence.
The bourgeoisie never defend the homeland for the sake of the homeland.
When its profits and its businesses are threatened, it is defeatist in its own nation.
UK capitalists defend their business with the EU and Wall Street... not the working class of the United Kingdom, as the SWP would have us believe.
The New Left endorsed the referendum; they were part of this trap, silencing that the imperialists may unify and divorceat will in order to exploit us best, so we continue paying for the cost of the crisis.
So did the German social Democracy that on 4 August 1914 voted for the German government war budget, carrying workers to that carnage, the 1WW, that is, to kill each other for ""their"" imperialist governments’ business.
A real class-war by the workers and exploited across Europe is due against imperialist governments and regimes.
The ""new left"" has raised the opposite, and thus it has isolated the British working class -and some time agothe Greek or Spanish State working class-, from theirclass brothers and sisters of France, Germany and the rest of Europe, when it is precisely there where the attack on the Greek and European working class can be stopped.
That’s why UK is in the NATO, and fills the world with military bases, as in the Malvinas Islands, which is sort of a ""land aircraft -carrier"" aiming at Latin America.
Pamela Parson and Noelia Ling International Workers' Organizer Great Britain 19 Continued from back page open round with Chinese crack.
For that reason, the French imperialism, after the selfattack of ""ISIS"" and then militarizing France with that excuse launched a brutal attack on the gains of the working class.
A decisive struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie in 2016 began.
With the crisis of Maastricht and the world economy, nothing could be equal in the imperialist France which is declaning, with the disputes of all the imperialist powers discussing how to take a paid of the global market that has shrunk.
The working class fought taking the streets with pickets, general strikes, setting up the embyons bodies of direct democracy, action committees, factory committees, showing to be up to the level of the war that the great bourgeoisie has declared trying to wrest their historical conquests.
The working class showed enormous energies to defeat Hollande and Khomri law As soon as the bill of the Labour Minister Khomri was sent to Parliament in March to wrest the 35-hour work week to the workers, the working class and the youth of France took the streets.
He had created the conditions to give a decisive blow to the working class.
They did not prepare the working class for the decisive struggle which was established.
Bureaucracies of the trade unions, like CGT (led by Stalinism), Force Ouvriere and the entire reformist left sought out combat of the exploited to pressure the parliament to pass the law.
An example of this was that the government cleared the lower house of the Congress by decree.
On March 31, the first mass action against the law developed against Khomri law.
Millions entered to the fight, which exceeded and overflowed the levees of all unions that do not represent more than 10% or 15% of workers in France.
The problem is that the law is mainly an attacks to the first job, imposing days of unlimited working hours.
For the reformist leaderships and the bourgeoisie it was time to prevent this square to be transformed into a new Tahrir Square as in Cairo, as a square of Commoners.
They traveled to France to preach a ""movement of citizens"" in general when what was proposed was a brutal clash between the bourgeoisie and the working class.
This decree makes France to explode and begin the decisive clash between classes.
Bonapartism of the 5 th French imperialist Republic showed its true face.
The working class during the month of May carried out massive days of struggle l ik e on 12,17, 19 and 26.
These demonstrations were led by rebellious youth, those who ""hate the police"" and ""vandals who break everything"" as they claimed.
Every day new sectors of the exploited entered to the revolutionary fight.
After each day of struggle, the exploited carried out new strikes per unions, barricade fights, pickets, clashes with the police, and with the youth they set up action committees and strengthened the coordination.
Facing mass radicalization, their struggle, the setting up of bodies of direct democracy and loss of control of the union bureaucracy in the labor movement, the government and great bosses responded with a brutal repression sending the order forces to systematically repress the demonstrations, pickets, the occupations of the public buildings and the struggle.
The judges banned the demonstrations and sent thousands of telegrams and letters of intimation with threats of prison to the workers and students who were seen in the demonstrations.
Despite all this the exploited still were fighting and setting up their bodies, the action committees tended to coordinate the struggle of the exploited ones.
The role of unions and the ""socialists"" of all kind was to prevent these bodies to develop, centralize and coordinate throughout France by setting up the real power of the exploited.
But despite the leadership, the working class was still climbing the ladder in their struggle.
On June 2 the main workers of power plants went on strike, the cost of electricity service down was to more than a million homes and returned the service to the houses that were cut because they could not afford it.
At the same time, they cut service to one of the headquarters of Medef (French employers' federation) and one of the homes of their leaders.
Also they cut power to a railway in support of the strike of the rail workers.
This is a true example of how the workers were beginning to take the resolution of the problems at their hands.
And they showed who the real owner of the means of production was and who makes them work.
The government of Hollande and the institutions of the 5 th 20 France International Workers' Organizer Republic were totally weak, hung by a thread; they had lost control of the working class, because it had broken with the control of the watchdog, the union bureaucracy and its program of putting pressure to the parliament to moderate the adjustment.
The economic struggle leads to a huge political struggle against the government.
Ultimately, it lacked the momentum of a decisive revolutionary general strike to put the law down and with it Hollande.
From there the great betrayal begins... a great conspiracy against the masses.
General Philippe Martinez, secretary of CGT and the entire trade union bureaucracy, which began the conspiring with great bosses organized in Medef, ie, the big bosses of the French imperialist corporations.
A great conspiracy against the masses The union bureaucracy saves Hollande and the great imperialist bosses taking out the masses from the revolutionary general strike path The government hardened the state repression, with thousands of telegrams, temporary detentions, police clashes against the masses ... but this only made the situation worse.
The workers must learn from this tramps imposed by the bourgeoisie supported in the leadership that this buys within the labor movement, as the union bureaucracy.
But that strength was still on, because the bureaucracy had also lost control of the working class.
But the working class had no leadership alternative that was going to tell the truth, the strength that had won their struggle in the streets and the weakness the government was left.
The conditions for a general strike were more than ripe, they were decomposing.
The NPA and current union Solidaires only lent him his left shoulder to a weakened Martinez to cover it.
Before this happens, the employer, at the time of greatest weakness of his government announced it would not allow the Senate any negotiations with the strikers and their senators announce that void directly the law set at 35 hours a week labor.
At the same time, sends bureaucracy to call and to put at the head of a national demonstration, because if he did, no one would control.
For the first time, the bureaucracy of all unions fell to the factories to make assemblies of all sectors to organize the march.
Employers’ class hardens in the Senate and instructs its agent, the bureaucracy, to be mounted on the coming independent action, to recover its prestige.
This happened on June 14, a huge and historic mobilization of the French working class, which was controlled by the bureaucracy in its major part, while huge swathes of the working class and youth clashed against the police in the streets of Paris.
The bureaucracy, pushing the people, took control of the mobilization and contained the independent mass action, in moInternational Workers' Organizer France 21 ments in which the bourgeoisie was weaker, and showed in the Senate a fortress that it hadn’t.
What returns to strengthen the Government is that the bureaucracy took the control again of the mobilization, putting itself to its head, taking advantage of the committees of action, the committees of factory still not having developed, or extended, or coordinated among them, and the same Place de la Republique had neither been transformed into an institution of centralization of fighting sectors of the workers and youth.
The working class rested in confidence that their huge mobilization could stop the law and rein in the government.
The working class gives it a respite, to see what is achieved after so many days of struggle, without perceiving that the essential combat was still lacking, which was the general strike that defeat Hollande, or as a result of this, achieve the withdrawal of the law as a minimum.
The betrayal of the bureaucracy consisted of making the masses believe that the fight had already been enough to win.
It was enough time and timely day to betray, and maneuver and conspiracy to give its fruits.
The masses do not completely understand why after such struggle and the June 6 mobilization they had promised that everything was to change, but the employers remained very strong in their positions in the Senate.
The bureaucracy of the 3 trade unions meet the Prefecture ""to warn"" that the march would be carried out on June 23.
The result was the realization of a march with a tour of 8 blocks in one direction and its return, controlled by the police and by the services of order of the union bureaucracy.
Then came a new march like that,e. also a restricted and agreed upon one, on June 28.
Thus the bourgeoisie got, through the bureaucracy, a relationship of forces that it had not conquered.
The Government sends back the bill to the Assembly, i.e., to the lower House, from this new relationship of forces.
This means a betrayal, a detour back to the starting point... where the original Khomri law will be approved perhaps with some cosmetic reforms.
They created illusions among the masses that you can stop the Bill in the lower House.
In the Assembly the Decree of Hollande-Valls turns to be applied so that nobody can negotiate anything.
They are complicit in the betrayal of the Union bureaucracy, of which they are part, working for years as left leg of the French imperialist Fifth Republic which they have served for decades as squires to Stalinism and the trade union bureaucracy.
They played that role of bureaucracy’s cronies throughout the process of mobilization.
They never prepared the working class for the decisive political struggle that was due.
When the masses began to change posters of the “Square of the Republic” for those of the Commune, they wore reddish and “May of 1968” drapes.
And when the bureaucracy agreed the betrayal with the Government, they wore yellow and accompanied from the left such treason.
At the moment when the action committees arose and the task was to develop them -so that they become organs of dual power and direct democracyand sweep the trade union bureaucracy, instead they supported the latter.
They kept a unified front with the trade union bureaucracy up to the defeat.
The NPA, for example, accompanied the CGT until it submitted the masses to the negotiation. mittees and action committees we must ignore the ^ ""Hollande-Martinez"" law to prevent it from being applied and the worker ranks to be divided.
Fet’s vote in factory assemblies and committees to set up again the action committees to break the wall imposed by the bureaucracy Union and return to unite the workers’ ranks in new mass actions.
Martinez, Force Ouvriere and all of the bureaucracy do not represent the workers or the million that entered the fight.
They are social-imperialist agents of Maastricht, whom the French imperialist bourgeoisie maintains and decorates with coins falling from the super-profits that imperialist bandits obtained by sacking the semi-colonial world.
The French working class should look at themselves in the eyes of the sufferings of the immigrant working class, the refugees and peoples oppressed by imperialism.
The task of the moment is to ignore the law and the infamous agreement of the trade union bureaucracy with the Government It is necessary to retrieve the path to the general strike The last word has not been said.
The offensive of the masses has been dispersed by the betrayal of their leaderships, not by the strength of the Government.
The employers will pass to the offensive factory by factory, trade by trade to impose the increase of the work day.
What does the bureaucracy want?... that the trade unions are present in every negotiation.
They mean to go to all the factories and guarantee that nobody rebels again so that the law is applied, preventing any centralized action of the working class.
It is necessary to prevent this road that the Government and the union bureaucracy want to impose.
This is the motion that all factory assemblies or trade union sectors should vote anywhere this law tries to be applied and the 35-hour week is in danger of being applied.
Only if they are unified with the European working class and face the looting of French imperialism in the semi-colonial world may workers in France maintain their conquests.
France cannot be a new Greece betrayed by the smoke-vendor left and the trade union bureaucracy.
Plenty of water has been let fall over the spark of Athens to turn it off, and tons of sand and water to try to extinguish the fire that went on in Paris.
The international revolutionary movement has an enormous commitment ahead, which is to fight out the treacherous leaderships that have hand-tied the French proletariat.
The French working class is carrying out in the last 4 months huge fighting days the streets fighting against the attack which was declared by Hollande’s government of and the great French booses seeking to wrest the 35-hour workweek with the Khomri law.
On the one hand, the French imperialism needs to impose to its own working France International Workers' Organizer class terrible conditions of labor outsorcing imposed on the oppressed masses of the colonies and semicolonies, the exploited of its overseas colonies and immigrant workers in their guts.
