No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher or a license permitting restricted copying.
Photo of Christians from various Ukrainian churches standing alongside one another as a witness for peace on Kyiv's central square during the Revolution of Dignity in 2014.
Following a pastorate in Bridlington, during which he also taught at Rawdon College in Yorkshire, Whitley became the first Principal of the Baptist College of Victoria in Melbourne, Australia, in 1891.
Whitley was a key figure in the formation of the Baptist Historical Society in 1908.
He edited its journal, which soon gained an international reputation for the quality of its contents — a reputation it still enjoys nearly a century later as the Baptist Quarterly.
His A History of British Baptists remains an important source of information and comment for contemporary historians.
Altogether he made an important contribution to Baptist life and self-understanding in Britain and Australia, providing a model of how a pastor-scholar might enrich the life and faith of others.
The establishment of the annual lecture in his name is designed as an encouragement to research and writing by Baptist scholars, and to enable the results of this work to be published.
The giving of grants, advice and other forms of support by the Lectureship Committee serves the same purpose.
The committee consists of representatives of the British Baptist Colleges, the Baptist Union of Great Britain, BMS World Mission, the Baptist Ministers’ Fellowship and the Baptist Historical Society.
The Whitley Committee is delighted that Joshua Searle has accepted the invitation to deliver the annual lecture for 2016.
Joshua is on the staff of Spurgeon's College and lectures in Theology and Public Thought, having spent time living and teaching in Ukraine, where he has family, through his marriage, and many personal friends.
His passion for this country and the work and witness of the Baptist Church there is not just of political interest in this rapidly changing part of the world.
In exploring the complex relationship of Ukraine and Russia he also exposes some of the darker and deeper challenges of being radical believers.
Sandwiched between the suspicions of the Orthodox Church and the political state, free thinking Baptists have already paid a heavy price for their convictions.
Joshua identifies some of the daily conflicts to be negotiated by Baptists in terms of civic duty, concluding that obedience ends where evil begins.
It is no use focusing on the sins of individuals in the church while our state structures are complicit with injustice.
We may profitably reflect on the implications for ourselves in the market-centred West.
Sally Nelson, Secretary to the Whitley Committee PREFACE I am very grateful to the Whitley Committee for the kind invitation to give the 2016 Whitley Lecture.
Having lived and worked as a missionary in the city of Donetsk between 2011 and 2013, I have chosen to focus on Ukraine and the plight of the Baptist community in the wake of the Ukrainian Revolution of Dignity and Freedom in 2013-14.
My aim is to elucidate the church’s role in public life by setting out a simple and generous evangelical vision of Christian engagement that is humble, hospitable, full of grace, ready to listen, learn and serve, and to stand in solidarity with society in defence of the fundamental gospel values of truth, freedom, love and justice.
I dedicate this lecture to Michael Bourdeaux in appreciation for his lifetime of indefatigable advocacy on behalf of the millions who suffered persecution for their faith in the Soviet Union.
Michael has been a tremendous source of moral support and encouragement to me personally in recent years and his fine example of courage and dedication to the gospel of freedom and truth continues to inspire my generation to look to the future with hope.
I take this opportunity to express my warmest thanks to my colleagues at Spurgeon’s College for their support and encouragement.
In particular, I convey my deepest gratitude and respect to Sergey Rakhuba and Mykhailo Cherenkov for their friendship and inspiration.
I am also very grateful to Anne Clements for her judicious proofreading of this text.
All translations from Ukrainian, Russian and German in this lecture are my own, except where indicated otherwise.
Joshua T Searle Spurgeon’s College London, October 2015 ' Mission Eurasia is a large mission organisation that works to train, equip and mobilise Christians throughout post-Soviet Eurasia to engage in evangelism, church-planting, and humanitarian relief projects by developing creative and strategic ministries.
The heavy shackles will fall, The gloomy prisons will crumble, Freedom will joyfully greet you at the gates, And the brothers will give you a sword. —Alexander Pushkin INTRODUCTION Anyone with a romantic frame of mind and a love of beauty cannot help being captivated by Ukraine.
Ukrainian culture — nurtured by an exuberant tradition of poetry, literature, music, and creative arts — possesses a depth and vigour that few nations could rival.
As well as being married to a Ukrainian, I am privileged to count several Ukrainians as some of my closest friends.
I have found the Ukrainian people, on the whole, to be imbued with a passionate and innate love of freedom.
Moreover, unlike other nations that I have visited in post-Soviet Eurasia, Christianity permeates every aspect of Ukrainian culture.
Since gaining independence in 1991, Ukraine has been the major hub of evangelistic and humanitarian activity throughout Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia.
Despite strong resistance from entrenched Soviet mentalities and the passing of unfavourable legislation, Ukrainian Christians succeeded in establishing various NGOs, Christian missions, evangelical think tanks and various centres of theological education.
I have long been convinced that of all the nations in Eastern Europe, it is Ukraine which has the greatest potential to become a beacon of light and hope to the people of the Former Soviet Union.
I am also persuaded that the Baptist community in Ukraine, despite its relatively small size, can play a leading role not only in the renewal of the churches, but also in the transformation of all spheres of postSoviet society in accordance with gospel values.
Kirchliche und gesellschaftliche Entwicklungen in Ostmitteleuropa nach dem Zerfall des Kommunismus, edited by Dietmar W Winkler , 257.
The central square in Kyiv, known as Maidan Nezalezhnosti (Matioan He3zaneocnocmi, translated as “Independence Square”), became a rallying point for the protestors.
Several people died in the mainly peaceful protests, which were met with bulldozers, batons and police violence in the winter of 2013.
It soon emerged that among the dead protestors there were dozens of Christians, including one young Baptist, Alexander Khrapachenko, who was a cousin of a friend and former colleague of mine.
Alexander, like the others in the “Heavenly Hundred” , was campaigning to ensure the future of a free Ukraine.
He paid the ultimate price when he was shot in the head by a police sniper on 20"" February 2014.
Alexander and millions of other Ukrainians like him were protesting against a state that had become little more than a system of organised “kleptocracy”* and extortion.
Law had become not a principle that guaranteed the rights of all citizens, but a tool in the hands of a corrupt elite that could be applied to extort money and power.
Under Ukraine’s fraudulent Russian-backed President, Viktor Yanukovych, the Ukrainian state had become a vehicle for the self-enrichment of the President’s family and a narrow circle of oligarchs and regime insiders.
When he took power in 2010 Yanukovych set about looting the Ukrainian economy.
In just four years, it is alleged that he had embezzled $100 billion from the state funds of Ukraine.
When he fled Ukraine, protestors entered his estate and found evidence of grotesque luxury and a large cache of incriminating documents that he had tried to dispose of in a lake before he left.
Escaping from his presidential palace, Yanukovych took with him an estimated $32 billion of Ukrainian state funds over the border to Russia.
The documents that were recovered from the lake at his palace showed that, as widows, orphans and pensioners were literally freezing to death during the severe Ukrainian winters, Yanukovych was adorning his vast estate with Lebanese cedar doors at a cost of $64,000 each and spending $328,000 on wall panelling for his winter garden.
After the grotesque regime of the discredited tyrant, Yanukovych, Ukrainian society required not just constitutional reform, but a wholesale social reformation, involving a transformation of values that would signify a clear break from the state-authorised crime, corruption and indignity of the post-Independence era.
In this regard, the “Revolution of Dignity” — as it came to be known — came to symbolize the awakening of civil society in Ukraine as a whole and the reinstitution of the values of dignity and respect throughout the country after the shameful debacle of Yanukovych’s criminal regime.
Therefore, contrary to the Russian propaganda about “Ukrainian fascists in Kyiv” and the fabricated threats to Russian citizens in Ukraine, the main aims of the revolution were social justice, democracy and the rule of law.
The protestors were demonstrating against the corrupt presidential election, which was rigged to give the impression that Viktor Yanukovych had gained the most votes.
The Orange Revolution succeeded in overturning this result and fresh elections were called, which resulted in a majority for the reformist President, Viktor Yushchenko.
Unfortunately for Ukraine, the new leaders of the Orange government were unable to unite and soon succumbed to infighting, which gave the opportunity for Yanukovych to be elected in 2010 with the help of Putin’s Russia, which spent millions of dollars on Yanukovych’s election > Matthew Luxmoore, “Journalists gather for Mezyhirya Fest investigate conference at fugitive ex-president’s estate,” Kyiv Post 8"" June 2014.
The result was an unmitigated disaster for Ukraine, as the country was brought further into Russia’s sphere of influence and corruption became even more endemic at every level of Ukrainian society.
One of the key differences between the 2014 demonstrations and both the Declaration of Independence in 1991 and the Orange Revolution of 2004-5 was the unprecedented ecumenical mobilisation of all the main Ukrainian churches in defence of fundamental human values of dignity and freedom.
For the first time in post-Soviet history, all the major churches stood in solidarity with society against the state.
The support that the churches gave to the Revolution of Dignity seems to have further consolidated this trust among the general population.
At the height of the protests in December 2013, my friend and former colleague, Dr Mykhailo Cherenkov, commented that, “While the government is paralyzed, the church has become a source of support.
People are hiding in churches from the repression of the police, church representatives are calling on the people to take peaceful action and on the authorities to fear God.
For the first time in postSoviet history, the church in Ukraine was found to be on the side of social reform.
I was not on the DCU campus at the time, but I heard tearful accounts from friends and former colleagues, who told me that the militants arrived on campus on a sunny afternoon, armed with Kalashnikov rifles and rocket-propelled grenades.
Speaking with pure Russian accents, these armed men threatened the staff and students who were on campus at the time with “court martial” if they did not comply fully with their orders.
In an instant, these armed men forced them out of their homes and deprived them of their livelihoods.
Reporting on this takeover, the former Baptist Rector of DCU noted recently that, “The academic buildings and dormitories have been converted into warehouses.
Hostages are being held there and the dormitories have been transformed into torture chambers.
A classroom of a private Christian school on the university campus has been turned into a shooting range where rebels shoot at Ukrainian symbols and children’s drawings.
Given my personal experience, part of the aim of this lecture will be to focus the attention of readers on the humanitarian catastrophe that is taking place in the Russianoccupied areas of Ukraine.
Many people in the West do not know about Russia’s undeclared, “hybrid war” against Ukraine.
In June 2015 Vice President of the Evangelical Baptist Union of Ukraine, Igor Bandura, reported that in the Donetsk region there are 56 Baptist churches that remain under Ukrainian control and 44 churches that are occupied by pro-Russian separatists.
In the ""' Mykhailo Cherenkov, “Reconciliation Begins at Home”, in New Eastern Europe 5 (September/October 2015), 66-7.
Congregations in these regions have either fled or gone underground, as their church buildings have been confiscated by armed Russian and pro-Russian separatists.
People in the West have not adequately grasped that in post-Soviet Russia a new ideology has emerged, which constitutes the greatest threat to global peace and religious freedom in the world today.
We in the West need to realise in particular how the notion of the so-called Russian World has started to dominate the discourse not only of the Kremlin but also of the Russian Orthodox Church.
The Russian World, with its triad of Orthodoxy—Autocracy—Nationalism, has filled the ideological void left by the Soviet Union.
Under the influence of the Russian World ideology, nationalistic hatred is disguised as holiness and religious zeal.
Recent commentators have pointed out the remarkable parallels between the foreign policy strategies of Adolf Hitler and Vladimir Putin.
In the 1930s Hitler used the existence of large German populations in Czechoslovakia, Austria and Poland to justify his demands for territorial expansion.
All of this may seem like an academic or political debate about ideas, and as something that is far removed from theology or Baptist principles.
So far it seems that the only countries threatened directly by this ideology are Russia’s immediate neighbours.
In Ukraine the Russian World ideology is causing death and destruction on a scale unknown since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Baptists and evangelicals have been tortured and murdered in the Russian-occupied territories of Ukraine.
If these facts alone are not sufficient to cause us to care about what is happening, then it needs to be made clear just how volatile the situation is in Ukraine at this time.
Unless decisive action is taken now, the Western world could be faced with not just a regional conflict in a small corner of Ukraine, but with nuclear weapons being unleashed by Russia against the capital cities of Europe and even North America.
There is already alarm among Poles and Lithuanians that Putin may engage in the kind of brinkmanship that will result in a '° This is the title of a book published in 2014 about Putin’s regime.
The use of nuclear weapons against Russia’s “enemies” is being openly discussed on Russian state television and such weapons are a long-standing part of Russia’s military strategy.
One authoritative report, commissioned by the Royal Institute of International Affairs in June 2015, warns that, “Just because something is unimaginable for Western »4 Asa result, the planners does not mean it is not considered a viable option by Russia. future not only of Ukraine, but of the whole of Eastern Europe, now hangs in the balance.
If Putin’s Russia manages to get its way in Ukraine, then the whole of Eastern Europe could be plunged into a new dark age of Russian-led serfdom.
For those in the West who advocate appeasement and who speak of Russia’s so-called “legitimate interests in Ukraine”, let it be clear that Putin’s Russia will not stop its aggressive policy of expansion in Ukraine.
The whole of Europe (together with the Western values of freedom, accountability, democracy and civil society) could find itself confronted by an existential threat.
From my personal experience as well as from sustained reading and reflection on this issue, I now believe that the only way to counter the threat posed by the imperialistic Russian World ideology is by demonstrating unity in solidarity.
The diplomatic efforts by the West can only secure temporary, imperfect ceasefire arrangements.
Mykhailo Cherenkov remarks that, the religious aspect of the Russian World ideology that lies behind the violence “makes the conflict in Ukraine unresolvable by political or economic means.
If the war against Ukraine is a Holy War for Holy Russia, then no sanctions or diplomatic agreements will end ites There is no military solution to the current conflict.
In a nuclear age, the principle of Mutually Assured Destruction makes it futile to speak of any “winners” emerging from the inevitable Armageddon.
Moreover, as we struggle against these violent and dehumanising ideologies, we should be aware of the danger that the fight against evil can easily acquire an evil character itself.
There is no doubt that Baptists are a small minority within the family of churches in Ukraine.
The membership of the All-Ukrainian Union of Churches of Evangelical Christians—Baptists *° for 2010 was assessed at 151,000 members, although such figures are difficult to corroborate.
Even if these figures are accurate, Ukrainian Baptists °° This was the main theme of the 2015 London Consultation on Ukraine at Lambeth Palace, London.
The Consultation was co-hosted by Mission Eurasia and BMS World Mission.
As Chairman of Mission Eurasia UK, I served as one of the co-moderators of the Consultation.
The blurring of distinctions between Baptist, Pentecostals and other evangelical Christian groups is partly a legacy of the Soviet era.
Some Baptists refused to accept this arrangement and were driven underground and persecuted for their faith.
In 1961, these Baptists organised themselves into a breakaway organisation, known as the Church of Evangelicals Christians-Baptists, and became known as initiativniki, or “initiators”. would constitute less than 0.4% of the total population of Ukraine.
Given their minority status, Baptist communities in Ukraine and throughout the former USSR have tended to make a virtue of necessity by idealising their marginality.
Therefore, from a Baptist perspective, one of the most remarkable outcomes of the Revolution of Dignity was the appointment of Oleksandr Turchynov as Interim President of Ukraine in 2014.
Turchynov belongs to the Union of Life Baptist Church in Kyiv, where he is a regular preacher.
The fact that Turchynov was a Baptist was played up by the Russian media, who portrayed him as a pawn of American interests and as a “sectarian” who did not fit into the ideological co-ordinates of the Russian World.
One of these was Pavel Unguryan, who now serves as Vice-Minister of Environment and Natural Resources of Ukraine.
According to the Baptist World Alliance, in 2013 there were 2,363 Baptist churches in Ukraine with a combined membership of 120,963, which makes the Ukrainian Baptist Union the second largest Baptist community in Europe, after the Baptist Union of Great Britain, which had 129,430 members.
The Revolution of Dignity can thus be understood not merely as a political or even social event, but as a catalyst of deep, tectonic shifts in thinking about the interrelation between the church and the world, the nature of prophetic witness and the role of mission.
In the history of the world, the Revolution of Dignity is merely an episode in a linear chronology.
But in the history of the church, it may be the kairos moment ushering in a new series of opportunities and challenges.
Ukrainian Christians can now bid farewell to the ideological remnants of a moribund and defunct Soviet system and to a society whose attitude towards Christianity wavered between grudging acceptance and outright hostility.
Therefore, one of the key contentions of this lecture is that the Revolution of Dignity signals the “coming of age” of the Ukrainian churches“ and that this development will have major implications that extend beyond the national boundaries of Ukraine.
I believe that despite their limited numbers, Baptists can be in the vanguard of a new movement for the reformation of the church and the renewal of society, which casts off the dismal legacy of corruption, inhumanity, inefficiency, unaccountability and servitude associated with the Soviet past, and moves towards an open future with hope for greater freedom.
Although Ukraine has deep historical roots in Orthodoxy, the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church is also prevalent, particularly in Western Ukraine.
The Orthodox and Greek Catholic Churches (Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars, 2014). this, the Baptist community will need a renewed vision of its responsibilities towards the state and society.
Baptists’ Responsibilities Towards the State and Society** The Revolution of Dignity has prompted new thinking among Ukrainian Baptists concerning the meaning and significance of basic terms, such as “power”, “the world”, “culture”, and “freedom” in the light of the gospel witness.
There has been a radical re-evaluation of the demarcation between the spheres of legitimate influence of the church, the state and society, in light of biblical teachings concerning the responsibilities of Christians as citizens both of a particular nation state and of God’s Kingdom.
The maps of the sacred and profane, religious and social have been redrawn.
The task of the church is to discern between good and evil, between God and gods, to illuminate the front line in the spiritual battle against the powers and principalities that manifest themselves in social structures and political institutions, and to make the Kingdom of God a visible reality in the public sphere.
By not protecting the victims of state violence, the church is complicit in the crimes of the governing regime; by not calling evil that which is evil, the church colludes with the criminals.
In common with every citizen, Baptists have a clear responsibility towards the state.
The church and individual Christians are obedient to the authorities, on condition that these authorities carry * The scope of this lecture precludes a detailed discussion of the meaning and application of the terms, “state” and “society” and their interrelation.
In contrast to the classical tradition of political theory, represented in the writings of Aquinas, Bodin, Hobbes, Spinoza, Locke and Kant, Hegel drew a clear distinction between the “political” and the “civil” spheres of ethical life.
Hegel maintained that the role of the state was to represent universal values that transcend the irreconcilable conflicts over private interests that are an inevitable consequence of citizens’ participation in civil society.
Civil society and the state are mutually dependent in so far as the competing interests within civil society require the regulation of the state.
For its part, the state cannot reach its full ethical potential without the operation of a robust civil society.
How Followers of Christ Should Serve the Common Good (Grand Rapids: Baker, 2011), xvi.
It is not the government, but moral conscience informed by the teachings of the Scriptures, which determines what is good and what is evil.
Baptists, in common with all Christian citizens, are called upon to distinguish between good and evil, and thus to legitimise the power that protects from evil, and to delegitimise the power that serves evil.
When those in power violate their legal and moral boundaries, they should not only be denied obedience, but should be actively resisted, as great Christian leaders such as Dietrich Bonhoeffer and Martin Luther King demonstrated.
Thus, in distinguishing between good and evil, the church is responsible for submitting to legitimate authority which acts in accordance with the constitution and moral law.
At the same time, the church has a sacred duty to resist lawless authority, which rewrites laws for itself and turns the legal system into a tool for the misappropriation of power and wealth by the state authorities.
Unfortunately, among many post-Soviet Baptists, we hear about obedience much more often than about resistance.
Yet, if we read the Bible carefully, we see many examples of resistance to oppressive power.
For instance, in 1 Samuel we read about God’s stern disapproval of the establishment of political power in Israel.
In Ecclesiastes the Preacher decries all political authority as vanity and hollow conceit.
In the New Testament, the condemnation of political authority is even more explicit.
Proper obedience is demonstrated in the payment of taxes, in answering to the institutions of power, and in complying with existing legislation.
Disobedience or resistance is demonstrated in criticising transgressions, in denouncing injustice, in the withholding of bribes, in peaceful meetings and civic rallies, and in the refusal to take up arms against peaceful citizens.
During the Revolution of Dignity the vast majority of Ukrainian Baptists recognised that they were called to resist the power of the corrupt state.
Therefore, if revolutionary resistance to the state is to avoid acquiring a destructive character, it must be imbued with a Christian content, well-defined limits, and appropriate, non-violent modes of engagement.
Alongside their duties to the state, Baptists also have responsibilities toward the broader church and to society as a whole.
In a world divided into spheres of religious influences, Baptist communities can create a place of meeting, dialogue and communication among the established historic churches.
Such a healthy ecumenism means no more and no less than the acceptance of genuine ecclesiastical diversity, good neighbourliness and the preservation of openness to others.
Baptists can be loyally and wholeheartedly committed to their own unique tradition without believing that it embodies final and exclusive truth, and without thereby abandoning the hope that there is more to be learned from other traditions.
Baptists can relate to Orthodoxy in the context of the history of the church, rather than through prejudiced beliefs concerning autocratic policies or national chauvinism.
Baptists can relate to the state by respecting the law and fulfilling their political duties and responsibilities to all people.
Baptists can relate to society by demonstrating solidarity with the legitimate aspirations of ordinary people for freedom and dignity.
Above all, Baptists must avoid the temptation to become too closely aligned with the interests of the state, which can lead to a dangerous sacralisation of state power.
For Baptists the archetypes of a “God-—bearing people,” “Holy Russia,” and “Orthodox people” are devoid of their customary magical hold.
Throughout their history, Baptists have learned that the alliance of church and state is without biblical justification and is morally bankrupt.
The recent history of Russia demonstrates that the hegemony of the Orthodox Church in post-Soviet society does not lead to spiritual revival, but merely creates a thin veneer of Christianity among a people who live in fear of the allpowerful church-state.
Neither Orthodox monarchism nor atheistic communism, along with their prevailing authoritarianism, is compatible with the freedom of the gospel.
History affords numerous examples of the fatal consequences that can ensue when political and religious institutions are united into the totality of a single authority.
Under such conditions, Christianity can become conscripted by imperialistic ideologies, resulting in a demonic hybrid of pseudo-Christian dogma and xenophobic nationalism.
This kind of fake patriotic religion leads to the blasphemous deification of the state.
Moreover, “national churches” can invoke the name of “God” as an idol who has bestowed a special blessing and favour on a particular nation, which then allegedly gives this “special” nation the right to invade and conquer neighbouring territories and subdue their peoples — as we are currently witnessing in Ukraine.
Such a sham Christianity, which is a denial of Christ and the gospel, will always refuse to accept any higher power and will ruthlessly destroy any forms of genuine Christian faith that go beyond cultural or national identity.
This kind of idolatrous, nationalistic “official Christianity”, which encourages war and hatred towards other nations, is a demonic distortion of the gospel and is under the control not of Christ, but of the dark “powers and principalities” which Paul alluded to in his Epistle to the Ephesians.
Baptists are thus right to be cautious of such alliances between the church and state, especially in the present context of post-Soviet Eurasia.
Since the fall of the USSR, the witness of post-Soviet Christians has been enervated by a dangerous imbalance in the relationship between the church and the state, on the one hand, and between the church and society on the other.
The church has tended to build a separate relationship with the state, promising it its loyalty in exchange for benefits, patronage, and preferential treatment.
As the church and state grew closer, society began to lose respect both for the state and the church.
In Ukraine and other nations of the former USSR, society became alienated from both the church and the state.
The political system of a society includes both the state and civil society.
In reality, however, the post-Soviet church became, in effect, co—ruler with the state.
Furthermore, the church has a duty of obedience to the state only insofar as the state protects the welfare of one’s neighbours and the general well—being of the people.
The church’s responsibility to society can be expressed positively in solidarity and negatively in constructive disagreement with social trends that do not correspond to the gospel values of truth, freedom, respect, dignity and compassion.
Thus, in relation to society, it seems that the church is enamoured of disagreement and forgetful about solidarity.
Baptist Historical Society, 2008). modes of evangelisation that were exported to Ukraine by Western missionaries in the years following the implosion of the Soviet Union, but which were so unsuited to the communitarian context of post-Soviet society.
After the Revolution, both the evangelical and the historical churches have been faced with the unsettling truth that personal faith and evangelism alone are no long sufficient.
The revolutionary events in Ukraine have demonstrated that traditional understandings of the church’s responsibilities toward the state and society have been exhausted and are in need of revision.
In this situation, I think that instead of calling the people to repent and make peace, we ourselves should repent for betraying the people, and for failing for so many years to speak truthfully to those in power and to stand on the side of the oppressed.
From Evangelical Activism to Missio Dei After the Revolution of Dignity, Christianity in Ukraine is entering a new era.
Before long, the needs of mission dictated the need for missiology, and the questions of missiology came up against the need for a comprehensive theological analysis of the ties that bind the church and the Kingdom of God, community and society, mission and education, and religion and culture.
Too often, post-Soviet Baptists have abdicated their social responsibility.
Some churches have reduced the task of mission to exhorting people to join their church.
Society remains without a transformative influence as churches relinquish their vocation to be salt and light.
The light shines only upon the faithful and the salt is distributed only to members of the church.
It is no longer good for anything, except to be thrown out and trampled underfoot.
Instead they put it on its stand, and it gives light to everyone in the house.
The radical French theologian, Jacques Ellul, maintained that, . we must not wait for people to come to church, or to meetings organised by Christians.
To evangelise means to go into groups and meetings of people who are not Christians.
To evangelise is to declare a gospel which enters the concrete interests, the anxieties and hopes of these people.
Instead, there needs to be a vision of holistic mission, in which both the individual and society, the spiritual and the social, the moral and the political become complementary parts of the overall Christian vision of biblically-informed action on behalf of the overriding biblical imperative of social justice.
As in the West, the well-intentioned emphasis of evangelicals on personal salvation and gaining individual converts has been misguided, especially when these emphases have been carried away with narrowly—defined personal issues at the expense of social responsibility.
One young theologian has helpfully noted that, if someone is convinced that there is a place where they will be tormented after death, and that the only way to avoid this terror is by affirming that Jesus Christ is Lord, then they will no doubt make that affirmation, regardless of whether they are genuinely moved by Christ or not.
This type of discourse endeavours to compel individuals to bow their knee regardless of their motives or the nature of their desire.
Like a lover of nuts who is offered thousands of shells with no centre, so we offer God thousands of “converts” with no hearts.
You travel over land and sea to win a single convert, and when you have succeeded, you make them twice as much a child of hell as you are” * Ellul, False Presence of the Kingdom , 103.
According to the late American Baptist theologian, James McClendon Jr., this focus on making converts constitutes a demonic perversion of the true task of mission.
The contours of the future are still hazy; we look as through a glass darkly.
Nevertheless, we can identify four stages of transition that the post-Soviet church is currently passing through.
Mission is not about inviting people to religious buildings to attend religious events organised by the church.
Mission has a theocentric, rather than an ecclesiocentric, object and point of departure.
Thoughts on God’s Mission within the CIS in the Future”, in Penner and Sawatsky , Mission in the Former Soviet Union (Schwarzenfeld: Neufeld Verlag, 2005), 258.
Anglican Consultative Council XIII (London: Anglican Communion Office, 2006), 302.
Paradigm Shifts in Theology of Mission . originates in the very nature of the Triune God, then mission becomes not so much an activity in which churches engage, but a divine imperative in which the church participates.
The Kingdom of God, rather than the growth of the church, is the object of mission.
The coming of that Kingdom “on earth as in heaven” , rather than numerical conversions, is regarded as the true aim of mission.
Secondly, we are witnessing the transition from a particular understanding of mission as the “spiritual work” of a few designated “missionaries” to the idea of a holistic mission, covering all spheres of life and mobilising all the people of the church to participate in the missio Dei.
Such participation involves a renewed commitment to work tirelessly in the struggle for social justice.
A reconsideration of the idea of the “priesthood of all believers” provides impetus to a theological understanding of mission as a responsibility delegated to all the people of God.
Related to this is the expansion of the social base of mission — from a ministry of professional missionaries to a movement of missional professionals.
Ukraine has seen new missional initiatives, such as the creation of the Alliance of Christian Professional Associations and the mass publication of the Desktop Gospel (Eeanzenue nua pa6bouem cmoue), in which Baptists have played a leading role.
If previously mission boiled down to evangelism and the planting of new churches, today it inevitably involves discerning the activity of the transfiguring Word in the world and campaigning for social justice, which is itself a gospel imperative.
The third trend that can be observed in connection with cultural and demographic processes is the call to revive, awaken, and reform existing church structures in order to equip the church for mission and ministry in a changing world.
The year 2013, which marked the 1025"" anniversary of the establishment of Christianity in Kyivan Rus,” highlighted the issue of nominal Christianity in the post-Soviet nations of the Eurasia.
Despite the selfidentification of most people throughout Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus as “Christian”, only a small percentage is made up of practicing Christians.
Although the federation was abolished by the Mongol invasions in the 1240s, many people in Ukraine, Russian and Belarus today claim cultural ancestry with the Rus. people.
In these traditionally “Orthodox” nations, society is transitioning into post— Christendom, and in many regions the church has become a museum, a relic to a bygone era.
Fourth, a shift is taking place from the usual short-term thinking and naive exclusivity to a meaningful partnership between traditions and regions.
Thus, Peter Penner calls for dialogue and a “truly biblical partnership” in implementing “God’s mission” between foreign and national movements, as well as between Evangelical and Orthodox Churches.
The mission of the churches will be served not by fawning and borrowing, but by mutually enriching partnerships and the creative construction of localised missiologies.
These transitions mark a more profound shift in the missiological paradigm, which is still difficult to describe, but of a magnitude suggesting that it will result in a radical rethinking of the church and its vocation.
It is no accident that these processes coincide in time with the upcoming 500"" anniversary of the European Reformation.
Some Ukrainian theologians and historians have even argued that post-Soviet evangelical Christians have skipped their Reformation.
Such a “reformation” would be directed not merely towards the renewal of the church, but also the transfiguration of society.
Revolution is the harbinger of new life, but the revolutionary period is always preceded by labour pangs that presage the birth of a new awakening of the consciousness of freedom.
Therefore, in order to sustain lasting social change, society needs the church to imbue the public sphere with values that reflect the inclusive vision of compassion symbolised by the Kingdom of God.
If civil society is the realm in which human values are developed for the common good of the whole public domain, then the church in the post-Soviet space is called upon to humanise society in the name of the Kingdom of God.
Society can rightfully expect the church to demonstrate the cardinal Christian virtues of faith, hope, compassion and solidarity.
The radical political implications of Jesus’ proclamation of the Kingdom of God and the transformative role of the church in society have far greater power to attract and inspire people than the isolated calls of the evangelist to personal repentance.
Reimagining Church and Post-Soviet Society Post-secularism and post-Christendom create opportunities for the Church’s return to the public sphere.
The church’s main interest in an open society should be solidarity with society rather than patronage of the state.
Post-Soviet Baptists can lead the way towards the church’s return to society.
The current revolutionary situation may be a particularly auspicious time for the church to engage with society.
Instead of vying for preferential treatment and struggling for influence, the church should educate its people and impart to them a new vision of hope because the future of post-Soviet society belongs to the people, and not to the oligarchs and corrupt state authorities.
As well as demonstrating fidelity to past traditions and concern for the present, the church in the power of the Holy Spirit has a prophetic mandate to foresee a new tomorrow.
The prophetic vocation of the church is expressed in its capacity to anticipate the future, to warn of danger, and to serve as a harbinger of hope.
The church should anticipate and embody renewal, awakening and rebirth and should prepare and educate its people to live out their prophetic calling as agents of the Kingdom of God.
We must focus on preparatory work for the future, rather than on responding to and struggling with what we have already outlived and agonised over.
It is obvious to everyone that the current order has lost legitimacy — the emperor has no clothes.
The dismal legacy of the seventy-year Soviet catastrophe and the spirit of servitude, falsehood and disrespect that it nurtured have left their mark on post-Soviet society today.
Given the widespread cynicism towards political institutions, the post-Soviet church is called not only to engage in politics, but should itself become a polis, which embodies an alternative vision for political engagement and mediation between society and the state.
The Greek word, éxkAnoia, translated in English Bibles as “church”, contains two primary significations.
In a strictly linguistic sense, therefore, the church is that which is “called out from or to” something.
It is significant that in the whole Bible there is no single reference to the church as an organisation, institution or building.
The church — in the sense of a community that is “called out” — is thus both an empirical and an eschatological reality.
The fullest expression of the meaning and nature of the church is to be found in the last book of the Bible, Revelation.
The New Jerusalem of Revelation 21 represents a transfigured world and the fusion of the entire human community into a spiritual fellowship without barriers or distinctions of any kind.
Nowhere in the Gospels do we read of Jesus’s establishing a religious institution.
Far from founding a religious institution based on order and hierarchy, he built a community in which the values of compassion and justice were lived out in the context of a new order of existence made possible by the Kingdom of God.
The problem in many post-Soviet churches is that missionaries and church planters have tried to build the Kingdom of God through programmes and evangelisation outreach strategies, which have had little relationship value.
God — as Father, Son and Holy Spirit — has ordained community as his chosen means to build his Kingdom on earth.
The early churches were not “churches” in the modern sense at all; the earliest Christians had no designated buildings of worship, but would congregate in each others’ houses, offer hospitality, share each others’ stories and read and reflect together on the meaning of Scripture.
In the same way that the disciples journeyed with Jesus and gradually came to a realisation of their faith, so should the church without walls welcome people into fellowship and allow them to journey with us as they (and we) become more integrated into the Way of Jesus.
The missional task of the church is to witness to the compassion of Christ for the benefit of the watching world.
Churches that thrive in post-Soviet Eurasia will be those communities of believers covenanted together in the love of Christ and exhibiting a radical witness guided by faithfulness to Christ, obedience to Scripture and an openness to the leading of the Holy Spirit.
Above all, church without walls is a missional movement that builds communities of grace.
Compassion is the defining character of the Kingdom of God, which is concerned with relationships.
Following Jesus in Contemporary Context (Downers Grove: InterVarsity, 2003), 230.
Compassion rooted in vision, covenant relationships, generous hospitality and inclusive community, must be both the object and point of departure of all of our educational and evangelistic endeavours.
Compassion stands to mission in the same relation as fire to flame; compassion is the heart and soul of mission, its most basic essence and condition of its being.
Compassion thus remains a constant gospel principle to be practiced regardless of the cultural context, even though the ways in which compassion is demonstrated will vary according to the setting.
In a context of social breakdown and deprivation, such as parts of urban areas in Eastern Ukraine, the element of compassion becomes particularly paramount.
In a context where broken families, substance abuse, alcoholism, destitution and poverty are facts of everyday life for the majority of people, any “gospel” message of salvation, hope and new life in Christ that does not reach out to people with the compassion of Christ, however well intentioned or doctrinally sound, will not be heard and may even do more harm than good.
Sin and evil are not merely personal issues, but also structural phenomena.
Thus, whilst it is true that God cares about whether we lie or tell the truth as individuals, God also cares about institutions in government and the media that disseminate lies and misinformation to entire populations.
The church is thus called to become a humanising force in society that upholds spiritual values of truth and compassion.
This kind of transformation demands a radical reformation of the church’s engagement with post-Soviet society.
Civil society has a right to demand transparency, honesty and accountability from the church.
However, while talking about salvation and eternity, all too often the church has engaged in underhand business deals and political machinations in order to maintain its interests.
Therefore, Christian values of honesty, dignity, freedom, justice and compassion need to be inculturated and embedded not just in explicit church activities, but in the mundane realities that govern social and personal relations in the nation as a whole.
The gospel message of the coming Kingdom of God can become a powerful change agent within post-Soviet society.
The Ukrainian Revolution, in which hundreds of thousands of Christian participated — and in which dozens of Christians lost their lives to the bullets of Yanukovych’s Berkut snipers — has the potential to become a symbol of hope for church and society not only in Ukraine, but throughout the post-Soviet space.
Celebrating the Great Traditions of Christian Faith (Trowbridge: Eagle Publishing, 1999), 153.
The Revolution of Dignity has signalled a new era in which the post-Soviet church is awakened to its social responsibilities and is able to demonstrate solidarity with the people.
In order for Christian values to become incarnated in the fabric of social relations, the church must jettison its obsequious dependence on the state.
The church must also resist the temptation to collude with authoritarian political regimes that attempt to impose morality “from above” by the passing of legislation, such as laws that discriminate against homosexuals.
Such legislation may have a thin veneer of Christianity, but is in fact a denial of the Christian faith and values, which can never be institutionally imposed or endorsed by ruling ideologies.
This kind of Christianity facilitates the development of civil society by being free, humble, generous, hospitable, full of grace, and ready not just to judge and criticise, but also to listen, learn, serve and suffer for the sake of the Kingdom of God.
The problem with recent missions in the post-Soviet space is that they have mainly been concerned with making occasional forays into society for testimony and to “catch” a few converts and bring them into the church.
The open and inclusive missional vision of church without walls, by contrast, signifies movement in two directions.
The church not only teaches society that which God reveals inside the church, but also learns from what God reveals to the church through social events and processes.
Society is the public space which is sustained, redeemed, and sanctified by God’s presence.
All around the world God is active, beckoning us to participate with Him in the great work of redemption.
The church can demonstrate solidarity with such groups and affirm the dignity and human rights of all people, regardless of their political views, social status or sexuality.
The church can do this without endorsing the lifestyles and opinions of those whose values appear to some Christians to contradict biblical moral teachings.
Mission, Theological Education and the Transformation of Post-Soviet Society , 99.
A church without walls, which sees the dissemination of the values of the Kingdom of God to all spheres of society as an urgent gospel imperative, will likewise influence not just church congregations, but will thus reach out to transform educational institutions, theological think tanks, the media, and all the various infrastructure of civil society.
A church that wants to work in tandem with the humanising forces of civil society will be concerned not to consolidate a religious institution based on order and hierarchy, but will be much more involved in building authentic communities of grace.
The success of this kind of mission is expressed not in the triumph of Christianity over society, but in compassion for and involvement in society.
What is preserved here is the social responsibility, the desire to influence and change, but without the naive optimism about Christianisation and Christendom.
Mission signifies not so much a movement from the church into the world, but also a constant Christian presence in the world, not only through evangelistic activity, but also through the sacrament of living.
This is not so much a course of action as it is a way of thinking and being.
The church’s mission in the world is realised in imperatives to proclaim and encourage, send and convert, to go and teach, but also in non-binding forms, such as being, living, sympathising, loving, salting, and shining the light of Christ in places of darkness.
Church without walls is a gospel-orientated vision of renewal that requires a reconnection between mission and discipleship, teaching and preaching, sanctification and conversion.
The Great Commission of Christ speaks not about a hasty transfer of the truth, but the long and difficult work of missionary teachers with students, the Christian enlightenment of nations, and the formation of entire populations.
The gospel is a call to radical metanoia, to a fundamental reorientation of one’s material relation towards God and towards one’s neighbours.
We demonstrate our fidelity to the gospel of Christ, not simply by adhering to sound doctrine, but by living and believing in accordance with the vision inspired by the world-changing events of incarnation, crucifixion and resurrection.
Baptists, in particular, who often pride themselves on their commitment to the unshakeable authority of the Scriptures, must demonstrate not merely that they know what the “Word of God” is , but must also show that they are capable of expressing it in the material reality of their lives by working in solidarity with society and the wider church.
The post-Soviet Baptist community now has a historic opportunity to lead the way into a vision of open Christianity and church without walls.
CONCLUSION The Ukrainian Revolution of Dignity has unleashed a new impulse for wholesale social reform and a desire to jettison the burden of lingering neo-Sovietism and its dysfunctional modes of social interaction.
As Hegel claimed, human actors are caught up in the drama, but no-one has seen the script.
The Owl of Minerva takes flight only at dusk®’ and we will only learn of the true significance of the Revolution of Dignity in hindsight.
But even now it is apparent that historians one hundred years hence will look back at the Revolution in 2013-14 as the time when Ukrainian society took a bold leap (as opposed to the previous timid steps) away from the post-Soviet vices of corruption, cynicism, and irresponsibility.
The Revolution marks a return to the values of freedom, compassion and solidarity that proved so fatal to the Soviet Union in the late 1980s and which similarly, in due course, will deliver the coup de grdce to the equally discredited and dysfunctional regime of Vladimir Putin’s Russia.
From a Christian perspective, the Revolution may prove to be God’s gracious call to the churches in the post-Soviet space to engage proactively in the transformation of unjust, corrupt social structures, to demonstrate solidarity with those fighting for freedom and justice and thereby to become salt and light to their society.
Ukraine’s Christian community, by demonstrating solidarity with its people, has helped to blaze a new trail out of the post-Soviet captivity of the church, which other countries in the region may now follow.
Perhaps, we may speculate that whenever Putin and his corrupt Kremlin apparatchiks are finally forced to release their stranglehold on Russian public opinion and when the church in Russia rediscovers its true prophetic voice, even Russia itself will have its own peaceful Revolution on Moscow’s Red Square.
Moreover, in a second letter addressed to Putin, the RUECB praises the Russian President for “his churches stand by their people in their legitimate aspirations for freedom and democracy (as their Ukrainian counterparts did in 2013/14), Russian Christians can expect from their Ukrainian brothers and sisters fervent prayers, material support and spiritual solidarity as they take a stand with the people on behalf of the Christian values of truth, justice, compassion, honesty, integrity, dignity and freedom.
I can see a new era in which Orthodox (notwithstanding their different and sometimes conflicting loyalties), Catholics, Baptists, Pentecostals and others join together out of common reverence for Christ in order to infuse the social space with spiritual values of love, humanity, compassion, forgiveness and solidarity.
As I have been praying for Ukraine recently, I can see a vision beginning to emerge, even though it sometimes seems that I am peering through a glass darkly.
I can see an Orthodox priest from Donetsk praying with a Pentecostal preacher from Kyiv.
I can see them calling each other brothers and honouring and serving each other out of reverence to Christ.
I can even see a Catholic monk from Lviv standing alongside a Baptist pastor from Moscow, and together praying that the peace of Christ would rule in their respective nations.
But I hope we can have the faith to realise that with God all things are possible and that we might yet live to witness all of these things.
This wish for a large-scale reconciliation between Orthodox, Catholics and Protestants in Ukraine is a worthy aspiration, which would constitute a significant and progressive step in Ukraine’s long journey out of the post-Soviet transition.
There may even be reconciliation between the Russian and Ukrainian churches.
The submissive attitude of Russian Baptists today may be explained by the fact that the Russian Baptist community, in common with everyone else in Putin’s Russia, lives in an atmosphere of intimidation, threat and surveillance by the Russian authorities.
Lunkin, R., “The Ukrainian Revolution and Christian Churches,” in East West Church & Ministry Report 22 , 1-5.
Luxmoore, M., “Journalists gather for Mezyhirya Fest investigate conference at fugitive expresident’s estate,” Kyiv Post 8"" June 2014.
Searle, J., “The Ecumenical Imperative and the Kingdom of God”, Journal of European Baptist Studies , 5—23.
This lecture advances the provocative argument that instead of calling the people to repent and make peace, the church itself should repent for betraying the people, and for failing for so many years to speak truthfully to those in power and to stand on the side of the oppressed.
It is argued that Baptists in both Ukraine and Britain need to reject the kind of narrow pietism that over-emphasises individual salvation, and should instead rediscover their holistic mission, in which both the individual and society become complementary parts of the overall Christian vision of biblically-informed action on behalf of the overriding biblical imperative of social justice.
The lecture concludes on a hopeful note by showing that despite their limited numbers, Baptists can be in the vanguard of a new movement for the reformation of the church and the renewal of society, which moves towards an open future with hope for greater freedom.
While drawing on the author’s experience of living and working in Ukraine, this lecture also addresses vital issues that affect the global Baptist community, such as the missional imperatives of social justice and solidarity and the limits of political authority.
Scarle issues a prophetic challenge to the church to recover its calling to serve the Kingdom of God through dynamic engagement in the public sphere.
Dr Mykhatlo Cherenkov, Vice President of Mission Eurasia and Professor at Ukrainian Catholic Universily Joshua T Searle is Tutor in Theology and Public Thought at Spurgeon’s College, London.
A Northumbrian by birth and tempcrament, he is a graduate of Oxford, Dublin and Praguc.
He is the author of books and articles on millennial studics and the social theology of evangelical Christians.
