Crimea is a peninsula on the northern coast of the Black Sea in Eastern Europe that is almost completely surrounded by both the Black Sea and the smaller Sea of Azov to the northeast.
It is located south of the Ukrainian region of Kherson, to which it is connected by the Isthmus of Perekop, and west of the Russian region of Kuban, from which it is separated by the Strait of Kerch though linked by the Crimean Bridge.
The Arabat Spit is located to the northeast, a narrow strip of land that separates a system of lagoons named Sivash from the Sea of Azov.
Crimea has historically been at the boundary between the classical world and the Pontic–Caspian steppe.
Its southern fringe was colonised by the Greeks, the Persians, the Romans, the Byzantine Empire, the Crimean Goths, the Genoese and the Ottoman Empire, while at the same time its interior was occupied by a changing cast of invading steppe nomads and empires, such as the Cimmerians, Scythians, Sarmatians, Goths, Alans, Bulgars, Huns, Khazars, Kipchaks, Mongols and the Golden Horde.
Crimea and adjacent territories were united in the Crimean Khanate during the 15th to 18th century.
During World War II, Crimea was downgraded to the Crimean Oblast after its entire indigenous population, the Crimean Tatars, were deported to Central Asia, an act recognized as a genocide.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, Ukraine was formed as an independent state in 1991 and most of the peninsula was reorganized as the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, while the city of Sevastopol retained its special status within Ukraine.
Ukraine extended Russia's lease of the naval facilities under the 2010 Kharkiv Pact in exchange for further discounted natural gas.
In February 2014, following the 2014 Ukrainian revolution that ousted the Ukrainian President, Viktor Yanukovych, pro-Russian separatists and Russian Armed Forces took over the territory.
A controversial Crimea-wide referendum, unconstitutional under the Ukrainian and Crimean constitutions, was held on the issue of reunification with Russia which official results indicated was supported by a large majority of Crimeans.
Russia formally annexed Crimea on 18 March 2014, incorporating the Republic of Crimea and the federal city of Sevastopol as the 84th and 85th federal subjects of Russia.
The classical name Tauris or Taurica is from the Greek Ταυρική , after the peninsula's Scytho-Cimmerian inhabitants, the Tauri.
The Crimean Tatar name of the peninsula is Qırım and so also for the city of Krym which is now called Stary Krym which served as a capital of the Crimean province of the Golden Horde.
However, Herodotus identifies the port not in Crimea, but as being on the west coast of the Sea of Azov.
No evidence has been identified that this name was ever in use for the peninsula.
The Turkic term is related to the Mongolian appellation kerm ""wall"", but sources indicate that the Mongolian appellation of the Crimean peninsula of Qaram is phonetically incompatible with kerm/kerem and therefore deriving from another original term.
The name ""Crimea"" is the Italian form,e., la Crimea, since at least the 17th century and the ""Crimean peninsula"" becomes current during the 18th century, gradually replacing the classical name of Tauric Peninsula in the course of the 19th century.
In English usage since the early modern period the Crimean Khanate is referred to as Crim Tartary.
The omission of the definite article in English became common during the later 20th century.
The classical name was used in 1802 in the name of the Russian Taurida Governorate.
In the 8th century BC the Cimmerians migrated to the area in retreat from Scythian advances, of whom the latter also migrated to the region.
Contemporaneously, and possibly because of the migration, the region came within the sphere of Greek maritime interest and became the site of Greek colonies.
The most important Greek city was Chersonesos at the edge of today's Sevastopol.
In the 9th century CE, Byzantium established the Theme of Cherson to defend against incursions by the Rus' Khaganate.
The Crimean peninsula from this time was contested between Byzantium, Rus' and Khazaria.
The area remained the site of overlapping interests and contact between the early medieval Slavic, Turkic and Greek spheres.
Slavs were sold to Byzantium and other places in Anatolia and the Middle-East during this period.
Trapezuntine Perateia had already been subjected to pressure from the Genoese and Kipchaks by the time Alexios I of Trebizond died in 1222 before the Mongol invasions began its western swept through Volga Bulgaria in 1223.
In the course of the 13th century CE, portions were controlled by the Republic of Venice and by the Republic of Genoa, the Perateia soon became the Principality of Theodoro and Genoese Gazaria, respectively.
The Crimean Khanate, a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire, succeeded the Golden Horde and lasted from 1449 to 1783.
In 1571, the Crimean Tatars attacked and sacked Moscow, burning everything but the Kremlin.
Until the late 18th century, Crimean Tatars maintained a massive slave trade with the Ottoman Empire, exporting about 2 million slaves from Russia and Ukraine over the period 1500–1700.
In 1774, the Khanate was proclaimed independent under the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca with the Ottomans, but was then conquered by the Russian Empire in 1783.
The Taurida Oblast was created by a decree of Catherine the Great on 2 February 1784.
The center of the oblast was first in Karasubazar but was moved to Simferopol later in 1784.
However, by a decree of Paul I on 12 December 1796, the oblast was abolished and the territory, divided into 2 uyezds was attached to the second incarnation of the Novorossiysk Governorate.
From 1853 to 1856, the peninsula was the site of the principal engagements of the Crimean War, a conflict fought between the Russian Empire and an alliance of France, Britain, the Ottoman Empire and Sardinia.
Following the Russian Revolution of 1917, the military and political situation in Crimea was chaotic like that in much of Russia.
During the ensuing Russian Civil War, Crimea changed hands numerous times and was for a time a stronghold of the anti-Bolshevik White Army.
The White Army controlled Crimea before remnants were finally driven out by the Red Army in November 1920.
It was in Crimea that the White Russians led by General Wrangel made their last stand against Nestor Makhno and the Red Army.
When resistance was crushed, many of the anti-Communist fighters and civilians escaped by ship to Istanbul.
Between 56,000 and 150,000 of the Whites were murdered as part of the Red Terror, organized by Béla Kun.
Crimea became part of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic in 1921 as the Crimean Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic, which became part of the Soviet Union in 1922.
During the Second World War the peninsula was invaded by Nazi Germany and Romanian troops in summer 1941 across the Isthmus of Perekop.
Following the capture of Sevastopol on 4 July 1942, Crimea was occupied until German and Romanian forces were expelled in an offensive by Soviet forces ending in May 1944.
On 25 June 1946, it was downgraded to the Crimean Oblast, and the Crimean Tatars were deported for alleged collaboration with the Nazi forces.
A total of more than 230,000 people – about a fifth of the total population of the Crimean Peninsula at that time – were deported, mainly to Uzbekistan.,300 Greeks, 12,075 Bulgarians, and about 10,000 Armenians were also expelled.
After the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, doubts have been expressed from the Russian side by all means, but even by Western historians about the very legitimacy of the 1954 transition of Crimea to Ukraine; in the critics' view the transition contradicted even the Soviet law.
In post-war years, Crimea thrived as a tourist destination, with new attractions and sanatoriums for tourists.
Tourists came from all around the Soviet Union and neighbouring countries, particularly from the German Democratic Republic.
In time the peninsula also became a major tourist destination for cruises originating in Greece and Turkey.
Crimea's infrastructure and manufacturing also developed, particularly around the sea ports at Kerch and Sevastopol and in the oblast's landlocked capital, Simferopol.
Populations of Ukrainians and Russians alike doubled, with more than 1. million Russians and 626,000 Ukrainians living on the peninsula by 1989.
In January 1991, a referendum was held in the Crimean Oblast, and voters approved restoring the Crimean Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic.
However, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union less than a year later, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea was formed as a constituent entity of independent Ukraine, with a slight majority of Crimean voters approving Ukrainian independence in a December referendum.
The Verkhovna Rada voted to grant Crimea ""extensive home rule"" during the dispute.
On 15 March 2014, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine officially dissolved the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea, and, on 17 March 2014, one day before the Russian annexation of Crimea, the State Council of Crimea was established in place of the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea.
Within days, unmarked forces with local militias took over the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol, as well as occupying several localities in Kherson Oblast on the Arabat Spit, which is geographically a part of Crimea.
Though Russia had control over the peninsula, sovereignty was disputed as Ukraine and the majority of the international community consider the annexation illegal, as was shown by the United Nations General Assembly adopting a non-binding resolution calling upon states not to recognise changes to the integrity of Ukraine.
A range of international sanctions have remained in place against Russia and a number of named individuals as a result of the events of 2014.
Russia withdrew its forces from southern Kherson in December 2014 Since Russian control over Crimea was established in 2014, the peninsula has been administered as part of the Russian Federation except for the northern areas of the Arabat Spit and the Syvash which are still controlled by Ukraine.
In July 2015, Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev stated that Crimea had been fully integrated into Russia.
Since 2014 the Russian government has invested heavily in the peninsula’s infrastructure—repairing roads, modernizing hospitals and building the Crimean Bridge that links the peninsula to the Russian mainland.
New sources of water are trying to be developed, with huge difficulties, to replace closed Ukrainian sources.
Russia provides electricity to Crimea via a cable beneath the Kerch Strait.
In June 2018 there was a full electrical outage for all of Crimea, but the power grid company Rosseti reported to have fixed the outage in approximately one hour.
From the medieval period to the early modern period additional ethnic communities migrated to the area, prominent representation includes the Armenian, German, Serbian, and Jewish ethnic communities.
Covering an area of 27,000 km2 , Crimea is located on the northern coast of the Black Sea and on the western coast of the Sea of Azov, the only land border is shared with Ukraine's Kherson Oblast from the north.
Crimea is almost an island and only connected to the continent by the Isthmus of Perekop, a strip of land about 5–7 kilometres wide.
The natural border between the Crimean Peninsula and the Ukrainian mainland is formed by the Sivash or ""Rotten Sea"", a large system of shallow lagoons between Russia by Kerch Strait.
Beside isthmus of Perekop, the peninsula is connected to the Kherson Oblast's Henichesk Raion bridges over the narrow Chonhar and Henichesk straits and Kerch Strait to the Krasnodar Krai.
The northern part of Arabat Spit is administratively part of Henichesk Raion in Kherson Oblast, including its two rural communities of Shchaslyvtseve and Strilkove.
Given its long history and many conquerors, most towns in Crimea have several names.
The Isthmus of Perekop /Perekop/Or Qapi is about 7 km wide and connects Crimea to the mainland.
The North Crimean Canal now crosses it to bring water from the Dnieper.
To the west Karkinit Bay separates the Tarkhankut Peninsula from the mainland.
On the south side is the large Donuzlav Bay and the port and ancient Greek settlement of Eupatoria/Yevpatoria/Kerkinitis/Gozleve.
The coast then runs south to Sevastopol/Chersonesus, a good natural harbor, great naval base and the largest city on the peninsula.
In the south, between the Crimean Mountains and the sea is a narrow coastal strip which was held by the Genoese and after 1475 by the Turks.
In Soviet times the many palaces were replaced by dachas and health resorts.
Heracles Peninsula; Balaklava/Symbalon/Cembalo, a smaller natural harbor south of Sevastopol; Foros, the southernmost point; Alupka with the Vorontsov Palace ; Gaspra; Yalta; Gurzuf; Alushta.
Further east is Kaffa/Theodosia/Feodosia which was once a great slave mart and a kind of capital for the Genoese and Turks.
At the east end of the 90km Kerch Peninsula is Kerch/Panticapaeum, once the capital of the Bosporian Kingdom.
Just south of Kerch is the new Crimean Bridge which connects Crimea to the Taman Peninsula.
Behind it is the Syvash or ""Putrid Sea"", a system of lakes and marshes which in the far north extend west to the Perekop Isthmus.
Southeast of Bakhchisarai is the cliff-fort of Chufut-Kale/Qirq Or which was used in more warlike times.
Towns on the northern steppe area are all modern, notably Dzhankoy, a major road and rail junction.
The longest is the Salhir River which rises southeast of Simferopol and flows north and northeast to the Sea of Azov.
The Alma River flows west to reach the Black Sea between Eupatoria and Sevastopol.
At the northeast point of the Sea of Azov at the mouth of the Don River were Tanais, Azak/Azov and now Rostov-on-Don.
North of the peninsula the Dnieper turns westward and enters the Black Sea through the east-west Dnieper-Bug Estuary which also receives the Bug River.
The southeast coast is flanked at a distance of 8–12 kilometres from the sea by a parallel range of mountains, the Crimean Mountains.
It was believed that this cape was supposedly crowned with the temple of Artemis, where Iphigeneia is said to have officiated as priestess.
Uchan-su, on the south slope of the mountains, is the highest waterfall in Crimea.
This means there is significant annual fluctuation in water flow with many streams drying up completely during the summer.
There are more than fifty salt lakes and salt pans on the peninsula, the largest of them is Lake Sasyk on the southwest coast, but others include Aqtas, Koyashskoye, Kiyatskoe, Kirleutskoe, Kizil-Yar, Bakalskoe, and Donuzlav.
Lake Syvash is a system of interconnected shallow lagoons on the northern coast, which covers an area of around 2,560 km2.
There are a number of dams that have created reservoirs, among the largest are the Simferopolskoye, Alminskoye, the Taygansky and the Belogorsky just south of Bilohirsk in Bilohirsk Raion.
The North Crimea Canal, which transports water from the Dnieper, is the largest of the man-made irrigation channels on the peninsula.
Seventy-five percent of the remaining area of Crimea consists of semiarid prairie lands, a southward continuation of the Pontic-Caspian steppe, which slope gently to the northwest from the foot of the Crimean Mountains.
Numerous kurgans, or burial mounds, of the ancient Scythians are scattered across the Crimean steppes.
The Crimean Mountains in the background and Yalta as seen from the Tsar's Path.
The terrain that lies beyond the sheltering Crimean Mountain range is of an altogether different character.
Here, the narrow strip of coast and the slopes of the mountains are smothered with greenery.
This ""riviera"" stretches along the southeast coast from capes Fiolente and Aya, in the south, to Feodosiya, and is studded with summer sea-bathing resorts such as Alupka, Yalta, Gurzuf, Alushta, Sudak, and Feodosiya.
Fishing, mining, and the production of essential oils are also important.
Numerous Crimean Tatar villages, mosques, monasteries, and palaces of the Russian imperial family and nobles are found here, as well as picturesque ancient Greek and medieval castles.
The Crimean Mountains and the southern coast are part of the Crimean Submediterranean forest complex ecoregion.
The natural vegetation consists of scrublands, woodlands, and forests, with a climate and vegetation similar to the Mediterranean Basin.
Crimea is located between the temperate and subtropical climate belts and is characterized by warm and sunny weather.
The northern parts of Crimea have a moderate continental climate with short, mild winters and moderately hot dry summers.
In the central and mountainous areas, the climate is transitional between the continental climate to the north and the Mediterranean climate to the south.
A subtropical, Mediterranean climate is found in the southern coastal regions, and is characterized by mild winters and moderately hot, dry summers.
The climate of Crimea is influenced by its geographic location, relief, and influences from the Black sea.
The Crimean coast is shielded from cold air masses coming from north and as a result has milder winters.
Maritime influences from the Black Sea are restricted to coastal areas; inside the peninsula, the influence is weak and does not play an important role.
Because a high pressure system is located north of Crimea in both summer and winter, winds predominantly come from the north and northeast year-round.
In winter, these winds bring in cold, dry continental air while in summer, it brings in dry and hot weather.
Winds from the northwest bring warm and wet air from the Atlantic Ocean and are responsible for bringing precipitation during spring and summer.
As well, winds from the southwest bring very warm and wet air from the subtropical latitudes of the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean sea and are responsible for bringing precipitation during fall and winter.
Cool season temperatures average around 7 °C and it is rare for the weather to drop below freezing except in the mountains, where there is usually snow.
The Crimean mountains greatly influence the amount of precipitation present in the peninsula.
The western parts of the Crimean mountains receive more than 1,000 millimetres of precipitation per year.
Most of the peninsula receives more than 2,000 sunshine hours per year; it reaches up to 2,505 sunshine hours in Karabi–Yayla in the Crimean mountains.
Because of its climate and subsidized travel packages from Russian state-run companies, the southern Crimean coast has remained a popular resort for Russian tourists.
Map of the historical trade route connecting Uppsala with Constantinople via Cherson.
The major centers of the Kievan Rus', Kiev itself, Novgorod and Ladoga, arose along this route.
The Black Sea ports of Crimea provide quick access to the Eastern Mediterranean, Balkans and Middle East.
The Dnieper River is a major waterway and transportation route that crosses the European continent from north to south and ultimately links the Black Sea with the Baltic Sea, of strategic importance since the historical trade route from the Varangians to the Greeks.
The Black Sea serves as an economic thoroughfare connecting the Caucasus region and the Caspian Sea to central and Eastern Europe.
According to the International Transport Workers' Federation, in 2013 there were at least 12 operating merchant seaports in Crimea.
In 2016 Crimea had Nominal GDP of US$7 billion and US$3,000 per capita.
The main branches of the modern Crimean economy are agriculture and fishing oysters pearls else, industry and manufacturing along mining and chemical, tourism, ports.
Industrial plants are situated for the most part in the southern coast regions of the republic, few northern , aside central area, mainly Simferopol okrug and eastern region in Nizhnegorsk city.
Important industrial cities include Dzhankoy, housing a major railway connection, Krasnoperekopsk and Armyansk, among others.
After the Russian annexation of Crimea in early 2014 and subsequent sanctions targeting Crimea, the tourist industry suffered major losses for two years.
The flow of holidaymakers dropped 35 percent in the first half of 2014 over the same period of 2013.
According to the Russian administration of Crimea, they dropped to 3. million in 2014, and rebounded to 5. million by 2016.
The most important industries in Crimea include food production, chemical fields, mechanical engineering and metal working, and fuel production industries.
Agriculture in the region includes cereals, vegetable-growing, gardening, and wine-making, particularly in the Yalta and Massandra regions.
Livestock production includes cattle breeding, poultry keeping, and sheep breeding.
Other products produced on the Crimean Peninsula include salt, porphyry, limestone, and ironstone since ancient times.
This is insufficient for local consumption and since annexation by Russia, Crimea is reliant on an underwater power cable to mainland Russia.
Also gas thermal Saki plant close to Jodobrom chemical plant and SaKhZ boosted production with Perm GTE GTU25P PGU turbogenerators.
Older plants are Sevastopol TEC which use AEG and Ganz Elektro turbines and turbogenerators about 25 MW each, Sinferopol TEC Eupatoria, Kamysh Burun TEC and few others.
In May 2015, work began on a multibillion-dollar road-rail link across the Kerch Strait.
The road bridge opened in May 2018, and the rail bridge is projected to be fully completed and operational by 2019.
With a length of 19 km, it is the longest bridge in Europe, as it overcame Vasco da Gama Bridge in Lisbon.
Almost every settlement in Crimea is connected with another settlement by bus lines.
Crimea contains the longest trolleybus route in the world, stretching from Simferopol to Yalta.
The trolleybus line starts near Simferopol's Railway Station through the mountains to Alushta and on to Yalta.
Railroad lines running through Crimea include Armyansk—Kerch , and Melitopol—Sevastopol , connecting Crimea to the Ukrainian mainland.
Simferopol International Airport's new terminal opened in from April 2018 with the ability to handle 6. million passengers a year.
The cities of Yalta, Feodosiya, Kerch, Sevastopol, Chornomorske and Yevpatoria are connected to one another by sea routes.
In the cities of Yevpatoria and nearby townlet Molochnoye are tram systems.
The development of Crimea as a holiday destination began in the second half of the 19th century.
The development of the transport networks brought masses of tourists from central parts of the Russian Empire.
At the beginning of the 20th century, a major development of palaces, villas, and dachas began—most of which remain.
These are some of the main attractions of Crimea as a tourist destination.
There are many Crimean legends about famous touristic places, which attract the attention of tourists.
A new phase of tourist development began when the Soviet government realised the potential of the healing quality of the local air, lakes and therapeutic muds.
It became a ""health"" destination for Soviet workers, and hundreds of thousands of Soviet tourists visited Crimea.
Artek is a former Young Pioneer camp on the Black Sea in the town of Hurzuf, near Ayu-Dag, established in 1925.
Artek was considered to be a privilege for Soviet children during its existence, as well as for children from other communist countries.
After the breaking up of the Young Pioneers in 1991 its prestige declined, though it remained a popular vacation destination.
In the 1990s, Crimea became more of a get-away destination than a ""health-improvement"" destination.
The most visited areas are the south shore of Crimea with cities of Yalta and Alushta, the western shore – Eupatoria and Saki, and the south-eastern shore – Feodosia and Sudak.
According to National Geographic, Crimea was among the top 20 travel destinations in 2013.
Following the Russia's largely unrecognized annexation of Crimea, the European Union, the United States, Canada, Australia, Japan, and several other countries imposed economic sanctions against Russia, including some specifically targeting Crimea.
Many of these sanctions were directed at individuals—both Russian and Crimean.
In general they prohibit the sale, supply, transfer, or export of goods and technology in several sectors, including services directly related to tourism and infrastructure.
Visa and MasterCard temporarily stopped service in Crimea in December 2014.
The Russian national payment card system now allows Visa and MasterCard cards issued by Russian banks to work in Crimea.
The Mir operated by the Central Bank of Russia operates in Crimea as well as Master Card and Visa.
The politics of Crimea is that of the Republic of Crimea on one hand, and that of the federal city of Sevastopol on the other.
Since becoming the 84th and 85th Federal Subjects of the Russian Federation in 2014, both have strongly supported United Russia in both local and national elections.
At the most recent Crimean parliamentary election on 14 September 2014, United Russia won 70 of the 75 seats in the State Council of Crimea based on just over 70% of the vote.
Despite calls from local Crimean Tatars for a boycott of the elections, turnout was over 53% which compared well with elections in other regions of Russia.
United Russia is also the leading party in the Legislative Assembly of Sevastopol having won 22 of the 24 seats at the last election.
The Governor of Sevastopol is Dmitry Ovsyannikov who was first appointed on 28 July 2016 following the resignation of Sergey Menyaylo, and secured re-election on 71% of the vote on 10 September 2017.
United Russia maintained its position as the most supported political party across Crimea at the Russian legislative election on 18 September 2016, achieving 72.8% of the vote.
At the 2018 Russian presidential election, Vladimir Putin secured 92% of the vote in Crimea compared to 77% across Russia as a whole.
According to the 2014 Russian census, 84% of Crimean inhabitants named Russian as their native language; 7.9% – Crimean Tatar; 3.7% – Tatar; and 3.3% – Ukrainian.
It was the first official Russian census in Crimea since Ukrainian that held in 2001.
According to the 2001 census, 77% of Crimean inhabitants named Russian as their native language; 11.4% – Crimean Tatar; and 10.1% – Ukrainian.
In 2013, however, the Crimean Tatar language was estimated to be on the brink of extinction, being taught in Crimea only in around 15 schools at that point.
Turkey provided the greatest support to Tatars in Ukraine, which had been unable to resolve the problem of education in their mother tongue in Crimea, by bringing the schools to a modern state.
Ethnic composition of Crimea's population has changed dramatically since the early 20th century.
But these numbers included Berdyansky, Dneprovsky and Melitopolsky uyezds which were on mainland, not in Crimea.
The population number excluding these uyezds is given in the table below.
Crimean Tatars, a predominantly Muslim ethnic minority who in 2001 made up 12.1% of the population, formed in Crimea in the late Middle Ages, after the Crimean Khanate had come into existence.
The Crimean Tatars were forcibly expelled to Central Asia by Joseph Stalin's government as a form of collective punishment, on the grounds that they had formed pro-German Tatar Legions.
After the fall of the Soviet Union, Crimean Tatars began to return to the region.
According to the 2001 Ukrainian population census, 58% of the population of Crimea are ethnic Russians and 24% are ethnic Ukrainians.
This was part of the 800,000 Germans in Russia who were relocated within the Soviet Union during Stalinist times.
Besides the Crimean Germans, Stalin in 1944 also deported 70,000 Greeks, 14,000 Bulgarians and 3,000 Italians.
Following the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea 38 out of 46 the Ukrainian Orthodox Church – Kiev Patriarchate parishes in Crimea ceased to exist, in three cases churches were seized by the Russian authorities.
Notwithstanding the annexation the Ukrainian Orthodox Church kept control of its eparchies in Crimea.
Alexander Pushkin visited Bakhchysarai in 1820 and later wrote the poem The Fountain of Bakhchisaray.
Crimea was the background for Adam Mickiewicz's seminal work, The Crimean Sonnets inspired by his 1825 travel.
A series of 18 sonnets constitute an artistic telling of a journey to and through the Crimea, they feature romantic descriptions of the oriental nature and culture of the East which show the despair of an exile longing for the homeland, driven from his home by a violent enemy.
Ivan Aivazovsky, the 19th-century marine painter of Armenian origin, who is considered one of the major artists of his era was born in Feodosia and lived there for the most part of his life.
Crimean Tatar singer Jamala won the Eurovision Song Contest 2016 representing Ukraine with her song 1944, about the historic deportation of Crimean Tatars in that year by Soviet authorities.
According to the, broken in practice by Russian companies, Ukrainian “law on concert activities” only Ukrainian companies can organise concerts in Crimea.
Following Crimea's vote to join Russia and subsequent annexation in March 2014, the top football clubs withdrew from the Ukrainian leagues.
Some clubs registered to join the Russian leagues but the Football Federation of Ukraine objected.
UEFA ruled that Crimean clubs could not join the Russian leagues but should instead be part of a Crimean league system.
The Crimean Premier League is now the top professional football league in Crimea.
A number of Crimean-born athletes have been given permission to compete for Russia instead of Ukraine at future competitions, including Vera Rebrik, the European javelin champion.
Due to Russia currently being suspended from all international athletic competitions Rebrik participates in tournaments as a ""neutral"" athlete.
In 2017, Jamala represented Ukraine at The Eurovision Song Contest and won with her song 1944 which is about the conflict in Crimea.
Organizing and holding the referendum on Crimea's accession to Russia was illegal under the Ukrainian constitution.
This is confirmed in regard to Crimea by Chapter X of the constitution, which provides for the autonomous status of Crimea.
The autonomous status provides Crimea with a certain set of authorities and allows, inter alia, to hold referendums.
The constitution makes clear that alterations to the territory of Ukraine require an all-Ukrainian referendum.
Explaining the Local Appellations in Sacred, Grecian, and Roman History; Exhibiting the Extent of Kingdoms, and Situations of Cities, &c.
And Illustrating the Allusions and Epithets in the Greek and Roman Poets.
The Whole Established by Proper Authorities, and Designed for the Use of Schools.
The Annual Register or a View of the History, Politics, and Literature for the Year 1783.
UN condemns Crimea vote as IMF and United States back loans"". bbc.co.uk.
Crimea Attracts More Than 4 Million Tourists Despite Annexation"". ibtimes.com.
Ukraine's Jamala wins with politically charged 1944"". www.theguardian.com.
The European western part of the country is more populated and urbanised than the eastern.
Russias capital Moscow is one of the largest cities in the world, other urban centers include Saint Petersburg, Yekaterinburg, Nizhny Novgorod.
Extending across the entirety of Northern Asia and much of Eastern Europe, Russia spans eleven time zones and incorporates a range of environments.
Rus ultimately disintegrated into a number of states, most of the Rus lands were overrun by the Mongol invasion.
The Soviet era saw some of the most significant technological achievements of the 20th century, including the worlds first human-made satellite and the launching of the first humans in space.
By the end of 1990, the Soviet Union had the second largest economy, largest standing military in the world.
It is governed as a federal semi-presidential republic, the Russian economy ranks as the twelfth largest by nominal GDP and sixth largest by purchasing power parity in 2015.
Russias extensive mineral and energy resources are the largest such reserves in the world, making it one of the producers of oil.
The country is one of the five recognized nuclear weapons states and possesses the largest stockpile of weapons of mass destruction, Russia is a great power as well as a regional power and has been characterised as a potential superpower.
The name Russia is derived from Rus, a state populated mostly by the East Slavs.
Crimean Tatars constituted the majority of Crimeas population from the time of its ethnogenesis until mid-19th century, and the relative largest ethnic population until the end of 19th century.
Starting in 1967, some were allowed to return to Crimea, Crimean Tatars constitute approximately 12% of the population of Crimea.
There remains a large diaspora of Crimean Tatars in Turkey and Uzbekistan, in the latest Ukrainian census,248,200 Ukrainian citizens identified themselves as Crimean Tatars with 98% of them living in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
An additional 1,800 citizens live in the city of Sevastopol, on the Crimean peninsula, about 150,000 remain in exile in Central Asia, mainly in Uzbekistan.
The official number of Crimean Tatars in Turkey is 150,000 with some Crimean Tatar activists estimating a figure as high as 6 million.
The activists reached this number by taking one million Tatar immigrants to Turkey as a starting point, Crimean Tatars in Turkey mostly live in Eskişehir Province, descendants of those who emigrated in the late 18th, 19th and early 20th centuries.
In the Dobruja region straddling Romania and Bulgaria, there are more than 27,000 Crimean Tatars,24,000 on the Romanian side, and 3,000 on the Bulgarian side.
However, the Cuman language is considered the ancestor of the current language of the Crimean Tatars with possible incorporations of the other languages like Crimean Gothic.
Another theory suggests Crimean Tatars trace their origins to the waves of ancient people Scythians, Goths and Armenians.
Goths and Greeks were assumed to be some of the ancestors of the Tatars on the coast of Crimea, while there were mixed hill Tatars and Greeks mixed with the coastal Crimean Tatars.
The Crimean Tatars emerged as a nation at the time of the Crimean Khanate, the Turkic-speaking population of the Crimea had mostly adopted Islam already in the 14th century, following the conversion of Ozbeg Khan of the Golden Horde.
Until the beginning of the 18th century, Crimean Tatars were known for frequent, at some periods almost annual, devastating raids into Ukraine and Russia.
The Autonomous Republic of Crimea is an autonomous republic of Ukraine, encompassing the territory of the former Crimean Oblast, a status it gained following a referendum on 20 January 1991.
Russia annexed Crimea to incorporate the Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol as federal subjects of Russia.
Crimea was annexed by the Russian Empire in 1783 and this was recognised in 1792 when the peninsula was ceded to Russia by the Ottoman Empire under the Treaty of Jassy.
On 26 February 1992, the Crimean parliament renamed the ASSR the Republic of Crimea and proclaimed self-government on 5 May 1992, on 6 May 1992 the same parliament inserted a new sentence into this constitution that declared that Crimea was part of Ukraine.
In the same period, Russian president Boris Yeltsin and Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk agreed to divide the former Soviet Black Sea Fleet between Russia and the newly formed Ukrainian Navy.
On 14 October 1993, the Crimean parliament established the post of President of Crimea, after an interim constitution, the current constitution was put into effect, changing the territorys name to the Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
Following the ratification of the May 1997 Treaty of Friendship, however, in 2006, anti-NATO protests broke out on the peninsula.
On 24 August 2009, anti-Ukrainian demonstrations were held in Crimea by ethnic Russian residents, sergei Tsekov said that he hoped that Russia would treat the Crimea the same way as it had treated South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Along with Verkhovna Rada, the treaty was ratified by the Russian State Duma as well, on 26 February 2014, thousands of pro-Russian and pro-Ukraine protesters clashed in front of the parliament building in Simferopol.
Two days later, Russian forces occupied airports and other locations in Crimea which the interim Government of Ukraine described as an invasion and occupation.
Gunmen, either armed militants or Russian special forces, occupied the Crimean parliament, under armed guard and with the doors locked, members of parliament reportedly elected Sergey Aksyonov as the new Crimean Prime Minister.
Ukraine is currently in territorial dispute with Russia over the Crimean Peninsula which Russia annexed in 2014 but which Ukraine and most of the international community recognise as Ukrainian.
Including Crimea, Ukraine has an area of 603,628 km2, making it the largest country entirely within Europe and it has a population of about 42. million, making it the 32nd most populous country in the world.
The territory of modern Ukraine has been inhabited since 32,000 BC, during the Middle Ages, the area was a key centre of East Slavic culture, with the powerful state of Kievan Rus forming the basis of Ukrainian identity.
Following its fragmentation in the 13th century, the territory was contested and divided by a variety of powers, including Lithuania, the Ottoman Empire, Austria-Hungary, and Russia.
Before its independence, Ukraine was typically referred to in English as The Ukraine, following independence, Ukraine declared itself a neutral state.
Nonetheless it formed a limited partnership with the Russian Federation and other CIS countries.
In the 2000s, the government began leaning towards NATO, and it was agreed that the question of joining NATO should be answered by a national referendum at some point in the future.
Former President Viktor Yanukovych considered the current level of co-operation between Ukraine and NATO sufficient, and was against Ukraine joining NATO and these events formed the background for the annexation of Crimea by Russia in March 2014, and the War in Donbass in April 2014.
On 1 January 2016, Ukraine applied the economic part of the Deep, Ukraine has long been a global breadbasket because of its extensive, fertile farmlands and is one of the worlds largest grain exporters.
The diversified economy of Ukraine includes a heavy industry sector, particularly in aerospace.
The Black Sea is a body of water between Eastern Europe and Western Asia, bounded by Bulgaria, Romania, Russia and Ukraine.
It is supplied by a number of rivers, such as the Danube, Rioni, Southern Bug.
The Black Sea has an area of 436,400 km2, a depth of 2,212 It is constrained by the Pontic Mountains to the south and by the Caucasus Mountains to the east, the longest east-west extent is about 1,175 km.
Mediterranean water flows into the Black Sea as part of a two-way hydrological exchange, the Black Sea drains into the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean, via the Aegean Sea and various straits.
The Bosphorus Strait connects it to the Sea of Marmara, and these waters separate Eastern Europe and Western Asia.
The Black Sea is connected to the Sea of Azov by the Strait of Kerch, the water level has varied significantly.
At certain critical water levels it is possible for connections with surrounding water bodies to become established and it is through the most active of these connective routes, the Turkish Straits, that the Black Sea joins the world ocean.
When this hydrological link is not present, the Black Sea is a basin, operating independently of the global ocean system.
Currently the Black Sea water level is high, thus water is being exchanged with the Mediterranean.
The Turkish Straits connect the Black Sea with the Aegean Sea, and comprise the Bosphorus, the Sea of Marmara, the International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Black Sea as follows, On the Southwest.
The Northeastern limit of the Sea of Marmara, a line joining Cape Takil and Cape Panaghia.
Strabos Geographica reports that in antiquity, the Black Sea was often just called the Sea, for the most part, Graeco-Roman tradition refers to the Black Sea as the Hospitable sea, Εὔξεινος Πόντος Eúxeinos Póntos.
This is a euphemism replacing an earlier Inhospitable Sea, Πόντος Ἄξεινος Póntos Áxeinos, strabo thinks that the Black Sea was called inhospitable before Greek colonization because it was difficult to navigate, and because its shores were inhabited by savage tribes.
Turkey, officially the Republic of Turkey, is a transcontinental country in Eurasia, mainly in Anatolia in Western Asia, with a smaller portion on the Balkan peninsula in Southeast Europe.
Turkey is a democratic, unitary, parliamentary republic with a cultural heritage.
The country is encircled by seas on three sides, the Aegean Sea is to the west, the Black Sea to the north, and the Mediterranean Sea to the south.
The Bosphorus, the Sea of Marmara, and the Dardanelles, Ankara is the capital while Istanbul is the countrys largest city and main cultural and commercial centre.
Kurds are the largest ethnic minority group, making up approximately 20% of the population, the area of Turkey has been inhabited since the Paleolithic by various ancient Anatolian civilisations, as well as Assyrians, Thracians, Phrygians and Armenians.
After Alexander the Greats conquest, the area was Hellenized, a process continued under the Roman Empire.
The Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm ruled Anatolia until the Mongol invasion in 1243, the empire reached the peak of its power in the 16th century, especially during the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent.
During the war, the Ottoman government committed genocides against its Armenian, following the war, the conglomeration of territories and peoples that formerly comprised the Ottoman Empire was partitioned into several new states.
Turkeys growing economy and diplomatic initiatives have led to its recognition as a regional power while her location has given it geopolitical, the name of Turkey is based on the ethnonym Türk.
The first recorded use of the term Türk or Türük as an autonym is contained in the Old Turkic inscriptions of the Göktürks of Central Asia, the English name Turkey first appeared in the late 14th century and is derived from Medieval Latin Turchia.
Similarly, the medieval Khazar Empire, a Turkic state on the shores of the Black.
Armenians constitute the population of Armenia and the de facto independent Nagorno-Karabakh Republic.
There is a diaspora of around 5 million people of full or partial Armenian ancestry living outside of modern Armenia.
The largest Armenian populations today exist in Russia, the United States, Georgia, Germany, Lebanon and Syria.
With the exceptions of Iran and the former Soviet states, the present-day Armenian diaspora was formed mainly as a result of the Armenian Genocide, most Armenians adhere to the Armenian Apostolic Church, a non-Chalcedonian church, which is the worlds oldest national church.
Christianity began to spread in Armenia soon after Jesus death, due to the efforts of two of his apostles, St.
Bartholomew, in the early 4th century, the Kingdom of Armenia became the first state to adopt Christianity as a state religion.
He relates that the people spoke a language that to his ear sounded like the language of the Persians and it is further postulated that the name Hay comes from one of the two confederated, Hittite vassal states—the Ḫayaša-Azzi.
Movses Khorenatsi, the important early medieval Armenian historian, wrote that the word Armenian originated from the name Armenak or Aram, the Armenian Highland lies in the highlands surrounding Mount Ararat, the highest peak of the region.
In the Bronze Age, several states flourished in the area of Greater Armenia, including the Hittite Empire, soon after Hayasa-Azzi were Arme-Shupria, the Nairi and the Kingdom of Urartu, who successively established their sovereignty over the Armenian Highland.
To the south it is linked by the narrow Strait of Kerch to the Black Sea, the sea is bounded in the north by mainland Ukraine, in the east by Russia, and in the west by the Crimean Peninsula.
The Sea of Azov is the shallowest sea in the world, there is a constant outflow of water from the Sea of Azov to the Black Sea.
The sea is affected by the inflow of numerous rivers, which bring sand and shells, which in turn form numerous bays, limans.
Because of these deposits, the sea bottom is relatively smooth, due to the river inflow, water in the sea has low salinity and a high amount of biomass that affects the water colour.
The sea shores and spits are low, they are rich in vegetation, the name likely derives from the settlement of an area around Azov, whose name comes from the Kipchak Turkish asak or azaq.
A Russian folk etymology, instead derives it from an eponymous Cuman prince named Azum or Asuf, a formerly common spelling of the name in English was the Sea of Azoff, which is closer to the Russian pronunciation.
In antiquity, the sea was known as the Maeotis Swamp from the marshlands to its northeast.
It remains unclear whether it was named for the nearby Maeotians or if that name was applied broadly to various peoples who happened to live beside it.
Other names included Lake Maeotis or Maeotius, the Maeotium or Maeotic Sea, the Cimmerian or Scythican Swamps, the Maeotians themselves were said by Pliny to call the sea Temarenda or Temerinda, meaning Mother of Waters.
The medieval Russians knew it as the Sea of Surozh after the adjacent city now known as Sudak and it was known in Ottoman Turkish as the Balük-Denis from its high productivity.
There are traces of Neolithic settlement in the now covered by the sea.
Subsequent work has been both to support and to discredit this theory, and archaeologists still debate it.
This has led some to associate this catastrophe with prehistoric flood myths, the Maeotian marshes around the mouth of the Tanais River were famous in antiquity, as they served as an important check on the migration of nomadic people from the Eurasian steppelands.
The area of the region is 28,461 km², its population is 1,083,367, the Dnieper River runs through the oblast which includes the Kakhovka Reservoir.
The oblast includes the portion of the Arabat Spit, a thin strip of land between the brackish Syvash and the Sea of Azov that is geographically part of the Crimean Peninsula.
Due to Russia gaining de facto control of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in 2014 the southern areas of Kherson are the parts of the Crimean Peninsula under direct Ukrainian control.
The Kherson Oblast is administratively subdivided into 18 raions and 3 municipalities which are subordinate to the oblast government Kherson, Nova Kakhovka.
The Kherson municipality is subdivided into 3 urban districts, all information below is current as of 2015.
The local administration of the oblast is controlled by the Kherson Oblast Rada, the governor of the oblast is the Kherson Oblast Rada speaker, appointed by the President of Ukraine.
Eastern Europe, known as East Europe, is the eastern part of the European continent.
There is no consensus on the area it covers, partly because the term has a wide range of geopolitical, cultural.
There are almost as many definitions of Eastern Europe as there are scholars of the region, a related United Nations paper adds that every assessment of spatial identities is essentially a social and cultural construct.
One definition describes Eastern Europe as an entity, the region lying in Europe with main characteristics consisting in Byzantine, Orthodox.
Another definition was created during the Cold War and used more or less synonymously with the term Eastern Bloc, a similar definition names the formerly communist European states outside the Soviet Union as Eastern Europe.
Historians and social scientists generally view such definitions as outdated or relegating, several definitions of Eastern Europe exist today, but they often lack precision or are extremely general.
These definitions vary both across cultures and among experts, even scientists, recently becoming more and more imprecise.
The Ural Mountains, Ural River, and the Caucasus Mountains are the land border of the eastern edge of Europe.
Eurovoc, a multilingual thesaurus maintained by the Publications Office of the European Union, provides entries for 23 EU languages, of these, those in italics are classified as Eastern Europe in this source.
Other official web-pages of the European Union classify some of the countries as strictly Central European.
The East–West Schism is the break of communion and theology between what are now the Eastern and Western churches which began in the 11th century and lasts until this very day and it divided Christianity in Europe, and consequently the world, into Western Christianity and Eastern Christianity.
Since the Great Schism of 1054, Europe has been divided between Roman Catholic and Protestant churches in the West, and the Eastern Orthodox Christian churches in the east, due to this religious cleavage, Eastern Orthodox countries are often associated with Eastern Europe.
A cleavage of this sort is, often problematic, for example, Greece is overwhelmingly Orthodox, the fall of the Iron Curtain brought the end of the East–West division in Europe, but this geopolitical concept is sometimes still used for quick reference by the media.
The Arabat Spit or Arabat Arrow is a spit which separates a large and very salty system of lagoons named Syvash from the Sea of Azov.
The spit is located between the Henichesk Strait to the north and the shores of Crimea to the south.
Arrow is not an idiomatic Russian or Ukrainian name for spit, rather this peninsula is called an arrow for unknown reasons, perhaps because it is long and thin.
The spit is low and straight on the Azov Sea side and it contains two areas which are 7–8 km wide and have brown-clay hills, they are located 7. km and 32 km from the Henichesk Strait.
The top layers of other parts of the spit are formed by sand and its vegetation mostly consists of various weed grasses, festuce grasses, spear grass, salsola, Carex colchica, rose hip, etc.
The latter activity is traditional for the due to the vast areas of shallow.
Salt production in the 19th century was about 24,000 tonnes per year on the Arabat Arrow alone, the spit is a health resort and its Azov Sea side is used as a beach.
The entirety of the spit was occupied during the annexation, although Russia withdrew its forces from the northern Kherson side in December 2014, the rural communities of Shchaslyvtseve and Strilkove are located in the northern section of the spit, within the Kherson Oblast.
As of 2014, the total population of the Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol was at 2,248,400 people.
This is down from the 2001 Ukrainian Census figure, which was 2,376,000, the interior was dominated by a succession of Scytho-Sarmatian, Hunnic, Turkic and Slavic conquests.
Its south coast was Greek speaking under the Romans and their states, the Byzantine Empire, the Empire of Trebizond.
In 1475 the region was conquered by the Ottoman Turks, during the late Middle Ages a few coastal cities were ruled by Italian city states.
The colonization New Russia at the end of the 18th century was led by Prince Grigori Potemkin who was granted the powers of a ruler over the area by Catherine the Great.
The lands were given to the Russian dvoryanstvo, and the enserfed peasantry mostly from Ukraine.
Catherine the Great invited European settlers to these newly conquered lands, Poles, Crimea is geographically and demographically divided into three regions, the steppe interior, the mountains, and the coast.
The Tatars were the predominant portion of the population in the area and about half of the steppe population.
Germans and Bulgarians settled in the Crimea at the beginning of the 19th century, receiving a large allotment, wealthy colonists bought substantial portions of land, mainly in Perekopsky and Yevpatoria districts.
The upheavals and ethnic cleansing of the 20th century vastly changed Crimeas ethnic situation, in 1944,200,000 Crimean Tatars were deported from Crimea to Central Asia and Siberia, along with 70,000 Greeks and 14,000 Bulgarians and other nationalities.
By the latter 20th century and Ukrainians made up almost the entire population, with the fall of the Soviet Union, exiled Crimean Tatars began returning to their homeland and would become 10% of the population by the beginning of the 21st century.
Other minorities are Black Sea Germans, Bulgarians, Azerbaijanis, Greeks, the number of Crimea Germans was 45,000 in 1941.
In 1944,70,000 Greeks and 14,000 Bulgarians from the Crimea were deported to Central Asia and Siberia, along with 200,000 Crimean Tatars and other nationalities.
According to the 2001 census, 77% of Crimean inhabitants named Russian as their language,11.
Bohdan Khmelnytsky, Hetman of Ukraine, established an independent Ukrainian Cossack state after the uprising in 1648 against Poland.
Decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet ""On the transfer of the Crimean Oblast"" Ukrainian military base at Perevalne surrounded by Russian troops without military rank insignia or cockade on 9 March 2014.
Two pikes on the left are wrapped in the traditional colors of Ukraine – blue/yellow and red/black.
Armenia, Mesopotamia, Babylonia and Assyria with Adjacent Regions, Karl von Spruner, published in 1865.
Neacșu's letter from 1521, the oldest surviving document written in Romanian.
Rabbi Chaim Chizkiyahu Medini, the ""chacham"" of the Krymchaki Jews, with his wife, daughters, sons-in-law, and grandchildren.
Curry about to pass while being guarded by John Wall and Nenê of the Washington Wizards.
Curry averaged 7. assists per game during the 2014–15 NBA regular season, good enough for sixth best in the league.
