No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without permission in writing from the Transatlantic Academy.
The views expressed here are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of the Transatlantic Academy.
Comments from readers are welcome; reply to the mailing address above or by e-mail to Info@transatlanticacademy.org.
About the Transatlantic Academy The Transatlantic Academy is a research institution devoted to creating common approaches to the longterm challenges facing Europe and North America.
The Academy does this by each year bringing together scholars, policy experts, and authors from both sides of the Atlantic and from different disciplinary perspectives to research and analyze a distinct policy theme of transatlantic interest.
The Academy was created in 2007 as a partnership between the German Marshall Fund of the United States and the ZEITStiftung Ebelin und Gerd Bucerius.
The Robert Bosch Stiftung and the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation joined as full partners beginning in 2008, and the Fritz Thyssen Stiftung joined as a full partner in 2011.
European countries German Chancellor Angela Merkel played a and the United States, together with partners central role in building this coalition and keeping such as Canada and Japan, have responded to it together.
Berlin and Washington, alongside Paris that challenge with a high degree of unity and and Brussels, were the key Western capitals during consistency.
Through that process, the idea of the Ukraine conflict. the West as an international actor, as the central pillar of the liberal world order, has experienced a With the joint response to Russian aggression renaissance. against Ukraine, Europe and the United States have set a precedent for a successful transatlantic By using coercive means such as sanctions coupled cooperation on international conflicts.
Whether with diplomacy, the West has helped Ukraine this success story can become the starting point to resist Russian aggression.
At the same time it for a true renaissance of the West depends on the has sent a strong message to Moscow and other willingness of the central actors to move from crisis capitals that the West continues to support core management to long-term strategic planning. international rules such as territorial integrity and ii Transatlantic Academy 1 A Transatlantic Success Story T ransatlantic cooperation in dealing with which may have calculated that Moscow had Russian aggression in Ukraine has been a enough leverage in Europe to prevent such unity success story.
United States, together with other partners such as Canada and Japan, developed a joint, strong, What produced this unity was Russia’s assault on and meaningful response to Russia’s violation of core principles of the European peace order and Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
And on basic rules of civilized international behavior. despite a lot of skepticism, they have managed to Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its only thinly Continued Russian hold the line. veiled, entirely unprovoked military attack on aggression and eastern Ukraine shocked many in the West who Russian President This joint response went far beyond a lowestthought that Europe had overcome this kind of Vladimir Putin’s common-denominator approach; it was ambitious. behavior.
It also reminded many observers of the unwillingness for Its three main pillars were defined by German period in the 1930s when the Versailles order Chancellor Angela Merkel very early in the crisis, in Europe unraveled.
The response is a success story because the remains difficult to maintain.
A first success was to transatlantic community has managed to stick build that common front and thereby send a strong together, to coordinate and cooperate closely, on all signal to the Kremlin.
This signal was underlined levels, and to use a wide range of tools for a joint by the fact that Western governments were ready purpose. to pay a cost for sending this message to Moscow, in terms of disruption of economic flows and That such a high degree of meaningful unity has interruption of engagement with Russia. been achieved and maintained is a powerful sign that the “West”2 remains a much more coherent Western sanctions have also hurt the Russian grouping of states than many have thought.
More economy, making Russia pay a tangible price for than two decades after the end of Cold War, which its military aggression against Ukraine.
While the produced the West as a collective actor, bonds exact costs are hard to pin down, sanctions appear between Europe and the United States apparently to have contributed to the current crisis of the remain strong beyond the core connection of the Russian economy, as Putin himself has admitted NATO security alliance.
The West’s Response to the Ukraine Conflict 1 Ukraine remains hard to determine.
Kremlin’s opaque decision-making and constant Without that fiction, Russia would have lost more use of disinformation, one can only speculate. international standing and would have more likely What can be said is that for many months, Western become an outcast.
It would have lost its narrative, leaders tried to prevent Russia from going deeper and therefore the ability to win support or at least into Ukraine in pursuit of the Novorossiya4 project, acceptance at home and abroad. using diplomacy and sanctions.
Moscow’s Western unity and sanctions have been a warning diplomacy over the The main reason for the Russian failure to gain shot that Russia is putting at risk its relations with more territory in Donbas appears to have been Europe and North America.
While the Kremlin last two years has the lack of enthusiasm and support of the local tries to isolate Russia and its neighborhood from been completely population, combined with the growing ability of the political influence of the West, Moscow clearly based on the regular and irregular Ukrainian troops to push is interested in maintaining good relations with fiction that it back.
Apparently Putin very much cares had not attacked point in August 2014 to bring regular Russian about meetings with other leaders, especially with Ukraine.
Without troops into Ukraine , as local and the United States president.
Being seen as a global leader that fiction, Russia irregular insurgent forces risked defeat. seems to be an important part of his image. would have lost more international But there are indicators that Western resolve played And unlike the Soviet Union, Russia depends an important role as well.
Russia never moved economically on close relations with the West. standing and from a military involvement in Donbas that was Diminished economic interactions with the West would have more deniable — though with shrinking plausibility — to are highly risky for Russia, especially in conjunction likely become open intervention.
Moscow was careful to make sure that it would and financial sanctions were a clear warning shot not be defined as a party involved in the conflict; from Western capitals to Moscow, and Russia had instead it pretended to be a concerned neighbor. to face potential further escalation on the side of the West.
The “nuclear option” of cutting Russia off One reason for that behavior may have been fear of from the SWIFT international financial payment a domestic backlash if Russia moved from hidden system was at least discussed in the West at the and hybrid warfare to open warfare, as indicated height of the conflict. by the Kremlin’s attempt to keep the number of Russian troops killed secret.
By demonstrating meaningful unity, condemning Moving from the role of a concerned neighbor Russian action, and by making it pay a prize in to admitting being a party to a war would have terms of sanctions and support for Ukraine, the burnt bridges with the West.
A weak, unreformed, and the diplomatic Ukrainian affairs, while Ukraine and its Western isolated Ukraine would naturally fall back in playing field. backers insist that the main point of Minsk is to Russia’s sphere of control. restore Ukraine’s territorial integrity, its control over its borders.
To date, however, the West has been steadfast in its support for Ukraine, by helping it to reform, Since then, Russia has emphasized Ukraine’s providing it with financial aid, and by renewing obligation to deliver on the political elements of sanctions against Russia linked to Moscow’s Minsk, which include constitutional reform in fulfillment of the Minsk agreement.
Merkel Ukraine in the shape of an agreement between regularly repeats that sanctions will stay “until Kyiv and the separatists in Donbas.
Ukraine, Germany, and France, has been criticized for being too conciliatory toward Russia.
But critics 6 Bundesregierung, “Pressestatements von Bundeskanzlerin Merkel und dem Staatspräsidenten der Ukraine, have failed to present an alternative way forward.
The West’s Response to the Ukraine Conflict 3 2 Leadership in the Conflict Germany Steps Up taken place between Western leaders and Putin T he Ukraine conflict is a major international between February 2014 and November 2015. crisis with global repercussions.
Merkel 65 times (35 of those played a key role as the only global power and conversations one-on-one), French President with a strong interest in stability in Europe and a François Hollande 38 times , U.S. constructive relationship with Russia.
What has President Barack Obama 15 times , Transatlantic surprised observers, however, is that Germany and British Prime Minister David Cameron 14 cooperation in the decided to play a leadership role.
Never before in times .8 Ukraine conflict recent decades has Germany led in an international crisis.
While it was leading on intra-EU affairs, There are a number of reasons why Berlin has taken has mainly been usually together with France, Germany was rather on that central role.
First, Germany has grown into German-U.S. cautious not to become entangled in conflicts.
That a leadership position in Europe in recent years, cooperation, because of its size, the strength of its economy, its became visible once more when Germany refused centered around geographical position in the center of EU-Europe, to support its Western partners in the decision to the German and its determination to work together with EU intervene in Libya in 2011. chancellery and partners on every major issue, to find European the White House.
And yet, transatlantic cooperation in the Ukraine solutions and to keep the EU together.
In addition, conflict has mainly been GermanUnited States cooperation, since Merkel now into her 11th year as German centered around the German chancellery and the chancellor, she is the most experienced leader White House.
But much more importantly than that, it is a source of constant Victoria Nuland, the United States assistant secretary of state geopolitical concern to Germans.
That is why the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, The central role of the German chancellor becomes remains immensely popular in Germany.
It was friendship. clear that either Germany would play a leadership role or nobody else would, because nobody else was Another reason for the priority of Russia in in a position to do so.
The United States was too German foreign policy is that Russia is a major far away, Britain and France were closer but not as concern for Germany’s key partners in Central close as Germany and also had other priorities, and Europe, first of all Poland.
Poland has become a major partner for Germany, Finding common not only economically (trade with Poland is higher But while Germany felt it had to take the lead, it ground with in volume than with Russia), but also politically. was well aware that its power to do so depended Warsaw, inside Warsaw and Berlin have coordinated their policies entirely on its ability to bring EU partners in by and outside closely.
Poland, bordering on Russian territory (the forging a joint EU and Western approach to the the EU, means Kaliningrad exclave) is much more hawkish on Ukraine conflict.
Finding common ground — sanctions, diplomacy, and support for Ukraine that Berlin has with Warsaw, inside and outside the EU, means that — could not work if Berlin was not able to put to deal with the Berlin has to deal with the perception of Russia as together the broadest possible alliance.
Germany perception of a threat. needed the backing of the EU and the United States Russia as a threat. in order to have a chance to influence Russian In Berlin’s view, it is of major importance to make behavior and to control the damage. sure that Europe and Russia are not falling back into a Cold War constellation, with dividing lines Building EU Consensus in Europe, massive troop deployments, and the While building and keeping a national consensus in permanent threat of war , Germany, the chancellor at the same time worked including nuclear Armageddon.
A constructive, closely with other Western capitals in order to build largely cooperative relationship with Russia is one and maintain coalitions.
Key for success on the level of the major geopolitical gains that Germany feels it of the EU has been German-French cooperation. has achieved since the end of Cold War.
Bringing Hollande on board was crucial to win This relationship came under massive stress with the support of other EU member states as well, the Ukraine conflict, and it collapsed in the months especially southern member states such as Italy and after the annexation of Crimea.
Without the close cooperation between 2014, alarm bells were ringing in Berlin.
For the Paris and Berlin, it would have been impossible to German government, there was no question that keep the EU on track and to shape a response that this was Germany’s moment — that Berlin was in gained the support of all 28 EU member states.
Nevertheless, the institutions in Brussels and Merkel ruled out the use of military power — While Merkel’s were important as facilitators in the process of both wanted to prevent the conflict from becoming position has been building consensus, and they provided important a proxy war, and were concerned about the risk of rather “hawkish” expertise and helped with matters escalating and spinning out of control. in the German the execution of joint decisions.
Third, Merkel had become the key leader in political context, it Europe, at least in the EU, as had become obvious was “dovish” in the Transatlantic Cooperation during the euro crisis.
She was the one European United States context and German-French cooperation was one indispensable leader with the power and capability to build the therefore fit into element of the joint Western response; the second necessary coalitions inside the bloc.
Talks between the the broader set-up the German chancellor was therefore the most German chancellor and the United States president were of Obama’s foreign promising approach to forging transatlantic unity the most important transatlantic communication policy, an effort on Russia and Ukraine. channel.
For the Obama administration, having Germany take the lead, together with its European partners, was a welcome development, for a number of reasons.
Both wanted to use non-military means to try to stop Russia from further advancing in Ukraine and to restore Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Arming the Ukrainians with lethal 4) support for Ukraine in order to increase its weapons was a contentious debate in the United resilience when under Russian attack.
All four States, however, with some members of Congress For the main elements have been supported by all 28 EU and government officials in favor of the move and Western players, governments and by the United States government, as well critical of Obama’s Ukraine policy. the priority was to as by other Western partners, including Canada, end the fighting, Japan, Australia, Norway, and Switzerland.
Ukraine openly with the full weight of the Russian government called for a military intervention in army.
This view was also shared by Obama, who order to stop to Russian aggression in Crimea or “knocked down the idea” of sending lethal weapons eastern Ukraine.
It was undisputed that NATO to Ukraine, “worrying that Putin would simply would not fight in Ukraine, as the country is not a further escalate in response.”16 member of the alliance and therefore not protected by NATO security guarantees.
Moreover, throughout the conflict, the main Western players were From Light to Heavy Sanctions determined to make sure that the conflict would not Since the military option was off the table from become a proxy war between Russia and the West. the beginning, Western governments chose to use sanctions as an alternative hard power tool.
A key moment in the debate was a February 2015 report end the fighting, even at the price of temporary by eight former senior United States diplomatic and military officials territorial losses for Ukraine. calling for the United States and NATO to provide Ukraine with defensive lethal weapons.
Western countries refused to send heavy reports/2015/02/ukraine-independence-russian-aggression.
The West’s Response to the Ukraine Conflict 7 From the moment it became clear that Russia had economic sanctions would come if Russia invaded indeed sent unmarked troops to Crimea, in late eastern or southern Ukraine.
February 2014, the EU and the United States both started to prepare sanctions.
At an extraordinary As Russia’s actions to destabilize eastern Ukraine meeting on March 3, EU foreign ministers went on despite the warnings, on April 26 the G7 condemned “the clear violation of Ukrainian called for more sanctions.
On May 2, Obama and Merkel it became clear 6, the United States president signed an executive order that met to discuss sanctions.
The intention was to use the threat both started to of economic sanctions as an instrument to prevent As fear over open war in eastern Ukraine grew, prepare sanctions.
Russia from destabilizing Ukraine’s east. on July 16 the United States decided to initiate economic sanctions, targeting Russia’s financial, When Russia, apparently unimpressed, went ahead energy, and military technology sectors.
The with the Crimea referendum on March 16, the same day, an extraordinary meeting of EU leaders United States and the EU on the next day both agreed on sanctions that were still below economic responded with a sanctions consisting of travel sanctions , described as “stage 2.9” bans and asset freezes on key individuals.
A number of countries, among them Moscow annexed Crimea two days later, Obama France, Italy, Austria, Slovakia, and Greece were not announced that Washington would prepare farready to move to the third stage, despite pressure ranging economic sanctions against Russia.
On the same day, EU leaders meeting in Brussels agreed on further personal sanctions and threatened Russia with economic sanctions as well; the summit tasked the European Commission to quickly draft 20 V Pop, “EU leaders agree new Russia sanctions,” EUobserver, proposals.
The 17 Council of the European Union, “Council conclusions on group had been scheduled to hold its next summit in Sochi Ukraine, FOREIGN AFFAIRS Council meeting,” March 3, 2014, in June 2014; the leaders of the G7 instead met in Brussels.
In the EU, it was much 17 on July 17, and amidst growing fear that Russia more difficult to find agreement among the 28 may be planning an outright, open invasion of member states.
Especially with regard to economic eastern Ukraine, the United States and key European sanctions, each country had its specific concerns leaders agreed to jointly escalate sanctions to a new and interests.
The leaders of the United States, Germany, 2014, the France, the U.K., and Italy agreed in a July 28 On the EU side, Merkel’s Germany was a leading economic video-conference on a package that targeted Russia’s proponent of sanctions, supported by the U.K. and sanctions were financial, energy, and military sectors (officially by Scandinavian countries.
In September 2014, the economic sanctions were First, they were an important signal to everybody refined and reinforced on both the United States and EU that the West was united in its rejection of Russian sides in response to another round of Russian aggression.
Second, they demonstrated the depth military escalation in eastern Ukraine.
Third, the Council of the European Union. sanctions imposed a serious economic cost on Russia for its actions.
The West’s Response to the Ukraine Conflict 9 convince skeptics in Europe that the aim was not to then, these four countries have negotiated many punish or isolate Russia, but to persuade Moscow to times at the level of foreign ministers or heads of change course and overcome the conflict. government.
But while the format has been seen as worth keeping, the result of the first meeting was During the entire conflict, Western leaders and disappointing, as it did not prevent Russia from foreign ministers have been in constant contact escalating its actions in the coming months. with the Russian side.
In June 2014 — one of the During the most tense months — Merkel and Putin talked no Equally disappointing was the first Minsk entire conflict, fewer than 10 times (four times one-on-one, six agreement, which was signed after a new offensive times with Hollande included). of the Donbas rebels with direct involvement of Western leaders Russian troops.
On September 5, 2014, Ukrainian and foreign A series of diplomatic initiatives were undertaken, and Russian negotiators and the rebels plus the ministers have on different levels.
Already on February 14, 2014, OSCE — the “contact group” — signed a ceasefire been in constant German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier in Minsk, at the initiative of the Russian president, contact with the had met Putin in Sochi and proposed an OSCE but it failed to end the fighting.
On February 21, the German, French, and Polish foreign After another round of “contact group” format talks ministers went to Kyiv to try to mediate between had collapsed on January 31, 2015, Merkel and President Yanukovych and the Maidan movement.
Hollande personally took the initiative and met with Putin and Poroshenko in Minsk to hammer In early March, Germany and France proposed an out an agreement.
After 16 hours of talks, the sointernational contact group consisting of Russia, called Minsk II agreement was signed on February Ukraine, the United States, and the EU.26 On 12, including a ceasefire and a broader plan to end April 17, this group met in Geneva, at the level of the conflict.
The push for this meeting came the same day. from the United States side.
In these negotiations, Russia surprisingly agreed to measures such as occupied The Minsk II agreement became the central buildings being vacated under the auspices of blueprint in the West’s diplomatic efforts to end the OSCE envoys, but the deal had no impact on the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
West on one hand and Russia on the other highlight different elements and are pursuing conflicting On June 6, 2014, the leaders of Germany, France, goals with the agreement.
The Kremlin, hampered in its military advance By linking sanctions with the restoration of Ukraine’s by growing Ukrainian resistance and Western sovereignty, the West has given Russia a strong sanctions, decided to try to reach its goal of keeping incentive to comply with the Minsk II agreement.
Ukraine in its sphere of control by using diplomatic At the same time, it has set a relatively clear set of means, hoping that over time Ukraine would criteria against which the lifting of sanctions can be For the Russian become weaker and lose Western support, allowing measured.
In doing so, the EU has made sure that side, Minsk II is Moscow’s interpretation of Minsk II to prevail. the debate over sanctions against Russia stays closely a tool to regain connected with the assessment of Russia’s actions in control over the For Ukraine and the West, in contrast, Minsk II is a Ukraine; the two cannot be decoupled.
For control over Ukraine and the West, Ukraine’s control over its Support for Ukraine Donbas, and b) to territory and its borders are the key elements of the The fourth element of the Western response force Ukraine to agreement; everything else is just meant as a step in to Russia’s attack on Ukraine has been support give the Donbas that direction. for Ukraine, the victim of Russia’s unprovoked region far-reaching aggression.
At their summit deny Russia success by strengthening Ukrainian in Kyiv. on March 19 and 20, European leaders endorsed statehood.
According to many statements by and market economy Ukraine is in a much better European leaders since, economic sanctions will position to withstand Russian pressure and to stay until Ukraine regains control over its border in defend its borders efficiently. the east.
As early as March 5, 2014, the European The United States has backed the Minsk II Commission unveiled a stabilization plan for agreement.
The West’s Response to the Ukraine Conflict 11 Ukraine worth €11 billion.
On April 9, the contributions to the EU part), and 5 percent from Commission set up a Support Group for Ukraine, Canada.
A recent research paper concludes that composed of experts from EU institutions and “Germany belongs to the countries that allocate the member states.
On April 23, the EU granted most funds for reforms in Ukraine, rivaled only by Ukrainian exporters preferential access to the EU the United States or the EU in general.”36 market.
The United States committed $2 billion in loan While Europeans guarantees and nearly $760 million in security, and Americans Despite Russian objections, Ukraine and the EU programmatic, and technical assistance to Ukraine signed their Association Agreement on June 27, from February 2014 through December 2015.37 work together on 2014.
The DCFTA (Deep and Comprehensive In addition, Washington advises “almost a dozen” the level of the Free Trade Agreement) between the EU and Ukrainian ministries and localities.
G7 and the IMF to Ukraine came partially into force on November support Ukraine, 2014; despite further Russian maneuvers to derail Europeans and Americans also support Ukraine via they do not always it, it came into full force on January 1, 2016.
In April 2014, a $17 coordinate their December 2014, an EU Advisory Mission for billion bail-out with the IMF was agreed upon; in other efforts on Civilian Security Sector Reform was put in place in March 2015, a new $17. billion bail-out followed. the ground.
The EU has brokered deals with Russia over But only a part of the money has been disbursed as gas supply for Ukraine (October 2014; September not all conditions have been met. 2015); it also supports the modernization of the While Europeans and Americans work together Ukrainian pipeline system. on the level of the G7 and the IMF to support The EU is also in negotiations with Ukraine over Ukraine, they do not always coordinate their other visa liberalization, using the prospect of easy efforts on the ground.
The EU and its member states are the biggest contributors to the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine that monitors the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
On sanctions, Merkel was also a major driving However, the lack of coordination on reform is not force, but her hand has been less visible, for tactical a specific transatlantic problem in Ukraine; donor reasons.
A Well-Coordinated Response the support of those EU member states that have The degree of Western unity and its ability to agree been more skeptical of sanctions.
Moving too far to a forceful response to Russian aggression in ahead or exposing the laggards in public would On sanctions, Ukraine has been impressive.
Few observers would have endangered her ability to build the necessary Merkel was also have thought that the transatlantic community consensus at the regular, crucial meetings of EU a major driving would unite behind strong economic sanctions leaders in Brussels. force, but her against Russia.
In all stages of the conflict, a hand has been From time to time, especially when it came to the remarkable degree of smooth coordination and less visible, for tougher economic sanctions , the cooperation has taken place among European tactical reasons.
The Minsk II agreement, which support of those advanced militarily in Donbas, the more the pressure helped move the conflict from the military to the EU member states rose in the United States Congress and in media commentary diplomatic playing field, was its main result. and think tanks to provide Ukraine with lethal that have been The United States was initially strongly involved weapons.
The Obama administration itself was more skeptical in joint diplomatic efforts on the level of foreign apparently split on this question.
But ultimately the of sanctions. ministers, but the Geneva agreement from April president decided against such a course of action. 2014 failed to produce a tangible outcome.
While The United States and Europe were united in the permanently engaged in diplomacy with all players, view that support for Ukraine must be an important the United States did not push for being integrated part of the West’s response.
On one hand, this was into the “Normandy format” (France, Germany, part of the crisis response.
On the other, the West Ukraine, and Russia). realized that the failure to build a strong, legitimate, and capable Ukrainian state has provided Russia 40 Anita Sobják writes, “An example of poor coordination is in with the opportunity to intervene at relatively the area of the rule of law, where the EU ensured valuable expert support via the EU Advisory Mission for Civilian Security low cost.
In order to help build a stable system of Sector Reform Ukraine , but no material and technical sovereign states in the post-Soviet space, the West support to assist not just the design, but the implementation of the reforms.
Meanwhile, the United States invested in substantial reform apparently must do more to help reformers in those of patrol police in big cities.
The West’s Response to the Ukraine Conflict 13 4 Motivations R ussia’s double attack on Ukraine — first the publicly to his face in a joint press conference for occupation and annexation of Crimea, then his handling of the opposition. the “hybrid” war against Eastern Ukraine — came as a shock to the West.
Policymakers in In November 18, 2013, when the EU still expected Western capitals had largely held the view that Ukrainian President Victor Yanukovych to sign Putin would ultimately not risk interrupting the Association Agreement with the EU despite Russia’s vital relations with the West.
Russian policymakers may have is our understanding of the unqualified mutual Merkel’s views expected a reaction rather similar to that to the respect of the freedom to choose as laid out in the toward Russia OSCE Charter.
Why did economic interests, dependency on Russian energy, The trust Merkel and Putin had developed in their Western German disinterest in Ukraine, fear of conflict with Russia, increasingly cool working relationship evaporated establishment. and hope for cooperation with the Kremlin in other over the annexation of Crimea.
Putin allegedly had areas not prevent the West from imposing harsh openly lied to Merkel about the presence of Russian sanctions and moving quickly back to business as troops.
At least one part of the answer can be found in the views of the German chancellor.
Angela Merkel, on In a speech to the German Parliament on March 13, succeeding Gerhard Schröder in 2005, brought to 2014, Merkel prepared Germans for a policy change the German chancellery some skepticism toward on Russia.
The chancellor calls it “almost a miracle” the established policy on Russia.
A second reason for United States involvement has been the interest in preventing Russia from In her speech, Merkel juxtaposes the world of becoming a rising threat and a spoiler.
The Obama globalization, characterized by interdependence administration would instead like to see Moscow as For the Obama and cooperation, with the world of old-fashioned a partner in dealing with issues such as the Iranian administration... geopolitics.
Germany and Russia, she argues, have and the North Korean nuclear programs, conflict what has been become deeply interconnected in the last decades, management in the Middle East and North Africa, at stake is the following the logic of globalization.
In addition, the European security conflict with Ukraine, Russia is putting the “right United States continues to see itself as the guardian of the strongest above the strength of the right.” order in which of the liberal international order; Merkel’s remarks What is at stake is “the territorial integrity of a the United States juxtaposing old style geopolitics with the win-win European neighbor, the respect of the principles remains deeply logic of globalization have probably resonated in of the United Nations, the principles and methods involved even the White House.
Russia has committed “a breach of fundamental territorial integrity in order to describe what is at become largely principles of international law.” stake.
Undisputed and trusted at home, she had moved in a leadership position in the EU during that govern relations between nations in Europe the Euro crisis.
Deeply concerned over what and around the world must be upheld in the 21st century.
That includes respect for sovereignty and she perceived as a Russian threat to “the entire territorial integrity — the notion that nations do European peaceful order,” Merkel started to take not simply redraw borders, or make decisions at the a leadership role in shaping and coordinating expense of their neighbors simply because they are Europe’s answer to Russia, in close cooperation with larger or more powerful.”49 other leaders, especially Hollande and Obama.
Merkel’s decision to use her political capital For the Obama administration, which backed and her leadership position in order to oppose and supported Berlin’s leadership role, what has Russian aggression and to reassert the principles of 46 A Merkel, “Regierungserklärung von Bundeskanzlerin international order in Europe was one important Merkel.” factor that has shaped the Western response.
C Grant, “What is wrong with German with Merkel as partners in leadership.
The West’s Response to the Ukraine Conflict 15 indispensable factor was the fact that Merkel and the skeptics.
The Western response to the aggression against Ukraine has been Ukraine crisis has been a success story from which impressive.
While the West has demonstrated its ability to act jointly One set of questions concerns the relationship the disagreements and it has reasserted key international norms and and differences post-Soviet space.
Is the West capable of developing rules. dominate the a longer-term answer to the challenges posed by a Russia that is enormously ambitious but lacks often increasingly This has been a major achievement.
Can the West bring more headlines, deeper many divisions inside Europe and between the stability to the post-Soviet space by building down the West transatlantic partners.
Can the positive experience of war in Syria. having gone through this together and formulated Germany seemed to be willing to act forcefully only a joint response encourage Western capitals to seek on internal EU issues and to remain very reluctant similar cooperation on other important foreign to engage beyond the EU space.
What the Ukraine conflict demonstrated was that when fundamentally challenged, the West, as a The answer to these questions to a large extent grouping of liberal democracies that have signed depends on the ability of Western capitals to up to a cooperative international order, is capable institutionalize the gains in cooperation and of responding resolutely when it has the political coordination.
While disagreements and differences dominate achievements evaporate once new leaders who do the often increasingly shrill media headlines, not understand the advantages of such cooperation deeper down the West as community of values is come to power in Washington, Paris, Berlin, and alive and strong.
To state this does not mean to elsewhere and try to solve the issues by addressing underestimate the challenges, but they should be them unilaterally.
The West’s Response to the Ukraine Conflict 17 sides of the Atlantic discuss strategic issues. cooperation.
If challenged on major principles, the Transatlantic cooperation is only institutionalized West is able to respond in a forceful and meaningful on the level of NATO on one hand and on the manner.
What is lacking is a regular, reaction to the kind of action that is able to shape institutionalized exchange between key officials in the environment according to long-term strategic major European capitals and their counterparts in interests shared by the West and its partners.
