For two decades Barry was the chief economics correspondent at Voice of America.
During three years in the 1990s he was the VOA correspondent in Prague, writing extensively about the economic transformation in formerly communist Eastern Europe.
The seizure of Crimea and the humiliating ceasefire imposed on President Petro Poroshenko, she wrote, meant that Ukraine was again ""a borderland playground"" for its mighty neighbor.By Barry D Wood, ContributorWashington-based writer and broadcasterWashington-based writer and broadcasterOct 25, 2014, 11:09 AM EDT | Updated Dec 6, 2017This post was published on the now-closed HuffPost Contributor platform.
If you need to flag this entry as abusive, send us an email.SAVEElizabeth Pond, the respected American author who has reported on Eastern Europe for three decades, recently wrote a eulogy for Ukraine.
The seizure of Crimea, Russia's military rout of the Ukrainians in the east, and the humiliating ceasefire imposed on President Petro Poroshenko, she wrote, meant that Ukraine was again ""a borderland playground"" for its mighty neighbor.Poroshenko, says Pond, gambled that the Ukrainian army could defeat the Russian-backed insurgents without provoking an outright Russian invasion.
Those districts adjacent to Russia form the core of the Donbas region that accounts for 20 percent of Ukraine' industry and 18 percent of its population.Advertisement HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); A further setback followed.
The best that can be hoped for, say analysts, is public endorsement of Poroshenko and Prime Minister Arseniy Yatseniuk's program of economic and political reform.The president's 'Petro Poroshenko Bloc' is expected to be the biggest winner with over 30% of the vote.
Analysts say only 23 percent of Ukrainians in the Russian-speaking east are likely to vote.Advertisement HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); With the election being boycotted by separatists and the party of disgraced former president Viktor Yanukovych not participating, this will be Ukraine's first election in which pro-western and pro-Russian parties are not pitted against each another.
Their task, he says, is to build a properly functioning state, something that has not occurred during 23 years of independence.The biggest problem is corruption, a fact freely admitted by Poroshenko and Yatseniuk.
However, he's optimistic that reforms will begin after the election.When Poroshenko and Vladimir Putin met in Milan on October 17 progress was reportedly made on the acrimonious dispute over gas supplies and pricing.
As with Russia, Ukraine's currency has lost value, down 18% against the dollar in the past three months.Through the persistent gloom one analyst sees hope.
Lawlessness and moral decay became pervasive.Advertisement HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); Putin was threatened, said Satter, by Ukrainians desire to connect with the European Union, a western alternative to a hopeless status quo.
The answer should be apparent within 6 to 12 months. --Barry D Wood has written extensively about post-communist economic transformation.
Realness delivered to your inbox HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); HPGam.cmd.push{ return HPGam.render; }); What's HotUkrainian High School Grads Pose For Heartbreaking Photos In War-Torn HomelandWhy The Color Of Your Kid's Swimsuit Might Matter More Than You ThinkIt's Time To Buy A Portable GeneratorAlabama Teen Accepted To 15 Top Universities With $2 Million In ScholarshipsMore In PoliticsFormer GOP Missouri Gov.
Blasted For 'RINO Hunting' Senate Campaign AdGeorgia's Brad Raffensperger To Testify At Next Public Jan.
Probe — Under OathRants By Herschel Walker's Son On Absent Fathers Go Viral At Awkward MomentGov.
Gavin Newsom Joins Truth Social To Call Out 'Republican Lies''Cowboys For Trump' Founder Avoids More Jail Time For Joining Jan.
Spent Days Vacationing In Italy As His State Suffered Historic FloodingDemocratic Rep.
Abortion Not Protected By State ConstitutionCourt Refuses To Dismiss Dominion's $1.
Inside The ACLU’s Post-Trump ReckoningThe Coming War On Abortion DrugsTrump Lawyer's Request To Join 'Pardon List' Spawns A MemeCritics In Stitches After GOP Lawmaker Deletes Mortifying Take On Jan.
