Support for ‘entry into the EU’ is still holding up as the most popular foreign policy option, at 49 percent as of September 2016, not too far down from a peak of 55 per cent in December 2015.
This view is both real and promoted by Russian stooges like the Opposition Bloc and fake ‘think-tanks’ like the Ukrainian Policy Fund.
With the war in eastern Ukraine bogged down, Russia has shifted its attention and resources to winning the battle for hearts and minds.
Fake letters from ‘ordinary’ Ukrainians and workers are launched online or in social media, and then fed into friendly traditional media controlled by local oligarchs.
This multifaceted anti-EU campaign, including a big drive to restore the ‘normal’ levels of Ukrainian-Russian trade that Russia has been busily destroying these last three years, will only grow in the short term, as Russia switches from anti-US propaganda as it sees how its relationship with Trump pans out.
Whatever the cause, a series of commentaries and op-eds appeared over the holiday period airing previously heretical thoughts.
President Petro Poroshenko’s adviser Kostiantyn Yeliseyev produced a rejoinder in the Wall Street Journal on 4 January; Poroshenko also reportedly will not attend the traditional Ukraine event organised by Pinchuk in Davos.
But others have joined in on Pinchuk’s side, or close to it; some objecting to Pinchuk wanting to give away everything at once, others claiming that there was nothing heretical or treasonous about specific proposals, such as Vasyl Pilipchuk, head of the International Centre for Prospective Research, who argued for a 20-year moratorium on the status of Crimea, for Ukraine to stop ‘beating on the closed door’ of the EU, and even for a restoration of military and technical co-operation with Russia.
Another Ukrainian oligarch, Dmytro Firtash, currently still facing legal problems in Austria, has made similar noises to Pinchuk about reviving trade with Russia.
Both men have a personal interest in their companies regaining access to Russian markets.
But the campaign also anticipates and feeds a Trumpist agenda, when Ukrainians are profoundly split about how to approach his presidency after Trump’s string of pro-Russian comments and gaffes during the campaign.
The first thing Kyiv did after Trump’s victory was quietly to drop the local investigation against his former campaign chief Paul Manafort, who also worked for exiled Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych.
On a visit to Kyiv in December, three United States senators, John McCain and Lindsey Graham , together with Amy Klobuchar promised that the United States would not abandon Ukraine, and proposed even tougher sanctions on Russia.
The group followed up once they were back home by launching a bipartisan bill in January that would toughen up Barack Obama’s belated reactions to Russian interference in the United States election campaign, and encode some of his executive orders on financial support for Ukraine in law, making them more difficult for Trump to overturn.
But given McCain’s role in publicising accusations about Trump’s long-standing Russia links, the action may backfire.
There were, hopefully exaggerated, claims that the damage to Ukraine-Trump relations had already been done.
Other Ukrainians have proposed aligning with Trump’s business instincts rather than confront his agenda head on, and the dilemma of whether to bandwagon with Trump or pre-empt his policies will only sharpen after the inauguration.
According to Catherine Smagliy, who runs the Kennan Institute’s Kyiv office, Ukraine must ‘move away from the image of the victim, and focus on the development of economic and cultural cooperation.
Don’t forget that the president is a representative of businesses, big business’, for which there could be big opportunities in Ukrainian industry, construction and agriculture.
To explain and motivate the American side not only by Ukraine’s ability to confront Russia, but also by our ability to create an attractive investment climate, to become interesting for United States investors.
This is the kind of language that Kyiv hopes that Trump will understand.
But Ukraine will have to redouble its effort after Trump’s inauguration, if it is not to be left out in the cold.
Some optimists have even argued that Trump is an opportunity for Ukraine, to show that it is not dependent on external sponsors and can get its act together on reform.
Some have argued that ‘Ukraine itself should create defences strong enough to make large-scale war inconvenient and very costly for Russia’, hoping that even Trump might be swayed by global opinion if Russia crosses that threshold.
NATO membership prospects were already distant and will recede further under Trump, although public support stands at 39 percent.
There will therefore be a growing trend towards alternative ideas, such as building a Baltic-Black Sea Alliance of local states uncomfortable with Russian pressures.
As a lesser alternative, there will be growing talk on both sides to allow for flexible partnerships across NATO boundaries – particularly between central European and Baltic NATO member states and east European partner states like Ukraine.
And then there is the EU, where Ukraine faces another difficult year in 2017.
Potentially traumatic elections, ripe for Russian interference, in the Netherlands, France and Germany , will see continued obsession with migration from the Middle East and North Africa unfairly tainting Ukraine, too.
As EU bureaucrats work on yet another reworking of the Eastern Neighbourhood Policy, Ukraine needs to show that the new Brussels buzzword of ‘stabilisation’ is not an alternative to reform.
Dealing with the EU will be completely different to dealing with Trump, however.
This may not be the top item on Trump’s agenda, but European public opinion cares more about whether Ukraine is worth saving; and Kyiv needs to do much more to make a convincing case in this respect.
Views expressed are those of the Author and do not necessarily reflect those of UCL, SSEES or SSEES Research Blog.
