Ukraine puts more sanctions on Russia, changing foreign currency laws, and expected to nationalize all Russian banks and businesses inside Ukraine.
A significant increase in Russian optempo in Donbass including the bombardment of civilian settlements.
Homeland Defence Minister Avakov launches planning for de-occupation of Donbass, while Col.
Girkin has paranoid fears of an AFU offensive to wipe out the proxy force.
Javelin testing in Ukraine imminent, while NGU takes delivery of US-made PSRL-1 clone RPGs.
Miscellaneous political and economic reports, plus some more bizarre statements by Savchenko.
SBU raids RIA Novosti and Russia Today offices in Kyiv for conducting infowar against Ukraine, Bureau Chief of RIAN detained and charged with high treason.
Russia howls, demonstrating again exceptionalism – Russia has a special right to conduct infowar without hindrance.
The sad fate of Ukraine’s military dolphin pod a major media topic in the West.
Ukraine’s central bank governor says that liberalization of Ukraine’s arcane foreign exchange controls will make it a much more investor-friendly place.
This Thursday, the Verkhovna Rada is expected to consider a historic proposal to replace 25-year-old foreign exchange legislation with an entirely new law that will open our country to international investors and make it easier for Ukrainian businesses to operate globally.
Technical though it may seem, liberalization of our arcane foreign exchange controls will make Ukraine a much more investor-friendly place and will help the country take its rightful spot amongst the major European and global economies.
For nearly four years now, we at the National Bank of Ukraine have been working to stabilize the macroeconomic situation and create a solid foundation for economic growth in Ukraine and prosperity for all who live and work here.
My new post-revolutionary team took over the National Bank in 2014, finding ourselves in an incredibly difficult context.
Ukraine was not only experiencing military aggression from Russia in the East, but the profound economic turmoil that coincided with it — since, our team at the National Bank have worked tirelessly to stabilize the situation and tame inflation.
A bill to nationalize the property of Russian companies and banks in Ukraine was introduced for consideration by the Verkhovna Rada.
The author of the document is People’s Deputy Roman Zvarych from the Petro Poroshenko Bloc faction.
To “promptly and effectively respond to potential threats” on the part of the Russian Federation, it is necessary “to transfer to Ukraine property of the aggressor state or of a legal or natural person that violated the relevant rights and interests of Ukraine and its citizens,” as well as establish liability for violation of legislation on sanction, the document says.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has signed a decree to enact a recently adopted decision to expand sanctions on Russian companies and entities.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko has signed a decree on putting into effect the decision of the National Security and Defense Council on the application and cancellation of personal special economic and other restrictive measures to individuals and companies.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel has expressed deep concern about repeated violations of a cease-fire between Ukrainian forces and Russia-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine.
A family, including a teenager, was killed in the village of Troyitske, Luhansk region, amid militant shelling with the use of artillery systems at night.
Chairman of the Donetsk Military and Civil Administration Pavlo Zhebrivskiy said the woman is in a critical condition in hospital.
Russian-led forces mounted 50 attacks on Ukrainian troops in Donbas in the past day, using heavy weapons 19 times.
No casualties are reported among the Ukrainian military since the beginning of the day.
The enemy used mortars and Grad multiple rocket launchers in Luhansk and Donetsk regions.
Fierce fighting with Russian-led troops in Donbas, eastern Ukraine, continued on Saturday, May 12, as a result of which one Ukrainian soldier was killed in action, another four were wounded in action.
The casualties of the Russian-led forces include one killed and six wounded troops.
Ukraine says one of its soldiers has been killed and two wounded in clashes in the country’s east.
Chairman of the Donetsk Military and Civil Administration Pavlo Zhebrivskiy has said the Russian-led troops in Donbas shelled a school in the Ukrainian town of Svitlodarsk, Donetsk region, one civilian was wounded in the incident.
Units of Ukraine’s Joint Forces have seized enemy weapons near the town of Maryinka in Donbas.
Currently, the weapons are being transferred to the area of the Ukrainian troops’ withdrawal.
The SBU has held several events for almost a year to brief on the war crimes committed by PMC Wagner in Ukraine.
Russia-backed separatists who control the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk have unveiled its newest multiple launch rocket systems called the Cheburashka.
The Cheburashka is a 217mm multiple launch rocket system developed by Ukrainian separatists.
According to the Russian media, the new Cheburashka MLRS fitted with two launcher units each able to fire 32 rockets.
The main role of the Cheburashka system is to support Russia-backed separatists troops with suppressive fire to counter mortar positions, destroy eliminate enemy nodes of resistance on the immediate battlefield.
The rocket launcher pods are mounted on a mobile elevatable launcher platform.
The rocket launcher weapon system is mounted at the rear of the KrAZ-260 truck chassis.
Russia-backed separatists showed improvised 23 mm heavy sniper rifle The MLRS can launch rockets directly from the cab or remotely from outside of the truck cab with a cable.
The Command of the Ukrainian Joint Forces Operation in the Donbas requested in a Facebook post that all media and bloggers avoid posting data on tactical movements of the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
On April 30, Ukraine’s President Petro Poroshenko officially announced the completion of the Anti-Terrorist Operation and the beginning of the Joint Forces Operation in the Donbas.
State Secretary of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Ukraine Oleksiy Takhtay says Ukrainian Interior Minister Arsen Avakov has launched a campaign for de-occupation of Donbas, eastern Ukraine.
It is important at this stage to receive information from international partners and their support, Takhtay said.
Former “Defense Minister” of the self-proclaimed “Donetsk People’s Republic” Igor Girkin, nom de guerre Strelkov, claims everything is ready in the Armed Forces of Ukraine to liberate most of the occupied part of Donetsk region.
Chairman of the People’s Front parliamentary faction, Member of Parliament Maksym Burbak does not rule out that Russia has begun a de-facto blockade of Ukrainian ports of the Sea of Azov.
Petro Poroshenko, the President of Ukraine plans to participate in the testing of Javelin anti-tank missiles until the end of May.
She noted that the provision of the United States Javelins to Ukraine confirms the weakening of Russia at the international arena.
As it was reported earlier, the United States State Department announced the Javelin anti-tank missile system delivery to Ukraine.
Ukrainian Interior Minister Arsen Avakov says the National Guard has received the first batch of U.S.-made anti-tank grenade launchers PSRL-1.
Euronews Agency Critics warn that such move would risk greater division in Ukraine and throughout the Orthodox world.
The State Food Safety and Consumer Protection Service of Ukraine says the country has obtained the right to export beef to the Turkish market.
The harmonization of the veterinary certificate for Ukrainian beef exports to Turkey is at its final stage.
The radical activists were angered after a statement against the renaming of streets for World War II-era Ukrainian nationalists was included in a broadcast.
Members of a far-right Ukrainian group disrupted an LGBT event in Kyiv on May 10 without Ukrainian police intervening to stop their actions, Amnesty International said in a May 11 statement.
Ukrainian Member of Parliament Nadiia Savchenko, who is suspected of plotting terrorist attacks and seizing state power, says she is ready to serve 22 years in Russian prisons in exchange for 60 Kremlin hostages from Ukraine.
Viktor Ruzhynsky Some people think there is no growth of anti-Semitism in Ukraine, and if there are any cases – it is the Kremlin’s intrigues.
Actually, even a letter of American congressmen about the situation with anti-Semitism in Poland and Ukraine in our country was assessed as something that was inspired by Russia.
I consider it unacceptable to bring this shameful phenomenon to Ukraine – as it recently took place during the actions in Lviv and Odesa.
Our Foreign Ministry notes that according to the Monitoring Group of National Minorities Rights of the Congress of National Communities of Ukraine, no cases of anti-Semitic violence were reported in Ukraine in 2017, and according to the results of the PEW Research Center poll, the level of anti-Semitism in Ukraine is the lowest in Central and Eastern Europe.
During the court session, Savchenko has appealed to the court with a request to bring her from the remand center to the sessions of the Verkhovna Rada.
Of course, the guards cannot enter the session hall, there are such laws and rules – then wait for me near the doors while I am working in the session hall.
Bring me to the committee for a work, National Security and Defense Committee where a lot of cases of the covered corruption take place’, Savchenko claimed.
The workers of the Security Service of Ukraine and the Prosecutor’s Office of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea has exposed the network of the media entities controlled by the Russian Federation.
The law enforcement bodies hold the investigative actions at the office of RIA News-Ukraine as Olena Hitlyanska, the spokeswoman of the SBU reported on Facebook.
The press secretary of the Ukrainian SBU Security Service’s chief, Olena Gitlianska, has said the SBU officers are conducting searches in the office of RIA Novosti Ukraine.
Editor-in-Chief of the Russia Today television channel Margarita Simonyan says the officers of the SBU Security Service of Ukraine have blocked the work of the channel’s Kyiv office.
The actions of Kyrylo Vyshynsky, the Head of RIA News-Ukraine were preliminarily qualified as the state treason.
At the moment, the preliminary qualification of the crime is the state treason.
Chief of RIA Novosti’s Kyiv office Kirill Vyshinsky, who was detained on May 15, has been indicted on charges of high treason.
Deputy head of the SBU Security Service of Ukraine Viktor Kononenko says chief of the Kyiv-based office of RIA Novosti Ukraine, Kirill Vyshinsky, who was detained in Kyiv on May 15, was paid EUR 53,000 every month for discrediting the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
Petro Poroshenko, the President of Ukraine, introduced the decision of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine on additional measures for the counterwork against Russia’s informational aggression in February.
We are not losing the information war, in fact, we are winning it, and there are many examples.
Volunteers, civil society, and the state are doing everything possible for this”, – he stressed.
Chief of RIA Novosti’s Kyiv office Kirill Vyshinsky, who was detained on May 15 and was indicted on charges of high treason in Ukraine, has admitted in court in Kherson that he has both Russian and Ukrainian passports.
A Ukrainian court has ordered the head of a major Russian state news agency’s branch in Ukraine held for two months on charges of high treason in a case that drew angry criticism from Moscow and expressions of concern from media watchdogs.
The head of a major Russian state news agency’s branch in Ukraine has been transferred to the southern region of Kherson for prosecution following his arrest in Kyiv on suspicion of treason.
Authorities in Ukraine said Thursday they arrested a senior journalist from a Kremlin-funded news agency who “justified” Crimea’s annexation, “supported” pro-Russian separatists and now faces up to 15 years in jail for treason.
Members of Ukraine’s Opposition Bloc party say they are ready to provide guarantees for the release of Chief of RIA Novosti’s Kyiv office Kirill Vyshinsky, who was detained on May 15 and was indicted on charges of high treason in Ukraine.
The Kherson City Court in Ukraine’s south ruled on May 17 that Vyshinsky charged with treason should be arrested until July 13 pending an investigation into his case.
Ukrainian state security agents searched the offices of Russian state news agency RIA Novosti and detained the director of its Kiev office on Tuesday, accusing RIA of being used in an “information war” by Russia against Ukraine.
Relations between Kiev and Moscow nose-dived after Moscow annexed Crimea from Ukraine in 2014 and backed a separatist insurgency in Ukraine’s eastern Donbass region that has killed more than 10,000 people.
The military had been using the secretive unit since the ’70s but the bottlenose dolphins were apprehended by Russia when it annexed Crimea in 2014.
Ukraine’s military-trained dolphins may have died because the aquatic commandos refused to eat the rations provided by their new handlers after the Russian takeover in Crimea, an official in Kiev said.
A Ukrainian representative said the dolphins died after going on a hunger strike.
The sea mammals were being trained in a Soviet-era facility in Sevastopol that breeds marine assistants for the navy.
Ex-Ukrainian Navy combat dolphins die in the occupied Crimea, refusing to be fed by Russian instructors.
Combat dolphins that previously served with Ukraine’s Navy deceased in the annexed Crimea where they were stationed.
According to him, the mammals who lived and trained at the naval base in Sevastopol, contacted with the Ukrainian military, using special whistles.
However, when the Russian instructors received the whistles and the rest of the equipment, the dolphins refused to contact them or even take food from them.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has opened the country’s newly built bridge to the annexed Crimean Peninsula, driving a truck across the controversial span.
The bridge spans a treacherous strait between the Black and Azov seas, and gives a key link to the Russian mainland.
The Russian leader jumped behind the wheel of an orange dump truck, leading the charge across the 12-mile bridge connecting the two regions for the first time in history.
The bridge over the Kerch Strait will be of use for the Russian occupants when they have to leave the Ukrainian peninsula.
Russia has defended the construction and opening of a road-and-rail bridge to Crimea this week amid international criticism.
In a ceremony broadcast live on state television Tuesday, Russian President Vladimir Putin rode a truck to inaugurate the newly-built bridge connecting mainland Russia to the annexed Crimean peninsula.
The United States State Department condemned the opening of the $3. billion bridge, saying it violates Ukrainian integrity and impedes the navigation of ships into Ukraine from the Sea of Azov.
The Russian Federation has responded to the criticism of the United States on the Crimean bridge and said it will not ask for anybody’s permission to build transport infrastructure on the peninsula.
Canada condemns the construction and partial opening today of the Kerch Strait Bridge.
Russian President Vladimir Putin on Tuesday will mark the opening of the Kerch strait bridge, a construction project that has become a symbol of his 18-year rule.
Four years after annexing Crimea, the Russian leader unveiled a bridge to Russia and the builder’s feline mascot has become famous all over the country.
A blue and yellow drone playing the Ukrainian anthem was launched in the Russian-occupied city of Simferopol on May 18, on the Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Crimean Tatar Genocide.
On May 18, Ukraine marks the Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Crimean Tatar Genocide, as well as the Day of Struggle for the Rights of the Crimean Tatars.
Representatives of human rights organizations earlier criticized the presidential bill.
Paul Goble Staunton, May 12 – Avraam Shmulyevich says that Moscow is forming Latin American-style “death squads” in occupied Crimea, the Russian Federation and even in some Western countries and that the Kremlin plans to use them to promote the militarization of society, the suppression of dissent, and the defeat of its enemies in the event of a real war.
The two post-Soviet Chechen wars showed the Kremlin that “the post-Soviet people does not want to die,” Shmulyevich continues.
Indeed, that attitude, many analysts say, is a major reason that has prevented Putin up to now from engaging in even broader forms of aggression abroad at least for the present.
As developments in occupied Crimea show, Shmulyevich continues, “this work has begun with children.
And the Kremlin hopes that as a result of their experiences, they will want to fight more than the current younger generation.
One reason these militarized activities have been as successful as they have, the Israeli analyst says, is that “all other independent youth subcultures and groups have been chipped away at, discredited and set to fight one another.
According to Shmulyevich, Kirillova writes, young people are being transformed into “’chained dogs of the regime’ in various spheres and this process is especially well advanced and worrisome in Russian-occupied Crimea.
The peninsula is strategically close to the Mediterranean basin and the main communication lines of the West,” especially important if there is a war.
Moreover, he continues, “Russian elites have gotten used to the thought that there is nothing terrible in nuclear war and that it is completely possible to make use of tactical nuclear weapons.
The reason Moscow has formed these death squad-like detachments in occupied Crimea, Shmulyevich says, is that they can be used there, shifted to Russia itself, or used in the event of a war.
They can suppress dissent on the Ukrainian peninsula, they can attack demonstrators in Russia, and they can become a target in the event of a war.
This process involved “the ideological processing of people and the creation out of them of a certain ‘fifth column,’” Shmulyevich says.
And “if a serious war should begin, it is not excluded that part of these people will be used for diversionary actions,” Shmulyevich says.
The phenomenon Shmulyevich points to is disturbing; and even though most of those swept up in Putin’s militarization program won’t end up in the kind of “death squads” the Israeli analyst suggests, some of them likely have and more may in the future, a dangerous trend that bears the closest possible monitoring.
