In the first paper above, I place Chabad Lubavitch at an unknown position in the Judeocentric Power Complex.
They appear to be foremost according to Ipatyev’s article, but I believe that there are more important groups above them — banksters, Frankists and Donmeh — who use Chabad to hide behind in a gemütlich tribal scheme against the goyim.
Radical Zionist sect Chabad seeks to to move to Ukraine from the USA that the sect has already milked dry.
Another Promised Land cannot be, but Dnepropetrovsk Chabad and Kolomoyski, who finances and directs fascist punitive operation in Donetsk and Lugansk, are trying to make Ukraine over into a promised land.
Today we will read the scroll of Esther, as we have done over thousands of years on Purim.
In the broad sense, it is Russia and Russians, and more specifically — President Vladimir Putin whose plans thwart Chabad – Lubavitch’s new Zion in Ukraine.
Even more painful is the process of separating the Donetsk and Lugansk republics, and later, of the whole South – East Ukraine.
Flimsy new Jerusalem began to fall apart as soon as builders started it, because they lied and betrayed, sacrificed ordinary Ukrainians with cruelty unprecedented for the 21st century, shocking so many people.
Builders of new Khazaria unleashed all their hatred of Russia and Russians, against Putin and his team, calling the new Russian president Aman, thereby emphasizing his patriotism and understanding of the enormous danger in the plans by Kolomoyski and the Chabad in Ukraine.
But even more important for grasping the root causes of Kolomoyski’s Kiev revolution is Kaminetski’s reference to a millennial common history on Ukrainian land.
To White Tower area, Khazar Jews fled in the 10th century after the defeat of Khazaria.
And now we are talking about a revival of the Khazars, with their centre shifted to Dnepropetrovsk and, apparently, Ukraine as a contributor to the “city on a hill” — the new Jerusalem.
In Dnepropetrovsk a temple was built for Schneersona to sit on his throne, in the Chabad “Menorah” centre, Europe’s largest complex of this type.
So, the Lubavitchers no longer expect Moshiach in Israel, but on the Ukrainian soil, recreating Khazaria, a new historical homeland, because they don’t remember Israel, and, apparently, don’t wish to have anything to do with the genuine Promised Land.
Motives of the coup were not as much religious as political, but had been covered up with fictitin to hide the truth.
Maidan victory on February 22, 2014, benefited those who had been shaping people’s anger at President Yanukovych and his corrupt cabal.
All those who have called the Ukrainian people to revolt, to take action against the police and Special Forces “Berkut”, while spilling blood of Maidan defenders, gained power by the right of conquest.
Chabad has won the revolution in Ukraine, but its goal was hidden deep in the bowels of the new government.
Owing only to lightning Crimean operation it became clear to those who care about the fate of the Ukrainian people.
The goal is to recreate Khazaria in Ukraine, with Schneerson on the throne.
The coup benefoted not the Khazars nor Khazar Jews but the invited Jews and world-wide Jewry.
Obadiah received the title Bey, which means malik in Arabic,e. he headed the government of nominal Khan who was kept in custody and paraded before the people once a year.
Turchynov, Yatsenyuk, Avakov and Nalyvaichenko constitute just a collective “nominal Kagan” for Kolomoyski, who distributes roles and appoints his representatives to public office.
Money and political influence of Chabad Lubavitch helped the Maidan revolution as well as the planning of the transformation of Ukraine for wealthy Jews, a new Khazaria awaited for resettling to, after United States collapse and before the imminent war in the Middle East.
But ordinary Jewish communities lose with this neighbor monster of international politics, as their business will inevitably go down for IMF and ECB “professional” actions, aimed at the redistribution of influence in the Ukrainian economy.
The oligarchs, long-time members of Chabad, will benefit, having invested money and influence in the revolution.
A Christian Orthodox entity, Crimean Gothia separated from the Khazars and joined the Byzantine Empire.
Recent accession of Crimea to Russia was due to the enormous influence of the peninsula in Ukraine, on the entire Ukrainian people.
Besides, Crimea is the most important geostrategically in the Black Sea region and the Middle East.
The neo-Khazar organizers in Washington and Dnepropetrovsk know it well, but Putin was faster, leaving no chance to the Kolomoyski junta nor their Chabad bosses.
Attitude towards Russia and Russians became a test for the tens of millions of Ukrainians.
Those who considered themselves Russian, grasped the goal of Kiev junta and rallied against it.
Those who considered themselves “ordinary” Ukrainians who hate Russia and Russians, defend the junta’s fascism, against their own interest, remaining hostages who agree to the revival of Khazaria.
Obadiah’s coup targetted tribal aristocracy of all ethnic groups of the Khazar Khanat that got on with the Turkic dynasty.
A civil war erupted, with Hungarians fighting on the rebel side, and mercenary Pechenegs on the Jewish side.
It was a ruthless war, as according to Babylonian Talmud, a Gentile harming a Jew does it to God Himself deserving death.
Not trusting the troops when ordered to shoot at Ukrainians, in the rear Kolomoyski put the Right Sector thugs of Chabad member Yarosh as well as his own assault troops, both formations hired for considerable money.
The entire punitive military campaign is not paid by Kolomoyski, but by his subordinate government of Yatsenyuk that fights Ukrainians with their own money.
Fueled by Chabad hate propaganda, this bloodthirst of fallen un-humans led to the grisly tragedy in Odessa on May 2.
More than a hundred were burned alive and shot in Odessa’s House of Trade Unions.
The cold-blooded bandits poured napalm on victim’s head and ignited it, and then filmed the living torches rushing through the corridors – the epilogue of Kolomoyski fascism.
From that moment, thos who have shared the joy of the executioners not be citizens of a free country, but have become slaves to Chabad.
After this war, the beginning and end of which is not amenable to dating, Khazaria changed its appearance.
From an integral system it has become an unnatural, amorphous mass of subjects under the ruling class of alien blood and religion.
It’s not feudalism, since an ethnosocial chimera escapes classification.
Indeed, after May 2, 2014, Ukraine has lost its previous statehood, never mind that under anti-people government in Kiev.
Chabad brought Odessa holocaust to their altar, just like the killing of Mariupol police officers on May 9, 2014, for refusing to shoot civilians celebrating Victory Day.
Finally the name “Ukraine” and Ukrainian culture were destroyed, becoming the symbol of horror fascism that has grown from forced Ukrainization of the “Nenko” population.
No wonder that after the referenda on Donetsk and Lugansk independence, the results of which surprised many analysts, the secessionist federation’s militia began a total destruction of Kolomoyski storm troopers.
Fight for freedom, supported by millions of citizens in Ukraine, will now spill over beyond Donbass borders — westwards to Kiev.
The first tranche of the IMF loan did not go to pay for Russian gas , but was divided between the top of the Dniepropetrovsk Chabad and the Ukrainian oligarchs.
Amorphous Ukraine is collapsing, passing her fate into the hands of New Russia and its staunch supporters and defenders.
Thus, attempts to revive Khazaria in Ukraine have failed completely, It became clear that there would not be any return to the old life.
Chabad Jews in Kiev create self-defense units not to protect Kolomoyski junta, but to create exit corridors and to buy time for export of their savings.
Fascist thugs continue punitive campaign against independent Donbass, shooting Kiev soldiers in the back and finishing off the wounded, but this rage is not as dangerous as a week ago.
The Rubicon has been crossed, and the militia of free republics rightly plan a march on Kiev and Dnepropetrovsk, in order to finally destroy the lair of the fascist traitors and oppressors of New Russia’s free people.
This main question should be resolved today, otherwise one regime will be replaced by another.
Thus it is necessary to consider that the western regions significantly differ from the eastern ones, as far as the relation to property and collectivization of labor are concerned.
Therefore, it is necessary to develop the principle that strategic enterprises become the property of the people,e. the state.
Land properrty is transferred in perpetuity to those who are not middlemen, but want to be the master in construction and agriculture.
Natural resources can not be transferred into private hands, foreign concessions or cartels citizens, but should be national asset.
These and many other questions need to be addressed immediately, so that the entire Ukrainian nation understand the ultimate goals of New Russia.
