Crowds of smiling families in traditional embroidered shirts turned out to wave tiny yellow and blue Ukrainian flags in the summer sunshine.
It was August 24, the anniversary of the day the country won its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991.
This year Ukraine's Independence Day carried particular symbolism, since pro-Russian separatists held eastern regions of the country.
The celebrations were intended to shore up support for Poroshenko, who three months before had won the presidency as the country risked being torn further apart.
Ironically, the Kiev display of military hardware mirrored, in miniature, the annual parades that had rumbled over Red Square in Communist times and have been reinstated by President Vladimir Putin to showcase a resurgent Russia.Poroshenko promised the crowd imminent victory in his country's proxy war against Russia.
Crimea may have been lost without a fight, but eastern Ukraine would be different.
The columns of armor Poroshenko said would be sent directly from Independence Square to the front line would hardly be enough to stop a stealth invasion by regular Russian troops.This report tells in detail for the first time the pivotal events that made up the Battle of Ilovaisk.
Reporting from both sides of the hastily drawn border in eastern Ukraine, and hearing evidence from key Ukrainian players and pro-Russian rebels, this account describes the Russian ambush of Ukrainian forces that forced Poroshenko to plead for an immediate cease-fire.The battle may not be the last in the struggle for Ukraine.
It took Poroshenko four days to publicly acknowledge the terrible news.
By then, several hundred Ukrainian soldiers in Ilovaisk had been surrounded, their rear guard along the Ukraine-Russian border crushed or beaten into a chaotic retreat.
The Russian forces simply marched in,\"" Lieutenant General Ruslan Khomchak, the commander of Ukrainian forces in Ilovaisk, tells Newsweek.
It was hardly a coincidence the Russian advance came to its climax on the 23rd anniversary of Ukraine's declaration of independence from the Kremlin.
The assault left 10 Ukrainian soldiers dead and the woods around them flattened, the silver-haired general recalls.
Khomchak understood that his invisible foe was cutting off his only escape route, but he couldn't obtain permission from the military commanders in Kiev to make an orderly withdrawal.
Instead, his troops started making contact with the approaching Russian juggernaut.Ukraine's lopsided war with Russia began in April, when armed men started seizing administrative buildings in the eastern Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
His confidence gave fresh impetus to the fight against the self-proclaimed Donetsk and Luhansk \""people's republics,\"" whose ideology is a mishmash of Communist-era slogans, czarist imperialism and Russian Orthodox Church iconography.In early July, Ukrainian forces retook the transport hub of Slovyansk.
On July 17, the shooting down of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17 over separatist-held territory shocked the world.
The Ukrainian military, bolstered by newly formed volunteer battalions, appeared to be on a roll.While the rebels denied they possessed rockets capable of bringing down a passenger airliner at cruising altitude, their rockets had been devastatingly effective in targeting Ukrainian military helicopters and planes.
Whenever Ukrainian forces approached, they were met by intense Russian artillery fire from across the border, according to officials in Kiev.
If they were to seize Ilovaisk, commanders believed, they would be able to cut the highway serving as the Russian supply line to rebels holed up in Donetsk, the regional capital.
The battalions didn't lack fighting spirit, but their original function was to police areas liberated by the army, not to take on a full-scale invasion.
In the rest of Ukraine, a campaign on social media demanded the Kiev government provide immediate relief for the hapless volunteers stuck in Ilovaisk, but it soon became clear that there were insufficient reserves available to tip the battle in Kiev's favor.
The only reinforcements arriving in force were coming to save the rebels.The Russians Were LostOn the day of the Kiev parade, Sector D, a Ukrainian defensive line along the Russian border, crumbled as the Russian \""rescue force\"" plowed north toward Ilovaisk.
The convoy we destroyed had simply gotten lost,\"" recalls Yuriy Bereza, commander of the Dnipro Battalion.The battle was not all one-sided.
The Ukrainians captured two dozen Russian troops in the ensuing skirmishes.
When nine captured Russian paratroopers were paraded in Kiev on August 27, Putin, who had strenuously denied that Russia was party to the Ukrainian conflict, was put on the spot.Putin insisted the Russian troops must have crossed into Ukraine by accident.
Meanwhile, reports were coming into Kiev military headquarters that a second column of Russian armor had entered Ukraine at Novoazovsk and was closing in on the port city of Mariupol on the road that links Russia to Crimea.As the situation grew more dire, frustrations broke into the open between local Ukrainian volunteer police battalions&mdash;which answer to the Interior Ministry&mdash;and the Kiev military command.
On August 28, Donbas Battalion commander Semyon Semenchenko, who had been wounded in Ilovaisk, posted an interview on his Facebook page accusing the central military leadership of abandoning his encircled comrades.The same day, senior Ukrainian officers on the ground took matters into their own hands.
Bereza offered to release two Russian prisoners&mdash;Junior Sergeant Ruslan Akhmetov and Senior Sergeant Arseny Ilmitov&mdash;in return for the safe passage of the Ukrainians trapped in Ilovaisk.
The Russians stalled, providing Ukrainian commanders with a new escape route, demanding the Ukrainians surrender their weapons and suggesting to Khomchak that he leave behind the volunteer battalions, vilified in the Russian media as fascist paramilitaries.
The convoy continued along a field road until it reached the outskirts of Starobesheve.
Hiding by day and walking by night, the men reached Ukrainian lines two days later.The second Ukrainian column, which traveled out of Mnohopillya on Peace Street, experienced a similar fate.
Hundreds of Ukrainian soldiers were dead, missing or captured, and practically all their equipment was destroyed.
Ukraine Is History'A month after the battle, residents of Ilovaisk felt embittered and forgotten after enduring almost three weeks of shelling.
Homes, the hospital and the school where the Ukrainian military had set up base all bear the scars of bullets and bombs.
Skeletons of trucks stand frozen in fields where their drivers tried in vain to escape.
A piece of a rocket, a pile of helmets and a charred pack of cigarettes lie on the shoulder.
The local commander, Mikhail Tolstykh, an excitable, 34-year-old former driver who goes by the nom de guerre Givi, claims Ukrainian forces never even entered the town&mdash;contrary to accounts by townspeople, news reports and the storm on Ukrainian social media.
It's history,\"" says Givi, seated behind his desk in the railway police station in Ilovaisk.
He says he completed the 11th grade and received his only military training as a conscript in a Ukrainian tank unit outside Kiev.
But when the conversation turns to the negotiations that Ukrainian commanders say they held with Russian officers for the Ukrainians' safe passage, Givi's voice rises.
I respect and love that country and have always supported the policies of Putin and Medvedev.
Alexander Borodai and Igor Girkin, both Russian citizens, led the separatists' political and military wings until their abrupt departure in August.
Alexander Zakharchenko, a local electrician who succeeded Borodai, has conceded that as many as 4,000 Russian volunteers have fought for the rebels, including active military personnel on leave.Yet if incontrovertible evidence of direct Russian military involvement was hard to come by before the battle at Ilovaisk, the caskets returning to garrison towns across Russia are very real.
They were boys, conscripts, who didn't even know they were going to war.
On October 12, Poroshenko fired Defense Minister Valeriy Heletey&mdash;who had come under intense criticism after Ilovaisk&mdash;without giving reasons.The Defense Ministry's Danylyuk doesn't deny that there were problems in coordination&mdash;after all, the Ukrainian armed forces had been neglected for 20 years.
Without declaring war, they entered our territory and started fighting.
The relative lull in the fighting is seen more as a chance to swap prisoners, regroup and rearm to fight another day.
Poroshenko himself has admitted that 65 percent of Ukraine's armor was destroyed.
Details of a Massacre Inside Rebel-Held Eastern UkraineBy Lucian Kim On 11/04/14 at 11:42 AM EST A Ukrainian serviceman stands next to the destroyed Grad multiple rocket launcher system of Ukrainian army at the village of Dmytrivka, in eastern Ukraine, September 19, 2014.
Ironically, the Kiev display of military hardware mirrored, in miniature, the annual parades that had rumbled over Red Square in Communist times and have been reinstated by President Vladimir Putin to showcase a resurgent Russia.Newsweek Poroshenko promised the crowd imminent victory in his country's proxy war against Russia.
The columns of armor Poroshenko said would be sent directly from Independence Square to the front line would hardly be enough to stop a stealth invasion by regular Russian troops.
But it proved to be a milestone in the country's recent history and brings into sharp focus the covert war Putin is fighting for control over what he calls ""Novorossiya"" or ""New Russia""—a czarist-era designation for southeastern Ukraine.Ukrainian soldiers ride on a military truck during fighting against militants, close to Ilovaysk town, near of Donetsk, Ukraine, Aug., 2014.
Ukrainian government forces have narrowed the ring around Luhansk and the other rebel stronghold in Donetsk.
Roman Pilipey/EPA Russian JuggernautEven as the parading troops saluted Poroshenko on August 24, alarming reports were reaching the capital that Russian troops, backed by tanks and heavy artillery, were pouring across the eastern border near Amvrosiivka and barreling toward the rail junction at Ilovaisk, where poorly equipped Ukrainian forces had been pinned down by rebels for almost a week.After months of complaining about commando units and volunteers from Russia backing up the ragtag rebels, Ukrainian officials were dumbstruck in the face of an incursion by the regular Russian army.
By early August, Ukrainian forces were worn out and spread dangerously thin across hundreds of miles of countryside.
Because there was not enough Ukrainian infantry available to take Ilovaisk, the volunteer battalions Dnipro and Donbas, made up of weekend warriors, were sent in on August 18.
His unit suffered two dead and eight wounded on the first day.The two sides fought each other to a stalemate, with the Ukrainians hunkered down to the west of the train line that bisects Ilovaisk, the rebels entrenched to the east—and a terrified civilian population caught in the ferocious crossfire.
The only reinforcements arriving in force were coming to save the rebels.Ukrainian soldiers are briefed by a commander before fighting commences against militants, close to Ilovaysk town, near of Donetsk, Ukraine, Aug., 2014.
Roman Pilipey/EPA The Russians Were LostOn the day of the Kiev parade, Sector D, a Ukrainian defensive line along the Russian border, crumbled as the Russian ""rescue force"" plowed north toward Ilovaisk.
Khomchak says his soldiers captured a T-72B3 tank, used only in the Russian army, fixed it up and started using it against its former owners.
Meanwhile, reports were coming into Kiev military headquarters that a second column of Russian armor had entered Ukraine at Novoazovsk and was closing in on the port city of Mariupol on the road that links Russia to Crimea.As the situation grew more dire, frustrations broke into the open between local Ukrainian volunteer police battalions—which answer to the Interior Ministry—and the Kiev military command.
Bereza offered to release two Russian prisoners—Junior Sergeant Ruslan Akhmetov and Senior Sergeant Arseny Ilmitov—in return for the safe passage of the Ukrainians trapped in Ilovaisk.
The Kremlin chief, shielded by a wall of plausible deniability, assumed the role of disinterested peacemaker.A wounded Ukrainian fighter is airlifted out at a military base camp near Kurakhovo, Donetsk Oblast on Aug., 2014.
Maks Levin Shooting GalleryYet as morning broke on August 29 and the exhausted Ukrainian fighters assembled at the small hamlet of Mnohopillya to withdraw, the conditions for the orderly retreat suddenly changed, Ukrainian officers say.
With one Russian prisoner of war in each column, the Ukrainians set off along two different roads heading toward Starobesheve, a town about 15 miles away where the official prisoner exchange was to take place.When his column passed through the first enemy ring, Khomchak says he was amazed to see so many Russian troops.
After the civilian Volkswagen Transporter carrying Khomchak got knocked out, he set out on foot through the fields with Bereza and a dozen other fighters.
On September 5, a fragile cease-fire went into effect.Ukrainian soldiers take cover after firing a mortar during fighting against militants, close to Ilovaysk town, near of Donetsk, Ukraine, Aug., 2014.
Ukrainian government forces have narrowed the ring around Luhansk and the other rebel stronghold Donetsk.
Roman Pilipey/EPA 'Ukraine Is History'A month after the battle, residents of Ilovaisk felt embittered and forgotten after enduring almost three weeks of shelling.
People don't feel they have to follow a president who sent his troops to kill us,"" says the acting principal, Larisa Chalenko, a petite woman wrapped in an overcoat in her windowless school.
The country road leading to Starobesheve is littered with the remains of vans and burned-out armored personnel carriers with their turrets blown off.
The pro-Kremlin rebels who now control Ilovaisk are happy to take credit for the stunning turn of events.
The local commander, Mikhail Tolstykh, an excitable, 34-year-old former driver who goes by the nom de guerre Givi, claims Ukrainian forces never even entered the town—contrary to accounts by townspeople, news reports and the storm on Ukrainian social media.
The gates of his base have been painted in the white-blue-red of the Russian tricolor, and his young soldiers wear ""Russia Armed Forces"" patches on their fatigues.
The only aid the rebels receive from Russia is food, medicine and building materials, Givi says, and all their weaponry was captured from the Ukrainians.A burying ceremony for unidentified soldiers at Kushugumskoye cemetery.
Allegedly the bodies are of soldiers of the 93rd, 51st and 24th brigades and the Donbass Battalion killed during the battle of Ilovaisk in south-eastern Ukraine.
Konstantin Sazonchik/TASS/ZUMA 1,200 Russians DeadThe question of Russian involvement has dogged the Donetsk uprising from the very start.
According to her data, up to 4,000 Russians have been killed or gone missing in the conflict.
If we were Germans, Ilovaisk would be our Stalingrad,"" says Sergei Ivanov, a blogger who had to flee Luhansk after the separatist takeover.Poroshenko has pledged to find and punish those responsible for the Ilovaisk debacle, but battalion commanders have already pinned the blame on the top military leadership for worrying more about moving flags on a map than listening to the men on the ground.
On October 12, Poroshenko fired Defense Minister Valeriy Heletey—who had come under intense criticism after Ilovaisk—without giving reasons.The Defense Ministry's Danylyuk doesn't deny that there were problems in coordination—after all, the Ukrainian armed forces had been neglected for 20 years.
On both sides of the front line, there is little confidence in the shaky cease-fire.
A few days ago, his group of separatist fighters took the name ""Somalia Battalion"" because, Givi says, they are as fearless as Somali pirates.
It's clear he's unaware that that broken country is currently in its 25th year of civil war.
