When Obama took control of Ukraine in February 2014, via a coup d’etat against the democratically elected President, rather than by an outright invasion of United States troops, the new Government that he imposed in Kiev was democratically very vulnerable.
The man whom Obama overthrew had been elected by overwhelming margins in Crimea, Luhansk and Donetsk regions in Ukraine’s southeast and by high margins elsewhere in the country’s southeast; those southeastern voters needed to be gotten rid of in order to make the new, proUnited States Ukrainian regime , stick, if Ukraine was ever to be restored to democracy while being anti-Russian such as the the new rulers were, whom Obama had installed.
Then, elsewhere in Ukraine’s southeast, locals took over government buildings and refused to accept the new coup-imposed, anti-Russian Ukrainian Government.
Obama and his newly appointed leaders of Ukraine didn’t like that, and were determined to stop the rebellion.
No one can understand Obama’s defeat in Ukraine who does not know that he imposed upon Ukraine a Government that was committed to an ethnic-cleansing campaign to get rid of the people in the regions that had voted for the man whom Obama overthrew.
That’s basic to know, in order to have any possibility to understand why Obama lost this war that he started with his February coup.
In fact, the man whom the Obama-team chose to design the ethnic-cleansing program announced in June that there were going to be concentration-camps for everyone in the southeast who supported the breakaway-movement.
The United States regime always staunchly backed what the new Ukrainian Government was doing in the southeast, specifically the ethnic-cleansing campaign.
One reason this line, that the southeasterners were bombing their own people , was false is that the civil war did not even start until May 2nd, when there was a massacre of peaceful opponents of the new Obama-imposed Government, carried out by supporters of the new government who were bussed into Odessa from Kiev in the northwest for that occasion, which massacre occurred at the Odessa Trade Unions Building.
This massacre was co-masterminded and was funded by Ihor Kolomoyskyi, a Ukrainian billionaire who hired Joe Biden’s son and won a local governorship from Obama’s team.
She alleged that it is they, and not the Ukrainian Government , that’s doing the “escalation,” in the Ukrainian civil war that the United States had started, and then was funding our nazi regime there to perpetrate against those Ukrainian villagers; that is, against the very people whom she was charging to be the source of the problem.
We’ve got to clear the land in Ukraine’s southeast, so as to enable our oil companies to frack Ukraine’s gas.
Except that ‘we’ don’t own those fracking companies; the biggest one is owned by oligarch Ihor Kolomoyskyi, whose United States agent is Joe Biden’s son, Hunter Biden, and who also hired someone from John Kerry’s clique.
There are also many other benefits to the American aristocracy that would have resulted if Obama had won Ukraine, but most of those benefits will be lost if the gas fields in Ukraine’s southeast are no longer assets that can be sold off to Western oil companies dirt-cheap by the Ukrainian Government desperate to repay the nearly $30 billion that the U.S., EU, and IMF lent to that Government to finance their ethnic-cleansing program, which is basic to that privatization.
If those loans don’t work out, Western taxpayers will be forced to repay those lenders to Ukraine, as Western citizens pay taxes.
However, our Ukrainian Government ultimately did fail to get rid of enough Ukrainians.
As things turned out, those “bilateral partners” have, by now, already lent Ukraine all that they can or will, and the job was way short of being finished.
The best that was in prospect for any continuation of it was a long-drawn-out guerilla war, for which the West had neither the money, nor the will.
Crimes Against Humanity In Donbass ~ President Eisenhower’s Order To Force Citizens To View The Holocaust.
The IMF acted as middleman for the West’s aristocrats , protecting them from losses on their international investments, so IMF member-governments absorb any aristocrat’s losses.
Meanwhile, the public in any country that borrows from the IMF get voraciously stripped, as the citizens in Ukraine will increasingly recognize.
But Obama’s Ukraine-deal was a bummer for just about everybody, except weapons-makers.
The reason Obama lost, is that the residents in Ukraine’s southeast would rather fight to the death than yield to our nazis.
Unlike the Jews in Nazi Germany, the ethnic Russians who live in Ukraine have their own guns, and also have the ones from Ukrainian troops they had killed.
But, above all, they’re willing to fight to the death, which only a few dedicated nazis on our side are.
There just aren’t enough dedicated nazis , in any and all countries, for ‘our side’ to win there.
Not enough anti-Russian racist fascists exist, for that victory to be able to happen.
But, now, already more than a month had gone by, and yet Poroshenko-Kolomoisky-Obama-Yatsenyuk not only didn’t experience “success” within “days,” but they were beyond Poroshenko’s promised limit, “Not Months,” and yet they still were actually losing their war.
His extermination-program ran out of money, long before the people who live there ran out of their will to fight against it.
Of course, the main people who pay the price for this are the ones whose lives Obama’s team snuffed out, and who were crippled by it, and whose homes were destroyed by it.
Western taxpayers and beneficiaries of government services won’t suffer nearly that much.
And the West’s aristocrats are doing everything they can to weaken Russia’s economy, in order to win the bigger renewed Cold War, which Obama’s coup in Ukraine restarted.
The owners of United States armaments-firms are especially booming as a result of Obama’s Ukraine-gambit.
It’s especially worth noting, in this context, that whereas WWII was fought against nazis, Obama’s Ukrainian war installed nazis.
America thus might have come full-circle with Ukraine, and become what in WWII had been our nemesis.
Obama, in his actions not his words, continues the George W Bush tradition.
