Atlanticists, seeking a closer relationship with the United States and the Western World in general; Imperialists, seeking a recovery of the semi-hegemonic status lost during the previous decade; and Neo-Slavophiles, promoting the isolation of Russia within its own cultural sphere.
The promotion of Yevgeny Primakov to Minister of Foreign Affairs will mark the beginning of a more nationalistic approach to foreign policy.
Vladimir Putin's presidency lasted from January 2000 until May 2008 and again from 2012.
In international affairs, Putin made increasingly critical public statements regarding the foreign policy of the United States and other Western countries.
Because no one can feel that international law is like a stone wall that will protect them.
Putin proposed certain initiatives such as establishing international centres for the enrichment of uranium and prevention of deploying weapons in outer space.
In a January 2007 interview Putin said Russia is in favour of a democratic multipolar world and of strengthening the system of international law.
While Putin is often characterised as an autocrat by the Western media and some politicians, his relationship with former United States President George W Bush, former Brazilian President Luis Inacio Lula da Silva, former Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, former German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, former French President Jacques Chirac, and former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi are reported to be personally friendly.
Putin's relationship with Germany's new Chancellor, Angela Merkel, is reported to be ""cooler"" and ""more business-like"" than his partnership with Gerhard Schröder, who accepted a job with a Russian-led consortium after vacating office.
In the wake of the 11 September attacks on the United States, he agreed to the establishment of coalition military bases in Central Asia before and during the US-led invasion of Afghanistan.
Russian nationalists objected to the establishment of any United States military presence on the territory of the former Soviet Union, and had expected Putin to keep the United States out of the Central Asian republics, or at the very least extract a commitment from Washington to withdraw from these bases as soon as the immediate military necessity had passed.
During the Iraq disarmament crisis 2002–2003, Putin opposed Washington's move to invade Iraq without the benefit of a United Nations Security Council resolution explicitly authorizing the use of military force.
After the official end of the war was announced, American president George W Bush asked the United Nations to lift sanctions on Iraq.
Putin supported lifting of the sanctions in due course, arguing that the UN commission first be given a chance to complete its work on the search for weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.
Vladimir Putin with former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, 2008.
The Commonwealth of Independent States , seen in Moscow as its traditional sphere of influence, became one of the foreign policy priorities under Putin, as the EU and NATO have grown to encompass much of Central Europe and, more recently, the Baltic states.
During the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election, Putin twice visited Ukraine before the election to show his support for Ukrainian Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych, who was widely seen as a pro-Kremlin candidate, and he congratulated him on his anticipated victory before the official election returns had been in.
Crises also developed in Russia's relations with Georgia and Moldova, both former Soviet republics accusing Moscow of supporting separatist entities in their territories.
In 2007, Russo-Estonian relations deteriorated further as a result of the Bronze Soldier controversy.
Putin took an active personal part in promoting the Act of Canonical Communion with the Moscow Patriarchate signed 17 May 2007 that restored relations between the Moscow-based Russian Orthodox Church and Russian Orthodox Church outside Russia after the 80-year schism.
In his annual address to the Federal Assembly on 26 April 2007, Putin announced plans to declare a moratorium on the observance of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe by Russia until all NATO members ratified it and started observing its provisions, as Russia had been doing on a unilateral basis.
Putin argues that as new NATO members have not even signed the treaty so far, an imbalance in the presence of NATO and Russian armed forces in Europe creates a real threat and an unpredictable situation for Russia.
NATO members said they would refuse to ratify the treaty until Russia complied with its 1999 commitments made in Istanbul whereby Russia should remove troops and military equipment from Moldova and Georgia.
Russia has suspended its participation in the CFE as of midnight Moscow time on 11 December 2007.
NATO's primary concern arising from Russia's suspension is that Moscow could now accelerate its military presence in the Northern Caucasus.
The months following Putin's Munich speech were marked by tension and a surge in rhetoric on both sides of the Atlantic.
So, Vladimir Putin said at the anniversary of the Victory Day, ""these threats are not becoming fewer but are only transforming and changing their appearance.
This was interpreted by some Russian and Western commentators as comparing the United States to Nazi Germany.
On the eve of the 33rd Summit of the G8 in Heiligendamm, American journalist Anne Applebaum, who is married to a Polish politician, wrote that ""Whether by waging cyberwarfare on Estonia, threatening the gas supplies of Lithuania, or boycotting Georgian wine and Polish meat, he has, over the past few years, made it clear that he intends to reassert Russian influence in the former communist states of Europe, whether those states want Russian influence or not.
British academic Norman Stone in his article ""No wonder they like Putin"" compared Putin to General Charles de Gaulle.
In the same article, Hastings continues that although ""a return to the direct military confrontation of the Cold War is unlikely"", ""the notion of Western friendship with Russia is a dead letter"" Both Russian and American officials always denied the idea of a new Cold War.
Putin publicly opposed to a United States missile shield in Europe, presented President George W Bush with a counterproposal on 7 June 2007 of sharing the use of the Soviet-era radar system in Azerbaijan rather than building a new system in Poland and the Czech Republic.
Putin expressed readiness to modernize the Gabala radar station, which has been in operation since 1986.
Putin proposed it would not be necessary to place interceptor missiles in Poland then, but interceptors could be placed in NATO member Turkey or Iraq.
Putin suggested also equal involvement of interested European countries in the project.
In a 4 June 2007, interview to journalists of G8 countries, when answering the question of whether Russian nuclear forces may be focused on European targets in case ""the United States continues building a strategic shield in Poland and the Czech Republic"", Putin admitted that ""if part of the United States’ nuclear capability is situated in Europe and that our military experts consider that they represent a potential threat then we will have to take appropriate retaliatory steps.
The end of 2006 brought strained relations between Russia and Britain in the wake of the death of a former FSB officer in London by poisoning.
The Russian constitution prohibits the extradition of Russian nationals to third countries.
Miliband's statement was widely publicized by Russian media as a British proposal to change the Russian constitution.
According to VCIOM, 62% of Russians are against changing the Constitution in this respect.
The British Ambassador in Moscow Tony Brenton said that the UK is not asking Russia to break its Constitution, but rather interpret it in such a way that would make Lugovoi's extradition possible.
When Litvinenko was dying from radiation poisoning, he allegedly accused Putin of directing the assassination in a statement which was released shortly after his death by his friend Alex Goldfarb.
Critics have doubted that Litvinenko is the true author of the released statement.
Following the Peace Mission 2007 military exercises jointly conducted by the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation member states, Putin announced on 17 August 2007 the resumption on a permanent basis of long-distance patrol flights of Russia's strategic bombers that were suspended in 1992.
The resumption of long-distance flights of Russia's strategic bombers was followed by the announcement by Russian Defense Minister Anatoliy Serdyukov during his meeting with Putin on 5 December 2007, that 11 ships, including the aircraft carrier Kuznetsov, would take part in the first major navy sortie into the Mediterranean since Soviet times.
The sortie was to be backed up by 47 aircraft, including strategic bombers.
According to Serdyukov, this is an effort to resume regular Russian naval patrols on the world's oceans, the view that is also supported by Russian media.
The military analyst from Novaya Gazeta Pavel Felgenhauer believes that the accident-prone Kuznetsov is scarcely seaworthy and is more of a menace to her crew than any putative enemy.
In September 2007, Putin visited Indonesia and in doing so became the first Russian leader to visit the country in more than 50 years.
In the same month, Putin also attended the APEC meeting held in Sydney, Australia where he met with Australian Prime Minister John Howard and signed a uranium trade deal.
On 16 October 2007 Putin visited Tehran, Iran to participate in the Second Caspian Summit, where he met with Iranian leader Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
Other participants were leaders of Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan.
This is the first visit of a leader from the Kremlin to Iran since Joseph Stalin's participation in the Tehran Conference in 1943.
During the summit it was also agreed that its participants, under no circumstances, would let any third-party state use their territory as a base for aggression or military action against any other participant.
This newly proposed institution is expected to monitor human rights violations in Europe and contribute to development of European democracy.
Russian President Vladimir Putin and exUnited States President George W Bush failed to resolve their differences over United States plans for the planned missile defense system based in Poland and the Czech Republic, on their meeting in the Russian Black Sea resort of Sochi on 6 April 2008.
Putin made clear that he does not agree with the decision to establish sites in the Eastern European countries, but said they had agreed a ""strategic framework"" to guide future U.S.-Russian relations, in which Russia and the United States said they recognized that the era in which each had considered the other to be a ""strategic threat or enemy"" was over.
The summit was the final meeting between Bush and Putin as presidents and follows both leaders' attendance at last the NATO summit in Romania 2 April 2008 – 4 April 2008.
That summit also highlighted differences between Washington and Moscow over U.S.-backed proposals to extend the military alliance to include the former Soviet republics of Ukraine and Georgia.
Russia opposes the proposed expansion, fearing it will reduce its own influence over its neighbours.Fareed Zakaria suggests that the 2008 South Ossetia War turned out to be a diplomatic disaster for Russia.
He suggests that it was a major strategic blunder, turning neighboring nations such as Ukraine to embrace the United States and other Western nations more.
George Friedman, founder and CEO of private intelligence agency Stratfor, takes an opposite view, arguing that both the war and Russian foreign policy have been successful in expanding Russia's influence.
We will continue strongly defending the United Nations Charter as a basis of the modern world order, and we will continue to push for everyone to proceed from the fact that only the United Nations Security Council has the right to make decisions in cases requiring the use of force"" The mid-2010s marked a dramatic downturn in Russian relations with the west, with some even considering it the start of a new Cold War.
The United States and Russia back opposing sides in the Syrian Civil War, and Washington regarded Moscow as obstructionist regarding its support for the Bashar al-Assad government.
In 2013, for the first time since 1960, the United States cancelled a summit with Russia after the latter granted asylum to Edward Snowden.
The greatest increase in tensions, however, came during the Ukraine crisis that began in 2014, which saw the Crimean peninsula annexed by Russia.
Russia also inflamed a separatist uprising in the Donbass region, though Moscow continues to deny its involvement.
The United States responded to these events by putting forth sanctions against Russia, and most European countries followed suit, worrying about Russian interference in the affairs of central and Eastern Europe.
October 2015 saw Russia, after years of supporting the Syrian government indirectly, directly intervene in the conflict, turning the tide in favor of the Assad regime.
Russia's relations with Turkey, already strained over its support for the Assad regime, deteriorated further during this period, especially after the Turkish Air Force shot down a Russian jet fighter on 24 November 2015.
In 2015, Russia also formed the Eurasian Economic Union with Armenia, Kazakhstan, and Belarus.
The Russian government also remains bitter over the expansion of NATO into Eastern Europe, arguing that western leaders promised that NATO would not expand beyond its 1990s borders.
For decades, the dispute between Japan and Russia over the ownership of the Kuril Islands has hindered closer cooperation between the two countries, but since 2017 high level talks involving Prime Minister Shinzō Abe have been ongoing in an attempt to resolve the situation.
Botswana and the Soviet Union initiated diplomatic relations on 6 March 1970.
Despite its pro-Western orientation, Botswana participated in the 1980 Summer Olympics.
The present-day relations between the two countries are described as friendly and long standing.
In March, the two countries also celebrated the 35th anniversary of establishing diplomatic relations.
According to the minister of Foreign Affairs, Russia was one of the first countries to establish full diplomatic relations with Botswana.
Trade and economic cooperation between Russia and Botswana are stipulated by the Trade Agreement of 1987 and the Agreement on Economic and Technical Cooperation of 1988.
The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Botswana signed the Agreement on Cultural, Scientific and Educational Cooperation in September 1999.
Russia and Botswana have had fruitful cooperation in a variety of fields, particularly in human resource development.
Botswana also is one of the countries where Russian citizens do not require a visa.
Russia has an embassy in Gaborone, while Botswana covers Russia from its embassy in Stockholm and an honorary consulate in Moscow.
Diplomatic relations between Burkina Faso and the Soviet Union were established for the first time on 18 February 1967.
After the breakup of the Soviet Union, Burkina Faso recognized Russia as the USSR's successor.
However financial reasons has shut the embassies between the two nations.
In 1992, the embassy of the Russian Federation in Ouagadougou was closed, and in 1996, the embassy of Burkina Faso in Moscow was closed.
Relations improved when Burundian relations with the west deteriorated.
Russia has an embassy in Yaoundé, and Cameroon has an embassy in Moscow.
The Ethiopian ambassador to Russia is also accredited to Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kirgizstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan.
Russia supplied the mountain guns the Ethiopian army used in the Battle of Adwa.
More recently, the Soviet Union was a major source of military and economic aid under the Derg and during the People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.
Relations are somewhat unsure owing to Russia's close ties with Ethiopia's neighboring rival, Sudan.
Diplomatic relations were later established once again after the breakup of the Soviet Union.
In 2008, assurances from Russia's ambassador to Ghana concerning assistance to sustain the fight against mosquitoes and environmental pollution in the region were very much appreciated since they were the major problems confronting Accra.
Guinea-Bissau has an embassy in Moscow, and Russia has an embassy in Bissau.
The help is sometimes done from the Russian embassy in Abidjan, but is also done from the embassy in Accra, Ghana.
From these point of view, Russia regarded the outcome of the extraordinary summit held in Dakar, Senegal, of the Economic Community for West African States.
Russia sharply criticised the NATO-led military intervention in the Libyan civil war, though it chose not to use its veto power on the United Nations Security Council to block it.
On 27 May 2011, Russian President Dmitri Medvedev said that although Moscow opposed the military operations, it believed Gaddafi should leave power.
In early June 2011, Russian envoy Mikhail Margelov was received in Benghazi, the de facto headquarters of the Libyan opposition.
Margelov's stated objective was to broker a truce between anti-Gaddafi forces and the Gaddafi-led government.
He left Benghazi with an invitation from the NTC for Russia to open a representative office in the city, though it opted not to do so before recognising the council as Libya's sole legitimate representative, which it did on 1 September 2011.
The establishment of diplomatic relations between Madagascar and the Soviet Union started on 29 September 1972.
He went on to say that, in addition to increasing economic and social problems, the use of force is of concern and runs counter to democratic principles, whilst affirming Russia's support of the African Union's position.
Russia has an embassy in Nouakchott, and Mauritania has an embassy in Moscow.
The Soviet Union and Mauritius established diplomatic relations on 17 March 1968.
Russia has an embassy in Port Louis, and Mauritius has an embassy in Moscow, which was opened in July 2003.
Mozambique-Russia relations date back to the 1960s, when Russia began to support the struggle of Mozambique's Marxist-oriented FRELIMO party against Portuguese colonialism.
Diplomatic relations were formally established on 25 June 1975, soon after Mozambique gained its independence from Portugal.
In June 2007, both Russia and Mozambique signed an agreement on economic cooperation.
Russia has an embassy in Maputo while Mozambique has an embassy in Moscow.
Namibia has an embassy to Russia in Moscow and Russia has an embassy to Namibia in Windhoek.
Relations between Namibia and Russia were considered ""excellent"" in 2006 by then-Namibian Minister of Education Nangolo Mbumba, while Russia expressed a desire for even stronger relations, particularly in the economic field.
Also in 2006, the Namibia-Russia Intergovernmental Commission on Trade and Economic Cooperation was officially opened during a visit by Russian Natural Resources Minister Yuri Trutnev to Windhoek.
During said visit, the Minister said Russia was interested in investing in oil, hydro-electric power and tourism.
In 2007, Russian Prime Minister Mikhail Fradkov held discussions with Namibian Deputy Prime Minister Nahas Angula and President Hifikepunye Pohamba in regards to the possibility of developing Namibia's significant uranium deposits with an aim towards creating a nuclear power plant in the country.
In 2008, Trutnev returned to Namibia, this time to Swakopmund, to meet at the third annual Intergovernmental Commission.
Top foreign ministry official Marco Hausiku and his deputy Lempy Lucas represented Namibia in discussions with Trutnev.
The Soviet Union established diplomatic relations with Senegal on 14 June 1962.
Diplomatic relations between Seychelles and the Soviet Union were established on 30 June 1976, a day after the island nation gained its independence from the United Kingdom.
Seychelles is represented in Russia through its embassy in Paris and an honorary consulate in Saint Petersburg.
Russia has an embassy in Pretoria and a consulate-general in Cape Town.
South African Department of Foreign Affaires about the relation with Russia.
For decades, Russia and Sudan have maintained a strong economic and politically strategic partnership.
Due to solidarity with both the United States and with the Soviet Union and with the allies of the two nations, Sudan declared neutrality and instead chose membership in the Non-Aligned Movement throughout the Cold War.
Due to a common enemy, diplomatic cooperation between the two countries dramatically got back on track during the late 1990s and early 2000s, when Vladimir Putin was elected the President, and then the Prime Minister of Russia, and along with Chinese leader Hu Jintao opposed UN Peacekeepers in Darfur.
Russia strongly supports Sudan's territorial integrity and opposes the creation of an independent Darfurian state.
Also, Russia is Sudan's strongest investment partner in Europe and political ally in Europe, and Russia has repeatedly and significantly regarded Sudan as an important global ally in the African continent.
For decades there have been Sudanese collegians studying in Russian universities.
Both countries have signed diplomatic missions on 11 December 1961 Russia has an embassy in Dar es Salaam, and Tanzania has an embassy in Moscow.
Russia-Zimbabwe relations date back to January 1979, during the Rhodesian Bush War.
The Soviet Union supported Joshua Nkomo's Zimbabwe African People's Union, and supplied them with arms; Robert Mugabe's attempts to gain Soviet support for his Zimbabwe African National Union were rebuffed, leading him to enter into relations with Soviet rival Beijing.
After the end of the white regime in Zimbabwe, Robert Mugabe had strengthened his relations with both Beijing and Moscow as a result of intense western pressure on him.
Russia maintains strong economic and political ties with Zimbabwe and both countries had vetoed the UN resolution imposing UN sanctions on Zimbabwe which was proposed by both the United States and the UK on 12 July 2008.
The Russian Federation and Barbados established formal diplomatic relations on 29 January 1993.
In 2018 both nations celebrated 25 years of diplomatic ties and pledged closer collaboration.
The two nations also discussed cultural exchanges and Russia working with Barbados' light oil and gas industry.
Russia is represented in Barbados, through its embassy in Georgetown, Guyana.
Belize immediately recognized Russia as the USSR's successor after the breakup of the Soviet Union.
Russia is represented in Belize through its embassy in Mexico City and an honorary consulate in Belize City.
With Bolivia the focus on relations with Russia is mainly economic, as opposed to political and strategic, as an agreement to invest in Bolivia's natural gas fields shows.
It is seen to ""help Latin America... expands Latin America's economic opportunities, diversifies its relationships...that's healthy."" 2008 saw, as a first step to re-establish ties with Russia, the Bolivian government had plans to purchase a small batch of helicopters.
Ambassador Leonid Golubev told The Associated Press that he would like to see Russia's ties to Bolivia one day ""approach the level"" of its growing partnership with Venezuela.
Brazil–Russia relations have seen a significant improvement in recent years, characterized by an increasing commercial trade and cooperation in military and technology segments.
Today, Brazil shares an important alliance with the Russian Federation, with partnerships in areas such as space and military technologies, and telecommunications.
Russia has an embassy in Brasília and consulates-general in Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo.
Canada and Russia benefit from extensive cooperation on trade and investment, energy, democratic development and governance, security and counter-terrorism, northern issues, and cultural and academic exchanges.
Russia has an embassy in Ottawa and consulates-general in Montreal and Toronto.
Chile has an embassy in Moscow and two honorary consulates in Saint Petersburg and in Vladivostok.
Holders of a Russian passport need a visa authorized by Costa Rica, or alternatively Costa Rican authorities will accept Russian nationals with a visa stamp for the European Union, Canada, USA, South Korea, or Japan valid for 90 days after arrival; with a tourist visa, Russians can stay in Costa Rica for a maximum of 90 days.
In order to get a tourist visa, the person needs to apply for it in the closest Costa Rican embassy to where the person is living.
Holders of a Costa Rican passport also need a visa from Russian authorities.
Relations between the two countries suffered somewhat during the Boris Yeltsin administration, as Cuba was forced to look for new major allies, such as China, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
Relations improved when Vladimir Putin was elected as the new Russian President.
Putin, and later Dmitry Medvedev, emphasized re-establishing strong relations with old Soviet allies.
In 2008, Medvedev visited Havana and Raúl Castro made a week-long trip to Moscow.
In that same year the two governments signed multiple economic agreements and Russia sent tons of humanitarian aid to Cuba.
Cuba, meanwhile, gave staunch political support for Russia during the 2008 South Ossetia war.
Relations between the two nations are currently at a post-Soviet high, and talks about potentially re-establishing a Russian military presence in Cuba are even beginning to surface.
Dominica and Russia have established diplomatic relations on 19 May 1995.
Russia is accredited to El Salvador from its embassy in Managua, Nicaragua.
During the New Jewel Movement, the Soviet Union tried to make the island of Grenada to function as a Soviet base, and also by getting supplies from Cuba.
On October 1983, during the United States invasion of Grenada, United States President Ronald Reagan maintained that United States Marines arrived on the island of Grenada, which was considered a Soviet-Cuban ally that would export communist revolution throughout the Caribbean.
In November, at a joint hearing of Congressional Subcommittee, it was told that Grenada could be used as a staging area for subversion of the nearby countries, for intersection of shipping lanes, and for the transit of troops and supplies from Cuba to Africa, and from Eastern Europe and Libya to Central America.
When the United States Marines landed on the island, they discovered a large amount of documents, which included agreements between the Soviet Government, and the New Jewel Movement, recorded minutes of the Committee meetings, and reports from the Grenadian embassy in Moscow.
Diplomatic relations between Grenada and the Soviet Union were severed in 1983 by the Governor General of Grenada.
Eventually in 2002, Grenada re-established diplomatic relations with the newly formed Russian Federation.
Guyana is represented in Russia by its High Commission in London, United Kingdom.
Both countries signed diplomatic missions on 18 October 1979, a few months after the Sandinista revolution.
Russia is represented in Paraguay through its embassy in Buenos Aires and an honorary consulate in Asunción.
On 13 September 2007, Russia's acting foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, declared to soon open a resident embassy in Paraguay's capital.
The nations have begun discussing cooperation in the areas of agriculture, fishing, shipbuilding, education, along with trade.
In October 2013, the Surinamese foreign minister, Yldiz Pollack-Beighle visited Moscow for talks on concluding military and joint law enforcement training.
In 2004, Sergey Lavrov and Knowlson Gift signed the protocol on the political consultations between the two Ministries.
In April 2005 the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of the Russian Federation and the Chamber of Industry and Commerce of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago signed the cooperation agreement.
In 2004, the Russian Cossack folk dance had nine concerts in Port of Spain, San Fernando, Couva, and Tobago.
United States has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Vladivostok and Yekaterinburg.
Russia has an embassy in Montevideo and Uruguay has an embassy in Moscow.
The diplomat said Uruguayan officials had shown interest in a floating nuclear power plant, when the project's presentation took place at the Russian Embassy recently.
The cost of the first plant is estimated at US$400 million, but could later be reduced to $240 million.
This year marks the 150th anniversary of diplomatic relations between Russia and Uruguay.
Afghanistan and Russia have shared a highly varied relationship from the mid-19th century to the modern day.
Following the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution, the new Soviet Union established more cordial relations with Afghanistan, and in 1919 became the first country to recognise Afghan sovereignty.
Relations between the two nations became complicated following the 1978 communist coup known as the Saur Revolution.
The new communist Democratic Republic of Afghanistan was highly dependent on the Soviet Union, and the Soviet support for the widely disliked communist regime, and the ensuing Soviet–Afghan War, led to a great hatred for the Soviets in much of the Afghan population.
The Soviets occupied Afghanistan in the face of a bitter ten-year insurgency before withdrawing in 1989.
Even following the withdrawal of Soviet forces, the Soviet Union provided massive support to the embattled DRA government, reaching a value of $3 billion a year in 1990.
However, this relationship dissolved in 1991 along with the dissolution of the Soviet Union itself.
On 13 September 1991, the Soviet government, now dominated by Boris Yeltsin, agreed with the United States on a mutual cut off of military aid to both sides in the Afghan civil war beginning on 1 January 1992.
The post-coup Soviet government then attempted to develop political relations with the Afghan resistance.
In mid-November it invited a delegation of the resistance's Afghanistan Interim Government to Moscow where the Soviets agreed that a transitional government should prepare Afghanistan for national elections.
The Soviets did not insist that Najibullah or his colleagues participate in the transitional process.
Having been cut adrift both materially and politically, Najibullah's faction torn government began to fall apart, and the city of Kabul fell to the Mujahideen factions in April 1992.
In 2009, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev announced that he wanted to be more involved in Afghanistan, supporting development of infrastructure and the army.
This came as relations between Afghan President Karzai and American President Obama reached a low.
It is estimated that there are between 2,500,000 and 2,900,000 Armenians in Russia.
Azerbaijan has an embassy in Moscow and consulate-general in Saint Petersburg.
Azerbaijan also announced that it will open another consulate-general in Yekaterinburg.
Relations can be traced back to 1971 during the independence war when the Soviet Union sympathised with the Mukti Bahini cause and offered their assistance in the conflict.
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union Bangladesh established ties with all the former Soviet Republics including Russia and began diversifying into other areas such as education, cultural, military and energy.
China has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Irkutsk, Kazan, Khabarovsk, Saint Petersburg, Vladivostok and Yekaterinburg.
Russia has an embassy in Beijing and consulates-general in Guangzhou, Hong Kong, Shanghai and Shenyang.
Russia was one of the first countries to recognise East Timor’s independence and took part in nearly all UN aid programs, providing food and relief personnel, including civil and transport aviation pilots.
After the shooting of José Ramos-Horta , the Russian ministry said; ""The Russian side expresses its concern over the attempt on the life of the East Timor president, and hopes political stability in East Timor will be maintained, as a fundamental condition for a successful solution to the complicated problems it is facing.
During the Cold War, India and the Soviet Union enjoyed a strong strategic, military, economic and diplomatic relationship.
After the collapse of the USSR, India improved its relations with the West but it continued its close relations with Russia.
In 2004, more than 70% of the Indian Military's hardware came from Russia, making Russia the chief supplier of arms.
Russian Ambassador to Indonesia Ludmilla Georgievna serve as the First Female Russian Ambassador to Indonesia since 2018.
Early in the Cold War, both countries had very strong relations, with Indonesian president Sukarno visiting Moscow and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev visiting Jakarta.
When Sukarno was overthrown by General Suharto, relations between the two states were significantly deteriorated, likely due to Indonesia's enforced anti-communist policy under Suharto following the 1965 unrest.
However, unlike the relations with China during Suharto's rule, the diplomatic relations were not suspended and remained intact.
During this time, Indonesia is also one of many countries that boycotted the 1980 Moscow Olympics.
Indonesian President Suharto will travel to the Soviet Union in September for his first visit to Moscow since taking power more than two decades ago, the government announced Wednesday.
Relations between the Soviet Union and Indonesia grew tense 20 years ago after a failed communist-inspired coup attempt, but a thaw began when Gorbachev came to power.
The USSR under Gorbachev began to develop closer ties with Indonesia alongside other Southeast Asian countries, and relations between the two states were improving once again since the formation of the modern-day Russian Federation.
Under Boris Yeltsin and later Vladimir Putin, relations were generally stable and continued to the present day.
On 17 May 1948, three days after Israel declared its independence, the Soviet Union officially granted de jure recognition of Israel, becoming the second country to recognise the Jewish state and the first country to grant Israel de jure recognition.
Japan has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Khabarovsk, Saint Petersburg, Vladivostok and Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk.
Russia has an embassy in Tokyo and consulates-general in Niigata, Osaka and Sapporo.
Diplomatic relations between Russia and Kazakhstan have fluctuated since the fall of the Soviet Union but both nations remain particularly strong partners in regional affairs and major supporters of the Collective Security Treaty Organization, Shanghai Cooperation Organisation and Eurasian Economic Union.
Kazakhstani-Russian relations have been strained at times by Astana's military and economic cooperation with the United States as well as negotiations over Russia's continued use of the Baikonur Cosmodrome, however the two nations retain high-level military and economic cooperation perhaps second among former Soviet states only to that between Russia and Belarus.
Kazakhstan sells oil and gas to Russia at a significantly reduced rate and Russian businesses are heavily invested in Kazakhstan's economy.
Whereas the other Central Asian republics have sometimes complained of Russian interference, Kyrgyzstan has more often wished for more attention and support from Moscow than it has been able to obtain.
For all the financial support that the world community has offered, Kyrgyzstan remains economically dependent on Russia, both directly and through Kazakhstan.
In early 1995, Askar Akayev, the then President of Kyrgyzstan, attempted to sell Russian companies controlling shares in the republic's twenty-nine largest industrial plants, an offer that Russia refused.
The ""Artillery Square"" in Beirut witnessed battles involving the Russian naval forces that were brought to the port of ""St.
George"" to fight alongside the people who rose up against the Turkish rule.
The naval forces set up their artillery at Beirut Square, which still bears the name ""Artillery Square"" and buried its soldiers who fought the Turks with the Lebanese soldiers in the cemetery of the Orthodox Church of St.Meter in Achrafieh.
Diplomatic relations between the two countries began even before the Lebanese independence.
At 1946 , the Soviet Union , the first country in the world for the first time in the history of the UN veto-wielding to support Lebanon and Syria's total independence.
Russia has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Moscow.
Relations between Mongolia and the Russian Federation have been traditionally strong since the Communist era, when Soviet Russia was the closest ally of the Mongolian People's Republic.
Mongolia has an embassy in Moscow, three consulate generals , and a branch in Yekaterinburg.
After the disintegration of the former Soviet Union, Mongolia developed relations with the new independent states.
Links with Russia and other republics were essential to contribute to stabilisation of the Mongolian economy.
The primary difficulties in developing fruitful coordination occurred because these new states were experiencing the same political and economic restructuring as Mongolia.
Despite these difficulties, Mongolia and Russia successfully negotiated both a 1991 Joint Declaration of Cooperation and a bilateral trade agreement.
This was followed by a 1993 Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation establishing a new basis of equality in the relationship.
Mongolian President Bagabandi visited Moscow in 1999, and Russian President Vladimir Putin visited Mongolia in 2000 in order to sign the 25-point Ulaanbaatar Declaration, reaffirming Mongol-Russian friendship and cooperation on numerous economic and political issues.
China and Russia once vetoed a United Nations Security Council resolution designed to punish Myanmar.
Relations improved even more when relations with the west deteriorated, following the Rohingya crisis.
Nepal and the Soviet Union had established diplomatic relations in 1956.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Nepal extended full diplomatic recognition to the Russian Federation as its legal successor.
Since then numerous bilateral meetings have taken place between both sides.
Since 1992 numerous Nepalese students have gone to Russia for higher studies on a financial basis.
In October 2005 the Foreign ministers of both countries met to discuss cooperation on a variety of issues including political, economic, military, educational, and cultural.
Russia has an embassy in Kathmandu while Nepal has an embassy in Moscow.
Russia–DPRK relations are determined by Russia's strategic interests in Korea and the goal of preserving peace and stability in the Korean peninsula.
Russia's official position is by extension its stance on settlement of the North Korean nuclear crisis.
Singapore maintains an embassy in Moscow and Russia has an embassy in Singapore.
Singapore and the Soviet Union entered into full diplomatic relations on 1 June 1968.
After the start of Vladimir Putin's term, Singapore and Russia strengthened ties, participating in a number of regional meetings such as the ASEAN-Russia Summit and the ASEAN Regional Forum.
South Korea has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Irkutsk, Saint Petersburg, Vladivostok and a consular office in Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk.
During the war between the Sri Lanka Armed Forces and Tamil Tigers, Russia helped Sri Lanka by providing education on battle field tactics to Sri Lanka Army.
Sri Lanka also reacted in favor of Russia during the Ukrainian crisis, and acknowledged the concerns of Russia as justifiable.
Russia has an embassy in Damascus and a consulate in Aleppo, and Syria has an embassy in Moscow.
As with most of the Arab countries, Russia enjoys a historically strong and stable friendly relationship with Syria.
Since 1971, Russia has leased port facilities in Tartus for its naval fleet.
Between 1992 and 2008 these facilities were much in disrepair, however, works have commenced concurrent with the 2008 South Ossetia war to improve the port's facilities to support an increased Mediterranean presence of the Russian Navy.
Russia has been strongly supporting Syria in the Syrian civil war, especially since the start of an air campaign in 2015.
Since the formation of the Russian Federation, Taiwan has exported many ferric materials to Russia in 2004–2005.
In 2005, the total amount of the trade between the two economies was $2,188,944,473.
Russia also has a representative office in Taipei, and Republic of China has a representative office in Moscow.
According to the data, Russia keeps a positive balance in its trade relations with Taiwan mainly from crude oil, cast iron and steel, nonferrous metals, petrochemical products, ferroalloys, coking coal, timber, and chemical fertilizers.
Russia imports mostly electronics and electronic parts, computers and computer parts, and home appliances.
The two countries cooperate closely and intensely by establishing unofficial diplomatic relations since 1993~1996.
Until 2005, Russia had 11,000 border guards manning the Tajik frontier with Afghanistan.
In September 2012, and after months of negotiating, Russia and Tajikistan have reached an agreement on what Russia will pay for its bases in Tajikistan and extended the lease to 20 or 29 years.
The bases are used for 9,000 Russian troops of the 201st Motor Rifle Division.
The new deal with Tajikistan makes it worthwhile for Russia to upgrade the four army camps and one air base they occupy.
To get the long lease, Russia agreed to sell Tajikistan weapons and military equipment at a sharp discount and train Tajik officers in Russian schools, for free, for the duration of the deal.
Russia has an embassy in Ashgabat and a consulate-general in Türkmenbaşy.
Recently, Russian-Turkmenistan relations have revolved around Russia's efforts to secure natural gas export deals from Turkmenistan.
Russia is competing with China, the European Union, India and the United States for access to Turkmenistan's rich supply of hydrocarbons.
The two countries often lock horns over price negotiations for gas exports to Russia.
Turkmen president Gurbanguly Berdimuhamedow has agreed to help supply and expand the Russian-backed Pricaspiysky pipeline, however no action has yet occurred towards this goal.
In the aftermath of the May 2005 unrest, Uzbekistan demanded that the United States leave the base at Karshi-Khanabad.
In November 2005, both presidents Islam Karimov and Vladimir Putin had signed a mutual cooperation agreement in Moscow.
On 30 January 1950 the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics established an embassy to North Vietnam.
Bosnia is one of the countries where Russia has contributed troops for the NATO-led stabilization force.
Russia has an embassy in Brussels and a consulate-general in Antwerp, whilst Belgium has an embassy in Moscow and an honorary consulate in Saint Petersburg.
Russia was the first country to recognize Bulgaria, and greatly helped Bulgaria in its war of independence from Ottoman Turkey.
Croatia has an embassy in Moscow and an honorary consulate in Kaliningrad.
The present day relations between the two countries are at their best, and many agreements have been signed.
Russia also has further reduced its oil deliveries to the Czech Republic.
Denmark has an embassy in Moscow, a consulate-general in Saint Petersburg.
Russia recognised Estonia via the Tartu Peace Treaty on 2 February 1920.
Russian-Estonian relations were re-established in January 1991, when presidents Boris Yeltsin of RSFSR and Arnold Rüütel of the Republic of Estonia met in Tallinn and signed a treaty governing the relations of the two countries after the anticipated independence of Estonia from the Soviet Union.
Russia re-recognised the Republic of Estonia on 24 August 1991 after the failed Soviet coup attempt, as one of the first countries to do so.
The Soviet Union recognised the independence of Estonia on 6 September.
Estonia's ties with Boris Yeltsin weakened since the Russian leader's initial show of solidarity with the Baltic states in January 1991.
Germany tries to keep Russia engaged with the rest of the Western world.
The future aim is to promote a stable market-economy liberal democracy in Russia, which is part of the Western world.
Diplomatic relations between the two countries were first established in 1920, following the conclusion of a Soviet-Latvian peace treaty on 11 August 1920.
The treaty was ratified by the Latvian Constituent Assembly on 2 September, and by the Latvian government on 25 September.
On the Russian side, it was ratified by the Pan Russian Central Executive Committee on 9 September.
Ratification letters were exchanged between the two governments in Moscow on 4 October, the date on which in entered into effect.
Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Russian government recognized the independence of Latvia on 24 August 1991.
Russia expresses concern for how Latvia's language and naturalization laws effect Latvia's Russian-speaking population.
In turn, Latvia is interested in the welfare of ethnic Latvians still residing in Russia.
The latest Russian census shows about 40,000 still living in Russia, but sources indicate that given the probability of an undercount, Latvians in Russia probably number about 50,000-60,000.
Norway has an embassy in Moscow and a consulate-general in Saint Petersburg and a consulate in Murmansk.
Russia has an embassy in Oslo and consulates-general in Barentsburg and Kirkenes.
Poland responded with strong disapproval towards the 2008 Georgian Crisis, in which a military invasion of Georgia was led by Russia.
Georgia is a former USSR republic, Poland was a member of the Eastern Bloc, and Poland stated its support for Georgia and condemned Russia's actions.
The Polish believed the invasion was carried out by the Russians in an attempt to reestablish and reassert its dominance over its former republics.
Since 2009, however, relations with Russia somewhat improved despite the plane accident where the former Polish president died on what is still considered a controversial event.
After the Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation the relations deteriorated again, as Poland strongly condemned Russian actions against Ukraine.
Poland has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Irkutsk, Kaliningrad and Saint Petersburg.
Russia has an embassy in Belgrade and a liaison office to UNMIK in Pristina.
Diplomatic relations between the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union were established on 24 June 1940, and Serbia and the Russian Federation recognize the continuity of all inter-State documents signed between the two countries.
There are about 70 bilateral treaties, agreements and protocols signed in the past.
Serbia and the Russian Federation have signed and ratified 43 bilateral agreements and treaties in diverse areas of mutual cooperation so far.
Switzerland opened a consulate in Saint Petersburg in 1816, upgrading it to a legation 90 years later.
The two countries broke off diplomatic relations in 1923, when Russia was going through a period of revolutionary turmoil – and they were not resumed until 1946.
Switzerland has an embassy in Moscow and since 2006, a Consulate-General in Saint Petersburg.
Russia has an embassy in Kiev and consulates-general in Kharkiv, Lviv and Odessa.
Ukraine has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Rostov-on-Don, Saint Petersburg, Tyumen and Vladivostok.
United Kingdom has an embassy in Moscow and consulates-general in Saint Petersburg and Yekaterinburg.
Nauru's banks are said to have provided services to the mafia in Russia during the 1990s; over the course of the 1990s, approximately 70 billion United States dollars owned by Russian mafia were held in Nauru banks.
In 2009, Nauru became the fourth country to recognize the states of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, breakaway regions of Georgia.
Russia was reported to be giving Nauru $50M in humanitarian aid in exchange.
New Zealand has an embassy in Moscow and an honorary consulate in Vladivostok.
Palau and Russia have had established diplomatic relations since 28 November 2006.
The Kingdom of Tonga and the Soviet Union established formal diplomatic relations in 1976.
The USSR was dissolved in 1991 and was succeeded by Russia as the successor state.
On 2 October 2005, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation Sergey Lavrov and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Tonga ST T Tupou exchanged telegrams offering congratulations on the occasion of 30th anniversary of establishing diplomatic relations between the two nations.
In his heads of foreign ministries of Russia and Tonga expressed confidence in further development of Russian-Tongan relations in the interests of the peoples of both countries and strengthen peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region.
Russia and Tuvalu established diplomatic relations with Russia on 25 September 2011.
In 1987, Vanuatu authorised Soviet vessels to fish within Vanuatu's Exclusive Economic Zone, in exchange for economic aid.
Pew Research Center indicated that only 4 surveyed countries have a positive view of Russia.
Reference to ""Russian aggression"" is common in Western media where it is used to criticize Russia.
It has been used to refer to both Catherine the Great's 18th century agenda and 21st century Russian policies.
NATO-sponsored analysts have described what they call a cybernetic ""Russian aggression"" against Ukraine in the 2010s.
On 20 May 1997, NATO and Russia signed the NATO–Russia Founding Act, which the parties hoped would provide the basis for an enduring and robust partnership between the Alliance and Russia—one that could make an important contribution to European security architecture in the 21st century, though already at the time of its signing doubts were cast on whether this accord could deliver on these ambitious goals.
This agreement was superseded by the NATO–Russia Council that was agreed at the Reykjavik Ministerial and unveiled at the Rome NATO Summit in May 2002.
On 24 June 1994, Russia and the European Union signed a partnership and cooperation agreement.
In recent years, tensions have heightened, as NATO members in Eastern Europe, especially Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, and Poland, feel threatened by Russia.
European Union imposed sanctions on Russian businesses and individuals in 2014, regarding the annexation of Crimea and alleged support for separatists during Donbass War.
The non-Russian countries that were once part of the USSR have been termed the 'near abroad' by Russians.
More recently, Russian leaders have been referring to all 15 countries collectively as ""Post-Soviet Space,"" while asserting Russian foreign policy interest throughout the region.
After the USSR was dissolved by the presidents of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus, Russia tried to regain some sort of influence over the post-Soviet space by creating, on 8 December 1991, a regional organization – the Commonwealth of Independent States.
However, most of these agreements were not fulfilled and the CIS republics began to drift away from Russia, which at that time was attempting to stabilize its broken economy and ties with the West.
One of the major issues which had an influence on the foreign relations of Russia in FSU was the remaining large Russian minority populations in many countries of the near abroad.
This issue has been dealt with in various ways by each individual country.
They have posed a particular problem in countries where they live close to the Russian border, such as in Ukraine and Kazakhstan, with some of these Russians calling for these areas to be absorbed into Russia.
By and large, however, Russians in the near-abroad do not favor active intervention of Russia into the domestic affairs of neighboring countries, even in defense of the interests of ethnic Russians.
Moreover, the three Baltic states have clearly signaled their desire to be outside any claimed Russian sphere of influence, as is reflected by their joining both the NATO alliance and the European Union in 2004.
Close cultural, ethnic and historical links exist between Russia, Belarus and Ukraine.
This manifested itself in lower levels of nationalism in these areas, particularly Belarus and Ukraine, during the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
However, few Ukrainians accept a ""younger brother"" status relative to Russia, and Russia's efforts to insert itself into Ukrainian domestic politics, such as Putin's endorsement of a candidate for the Ukrainian presidency in the last election, are contentious.
Russia maintains its military bases in Armenia, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, and Tajikistan.
Russia's relationships with Georgia are at their lowest point in modern history due to the Georgian-Russian espionage controversy and due to the 2008 Russo-Georgian war, Georgia broke off diplomatic relations with Russia and has left the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Russia's relations with Ukraine, since 2013, are also at their lowest point in history as a result of the pro-Western Euromaidan revolution in Ukraine, the 2014 Crimean Crisis and the pro-Russian insurgency in Ukraine's Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
Ukraine, like Georgia, has introduced a bill to the Verkhovna Rada to withdraw from the Commonwealth of Independent States, and Kiev has begun the process of doing so.
In addition, Russia also maintains relations with Bulgaria, Czech Republic, part of the former East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Slovakia, the countries that were once part of the former Warsaw Pact, and furthermore, Albania.
Russia also continues to maintain friendly relations with Cuba, Mongolia and Vietnam as well as third world and non-aligned countries of Afghanistan, Angola, Benin, Cambodia, Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, India, Iraq, Laos, Mozambique, Serbia, Syria and the former Southern part of Yemen.
Prior to 1991, the Soviet Union held Russia's UN seat, but, after the breakup of the Soviet Union the Russian government informed the United Nations that Russia will continue the Soviet Union's membership at the United Nations and all other UN organs.
Russia has played an important role in helping mediate international conflicts and has been particularly actively engaged in trying to promote a peace following the Kosovo conflict.
Russia's foreign minister claimed on 25 February 2008 that NATO and the European Union have been considering using force to keep Serbs from leaving Kosovo following the 2008 Kosovo declaration of independence.
Russia is a co-sponsor of the Middle East peace process and supports UN and multilateral initiatives in the Persian Gulf, Cambodia, Burma, Angola, the former Yugoslavia, and Haiti.
Russia is a founding member of the Contact Group and a member of the G8.
Russia has contributed troops to the NATO-led stabilization force in Bosnia and has affirmed its respect for international law and OSCE principles.
Russia has accepted UN and/or OSCE involvement in instances of regional conflict in neighboring countries, including the dispatch of observers to Georgia, Moldova, Tajikistan, and the de-facto Republic of Artsakh.
Russia supported, on 16 May 2007, the set up of the international tribunal to try the suspects in the murder of the Lebanese Prime Minister, Rafiq Hariri.
The Kuril Islands dispute concerns the islands of Iturup, Kunashir, and Shikotan and the Khabomai group, all of which had belonged to the Japanese Empire until the Soviet–Japanese War when the Soviet Union occupied them and the southern part of the Sakhalin island.
However, the disputed territory is currently administered by the Russian Federation, and the majority of inhabitants of the disputed territory are supportive of Russian administration, because all the Japanese inhabitants were expelled from the islands in 1946.
The dispute between Russia and Latvia regarding the Pytalovo area of Pskov Oblast, Russia, was settled in the 27 March 1997 border treaty.
Disputes over the boundary with the People's Republic of China were finally resolved on 21 July 2008.
On that day the Foreign Ministers of the two countries signed an agreement in Beijing.
The territory transferred comprised Tarabarov Island and approximately half of Bolshoy Ussuriysky Island.
The settlement of their border dispute followed over 40 years of negotiations.
The final settlement was the result of the Treaty of Good-Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation which was concluded on 2 June 2005 and signed by Chinese Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing and his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov.
There is now no border dispute between Russia and China along their 4300 km border.
Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet determined among all littoral states.
Russia has no common land or Caspian-sea border with Turkmenistan and Iran, which do not agree with the Caspian Sea settlements.
Territorial issues between Estonia and Russia regarding some territories of Pskov and Leningrad Oblast of Russia are still unresolved.
The 2005 treaty on Estonia–Russia border was not ratified by the Russian side.
Negotiations were reopened in 2012 and the Treaty was signed in February 2014, but ratification is still pending.
Russia has made no territorial claim in Antarctica and does not recognize the claims of any other nation.
Disputes over the boundary with Georgia relating to Russia's recognition of Georgian regions, South Ossetia and Abkhazia as independent states, due to the 2008 South Ossetia war and which has led to the severance of all diplomatic relations between them.
Following the breakup of the Soviet Union, the Russian Federation refused to recognize Ukrainian sovereignty over Sevastopol as well as over the surrounding Crimean Oblast, using the argument that the city was never practically integrated into the Ukrainian SSR because of its military status.
This claim was relinquished in the bilateral Peace and Friendship Treaty, which confirmed that both the Crimea and Sevastopol belong to Ukraine.
A separate treaty established the terms of a long-term lease of land and resources in and around Sevastopol by Russia.
In the Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation of early 2014 Crimea was annexed by Russia.
Since then status of the Crimea and of the city of Sevastopol is currently under dispute between Russia and Ukraine; Ukraine and the majority of the UN members consider Crimea to be an autonomous republic of Ukraine and Sevastopol to be one of Ukraine's cities with special status, while Russia and other UN members, on the other hand, consider Crimea to be a federal subject of Russia and Sevastopol to be one of Russia's federal cities.
On 31 March 2014 the State Duma approved the denunciation of the above-mentioned Peace and Friendship Treaty and long-term lease of land in Sevastopol. ^ a b c 43rd Munich Conference on Security Policy.
Putin's speech in English Archived 4 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine, 10 February 2007.
Russian navy to start sorties in Mediterranean Reuters 5 December 2007.
This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to International relations of Russia.
Back to the Future?, July 2007 article by Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs Sergey Lavrov.
