It began in February 2014 following the Ukrainian Revolution of Dignity, and initially focused on the status of Crimea and the Donbas, internationally recognised as part of Ukraine.
The first eight years of the conflict included the Russian annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbas between Ukraine and Russian-backed separatists, as well as naval incidents, cyberwarfare, and political tensions.
Following a Russian military build-up on the Russia–Ukraine border from late 2021, the conflict expanded significantly when Russia launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022.
Following the Euromaidan protests and a revolution resulting in the removal of pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014, pro-Russian unrest erupted in parts of Ukraine.
In April 2014, demonstrations by pro-Russian groups in the Donbas escalated into a war between the Armed Forces of Ukraine and Russian-backed separatists of the self-declared Donetsk and Luhansk republics.
In August 2014, unmarked Russian military vehicles crossed the border into the Donetsk republic.
An undeclared war began between Ukrainian forces on one side, and separatists intermingled with Russian troops on the other, although Russia attempted to hide its involvement.
The war settled into a static conflict, with repeated failed attempts at a ceasefire.
In 2015, the Minsk II agreements were signed by Russia and Ukraine, but a number of disputes prevented them being fully implemented.
By 2019, 7% of Ukraine was classified by the Ukrainian government as temporarily occupied territories.
In 2021 and early 2022, there was a major Russian military build-up around Ukraine's borders.
Russian President Vladimir Putin criticized the enlargement of NATO as a threat to his country and demanded Ukraine be barred from ever joining the military alliance.
He also expressed irredentist views, questioned Ukraine's right to exist, and wrongfully stated that Ukraine was established by Vladimir Lenin.
On 21 February 2022, Russia officially recognised the two self-proclaimed separatist states in the Donbas, and openly sent troops into the territories.
Much of the international community has condemned Russia for its actions in Ukraine, accusing it of breaking international law and violating Ukrainian sovereignty.
Many countries implemented economic sanctions against Russia, Russian individuals, or companies, especially after the 2022 invasion. .mw-parser-output .toclimit-2 .toclevel-1 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-3 .toclevel-2 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-4 .toclevel-3 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-5 .toclevel-4 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-6 .toclevel-5 ul,.mw-parser-output .toclimit-7 .toclevel-6 ul{display:none}Contents 1 Background 1.
November 2014 escalation 2.2. 2015 and ceasefire 2. 2015–2022 frozen conflict phase 2.3.
Russia–Ukraine relations See also: Historical background of the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine Post-Soviet context and Orange Revolution Further information: Orange Revolution After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Ukraine and Russia maintained close ties.
In 1994, Ukraine agreed to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a non-nuclear-weapon state.
Russian leaders described this expansion as a violation of Western powers' informal assurances that NATO would not expand eastward.The 2004 Ukrainian presidential election was controversial.
During the election campaign, opposition candidate Viktor Yushchenko was poisoned by TCDD dioxin; he later implicated Russian involvement.
In November, Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych was declared the winner, despite allegations of vote-rigging by election observers.
During a two-month period which became known as the Orange Revolution, large peaceful protests successfully challenged the outcome.
After the Supreme Court of Ukraine annulled the initial result due to widespread electoral fraud, a second round re-run was held, bringing to power Yushchenko as president and Yulia Tymoshenko as prime minister, and leaving Yanukovych in opposition.
The Orange Revolution is often grouped together with other early-21st century protest movements, particularly within the former USSR, known as colour revolutions.
According to Anthony Cordesman, Russian military officers viewed such colour revolutions as an attempt by the United States and European states to destabilise neighbouring countries and undermine Russia's national security.
Russian President Vladimir Putin accused organisers of the 2011–2013 Russian protests of being former advisors to Yushchenko, and described the protests as an attempt to transfer the Orange Revolution to Russia.
The response among NATO members was divided; Western European countries opposed offering Membership Action Plans in order to avoid antagonising Russia, while United States President George W Bush pushed for their admission.
Putin voiced strong opposition to Georgia and Ukraine's NATO membership bids.
By January 2022, the possibility of Ukraine joining NATO remained remote.
Euromaidan, Revolution of Dignity, and 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine In 2009, Yanukovych announced his intent to again run for president in the 2010 Ukrainian presidential election, which he subsequently won.
In November 2013, a wave of large, pro-European Union protests erupted in response to Yanukovych's sudden decision not to sign the EU–Ukraine Association Agreement, instead choosing closer ties to Russia and the Eurasian Economic Union.
The Ukrainian parliament had overwhelmingly approved of finalizing the agreement with the EU, and Russia had put pressure on Ukraine to reject it.Following months of protests as part of the Euromaidan movement, on 21 February 2014 Yanukovych and the leaders of the parliamentary opposition signed a settlement agreement that called for early elections.
The following day, Yanukovych fled from the capital ahead of an impeachment vote that stripped him of his powers as president.
On 23 February, the parliament adopted a bill to repeal the 2012 law which gave Russian language an official status.
The bill was not enacted, however, the proposal provoked negative reactions in the Russian-speaking regions of Ukraine, intensified by Russian media saying that the ethnic Russian population was in imminent danger.On 27 February, an interim government was established and early presidential elections were scheduled.
The following day, Yanukovych resurfaced in Russia and in a press conference declared that he remained the acting president of Ukraine, just as Russia was beginning its overt military campaign in Crimea.
Leaders of Russian-speaking eastern regions of Ukraine declared continuing loyalty to Yanukovych, causing the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine.
Political status of Crimea At the onset of the conflict, Russia had roughly 12,000 military personnel in the Black Sea Fleet, in several locations in the Crimean peninsula like Sevastopol, Kacha, Hvardiiske, Simferopol Raion, Sarych, and others.
In 2005 a dispute broke out over control of the Sarych cape lighthouse near Yalta, and a number of other beacons.
Russian presence was allowed by the basing and transit agreement with Ukraine.
Under the agreements the Russian military in Crimea was constrained to a maximum of 25,000 troops, required to respect the sovereignty of Ukraine, honor its legislation and to not interfere in the internal affairs of the country, and to show their ""military identification cards"" when crossing the international border.
Operations beyond designated deployment sites were permitted only after coordination with the competent agencies of Ukraine.
Early in the conflict, the agreement's sizeable troop limit allowed Russia to significantly reinforce its military presence under the plausible guise of security concerns, deploy special forces and other required capabilities to conduct the operation in Crimea.According to the original treaty on the division of the Soviet Black Sea Fleet signed in 1997, Russia was allowed to have its military bases in Crimea until 2017, after which it would evacuate all military units including its portion of the Black Sea Fleet out of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol.
A Russian construction project to re-home the fleet in Novorossiysk launched in 2005 and was expected to be fully completed by 2020; as of 2010, the project faced major budget cuts and construction delays.
The constitutional provision on ""-existing bases"" was revoked in 2019, after Russia had already annexed Crimea and withdrawn from the basing treaties unilaterally.
Declaration of military operations No formal declaration of war has been issued in the ongoing Russo-Ukrainian War.
When the Kremlin announced the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, it claimed to commence a ""special military operation"", side-stepping a formal declaration of war.
The statement was, however, regarded as a declaration of war by the Ukrainian government and reported as such by many international news sources.
While the Ukrainian parliament refers to Russia as a ""terrorist state"" in regards to its military actions in Ukraine, it has not issued a formal declaration of war on its behalf.
History This section may require copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone, or spelling.
You can assist by editing it.14 Russian annexation of Crimea For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation.
The blockade of military units of the Armed Forces of Ukraine during the capture of Crimea by Russia in February–March 2014 Russian troops blocking the Ukrainian military base in Perevalne On 20 February 2014, Russia began an annexation of Crimea.
On 22 and 23 February, Russian troops and special forces began moving into Crimea through Novorossiysk.
On 27 February, Russian forces without insignias began their advance into the Crimean Peninsula.
They took strategic positions and captured the Crimean Parliament, raising a Russian flag.
Security checkpoints were used to cut the Crimean Peninsula off from the rest of Ukraine and to restrict movement within the territory.In the following days, Russian soldiers secured key airports and a communications center.
Cyberattacks also enabled Russian access to the mobile phones of Ukrainian officials and members of parliament over the next few days—some of whom had their phones disabled as a result—further severing lines of communication.On 1 March, the Russian legislature approved the use of armed forces, leading to an influx of Russian troops and military hardware into the peninsula.
In the following days, all remaining Ukrainian military bases and installations were surrounded and besieged, including the Southern Naval Base.
After Russia formally annexed the peninsula on 18 March, Ukrainian military bases and ships were stormed by Russian forces.
On 24 March, Ukraine ordered troops to withdraw; by 30 March, all Ukrainian forces had left the peninsula.
On 15 April, the Ukrainian parliament declared Crimea a territory temporarily occupied by Russia.
After the annexation, the Russian government increased its military presence in the region and made nuclear threats to solidify the new status quo on the ground.
Russian president Vladimir Putin said that a Russian military task force would be established in Crimea.
In November, NATO stated that it believed Russia was deploying nuclear-capable weapons to Crimea. 2014–2015 war in Donbas For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the war in Donbas.
Combatants of the war in Donbas and List of equipment used by Russian separatist forces of the war in Donbas Pro-Russian unrest Main article: 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine The first protests across southern and eastern Ukraine were largely native expressions of discontent with the new Ukrainian government.
Russian involvement at this stage was limited to voicing support for the demonstrations, and the emergence of the separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk began as a small fringe group of protesters, independent of Russian control.
Russia went on to take advantage of this, however, and launched a co-ordinated political and military campaign against Ukraine, as part of the broader Russo-Ukrainian War.
Putin gave legitimacy to the nascent separatist movement when he described the Donbas as part of the historic ""New Russia"" region, and expressed bewilderment as how the region had ever become part of Ukraine in 1922 with the foundation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.When the Ukrainian authorities cracked down on the pro-Russian protests and arrested local separatist leaders in early March, they were replaced by people with ties to the Russian security services and interests in Russian businesses, probably by order of Russian intelligence.
By April 2014, Russian citizens had taken control of the separatist movement, and were supported by volunteers and materiel from Russia, including Chechen and Cossack fighters.
According to DPR commander Igor Girkin, without this support in April, the movement would have fizzled out, as it had in Kharkiv and Odessa.
The disputed referendum on the status of Donetsk Oblast was held on 11 May.These demonstrations, which followed the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation, and which were part of a wider group of concurrent pro-Russian protests across southern and eastern Ukraine, escalated into an armed conflict between the Russia-backed separatist forces of the self-declared Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics , and the Ukrainian government.
The SBU claimed key commanders of the rebel movement during the beginning of the conflict, including Igor Strelkov and Igor Bezler were Russian agents.
The prime minister of Donetsk People's Republic from May to August 2014 was a Russian citizen, Alexander Borodai.From August 2014 on, all top positions in Donetsk and Luhansk were held by Ukrainian citizens.
Russian volunteers are reported to make up from 15% to 80% of the combatants, with many said to be former military personnel.
Recruitment for the Donbas insurgents was performed openly in Russian cities using private or voyenkomat facilities, as was confirmed by a number of Russian media.Economic and material circumstances in Donbas had generated neither necessary nor sufficient conditions for a locally rooted, internally driven armed conflict.
The role of the Kremlin's military intervention was paramount for hostilities to begin.
April–July 2014 The Russian military buildup along Ukraine's eastern border in February–March 2014 The Donbas status referendums in May 2014 were not officially recognised by the Ukrainian government or any UN member state.
The deployment was likely used to threaten escalation and stymie Ukraine's response to unfolding events.
Concerns were expressed that Russia might again be readying an incursion into Ukraine following its annexation of Crimea.
This threat forced Ukraine to divert force deployment to its borders instead of the conflict zone.In April, armed conflict began in eastern Ukraine between Russian-backed separatist forces and Ukrainian government.
The separatists declared the People's Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk.
From 6 April, Militants occupied government buildings in many cities and took control of border crossings to Russia, transport hubs, broadcasting center, and other strategic infrastructure.
Faced with continued expansion of separatist territorial control, on 15 April the Ukrainian interim government launched an ""Anti-Terrorist Operation"" , however, Ukrainian military and security services were poorly prepared and ill-positioned and the operation quickly stalled.By the end of April, the Ukrainian Government announced it had no full control of the provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk, being on ""full combat alert"" against a possible Russian invasion and reinstatement of conscription to the armed forces.
Through May, Ukrainian campaign focused on containing the separatists by securing key positions around the ATO zone to position the military for a decisive offensive against the rebel enclave once Ukraine's national mobilization complete.
As conflict between the separatists and the Ukrainian government escalated in May, Russia began to employ a ""hybrid approach"", deploying a combination of disinformation tactics, irregular fighters, regular Russian troops, and conventional military support to support the separatists and destabilise the Donbas region.
From June Russia trickled in arms, armor, and munitions to the separatist forces.
By the end of July, they were pushing into Donetsk and Luhansk cities, to cut off supply routes between the two, isolating Donetsk and thought to restore control of the Russo-Ukrainian border.
By 28 July, the strategic heights of Savur-Mohyla were under Ukrainian control, along with the town of Debaltseve, an important railroad hub.
These operational successes of Ukrainian forces threatened the very existence of Russian-supported DPR and LPR statelets, prompting Russian cross-border artillery shelling targeted against advancing Ukrainian troops on their own soil, from mid-July onwards.American and Ukrainian officials said they had evidence of Russian interference in Ukraine, including intercepted communications between Russian officials and Donbas insurgents.Ukrainian media have described the well-organised and well-armed pro-Russian militants as similar to those who occupied regions of Crimea during the Crimean crisis.
The former deputy Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, Admiral Ihor Kabanenko, said that the militants are Russian military reconnaissance and sabotage units.Arsen Avakov stated that the militants in Krasnyi Lyman used Russian-made AK-100 series assault rifles fitted with grenade launchers, and that such weapons are only issued in the Russian Federation.
Militants in Sloviansk arrived in military lorries without license plates.
A reporter from Russia's Novaya Gazeta, having visited separatist artillery positions in Avdeyevka, wrote that in his opinion ""it's impossible that the cannons are handled by volunteers"" as they require a trained and experienced team, including observers and adjustment experts.
Battle of Ilovaisk June–August 2014 progression map After a series of military defeats and setbacks for the Donetsk and Luhansk separatists, who united under the banner of ""Novorossiya"", a term Russian President Vladimir Putin used to describe southeastern Ukraine, Russia dispatched what it called a ""humanitarian convoy"" of trucks across the Russo-Ukrainian border in mid-August 2014.
Ukraine's National Security and Defence Council published a report on the number and contents of these convoys, claiming they were arriving almost daily in November and their contents were mainly arms and ammunition.
In early August, according to Igor Strelkov, Russian servicemen, supposedly on ""vacation"" from the army, began to arrive in Donbas.By August 2014, the Ukrainian ""Anti-Terrorist Operation"" was able to vastly shrink the territory under the control of the pro-Russian forces, and came close to regaining control of the Russo-Ukrainian border.
Igor Girkin urged Russian military intervention, and said that the combat inexperience of his irregular forces, along with recruitment difficulties amongst the local population in Donetsk Oblast, had caused the setbacks.
In response to the deteriorating situation in the Donbas, Russia abandoned its hybrid approach, and began a conventional invasion of the region.
Ten Russian paratroopers of the 331st Guards Airborne Regiment, military unit 71211 from Kostroma, were captured in Dzerkalne that day, a village near Amvrosiivka, 20 kilometres from the border, after their armoured vehicles were hit by Ukrainian artillery.
On 25 August, the Security Service of Ukraine reported the capture of paratroopers who claimed they'd crossed Ukrainian border by accident in the night of 23 August.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine labeled the conflict an invasion on 27 August 2014.
On 25 August, a column of Russian tanks and military vehicles was reported to have crossed into Ukraine in the southeast, near the town of Novoazovsk located on the Azov sea coast, and headed towards Ukrainian-held Mariupol, in an area that had not seen pro-Russian presence for weeks.
Russian forces captured the city of Novoazovsk. and Russian soldiers began arresting and deporting to unknown locations all Ukrainians who did not have an address registered within the town.
Pro-Ukrainian anti-war protests took place in Mariupol which was threatened by Russian troops.
The UN Security Council called an emergency meeting to discuss the situation.
Residents of Kyiv with Sich Battalion volunteers on 26 August 2014 The 76th Guards Air Assault Division based in Pskov allegedly entered Ukrainian territory in August and engaged in a skirmish near Luhansk, suffering 80 dead.
The Ukrainian Defence Ministry said that they had seized two of the unit's armoured vehicles near Luhansk city, and reported about another three tanks and two armoured vehicles of pro-Russian forces destroyed in other regions.
Russian media highlighted that the medal is awarded exclusively for combat operations and reported that a large number of soldiers from this division had died in Ukraine just days before, but their burials were conducted in secret.
Some Russian media, such as Pskovskaya Guberniya, reported that Russian paratroopers might have been killed in Ukraine.
Journalists traveled to Pskov, the reported burial location of the troops, to investigate.
Multiple reporters said they had been attacked or threatened there, and that the attackers erased several camera memory cards.Pskovskaya Guberniya revealed transcripts of phone conversations between Russian soldiers being treated in a Pskov hospital for wounds received while fighting in Ukraine.
A reporter for Novaya Gazeta, an opposition newspaper in Russia, stated that the Russian military leadership paid soldiers to resign their commissions and fight in Ukraine in the early summer of 2014, and then began ordering soldiers into Ukraine.
This reporter mentioned knowledge of at least one case when soldiers who refused were threatened with prosecution.
Valentina Matviyenko, a top politician in the ruling United Russia party, also praised ""volunteers"" fighting in ""our fraternal nation"", referring to Ukraine.
Russian state television for the first time showed the funeral of a soldier killed fighting in east Ukraine.
State-controlled TV station Channel One showed the burial of paratrooper Anatoly Travkin in the central Russian city of Kostroma.
The broadcaster said Travkin had not told his wife or commanders about his decision to fight alongside pro-Russia rebels battling government forces.
Offensive on Mariupol and Minsk agreements A map of the line of control and buffer zone established by the Minsk Protocol on 5 September 2014 On 3 September 2014, a Sky News team filmed groups of troops near Novoazovsk wearing modern combat gear typical for Russian units and traveling in new military vehicles with number plates and other markings removed.
Specialists consulted by the journalists identified parts of the equipment as currently used by Russian ground forces and paratroopers.Also on, 3 September, Ukrainian President Poroshenko said he had reached a ""permanent ceasefire"" agreement with Russian President Putin.
Poroshenko then backtracked from his previous statement about the agreement.Mick Krever wrote on the CNN blog that on 5 September Russia's Permanent Representative to the OSCE, Andrey Kelin, had said it was natural pro-Russian separatists ""are going to liberate"" Mariupol.
Ukrainian forces stated that Russian intelligence groups had been spotted in the area.
On 4 September 2014, a NATO officer said there were several thousand regular Russian forces operating in Ukraine.On 5 September 2014, the ceasefire agreement called the Minsk Protocol, drew a line of demarcation between Ukraine and separatist-controlled portions of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts in the southeast of the country.
On 12 November, NATO reiterated the prevalence of Russian troops; United States general Philip M Breedlove said ""Russian tanks, Russian artillery, Russian air defence systems and Russian combat troops"" were sighted.
The Lithuanian Mission to the United Nations denounced Russia's 'undeclared war' on Ukraine.
Journalist Menahem Kahana took a picture showing a 1RL232 ""Leopard"" battlefield surveillance radar system in Torez, east of Donetsk; and Dutch freelance journalist Stefan Huijboom took pictures which showed the 1RL232 traveling with the 1RL239 ""Lynx"" radar system.OSCE monitors further observed vehicles apparently used to transport soldiers' dead bodies crossing the Russian-Ukrainian border – in one case a vehicle marked with Russia's military code for soldiers killed in action crossed from Russia into Ukraine on 11 November 2014, and later returned.
On 23 January 2015 the Committee of Soldiers' Mothers warned about conscripts being sent to east Ukraine.
NATO said it had seen an increase in Russian tanks, artillery pieces and other heavy military equipment in eastern Ukraine and renewed its call for Moscow to withdraw its forces.The centre for Eurasian Strategic Intelligence estimated, based on ""official statements and interrogation records of captured military men from these units, satellite surveillance data"" as well as verified announcements from relatives and profiles in social networks, that over 30 Russian military units were taking part in the conflict in Ukraine.
The Russian side also frequently employed electronic warfare systems that Ukraine lacked.
Similar conclusions about the technical advantage of the Russian separatists were voiced by the Conflict Studies Research Centre.Numerous reports of Russian troops and warfare on Ukrainian territory were raised in United Nations Security Council meetings.
In 12 November meeting, the representative of the United Kingdom also accused Russia of intentionally constraining OSCE observation missions' capabilities, pointing out that the observers were allowed to monitor only two kilometers of border between Ukraine and Russia, and drones deployed to extend their capabilities were being jammed or shot down. 2015 and ceasefire Pro-Russian rebels in Donetsk in May 2015.
Ukraine declared the Russia-backed separatist republics from eastern Ukraine to be terrorist organizations.
He abbreviated his visit to the World Economic Forum in Davos because of his concerns at the worsening situation.
It reported on an intensified movement of unmarked military trucks, covered with canvas.
A new package of measures to end the conflict, known as Minsk II, was agreed on 15 February 2015.
On 18 February, Ukrainian forces withdrew from Debatlseve, the last major battle of the Donbas war. 2015–2022 frozen conflict phase According to a top United States general in January, Russian supplied drones and electronic jamming have ensured Ukrainian troops struggle to counter artillery fire by pro-Russian militants.
According to estimates by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs in February, Russian separatists forces numbered around 36,000 troops , of whom 8,500–10,000 were Russian soldiers.
Casualties of the War in Donbas In February 2015, the independent Russian newspaper Novaya Gazeta obtained documents, allegedly written by oligarch Konstantin Malofayev and others, which provided the Russian government with a strategy in the event of Viktor Yanukovych's removal from power and the break-up of Ukraine, which were considered likely.
The documents outlined plans for the annexation of Crimea and the eastern portions of the country, closely describing the events that actually followed after Yanukovych's fall.
The documents also described plans for a public relations campaign which would seek to justify Russian actions.
Russian financing of militias and Glazyev tapes In August 2016, the Security Service of Ukraine published the first batch of telephone intercepts from 2014 of Sergey Glazyev , Konstantin Zatulin, and other people in which they discussed covert funding of pro-Russian activists in Eastern Ukraine, the occupation of administration buildings and other actions that in due course led to the armed conflict.As early as February 2014, Glazyev gave direct instructions to various pro-Russian parties in Ukraine to instigate unrest in Donetsk, Kharkiv, Zaporizhia, and Odessa.
In further calls recorded in February and March 2014, Glazyev pointed out that the ""peninsula doesn't have its own electricity, water, or gas"" and a ""quick and effective"" solution would be expansion to the north.
According to Ukrainian journalists, this indicated plans for military intervention in Donbas to form a Russia-controlled puppet state of Novorossiya to ensure supplies to annexed Crimea were discussed long before the conflict actually began in April.
Russian troop deployments A report by Igor Sutyagin published by the Royal United Services Institute in March 2015 stated that a total of 42,000 regular Russian combat troops were involved in the fighting, with a peak strength of 10,000 in December 2014.
The direct involvement of the Russian troops on Ukrainian territory began in August 2014, when Ukrainian military successes created the possibility that the pro-Russian rebels would collapse.
Similar conclusions about the technical advantage of the Russian separatists were voiced by the Conflict Studies Research Centre.Cases of Russian soldiers killed and wounded in Ukraine were widely discussed in local Russian media in the republics from which they originated.
Recruitment for Donbas was performed rather openly via veteran and other paramilitary organisations.
Vladimir Yefimov, leader of one such organisation, explained in detail in an interview how the process worked in the Ural area.
The organisation recruited mostly army veterans, but also policemen, firefighters etc. with military experience.
The cost of equipping one volunteer was estimated at around 350,000 rubles plus the cost of the volunteer's salary, from 60,000 to 240,000 rubles per month depending on their experience.The volunteers were issued a document claiming that their participation was limited to ""offering humanitarian help"" to avoid Russian mercenary laws.
The recruits traveled to the conflict zone without weapons, which they receive at their destination.
Russia also reinforced its military presence on the eastern border with Ukraine as well as near Belgorod, which is close to Kharkiv.
In June 2015, Vice News reporter Simon Ostrovsky investigated the movements of Bato Dambaev, a Russian contract soldier from Buryatia, through a military camp in Rostov Oblast to Vuhlehirsk in Ukraine during the battle of Debaltseve and back to Buryatia, finding exact locations where Dambaev photographed himself, and came to the conclusion that Dambaev had fought in Ukraine while in active service in the Russian army.Russia refused to allow the OSCE to expand its mission, and OSCE observer Paul Picard stated that ""We often see how Russian media outlets manipulate our statements.
In 2020 analysis of publicly available Russian railway traffic data indicated that in January 2015, a period of especially heavy fighting, thousands of tons of cargo declared ""high explosives"" were sent by railway from various places in Russia into Uspenskaya, a small train station on a line crossing from Rostovskaya oblast' into a separatist-controlled part of Ukraine. 2016 escalation Russian-backed separatists in May 2016 On 8 August 2016, Ukraine reported that Russia had increased its military presence along the Crimea demarcation line.
On 10 August, the Russian security agency FSB claimed it had prevented ""Ukrainian terrorist attacks"" and that two servicemen were killed in clashes in Armiansk , adding that ""several"" Ukrainian and Russian citizens were detained.
Russian media reported that one of the killed soldiers was a commander of the Russian GRU, later buried in Simferopol.The Ukrainian government denied that the incident took place.
Parallel to the incident on 9 August, a Ukrainian official claimed that a number of Russian soldiers had deserted but had not entered into Ukraine, and that skirmishes broke out between Russian intelligence officers and border guards.
Russia used the allegation to engage in a rapid military build-up in Crimea, followed by drills and military movement near the Ukrainian border.
Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko warned that Russia was preparing for a full-scale invasion of Ukraine.
Kerch Strait incident See also: Martial law in Ukraine and List of Black Sea incidents involving Russia and Ukraine The Kerch Strait incident over the passage between the Black and Azov seas The Kerch Strait offers a critical link for Ukraine's eastern ports in the Azov Sea to the Black Sea, over which Russia gained de facto control in the aftermath of 2014.
In 2017, Ukraine appealed to court of arbitration over the use of the strait, but, by 2018 Russia had built a bridge over it, limiting the size of ships that could transit the strait, imposed new regulations, and subsequently detained Ukrainian vessels on several occasions.
On 25 November 2018, three Ukrainian boats traveling from Odessa to Mariupol attempted to cross the Kerch Strait caused an incident, in which Russian warships fired on and seized the Ukrainian boats; 24 Ukrainian sailors were detained.
A day later on 26 November 2018, lawmakers in the Ukrainian parliament overwhelmingly backed the imposition of martial law along Ukraine's coastal regions and those bordering Russia in response to the firing and seizure of Ukrainian naval ships by Russia near the Crimean peninsula.
In May 2019, the newly elected Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy took office promising to end the War in Donbas.
In December 2019, Ukraine and pro-Russian separatists began swapping prisoners of war.
According to Ukrainian authorities, 50 Ukrainian soldiers were killed in the conflict between Ukrainian government forces and Russian-backed separatists in 2020.
Prelude to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine Further information: Timeline of the war in Donbas and Timeline of the war in Donbas Rise in tensions United States paratroopers of 2nd Battalion, 503rd Infantry Regiment depart Italy's Aviano Air Base for Latvia, 23 February 2022.
From March to April 2021, Russia commenced a major military build-up near the Russo-Ukrainian border, followed by a second build-up between October 2021 to February 2022 in both Russia and Belarus.
During these developments, the Russian government repeatedly denied it had plans to invade or attack Ukraine; those who issued the denials included Putin's spokesman Dmitry Peskov in November 2021, Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov in January 2022, Russian ambassador to the United States Anatoly Antonov on 20 February 2022, and Russian ambassador to the Czech Republic Alexander Zmeevsky on 23 February 2022.
In early December 2021, following Russian denials, the United States released intelligence of Russian invasion plans, including satellite photographs showing Russian troops and equipment near the Ukrainian border.
The intelligence reported the existence of a Russian list of key sites and individuals to be killed or neutralized upon invasion.
The United States continued to release reports that accurately predicted the invasion plans, but according to Michael Kofman of the Center for Naval Analyses, the Ukrainian government did not adequately prepare for a large invasion.
Disinformation in the 2021–2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis and Russian irredentism See also: Russia–NATO relations and Ukraine–NATO relations Ukrainian deputy prime minister Olha Stefanishyna with NATO secretary-general Jens Stoltenberg at a conference on 10 January 2022 regarding a potential Russian invasion In the months preceding the invasion, Russian officials accused Ukraine of inciting tensions, Russophobia, and the repression of Russian speakers in Ukraine.
These actions were described by commentators and Western officials as attempts to justify war.
He incorrectly described the country as having been created by Vladimir Lenin, who carved a Soviet Republic out of what Putin said was Russian land, then according to Putin Joseph Stalin supplemented Ukrainian lands with lands from other eastern European countries following the Second World War, and his successor Nikita Khrushchev “took Crimea away from Russia for some reason and gave it to Ukraine” in 1954.
To justify an invasion, Putin falsely accused Ukrainian society and government of being dominated by neo-Nazism, invoking the history of collaboration in German-occupied Ukraine during World War II, and echoing an antisemitic conspiracy theory which casts Russian Christians, rather than Jews, as the true victims of Nazi Germany.
While Ukraine has a far-right fringe, including the neo-Nazi Azov Battalion and Right Sector, analysts have described Putin's rhetoric as greatly exaggerating the influence of far-right groups within Ukraine; there is no widespread support for the ideology in the government, military, or electorate.
The Poroshenko administration enforced the law condemning the Soviet Union and the Nazis in 2015.
Ukrainian president Zelenskyy, who is Jewish, stated that his grandfather served in the Soviet army fighting against the Nazis; three of his family members died in the Holocaust.
A United States intelligence assessment map and imagery on Russian military movement nearby the Ukrainian border, as on 3 December 2021.
During the second build-up, Russia issued demands to the United States and NATO, including a legally binding arrangement preventing Ukraine from ever joining NATO, and the removal of multinational forces stationed in NATO's Eastern European member states.
These demands were widely interpreted as being non-viable; new NATO members in Central and Eastern Europe had joined the alliance because their populations broadly preferred to move towards the safety and economic opportunities offered by NATO and the EU, and their governments sought protection from Russian irredentism.
The demand for a formal treaty preventing Ukraine from joining NATO was also seen as unviable by Western officials as it would contravene the treaty's ""open door"" policy, although NATO showed no desire to accede to Ukraine's requests to join.
Alleged clashes Fighting in Donbas escalated significantly from 17 February 2022 onwards.
The Ukrainians and the Russian separatists each accused the other of firing into their territory.
On 18 February, the Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics ordered mandatory emergency evacuations of civilians from their respective capital cities, although observers noted that full evacuations would take months.
Ukrainian media reported a sharp increase in artillery shelling by the Russian-led militants in Donbas as attempts to provoke the Ukrainian army.In the days leading up to the invasion, the Russian government intensified its disinformation campaign, with Russian state media promoting fabricated videos on a nearly hourly basis purporting to show Ukrainian forces attacking Russia, in a bid to justify an invasion of Ukraine.
Many of the disinformation videos were poor and amateur in quality, and evidence showed that the claimed attacks, explosions, and evacuations in Donbas were staged by Russia.
Escalation Putin's address to the nation on 21 February On 21 February at 22:35 , Putin announced that the Russian government would diplomatically recognize the Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics.
The 21 February intervention in Donbas was condemned by several members of the UN Security Council; none voiced support for it.
On 22 February, the Federation Council unanimously authorised Putin to use military force outside Russia.In response, Zelenskyy ordered the conscription of army reservists; The following day, Ukraine's parliament proclaimed a 30-day nationwide state of emergency and ordered the mobilisation of all reservists.
He also refuted Russia's claims about the presence of neo-Nazis in the Ukrainian government and stated that he had no intention of attacking the Donbas region.
Sergiy Kyslytsya, the Ukrainian representative, subsequently called on the Russian representative, Vasily Nebenzya, to ""do everything possible to stop the war"" or relinquish his position as president of the UN Security Council; Nebenzya refused.
Animated map of Russia's invasion of Ukraine The invasion began on the morning of 24 February, when Putin announced a ""special military operation"" to ""demilitarise and denazify"" Ukraine.
Minutes later, missiles and airstrikes hit across Ukraine, including the capital Kyiv, shortly followed by a large ground invasion from multiple directions.
Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy enacted martial law and a general mobilisation of all male Ukrainian citizens between 18 and 60, who were banned from leaving the country.At the start of the invasion, Russian attacks were launched on a northern front from Belarus towards Kyiv, a northeastern front towards Kharkiv, a southern front from Crimea, and a southeastern front from the cities of Luhansk and Donetsk.
On 8 April, Russia announced that its forces in southern and eastern Ukraine would be placed under the command of General Aleksandr Dvornikov, and some units withdrawn from northern Ukraine were subsequently redeployed to the Donbas.
By 13 May, Russian forces near Kharkiv had withdrawn following a Ukrainian counter-offensive.
By 20 May, Mariupol fell to Russian troops following a prolonged siege of the Azovstal steel works.The invasion was internationally condemned as a war of aggression.
A United Nations General Assembly resolution demanded a full withdrawal of Russian forces, the International Court of Justice ordered Russia to suspend military operations and the Council of Europe expelled Russia.
Humanitarian situation during the war in Donbas and Russian war crimes § Ukraine The war has been accompanied by violations of human rights.
The right of movement was impeded for the inhabitants of the conflict zone.
Arbitrary detention was practiced by both sides in the first years of the conflict.
It decreased after 2016 in government-held areas, while in the separatist-held ones it continued.
The investigation into the abuses, including torture, committed by both sides made little progress.
According to OHCHR the closure of three TV channels amounted to a violation of the freedom of expression.
Russia–Ukraine gas disputes, Nord Stream, Nord Stream 2, and Russia in the European energy sector Major Russian natural gas pipelines to Europe Ukraine remains the main transit route for Russian natural gas sold to Europe, which earns Ukraine about $3 billion a year in transit fees, making it the country's most lucrative export service.
Following Russia's launch of the Nord Stream pipeline, which bypasses Ukraine, gas transit volumes steadily decreased.
During the Ukrainian crisis, starting in February 2014 with the Russian annexation of Crimea, severe tensions extended to the gas sector.
The outbreak of war in the Donbas region forced the suspension of a project to develop Ukraine's own shale gas reserves at the Yuzivska gas field, which had been planned as a way to reduce Ukrainian dependence on Russian gas imports.
Eventually, the EU commissioner for energy Günther Oettinger was called in to broker a deal securing supplies to Ukraine and transit to the EU.A terrorist explosion damaged Russia's Urengoy–Pomary–Uzhhorod pipeline in Rozhniativ district in Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast, Ukraine in May 2014.
Another section of the pipeline exploded in the Poltava Oblast on 17 June 2014, one day after Russia limited the supply of gas to Ukrainian customers due to non-payment.
Ukraine's Interior Minister Arsen Avakov said the following day that the explosion had been caused by a bomb.Russia planned to completely abandon gas supplies to Europe through Ukraine after 2018.
Gazprom and Ukraine agreed to a five-year deal on Russian gas transit to Europe at the end of 2019.
In 2020, the TurkStream natural gas pipeline running from Russia to Turkey changed the regional gas flows in South-East Europe by diverting the transit through Ukraine and the Trans Balkan Pipeline system.In May 2021, the Biden administration waived Trump's CAATSA sanctions on the company behind Russia's Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline to Germany and its chief executive.
Ukrainian President Zelenskyy said he was ""surprised"" and ""disappointed"" by Joe Biden's decision.
The deal aimed to prevent Poland and Ukraine from being cut off from Russian gas supplies.
Ukraine will get a $50 million loan for green technology until 2024 and Germany will set up a billion dollar fund to promote Ukraine's transition to green energy to compensate for the loss of the gas transit fees.
Vitrenko stated that ""A joint statement from the United States and Germany said that if the Kremlin used gas as a weapon, there would be an appropriate response.
Hybrid warfare The Russo-Ukrainian conflict has also included elements of hybrid warfare using non-traditional means.
Cyberwarfare has been used by Russia in operations including the Ukraine power grid hack in December 2015 and 2016, which was the first successful cyber attack on a power grid, and the Mass hacker supply-chain attack in June 2017, which the United States claimed was the largest known cyber attack.
In retaliation, Ukrainian operations have included the Surkov Leaks in October 2016 which released 2,337 e-mails in relation to Russian plans for seizing Crimea from Ukraine and fomenting separatist unrest in Donbas.
The Russian information war against Ukraine has been another front of hybrid warfare waged by Russia.
Russian information war against Ukraine and Russian disinformation in the post-Soviet era Pro-Kremlin TV and radio host Vladimir Solovyov voiced support for his country's invasion of Ukraine.
In April 2014, Russian news channels Russia-1 and NTV showed a man saying he was attacked by a fascist Ukrainian gang on one channel and on the other channel saying he was funding the training of right-wing anti-Russia radicals.
In May 2014, Russia-1 aired a story about Ukrainian atrocities using footage of a 2012 Russian operation in North Caucasus.
In the same month, the Russian news network Life presented a 2013 photograph of a wounded child in Syria as a victim of Ukrainian troops who had just retaken Donetsk International Airport.In June 2014, several Russian state news outlets reported that Ukraine was using white phosphorus using 2004 footage of white phosphorus being used by the United States in Iraq.
In July 2014, Channel One Russia broadcast an interview with a woman who said that a 3-year-old boy who spoke Russian was crucified by Ukrainian nationalists in a fictitious square in Sloviansk that turned to be false.In 2022, Russian state media told stories of genocide and mass graves full of ethnic Russians in eastern Ukraine.
One set of graves outside Luhansk was dug when intense fighting in 2014 cut off the electricity in the local morgue.
On 4 March 2022, Putin signed into law a bill introducing prison sentences of up to 15 years for those who publish ""fake news"" about the Russian military and its operations, leading to some media outlets to stop reporting on Ukraine.
Russia's opposition politician Alexei Navalny said the ""monstrosity of lies"" in the Russian state media ""is unimaginable.
Putin and Russian media have described the government of Ukraine as being led by neo-Nazis persecuting ethnic Russians who are in need of protection by Russia, despite Ukraine's President Zelenskyy being Jewish.
Russia–NATO relations Russian military aircraft flying over the Baltic and Black Seas often do not indicate their position or communicate with air traffic controllers, thus posing a potential risk to civilian airliners.
NATO aircraft scrambled many times in late April 2022 in order to track and intercept these aircraft near alliance airspace.
The Russian aircraft intercepted never entered NATO airspace, and the interceptions were conducted in a safe and routine manner.
British Prime Minister Boris Johnson rejected Lavrov's allegation that NATO is fighting a 'proxy war' in Ukraine.
Second Cold War Reactions to the annexation of Crimea Main article: International reactions to the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation Ukrainian response Following Russia's annexation of Crimea, Ukraine blocked the North Crimean Canal, which provided 85% of Crimea's drinking and irrigation water.
Interim Ukrainian President Oleksandr Turchynov accused Russia of ""provoking a conflict"" by backing the seizure of the Crimean parliament building and other government offices on the Crimean peninsula.
He compared Russia's military actions to the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, when Russian troops occupied parts of the Republic of Georgia and the breakaway enclaves of Abkhazia and South Ossetia were established under the control of Russian-backed administrations.
On 1 March, Acting President Oleksandr Turchynov placed the Armed Forces of Ukraine on full alert and combat readiness.The Ministry of Temporarily Occupied Territories and IDPs was established by Ukrainian government on 20 April 2016 to manage occupied parts of Donetsk, Luhansk and Crimea regions affected by Russian military intervention of 2014.
Operation Atlantic Resolve, European Deterrence Initiative, NATO Enhanced Forward Presence, and Russia–NATO relations A United States Army convoy in Vilseck, Germany during Operation Atlantic Resolve, NATO's efforts to reassert its military presence in central and eastern Europe that began in April 2014.
On 4 March 2014, the United States pledged $1 billion in aid to Ukraine.
Russia's actions increased tensions in nearby countries historically within its sphere of influence, particularly the Baltic and Moldova.
All have large Russian-speaking populations, and Russian troops are stationed in the breakaway Moldovan territory of Transnistria.
Some devoted resources to increasing defensive capabilities, and many requested increased support from the United States and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, which they had joined in recent years.
The conflict ""reinvigorated"" NATO, which had been created to face the Soviet Union, but had devoted more resources to ""expeditionary missions"" in recent years.In addition to diplomatic support in its conflict with Russia, the United States provided Ukraine with US$1. billion in military aid during the 2010s.
In 2018 the United States House of Representatives passed a provision blocking any training of Azov Battalion of the Ukrainian National Guard by American forces.
In previous years, between 2014 and 2017, the United States House of Representatives passed amendments banning support of Azov, but due to pressure from the Pentagon, the amendments were quietly lifted.
Financial markets The initial reaction to the escalation of tensions in Crimea caused the Russian and European stock market to tumble.
The intervention caused the Swiss franc to climb to a 2-year high against the dollar and 1-year high against the Euro.
The Euro and the United States dollar both rose, as did the Australian dollar.
The Russian stock market declined by more than 10 percent, while the Russian ruble hit all-time lows against the United States dollar and the Euro.
The Russian central bank hiked interest rates and intervened in the foreign exchange markets to the tune of $12 billion to try to stabilize its currency.
Prices for wheat and grain rose, with Ukraine being a major exporter of both crops.Later in March 2014, the reaction of the financial markets to the Crimea annexation was surprisingly mellow, with global financial markets rising immediately after the referendum held in Crimea, one explanation being that the sanctions were already priced in following the earlier Russian incursion.
Other observers considered that the positive reaction of the global financial markets on Monday 17 March 2014, after the announcement of sanctions against Russia by the EU and the US, revealed that these sanctions were too weak to hurt Russia.
In early August 2014, the German DAX was down by 6 percent for the year, and 11 percent since June, over concerns Russia, Germany's 13th biggest trade partner, would retaliate against sanctions.
A poll of the Ukrainian public, excluding Russian-annexed Crimea, was taken by the International Republican Institute from 12 to 25 September 2014. 89% of those polled opposed 2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine.
As broken down by region, 78% of those polled from Eastern Ukraine opposed said intervention, along with 89% in Southern Ukraine, 93% in Central Ukraine, and 99% in Western Ukraine.
A joint poll conducted by Levada and the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology from September to October 2020 found that in the breakaway regions controlled by the DPR/LNR, just over half of the respondents wanted to join Russia while less than one-tenth wanted independence and 12% wanted reintegration into Ukraine.
It contrasted with respondents in Kyiv-controlled Donbas, where a vast majority felt the separatist regions should be returned to Ukraine.
According to results from Levada in January 2022, roughly 70% of those in the breakaway regions said their territories should become part of the Russian Federation.
Russian public opinion An April 2022 survey by the Levada Centre reported that approximately 74% of the Russians polled supported the ""special military operation"" in Ukraine, suggesting that Russian public opinion has shifted considerably since 2014.
According to some sources, a reason many Russians supported the ""special military operation"" has to do with the propaganda and disinformation.
In addition, it has been suggested that some respondents did not want to answer pollsters' questions for fear of negative consequences.
United States On 28 April 2022, United States President Joe Biden asked Congress for an additional $33 billion to assist Ukraine, including $20 billion to provide weapons to Ukraine.
On 21 May 2022, the United States passed legislation providing $40 billion in new military and humanitarian foreign aid to Ukraine, marking a historically large commitment of funds.
Ukraine claims 20 February 2014 as ""the beginning of the temporary occupation of Crimea and Sevastopol by Russia"", citing the timeframe inscribed on the Russian medal ""For the Return of Crimea"", and in 2015 the Ukrainian parliament officially designated the date as such.
President Putin, in a bravura performance before the world's media at the end of the Nato summit, warned President Bush and other alliance leaders that their plan to expand eastwards to Ukraine and Georgia ""didn't contribute to trust and predictability in our relations.
A CNN team in the area encountered more than one pro-Russian militia checkpoint on the road from Sevastopol to Simferopol.
Checkpoints were put up at all entrances to Sevastopol last night and the borders to the city are guarded by groups of people, police units, and traffic police. ^ a b ""Russian parliament approves use of armed forces in Crimea"". dw.com.
Belarus To Host Talks Between Ukraine and Russia"". www.interpretermag.com.
President Petro Poroshenko considers the government's anti-terrorist operation against separatists as Ukraine's patriotic war.
Tanks, artillery and infantry have crossed from Russia into an unbreached part of eastern Ukraine in recent days, attacking Ukrainian forces and causing panic and wholesale retreat not only in this small border town but a wide swath of territory, in what Ukrainian and Western military officials are calling a stealth invasion.
Unidentified, heavily-armed strangers with Russian accents have appeared in an eastern Ukrainian village, arousing residents' suspicions despite Moscow's denials that its troops have deliberately infiltrated the frontier.
Retrieved 11 August 2016. ^ a b Weinberger, Kathleen . ""russian build-up in and around ukraine"". foreignpolicy.
Russia's invasion of Ukraine constitutes the crime of aggression under international law.
Eighty-two percent of those polled said they fully supported Crimea's inclusion in Russia, and another 11 percent expressed partial support.
A total of 82% of the population of the Crimea fully support Russia's annexation of the peninsula, according to a poll carried out by the GfK Group research institute in Ukraine, Ukrainian online newspaper Ukrainska Pravda reported on Wednesday.
Another 11% of respondents said that they rather support the annexation of Crimea, while 4% were against it.
