These voters voted disproportionately for candidates and parties that supported closer ties with Russia.
This article quantifies the changes to the electorate and projects the likely partisan impact.
The changes decisively tip the Ukrainian electorate away from the east and south.
Anticipating these effects, Ukraine’s government could seek to prolong these voters’ exclusion, while Russia could actually seek to end the occupation to get them reincluded.
The implication is that various actors could try to “gerrymander” the entire Ukrainian state, a phenomenon that previously has only been explored at the district level, within states.
This raises the broader question of how electoral effects shape the many territorial disputes around the world.
Ukraine; Russia; Elections; Donbas; Crimea; Gerrymandering Introduction Two parts of Ukraine, Crimea and a portion of the Donbas (parts of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts), have been occupied by Russian or Russian-supported forces since 2014, and neither occupation appears likely to end in the foreseeable future.
Much of the discussion of this conflict has focused on the territorial dimension of the problem, which continues to defy resolution.
But as well as separating territory from Ukraine, Russia’s occupation has also separated many citizens and voters from Ukraine.
This article asks how the occupation reshapes the Ukrainian electorate, what the likely electoral impact is, and how this might shape efforts to return the territory to Ukraine.
The regions now occupied by Russia or Russian proxies contained roughly 12 percent of the voters in the 2012 parliamentary elections, and 16 percent of the voters 90 East European Politics and Societies and Cultures in the 2010 presidential election.
Therefore, the removal of these regions disproportionately undermines those forces nationally.
While some uncertainty is created by the displacement of many of the regions’ citizens, we can estimate the potential change by looking at past voting behavior.
First, it will be nearly impossible for a candidate with support based primarily in eastern and southern Ukraine to win the presidency, as has happened in the past.
Second, however, we cannot conclude that a candidate or party with strength concentrated in the center and/or western parts of the country will naturally triumph.
The country is still quite evenly divided, and western Ukraine–based forces have been able to unify only for the very brief period before and during the 2004 Orange Revolution.
These findings have important and paradoxical consequences for attempts to resolve the conflict, and they raise much broader questions about the relationship between territory and statebuilding.
Because the truncation of the electorate disproportionately removes voters who support closer ties with Russia, it may well be in Russia’s interest not to annex the territory, as many have assumed its goal to be, but to see it reintegrated into Ukraine.
More provocatively, pro-western Ukrainians might have a reason to want the territory to remain excluded in order to remove its voters from the electorate.
Similarly, politicians’ views on reintegrating the territory may be shaped by whether their parties tended to perform well or poorly in the occupied regions.
This may explain why Russia has insisted on implementing the Minsk agreements, which assume reincorporation of the territories into Ukraine, and it adds to the list of reasons why Ukrainian leaders are unlikely to accept the Minsk formula, even if they pay lip service to it.
These electoral effects show why a few in Ukraine now openly advocate not bringing the territories back in.
Given the large number of territorial disputes in the world (a recent encyclopedia of territorial disputes runs to over twelve hundred pages2), and the historical record of border changes, the questions raised here are important far beyond Ukraine.
From this perspective, this case presents a unique opportunity to observe how the contemporary state balances the territorial and political-community aspects of the nation-state.
The next section overviews the intersection of territory with voters and elections in Ukraine.
The subsequent sections examine in detail how Ukrainians have voted in recent elections, with focus on the territories that are now occupied.
One compares the presidential election of 2010 and parliamentary election of 2012 with those afterwards, in 2014.
A second analysis looks at the line of control, which stabilized after 2015, as of January 2018, and shows what the elections of 2010 and 2012 would have looked like without those territories and voters who are outside the control of Ukraine’s government.
The analysis then considers the impact of internally displaced persons on these results and looks at recent polling data as a separate indicator of change.
Subsequent sections go on to consider the paradoxical implications of these findings.
Russia may have a larger incentive to see the territories reintegrated into Ukraine than we have understood.
Similarly, some Ukrainians may perceive both partisan advantage and national interest in continuing to leave the territories outside Ukraine.
The implication is that the conflict may be even harder to resolve than we have thought.
In the United States, drawing electoral districts to include or exclude voters with particular tendencies is an old tradition and a highly refined art and science.
Applying the concept of gerrymandering to the case of Ukraine stretches the concept a bit, as the question is not simply rearranging voters, but excluding some.
But the techniques have in common trying to move some voters out of one area in order to shape electoral outcomes.
To be clear, such a deliberate effort to reshape the electorate has not been articulated as a strategy by either the Ukrainian or the Russian governments.
However, the status quo in Ukraine after early 2015 has created such a scenario de facto, raising the question of how hard Ukraine will try to get the territory and its voters back, and whether Russia will try to get them back in.
Historically, it seems that states have focused on territory, where more is always better, rather than on voters, where subtraction might yield partisan advantage for some or make a polity more governable.
Kimitaka Matsuzato asserts that while reintegration was welcomed in the case of Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan, where it would have little impact on the overall political balance, it would be much harder in Transnistria, where it would have a significant impact on Moldovan politics.
As Stephen Hanson argues, the relative stability of state borders, combined with Weberian conception of states as having fixed territories, has led scholars to neglect the study of how particular borders are established and legitimated.
One exception to this tendency is the work by O’Leary, Lustick, and Callaghy on Right-Sizing the State.
Rejecting Weber’s assumption that states exist within “a given territory,” these authors focus on the fact that changes in borders have happened repeatedly throughout history, including recent history, often without war, and they examine the different reasons for this.
But it has also deepened the hostility of the region’s de facto elites to rule from Kyiv.
Ian Lustick argues that before a state can agree to cede territory, it must first come to regard that territory as “inessential,” or even as a colony.
It is notable, therefore, that in contemporary Ukraine, while it is still considered politically untenable to advocate surrendering the territory, the issue has been raised increasingly publicly.
If there are cases where leaders have sought to jettison territory for partisan electoral purposes, they are rare.
Several recent examples illustrate the reluctance to pursue partisan gains via territorial reduction.
Conservatives in the UK opposed the secession of Scotland, even though it would have removed a significant portion of Labour voters from the electorate, raising the prospect of a “permanent” Conservative majority.
And despite the beneficial effects that Slovak secession had for the Czech Republic’s rapid reform, Czechoslovak President Václav Havel strongly opposed it.
In these cases, territory seems to have trumped electoral calculations.
Thus, if Ukraine were to voluntarily surrender Crimea and/or the occupied Donbas, it would be highly unusual.
At least as matters stand in 2018, Russia has taken the question out of Ukraine’s hands, but Ukraine can choose how hard it tries to get the territories back, including what kind of concessions it might make.
We can imagine that the Ukrainian leadership will continue to voice support for regaining the occupied territories, but not try very hard to actually bring it about.
In interviews conducted in Kyiv in the summer of 2018, several elites asserted that while Ukraine cannot declare a policy of surrendering the territory, recent changes in law and in practice indicate a de facto policy of stabilizing the status quo rather than trying to reverse it.
With Russia having annexed Crimea, it seems certain that residents of Crimea will not vote in Ukrainian elections for the foreseeable future.
That would appear to be true in the occupied Donbas as well, though there is less certainty about the specific demarcation between Russianand Ukrainian-controlled territories.
While it is hard to predict the future of the conflict, the lines of control in the region have substantially stabilized since 2015, despite ongoing violence.
As several authors have pointed out, this will have an impact on election results in Ukraine.
Colton, writing well before Russia’s seizure of Ukrainian territory, used data from Ukrainian elections to hypothesize what might happen if various regions of Ukraine, including Crimea, the Donbas , and Galicia were no longer part of the country.
Erik Herron, Michael Thunberg, and Nazar Boyko examined the impact of the conflict both on the challenge of holding the 2014 elections and on the outcomes.
The following analysis builds on that work by seeking to quantify the actual impact on the electorate, based on the line of control that has stabilized since 2015, and by exploring the political implications.
An important question therefore, is how the change in the electorate will shape debates in future elections.
Moreover, the events of 2013–2014 caused broader changes in political attitudes and partisan preferences in Ukraine.
These changes will interact with those resulting from territorial change, so it is important to recognize the effect of territorial change that is the focus of this article is only one of the ways in which the ongoing conflict is shaping elections.
While there are other changes to attitudes and the party structure, none is likely to shape incentives on resolving the conflict the way that the change in the electorate will.
A first cut compares the results of presidential and parliamentary elections conducted in 2014 (after the annexation in Crimea and the outbreak of conflict in the Donbas) with the 2010 presidential election and the 2012 parliamentary election.
A second cut begins with the line of control as it was in early 2018, which looks likely to endure for some time, and asks, counterfactually, how the voting outcomes in 2010 and 2012 would change if those regions and their voters were excluded.
This helps us to isolate the territorial impact of the conflict from the partisan impact.
The Impact on 2014 Presidential and Parliamentary Elections Following the departure of Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014, presidential elections were scheduled for May.
The elections were conducted in chaotic conditions, and therefore yield limited insight on future voting behavior.
Herron, Thunberg, and Boyko demonstrate considerable partisan effects of the conflict on the 2014 Presidential election.
Petro Poroshenko won the election in the first round with 54. percent of the vote, with Yuliya Tymoshenko finishing second with only 12.8 percent.
In the 2014 parliamentary elections, single-member district elections were not carried out in 27 districts in Crimea and the Donbas, and voters in those regions did not vote in the proportional representation portion of the ballot either.
Third, those same districts did not vote in the PR portion of the ballot, influencing those results.
This reflects the political upheaval that took place between the two elections.
Of those twenty-nine seats, twenty-seven were won in the PR portion of the ballot.
Most of that difference can be accounted for by those who lived in areas that did not vote in 2014.
The CPU ended up with 612,000 or 3. percent, leaving them 176,000 votes short.
At the same time, in oblasts entirely free from Russian intervention where the party had done well in 2012, such as Kherson and Zaporizhzhya, CPU percentages also collapsed.
Third, with the party out of government and its leaders having fled to Russia, it likely suffered from a lack of resources, which were especially important in a patronage-based system.
In contrast, the Batkivshchina party of Yuliya Tymoshenko appears to have benefitted decisively.
Like the CPU, Batkivshchina’s popularity plummeted between 2012 and 2014, but it benefitted from the change in the electorate.
Because Batkivshchina won only 3.5 percent of its nationwide vote in the occupied areas, its vote was concentrated rather than diluted.
The vote totals from the 2014 elections likely overstate the decline in eastern Ukraine’s voting power, because there was a significant drop in turnout in the 2014 parliamentary elections that may not be repeated in the future.
Even in the parts of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts that did vote in the 2014 elections, the number of votes cast dropped dramatically, perhaps because of ongoing conflict, and perhaps because residents were skeptical of the legitimacy of the elections.
The number of votes cast in the Presidential election in unoccupied Donetsk in 2014 was only 11 percent of what it was in 2010 in Donetsk, and was only 18 percent in unoccupied Luhansk.
In the 2014 parliamentary election, turnout increased, but only to 39 percent of the 2010 level in unoccupied Donetsk and to 33 percent in unoccupied Luhansk.
In the presidential election, 232,000 more votes were cast in these areas in 2010 than 2014, and in the parliamentary election, 984,000 more votes were cast in 2012 than 2014.
The lines of control have changed and stabilized, so future elections will likely be held in more districts than was the case in 2014, and participation rates in other parts of the oblasts are likely to rise toward the previous levels.
One asset of this approach is that it separates out the territorial effect from the political effect of the events of 2013–2014.
In Donetsk, Artemivs’k and Kramators’k were regained, while Starobesheve was lost.
Under the territorial configuration of January 2018, the 2010 election would go from a narrow Yanukovych win to a Tymoshenko landslide.
Tymoshenko would win by 11,231,565 to 9,226,078, or 55. to 45. percent.
The implication is that it will be much harder in the future for a candidate to win an election with the eastern-based strategy that worked in 1991, 1994, and 2010.
Controlling the parliament solely by appealing to eastern/southern Ukraine is no longer a viable strategy.
Forces supporting close ties with Russia also had much to lose in the proportional representation portion of the ballot.
It is difficult to know how these results would affect the subsequent coalition structure of the parliament, but clearly the weight of the eastern-based parties would be reduced.
Its share of the PR vote falls from 30. percent to 29. percent, and its number of SMD seats falls by eleven.
The CPU would lose 0. percent of the PR vote and Batkivshchina would lose 0. percent, and neither would lose any SMD seats.
The implication is that a Ukraine without Crimea but with the Donbas reintegrated could still elect a president who supports closer ties with Russia, and that eastern Ukraine could still control the country.
In electoral terms, the occupied Donbas, because of its much larger population, is much more important than Crimea.
At least two caveats are in order, connected to the two inferential steps this kind of analysis is based on.
We assume that when territory is excluded from elections, the voters in it are excluded as well.
While regional patterns have been robust in Ukraine, they do not fully explain voting behavior, and particularly since 2014, other factors may dramatically change voting preferences.
Internally Displaced Persons The magnitude of the effects discussed above will be reduced to the extent that people from the occupied regions resettle and vote in other parts of Ukraine.
We know something about the first two questions, but little about the third.
Overall, the effects of relocation will likely be small in the short to medium term, as IDPs have difficulty voting.
In late 2017 and early 2018, the Ukrainian government’s Ministry of Social Policy’s weekly updated estimate of IDPs hovered around 1. million.
UNHCR uses a “triangulated IDP figure” of 800,000 to 1 million, taking into account that some registered IDPs may have returned home.
The UNHCR reported in late 2017 approximately 450,000 asylum seekers from Ukraine, almost all of whom were in Russia.
This would reduce the scale of the effects discussed above by between 11 and 21 percent.
It is likely that some of the IDPs do not come from occupied areas at all, but rather from areas controlled by the government but near the conflict zone.
That would reduce the numbers somewhat; in any event, these must be regarded as rough estimates.
The bigger question is whether these displaced persons will be able to vote, and that seems unlikely in the short term.
First, Ukraine’s voter registration laws focus on one’s place of legal residence, so as long as one claims residence in an occupied region , one will not be able to register elsewhere.
Second, surveys show a low degree of support for allowing IDPs to vote in the places to which they have relocated.
Third, because of these voters’ presumed policy and partisan preferences, Ukraine’s current rulers are unlikely to want to facilitate bringing them back into the electorate.
For all of these reasons, the potential for IDPs to vote in future elections is unlikely to dramatically underline the findings in this article, at least in the near term.
A limitation of this approach is that it might lead to the oversimplified view that the territorial change will be the only thing changing voting between 2010–2012 and 2019, which clearly is not the case.
Because of the conflict in eastern Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea, a survey that includes the entire pre-2014 territory of Ukraine is impossible.
That is a major reason to approach the question by looking retrospectively at 2010 and 2014.
With that limitation in mind, we can look both at studies based on post-2014 data and at survey data itself.
Much of research since 2014 focuses on general political attitudes, rather than elections.
Henry Hale and Volodymyr Kulyk, using survey data from 2017, found that Ukraine’s traditional cleavages play a strong role in predicting attitudes toward reform, even after the “critical juncture” of 2014.29 A separate study by Kulyk finds a greater degree of attitude change, especially in the salience and definition of national identity.
Among likely voters who voiced a preference, the Opposition Bloc tied with another eastern-based party, Za Zhyttya, for second place in a highly fragmented field, with support from just 7 percent of respondents.
These results are consistent with the backward-looking analysis above, showing that the vote in eastern/southern Ukraine is more fragmented than it was prior to 2014, and that basing a national strategy on eastern Ukraine is a much less viable strategy than it was previously.
Taking these two caveats (displaced persons and other sources of changes in voting behavior) into account does not significantly alter the findings.
Given the size of the populations in the occupied territories, the impact of territorial change is still likely to be large.
While the displacement of voters from occupied regions to other parts of Ukraine might reduce the damage done to easternand southern-based parties, the overall partisan drift in Ukraine has been in the other direction, as the 2014 election showed.
Overall then, these caveats do not undermine the finding that the impact of territorial revision on electoral outcomes is potentially decisive, because the number of votes involved is large and because Ukraine’s elections have tended to be closely contested.
Discussion Impact on Ukraine’s Politics A potentially decisive shift in the Ukrainian electorate has taken place.
Removal of voters by the occupation of Crimea and parts of the Donbas will likely make it impossible for a politician or party to win elections relying entirely or almost entirely on eastern Ukraine.
The electoral balance in Ukraine has been shifted away from the east and south and toward the center and west.
The 3.75 million voters removed from Crimea and the occupied Donbas constituted about 16 percent of the 2010 voters, and 87 percent of them voted for Yanukovych.
Put differently, a quarter of the Yanukovych electorate lived in territory that is now occupied by Russia.
In four of Ukraine’s six presidential elections, the candidate that won a majority and the east and south won the presidency.
That is still possible, but such a candidate will now have to generate support in the center and/or the west as well.
It will be much harder to build a parliamentary majority primarily on votes won in the east and south.
Even with the voting base diminished, a party that dominated eastern and southern Ukraine would continue to be powerful, as the population of these areas remains substantial.
It is now possible that Ukraine could enter the second round of a presidential election with no candidate explicitly based in eastern Ukraine or catering to those supporting closer ties with Russia and/or improved status for the Russian language in Ukraine.
That has happened before only in 2014 and if it becomes normal, it might have two very different impacts.
It might compel candidates with bases in other regions to tailor their messages to eastern Ukraine, thus eroding the regionalization of Ukraine’s elections.
It might also leave many eastern Ukrainians feeling alienated, further exacerbating Ukraine’s problems.
The broader implication is that the change in the electorate could drive a restructuring of the party system in Ukraine.
Candidates or parties that can add votes in the east to their central or western bases will be at a distinct advantage, and so we may see new coalitions or alignments develop for that purpose.
More generally, the incentive to build parties or alliances that reach across Ukraine’s regions may be strengthened.
One major question going forward is whether parties based outside the Donbas can win over a significant number of voters in the non-occupied parts of the Donbas.
However, these changes do not automatically mean a decisive shift toward candidates and agendas supported in the west.
The change in the electorate will diminish the advantage of the south and east, but not enough to tip the balance decisively in favor of the west and center.
The unoccupied parts of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts and the rest of eastern and southern Ukraine still contain a huge number of voters.
These regions and their voters will likely be able to prevent a western-based force from coming to dominate Ukrainian politics.
Similarly, the support for the eastern-based Opposition Bloc and Za Zhyttya parties nearly equals that of the two leading central/western-based parties, Solidarnist and Batkivshchyna (16 percent combined).35 Moreover, having a large number of voters is a necessary but not sufficient condition for regional dominance.
Two periods in particular illustrate the fissiparous nature of central and western Ukraine.
The first was immediately after independence, when Rukh and other “national democratic” parties who had jointly pushed for independence immediately broke into multiple competing factions.
A second period was after the Orange Revolution, when the forces who had supported Viktor Yushchenko fell out so bitterly that they created room for Yanukovych’s comeback.
The alliance between Petro Poroshenko and Arseniy Yatseniuk that was formed in 2014 lasted less than two years, as did Poroshenko’s alliance with former Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili.
By 2017, Yuliya Tymoshenko was campaigning actively against Poroshenko and demanding early elections so that he could be unseated.
In sum, the absence of a unified force pushing for closer ties with Russia does not mean the presence of a unified pro-western force.
With the east and south diminished and less unified, and the center and west showing no signs of unity, a parliamentary majority may be harder to form in Ukraine than ever before.
Until 2010, Ukraine struggled to build a functioning coalition in parliament.
The parliament has returned to its more fragmented earlier state, and seems likely to remain that way.
In the 1990s, fragmentation of the parliament was one justification for the consolidation of presidential power under Leonid Kuchma.
The Minsk agreement focuses on reintegrating the occupied Donbas into Ukraine while giving the regions considerable autonomy, which is one strategy for managing ethnic differences.
Many have pointed out that due to Russia’s influence on the leaders of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, reintegration would give it direct input into Ukrainian politics.
Less widely recognized is how reintegration would shape the electorate in ways likely to favor Russia.
The implications for both Russian and Ukrainian strategies toward the occupied territories are counterintuitive.
For Russia, it means that occupying Donbas did not make much sense if the goal was to influence democratic politics in Ukraine.
Going forward, it means that Russia needs not to perpetuate its occupation but to find a way to get those votes back into Ukraine.
Despite their promises to regain the territory, current Ukrainian leaders have much to gain by ensuring that it does not happen.
In this vein, Colton pointed in 2010—long before the events in question—to a hypothetical “expulsion” strategy that would help unify Ukrainian society by ejecting the more pro-Russian Donbas and Crimea.
The case for down-sizing may be especially compelling for Ukraine, which, other things being equal, would be better off without two of its eastern provinces, Luhansk and Donetsk.
Public opinion polls show that they are the least supportive of Ukrainian independence and most supportive of union with Russia.
Their industrial base consists of hopelessly outdated plants, factories, and coal mines that are an enormous economic drain on Kyiv’s ragged resources.
The level of pollution in both regions, and thus of health problems, is among the highest in the world.
The writer Yurii Andrukhovych argued in 2010 for either ejecting the Crimea and Donbas from Ukraine or holding a referendum in which the regions’ residents would have to choose either to pursue European integration along with Ukraine or to secede.
This tumor can be eliminated only by surgical intervention, and nothing else.
As in other countries, they appear to prioritize territorial integrity over partisan advantage or political unity, or at least they perceive the need be seen to be as doing so.
A survey in 2015 showed that while Ukrainians wanted the conflict resolved, only 4 percent wanted the occupied regions of the Donbas to become part of Russia, and only 2 percent wanted them to become independent states.
A third, however, supported the occupied territories remaining part of Ukraine but with greater autonomy, which fits Russia’s position.
Half supported the territories remaining part of Ukraine “as before crisis,”44 though it is difficult to see how this might be brought about.
Letting the territory go would strongly contradict the emphasis that leaders around the world have generally placed on gaining and retaining territory.
It remains unclear how these internal political consequences will influence the strategies of Ukraine and Russia in dealing with the future of the occupied regions.
While this article has focused on Ukraine, the questions it raises are likely to be present among the many border disputes in the world now and in the past.
An important question for future research is how the issues currently being raised in Ukraine operate in the many other states around the world with contested boundaries.
Acknowledgments Previous versions of this article were presented at the Harvard Postcommunism Seminar, October 2017, and at the ASEEES Annual Convention, Chicago, November 2017.
I am grateful to the participants for the numerous helpful suggestions I received and to Erik Herron, Oxana Shevel, and Kateryna Zarembo who provided extensive comments on various drafts.
I wish to acknowledge the generous support of the Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute, where I was Eugene and Daymel Shklar Research Fellow in the fall of 2017.
Outbreak and Deadlock” (paper presented at the ASEEES Annual Convention, Washington, November 2016), 35.
Stephen E Hanson, “Russia, Ukraine, and the Borders of Europe” (paper prepared for the American Political Science Association Annual Conference, San Francisco, CA, September 2015), 7–8.
Imperial Legacies and Post-communist Pathways in Eastern Europe,” East European Politics and Societies 19, no. : 412.
The Host Community Perspective,” in Agnieszka Pikulicka-Wilczewska and Greta Uehling, eds., Migration and the Ukraine Crisis: A Two-Country Perspective , 29.
Grigore Pop-Eleches and Graeme B Robertson, “Identity and Political Preferences in Ukraine— Before and After the Euromaidan,” Post-Soviet Politics 34, no.
O’Leary, “The Elements of Right-Sizing and Right-Peopling the State,” 29.
Colton shows that the Minister of Education under Yanukovych, Dmytro Tabachnyk, had, when a member of parliament in 2009, pointed to a policy of expelling Galicia as the outlier that prevented Ukrainian unity.
Youth Perceptions of Territoriality in War-Time Ukraine,” East European Politics and Societies 32, no. : 24.
He is currently writing a book on the long-term sources of the war between Russia and Ukraine.
