The Annex should be amended and the entries for three deceased persons should be deleted.
Article 1 Annex I to Regulation No 269/2014 shall be amended as set out in the Annex to this Regulation.
Article 2 This Regulation shall enter into force on the day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.
L 67/2 EN Official Journal of the European Union 12.3.2016 This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.
LIST OF PERSONS Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 1.
Beltsy , now Sergei Valerievich Republic of Moldova khovna Rada on 27 February 2014 AKSENOV (Сергей in the presence of pro-Russian gun­ Валерьевич AKCëHOB), men.
His ‘election’ was decreed un­ constitutional by the acting Ukrai­ Serhiy Valeriyovych nian President Oleksandr Turchynov AKSYONOV (Сергiй on 1 March 2014.
He actively lob­ Валерiйович Аксьонов) bied for the ‘referendum’ of 16 March 2014 and was one of the co-signa­ tories of the ‘treaty on Crimea's ac­ cession to the Russian Federation’ of 18 March 2014.
He publicly recognized that the MPs from Crimea were the initiators of inviting Russian soldiers to take over the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea.
Currently First Deputy Governor of the Kurgan Oblast and Head of the delegation of the Government of Kurgan Oblast to the Government of the Russian Federation.
Makiivka (Donetsk seizure and occupation of the re­ Пушилiн), oblast) gional administration.
Zaporozhye Григорьевич Козюра) sponsible for the systematic and ex­ pedited issuance of Russian passports for the residents of Sevastopol.
Currently assistant to Sevastopol Mu­ nicipal Council Deputy Mikhail Cha­ luy.
Sloviansk Vyacheslav Ponomariov called on Vladimir Putin Volodymyrovich to send in Russian troops to protect PONOMARYOV the city and later asked him to sup­ (В'ячеслав ply weapons.
Remains active in (Олег Анатольевич supporting separatist actions or poli­ Цаpëв) cies.
Debalcevo Владимирович Руденко) that they will continue their fighting in the rest of the country.
Tsypkalov has therefore supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Mikhail Sergeyevich DOB 23.5.1971 So-called ‘First Deputy Prime Minis­ 12.9.2014 SHEREMET (Михаил ter’ of Crimea.
Dzhankoy Сергеевич Шеремет) role in the organization and imple­ mentation of the 16 March referen­ dum in Crimea on unification with Russia.
Sergey Yurevich So called Commander in Chief of the 16.2.2015 IGNATOV (Сергей People's Militia of the so called ‘Lu­ Юрьевич ИГНАТОВ) hansk People's Republic’. k.a.
KUZOVLEV In taking on and acting in this capa­ city, he has therefore actively sup­ ported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised the country.
GDR Валерьевич Картaпoлoв) Former Director of the Main Opera­ tions Department and deputy chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
Re-re­ gistered as limited liability company ‘Port Feodosia’ (ОБЩЕСТВО С ОГРАНИЧЕННОЙ ОТВЕТСТВЕННОСТЬЮ ‘ПОРТ ФЕОДОСИЯ’) on 9 February 2015.
So called ‘Donbass Illegal armed separatist group responsible for fighting against 25.7.2014 People's Militia’ the Ukrainian government forces in the Eastern Ukraine, thus ‘Нарoдное oпoлчéние threatening the stability or security of Ukraine.
State Unitary Enterprise The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Uk­ 25.7.2014 of the City of rainian law.
The Government of Sevastopol (Пра­ Sevastopolski morskoy вительство Севастополя). torgovy port) 14.
Limited Liability The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Uk­ 25.7.2014 Company ‘Kerch rainian law.
In terms of volume of trade, it is the sec­ predpriyatiye ond biggest commercial seaport in Crimea.
State Unitary Enterprise The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Uk­ 25.7.2014 of the Republic of rainian law.
L 67/16 EN Official Journal of the European Union 12.3.2016 Name Reasons Date of listing 16.
Federal State Budgetary The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Uk­ 25.7.2014 Enterprise ‘Sanatorium rainian law.
Federal State Budgetary The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Uk­ 25.7.2014 Enterprise ‘Productionrainian law.
