The rising accommodative narrative of the 2014 pseudo-referendum on Crimea is mistaken.
There is a broader trend rising today in certain European political circles towards the acceptance of the Crimea annexation.
But this ignores the details that are questioning the Kremlin-supported narrative of allegedly near-universal and enthusiastic support for annexation among the local population.
In summer 2017, the German Bundestag election campaign was rocked by an unexpected statement from the leader of Germany’s liberals, Christian Lindner.
While this was unusual, Lindner only expressed a view which can be heard among many politicians, diplomats, and journalists in Germany and other Western countries.
In fact, Lindner has – at least within the German political context – been not the most accommodative towards Kremlin expansionism.
Alexander Gauland, the deputy chair of the new right-wing populist Alternative for Germany party, which entered the Bundestag in September 2017, said this summer that “Crimea is ultimately ancient Russian territory and cannot go back to Ukraine” – thereby fully embracing the Kremlin’s irredentist narrative.
The leader of the radical left Die Linke Sarah Wagenknecht had already called for Germany to accept the result of the Crimea “referendum” to legitimise the annexation of Crimea even before the event in March 2014.
Lindner’s approach is symptomatic for larger trends within the EU’s political establishment to go soft on Russian imperialism and to do so by simply ignoring the actual situation on the ground.
The Kremlin-supported narrative of allegedly near-universal and enthusiastic support for annexation among Crimeans often creeps into mainstream Western discourse.
Such a narrative is a particularly popular argument of Europe’s Russlandversteher in business circles, armchair punditry and radical parties.
It is also a truism in the government-guided public discourse of the Russian Federation.
However, this argument ignores not only the fact of a covert military operation that had, in late February 2014, preceded and conditioned Crimea’s following secession from Ukraine and annexation to Russia.
Various details of the March 2014 Russia-organised “referendum’ also call into question the myth that there was an overwhelming demand for “re-unification” of Russia and the peninsula among Crimeans.
On the basis of this private field trip to the freshly annexed peninsula, the Russian Presidential Council’s report, referring to local interlocutors, estimated that the referendum’s turnout was not 83. percent, as officially reported by the Kremlin-installed authorities on Crimea, but rather around 30 to 50 percent.
Even allowing for a considerably higher turnout and larger real support for annexation in the city of Sevastopol – base of the Russian Black Sea fleet – this would mean that significantly less than a third of the overall Crimean population actually cared to vote in support of the annexation.
The various polls that have been conducted after Russia’s military and political take-over of the peninsula seemingly demonstrate large Crimean support for annexation.
The more recent polling results reflect partially the effects, on Crimea’s citizens, of the shrill and fear-mongering defamation campaign against Ukraine in the Kremlin-controlled media – the only major source of mass information that has been left since March 2014.
Some of the polls also do not address the familiar popular bias towards support for the status quo – an effect that had earlier favored the peninsula’s continuance in Ukraine even among many otherwise pro-Moscow Crimean respondents.
Most post-annexation pollsters seem to ignore the considerable stakes involved, for their respondents, to voice in front of strangers their possible support for Crimea’s return under Kyiv control, or even mere indifference with regard to this issue.
Disapproval of the annexation is politically and legally highly stigmatized by Moscow and its Crimean proxies who have been and are ruthless in their persecution of political dissident and even of mere sympathy for Ukraine, on the peninsula.
To return to the developments in spring 2014, there are further reasons why reference to the Russia-organized pseudo-plebiscite cannot serve as justification for an accommodative approach to Russia with regard to Crimea’s annexation.
The preparations, procedure, and wording of the “referendum“ were so demonstratively biased that this voting procedure can serve as a text-book case of electoral manipulation.
Thus, the date of the referendum was changed twice, and there was neither time nor opportunity for Crimea’s citizens to publicly, pluralistically, and freely discuss the choices they would be given in the alleged plebiscite on 16 March 2014.
The first option promised Crimeans “re-unification“ of Crimea with Russia.
Much of today’s dry land of Ukraine had, for approximately as long as Crimea, been part and parcel of both the tsarist empire and the Soviet Union,e. those states which the word “Russia” in the referendum apparently implied.
From 1783 until 1991, Crimea had thus only been united with an empire sometimes called “Russia“, and not with the non-existent Russian nation-state.
The larger part of today’s entire Ukrainian territory – and not only Crimea – once belonged to this empire as much as most of the area of the current Russian Federation.
Crimea belonged, within the tsarist empire, to the Tauric Gouvernment that included not only the peninsula, but also most of today’s southern mainland Ukraine.
As the Crimean peninsula had not belonged to an exclusively Russian state, separate from dry land Ukraine before 1991, Crimea could not have been separated from “Russia“ in 1991, and an could not have been “reunited“ with it in 2014.
Both agreements were ratified by the Russian parliament, and signed into law by Russia’s presidents.
Had this second option won in the “referendum,“ it would have been left to the powerholders to choose among these two different basic laws.
Yet, many Western observers who actively comment on Crimea’s past, annexation and future seem to not know some or even most of them.
Instead, the Kremlin’s apologetic narrative is still widespread of a perhaps somewhat roughly initiated referendum that, however, eventually led to a decision allegedly supported by the vast majority of Crimeans.
Andreas Umland is Senior Research Fellow at the Institute for Euro-Atlantic Cooperation in Kyiv.
It first appeared in the “Wider Europe Forum” of the European Council on Foreign Relations.
