RUSSO-UKRAINIAN WAR ABOUT SIGN IN BECOME A MEMBER .wotr_top_lbjspot { width:100%; margin:0 auto 20px auto; text-align:center; } .wotr_top_lbjspot a { display:none; visibility:hidden; } @media screen and { wotr_lbjspot_300x250 { display:inline-block; visibility:visible; } } @media screen and { wotr_lbjspot_728x90 { display:inline-block; visibility:visible; } } googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); Implementing the Minsk Agreements Might Drive Ukraine to Civil War.
That’s Been Russia’s Plan All Along Jonathan Brunson February 1, 2019 Commentary In less than five years, a peace agreement negotiated between Russia, Ukraine, and Western Europe has become the object of acrimonious opposition and anti-Putin conspiracy theories.
Either surrender secessionist enclaves to focus on realigning the rest of the country West; or swap Crimea for Donbas, long the fear of many as a surreptitious goal of any Trump-Russia channel.
Others hope more quixotically for Russia’s implosion — a fantasy that animates Ukrainians regarding not only the future of occupied Donbas and annexed Crimea, but also of long-lost Kuban, the Cossack region of southern Russia adjacent to Ukraine’s separatist areas.
How the Accords Were Born The Minsk format was created by the “Normandy Quartet,” which consists of Ukraine, Russia, Germany, and France at heads of state level, and the Trilateral Contact Group, comprising Ukraine, Russia, and OSCE at the working level.
The Ukraine ceasefire swiftly collapsed when separatists, with Russian help, dealt Kyiv two strategic defeats at Donetsk airport and the Debaltseve rail hub.
Talks continued into 2015, and separatists continued to consolidate strategic gains.
From Ukraine’s independence in 1991 until Russia annexed Crimea in 2014, Crimean Tatar ethnic autonomy — the Bolshevik answer to the nationalities question — provoked Ukrainian nationalists, who argued that it created an enabling environment for separatism.
Revanchist fears led Ukraine to not extend similar privileges to other regions with significant ethnic minorities, like Romanian Bessarabia and Chernivtsi, or Hungarian Transcarpathia.
Russia doesn’t want a failed state on its border, separatist capabilities are limited without Moscow’s blessing, and Kyiv doesn’t want to risk more deaths — or the chance its Western allies might choose not to protect it — by launching an offensive.
At the same time, neither side wants to win, as evidenced by both Ukrainian and Russian unwillingness to assume reconstruction costs.
