His 'election' was decreed unconstitutional by the acting Sergei Valerievich now Republic of Ukrainian President Oleksandr Turchynov on 1 March 2014.
He actively AKSENOV (Сергей Moldova lobbied for the 'referendum' of 16 March 2014 and was one of the Валерьевич АКСЁНОВ), co-signatories of the 'treaty on Crimea's accession to the Russian Serhiy Valeriyovych Federation' of 18 March 2014.
On 9 April 2014, he was appointed acting AKSYONOV (Сергiй 'Head' of the so-called 'Republic of Crimea' by President Putin.
They have no official or legal status in the form they are published here.
Buryat ASSR ТЕМИРГАЛИЕВ) He lobbied actively for the integration of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Remains active in supporting separatist actions or policies. 2/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 4.
Moscow or ЧАЛЫЙ) Sevastopol to become a separate entity of the Russian Federation Sevastopol following a referendum on 16 March 2014.
He was one of the Oleksiy Mykhaylovych co-signatories of the 'treaty on Crimea's accession to the Russian CHALYY (Олексій Federation' of 18 March 2014.
For his involvement in the annexation process he has been awarded with Russian State order 'For Merit to the Fatherland' — first degree. 3/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 6.
This included information on renamed back to (Петро Анатолійович Euro-Maidan activists and human rights defenders of Crimea.
He played Bakhmut/Бахмут), ЗИМА) a relevant role in preventing Ukraine's authorities from controlling the Donetsk Oblast, territory of Crimea.
On 11 March 2014 the formation of an independent Ukraine Security Service of Crimea was proclaimed by former SBU officers of Crimea.
Simferopol Konstantinov into this endeavour, threatening him with dismissal.
Abakan, Озеров) Khakassia On 1 March 2014 Ozerov, on behalf of the Security and Defence Committee of the Federation Council, publicly supported, in the Federation Council, the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Sverdlovsk (Андрей Александрович On 1 March 2014 Klishas publicly supported, in the Federation Council, Клишас) the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
In public statements Klishas sought to justify a Russian military intervention in Ukraine by claiming that ‘the Ukrainian President supports the appeal of the Crimean authorities to the President of the Russian Federation on landing an all-encompassing assistance in defence of the citizens of Crimea’. 5/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 12.
Ordzhonikidze, (Александр Борисович North Ossetia On 1 March 2014 Totoonov publicly supported, in the Federation Council, Тотоонов) the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Pushkin, (Сергей Михайлович Leningrad region Initiator of the bill allowing Russian Federation to admit in its composition, Миронов) under the pretext of protection of Russian citizens, territories of a foreign country without the consent of that country or an international treaty.
Petersburg Actively supported use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea.
Currently Deputy Chairperson of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the State Duma of the Russian Federation.
Currently Chairperson of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the State Duma of the Russian Federation. 7/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 19.
Siva, Perm presence in Crimea which is undermining the sovereignty of the Ukraine (Анатолий Алексеевич region, USSR and assisted the Crimean authorities in preventing public demonstrations Сидоров) against moves towards a referendum and incorporation into Russia.
Aide to the Minister of Defence since 19 January 2017. 8/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 22.
On 1 March 2014, publicly supported, 21.3.2014 MATVIYENKO (born Shepetovka, in the Federation Council, the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
TYUTINA) Khmelnitsky (Валентина Ивановна region (Ukrainian Матвиенко ) SSR) 25.
Publicly supported the deployment of 21.3.2014 NARYSHKIN Russian forces in Ukraine.
St Petersburg reunification treaty and the related federal constitutional law.
Permanent member and Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian Federation. 9/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 26.
Moscow Central figure of the government propaganda supporting the deployment Dmitrii Konstantinovich of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Solntsevo, the process in Crimea by which local Crimean communities were (Владислав Юрьевич Lipetsk region mobilised to stage actions undermining the Ukrainian authorities in Сурков) Crimea. 10/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 30.
Responsible for administering 21.3.2014 MALYSHEV the Crimean referendum.
Responsible for administering 21.3.2014 MEDVEDEV the Crimean referendum.
Bui, Kostroma countries to join Russia without their central authorities’ prior agreement.
Bandurovo, annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Currently Plenipotentiary Representative of the President of the Russian Federation into the North Caucasus Federal District. 12/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 36.
Responsible for the integration of the 29.4.2014 SAVELYEV annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Member of the Security Autonomous SSR, Council of the Russian Federation.
Li Van Chol, Ли Ван Чоль) 14/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 44.
Donetsk Oblast Serhiy Hennadiyovych Member of the 'People's Council of the Donetsk People's Republic', Chair TSYPLAKOV (Сергій of the 'People's Council Committee on Information Policy and Information Геннадійович ЦИПЛАКОВ) Technology'. 16/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 48.
Former ГИРКИН) ‘Minister of Defence’ of the so-called ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’. (a.k.a.
Igor STRELKOV Ihor Organised, on 4 November 2016, a Russian March in Moscow for STRIELKOV) Russian nationalists who support the separatists in eastern Ukraine.
Alekseevka, annexed Ukrainian region of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Ignatovo, legislation on the annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol into the Russian ПЛИГИН) Vologodsk Oblast, Federation.
Simferopol, Oleh Hryhorovych Crimea or Zaporizhia Currently assistant to Sevastopol Municipal Council Deputy Mikhail Chaly.
KOZYURA (Олег Григорович КОЗЮРА) 18/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 54.
Remains Viacheslav Vladimirovich active in supporting separatist actions and policies.
Simferopol, building and afterwards seized the Ministry of Internal Affairs' district (Игорь Николаевич Crimea station in the town of Horlivka.
He has links to Igor Strelkov/Girkin under БЕЗЛЕР) whose command he was involved in the murder of the Peoples' Deputy of Ihor Mykolayovych BEZLER the Horlivka's Municipal Council Volodymyr Rybak.
Igor Evegenevich KHAKIMZYANOV (Игорь Евгеньевич ХАКИМЗЯНОВ) Ihor Yevhenovych KHAKIMZIANOV (Ігор Євгенович ХАКІМЗЯНОВ ) 20/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 57.
Remains active in supporting separatist (Олег Анатолійович Dnepropetrovsk actions or policies.
Oleg Anatolevich TSARYOV Remains active in supporting separatist actions or policies.
Roman Viktorovych LIAHIN Remains active in supporting separatist actions and policies. 21/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 59.
Alexander Sergeevich MALYHIN (Александр Сергеевич МАЛЫХИН) Oleksandr Serhiyovych MALYKHIN (Олександр Сергiйович МАЛИХIН) 60.
Actively ПОКЛОНСКАЯ) region, Ukrainian implemented Russia's annexation of Crimea.
SSR or Yevpatoria, Currently First Deputy Chairperson of the Committee for Security and Ukrainian SSR countering corruption of the State Duma of the Russian Federation.
Actively implementing Russia’s annexation of 12.5.2014 SHEVCHENKO (Игорь Sevastopol.
Sevastopol, Сергеевич ШЕВЧЕНКО) Crimea 22/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 62.
Involved actively in recruitment and training of 'volunteers' sent to fight in Donbas.
Remains active in KHODAKOVSKYY supporting separatist actions or policies.
Oleksandr Vitaliyovych KHRYAKOV (Олександр ВiTалiйович ХРЯКОВ) 24/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 66.
NIKITIN Responsible for the statement of the Army of the South-East that the (Василий Александрович Ukrainian presidential elections in the ‘Lugansk People's Republic’ cannot НИКИТИН) take place due to the ‘new’ status of the region.
As a member of the Security Council, which provides Kuibyshev region advice on and coordinates national security affairs, he was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Nikolai Platonovich DOB 11.7.1951 Permanent member and Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian 25.7.2014 PATRUSHEV (Николай Federation.
Leningrad (St Платонович Патрушев) on and coordinates national security affairs, he was involved in shaping Petersburg) the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Perm Security Council, which provides advice on and coordinates national (Александр security affairs, he was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Васильевич Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Zhetikara, Гумарович Нургалиев) advice on and coordinates national security affairs, he was involved in Kazakh Soviet shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial Socialist Republic integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine. 28/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 77.
Boris Vyacheslavovich DOB 15.12.1950 Former permanent member of the Security Council of the Russian 25.7.2014 GRYZLOV Federation.
Vladivostok on and coordinates national security affairs, he was involved in shaping (Борис Вячеславович the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, ГРЫЗЛОВ) sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Kuibyshev As a member of the Duma he announced the inauguration of the ‘de facto embassy’ of the unrecognised, so-called ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ in ДЕГТЯРËВ) Moscow, he contributes to undermining or threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Currently Chairman of the Russian State Duma Committee on Physical Education, Sport and Youth Affairs. 29/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 80.
On that occasion, the Acting Head (Александр of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea said that Tkachyov was one of the Николаевич first to express his support to the new 'leadership' of Crimea.
Igor Strelkov/Girkin who is responsible for actions which undermine or Sievierodonetsk Pavlo Yuriyovich GUBARIEV threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Gubarev was responsible for recruiting people for armed forces of (Павло Юрiйович separatists.
In taking on and acting in this capacity she has therefore ГУБАРЕВА), supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, Kateryna Yuriyivna sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Remains active in supporting GUBARIEVA separatist actions and policies.
Donetsk responsible for actions which undermine or threaten the territorial (Фëдор Дмитриевич integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
In taking on and БЕРЕЗИН), acting in this capacity Berezin has therefore supported actions and Fedir Dmytrovych BEREZIN policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and (Федiр Дмитрович independence of Ukraine.
Odessa acting in this capacity he has therefore supported actions and policies (Валерий Владимирович which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of КАУРОВ) Ukraine.
Valeriy Volodymyrovych Remains active in supporting separatist actions and policies.
KAUROV (Валерій Володимирович КАУРОВ) 32/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 86.
Vinnytsia has therefore supported actions and policies which undermine the ЗДРИЛЮК) region territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Novosibirsk Vladimir Iurievici responsible for security and law enforcement.
ALEXANDROV, Vadim Remains active in supporting separatist actions and policies.
Spokesperson of the so-called ‘government’ of the so-called ‘Lugansk 30.7.2014 possibly 23.7.1981 People's Republic’ who made declarations justifying, inter alia, the Oksana Aleksandrovna shooting down of a Ukrainian military airplane, the taking of hostages, CHIGRINA fighting activities by the illegal armed groups, which have as a (Оксана Александровна consequence undermined the territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of ЧИГРИНА) Ukraine.
Simferopol, on 5 May 2014 and by his actions as so-called ‘Minister of Interior’ he has АБИСОВ) Crimea undermined the territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of Ukraine Sergiy Vadymovych ABISOV (Сергій Вадимович АБІСОВ) 35/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 92.
His level of ROTENBERG (Аркадий economic success is attributable to the influence of key decision makers Романович Ротенберг) favouring him, notably in the award of public contracts.
Address Crimea', a public relations campaign that was designed to persuade Crimean children that they are now Russian citizens living in Russia and thereby supporting the Russian Government's policy to integrate Crimea into Russia. 36/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 93.
Puschino, 'Prime Minister' of the 'Donetsk People's Republic' and met with Mr (Константин Валерьевич Moscow region Aksyonov, so-called 'Prime Minister' of the so-called 'Republic of Crimea', МАЛОФЕЕВ) during the period of the Crimean annexation process.
Therefore, Mr Malofeev is acting in support of the destabilisation of Eastern Ukraine. 37/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 94.
Yuriy Valentinovich DOB 25.7.1951 Mr Kovalchuk is a long-time acquaintance of President Putin.
Leningrad (St Валентинович Ковальчук) together an influential group of individuals around President Putin.
Petersburg) He is benefiting from his links with Russian decision-makers.
Furthermore, Bank Rossiya has important stakes in the National Media Group which in turn controls television stations which actively support the Russian government's policies of destabilisation of Ukraine. 38/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 95.
Belarus together an influential group of individuals around President Putin.
In taking on and acting in this (Александр Владимирович capacity, Zakharchenko has supported actions and policies which ЗАХАРЧЕНКО) undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Oleksandr Volodymyrovych Ukraine.
ZAKHARCHENKO (Олександр Володимирович ЗАХАРЧЕНКО) 39/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 97.
Gorsky commanded a division of separatist fighters in Donetsk since April 2014 (Владимир Петровнч and has promised to solve the strategic task of repelling Ukraine's military КОНОНОВ) aggression.
Kononov has therefore supported actions and policies which Volodymyr Petrovych undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of KONONOV Ukraine.
He has, inter alia, stated 12.9.2014 RUDENKO that they will continue their fighting in the rest of the country.
Debaltsevo therefore supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial (Мирослав Владимирович integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
He has therefore supported actions and Andriy Yuriyovych PINCHUK policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Moscow conduct a guerrilla war and their seizure of weapon systems from the Родкин) Ukrainian armed forces.
One of the leaders of the “Union of Donbas volunteers”. 41/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 103.
He has therefore КАРАМАН), Republic of Moldova supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, Alexandru CARAMAN sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
He has therefore supported actions and Komi ASSR policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine. 42/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 105.
Mikhail Sergeyevich DOB 23.5.1971 Member of the State Duma, elected from the illegally annexed 12.9.2014 SHEREMET (Михаил Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
Dzhankoy Сергеевич ШЕРЕМЕТ) Former so-called ‘First Deputy Prime Minister’ of Crimea.
Sheremet Mykhaylo Serhiyovych played a key role in the organisation and implementation of the 16 March SHEREMET referendum in Crimea on unification with Russia.
At the time of the referendum, Sheremet reportedly commanded the pro-Moscow (Михайло Сергійович ‘self-defence forces’ in Crimea.
Elected on 18 September 2016 as a Duma deputy from illegally annexed Crimean Peninsula.
Yuri Leonidovich DOB 2.2.1948 Deputy Speaker of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation.
Krasnoyarsk Леонидович Воробьев) deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Viktor Petrovich DOB 19.8.1957 Chairman of the Union of the Russian and Foreign Cossack 12.9.2014 VODOLATSKY (Виктор Forces, and deputy of the State Duma.
Stefanidin Dar, Петрович Водолацкий) Crimea and admitted that Russian Cossacks were actively engaged in the Rostov region Ukrainian conflict on the side of the Moscow-backed separatists.
Currently Chairman of the Russian State Duma Committee for CIS Affairs, Eurasian Integration and Relations with Compatriots 44/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 111.
Bogoroditsk Мельников) Russian Federation of the Republic of Crimea and the formation within the Russian Federation of new federal subjects the republic of Crimea and the City of Federal Status Sevastopol'. 45/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 114.
Pavlov-on-theСергеевна Журова) Law 'on the acceptance into the Russian Federation of the Republic of Neva Crimea and the formation within the Russian Federation of new federal subjects the republic of Crimea and the City of Federal Status Sevastopol'. 46/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 117.
He is the commander of the 76th 12.9.2014 NAUMETS airborne division which has been involved in the Russian military presence on the territory of Ukraine, notably during the illegal annexation (Алексей Васильевич of Crimea.
Furthermore, Rosoboronexport, a subsidiary of Rostec, has supported the integration of Crimean defence companies into Russia's defence industry, thereby consolidating the illegal annexation of Crimea into the Russian Federation. 47/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 119.
He is a (Aлександр Михайлович prominent member of ‘United Russia’ and a businessman with heavy БАБАКОВ) investments in Ukraine and in Crimea.
These ‘elections’ (Сергей Юрьевич were in breach of Ukrainian law and therefore illegal.
KOZYAKOV In taking on and acting in these capacities, and in organising the illegal (Сергiй Юрiйович ‘elections’, he has therefore actively supported actions and policies which КОЗЬЯКОВ) undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine. 48/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 121.
AKIMOV In taking on and acting in this capacity, and in participating formally as a (Олег Костянтинович candidate in the illegal ‘elections’, he has therefore actively supported АКІМОВ) actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
Supports actively actions and policies undermining the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
AIRAPETYAN These ‘elections’ are in breach of Ukrainian law and therefore illegal.
Belozernoe ХАЛИКОВ) village, In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has therefore actively Romodanovskiy supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, Ravil Zakariyovych rayon, USSR sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised KHALIKOV Ukraine.
Moscow Dmitrii Aleksandrovich In taking on and acting in this capacity, has actively supported actions SEMENOV and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
Sverdlovsk, supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, BUHROV (Олег Євгенович Luhansk sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised БУГРОВ) Ukraine. 51/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 128.
Vodyanske, Vladimirovich KOSTENOK) Dobropillia Rayon, In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has therefore actively (Игорь Владимирович Donetsk oblast supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, КОСТЕНОК) sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Водянское, Ukraine.
Romny, Sumy Nikolayevich DEYNEGO oblast In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has therefore actively (Владислав Миколайович supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, Ромны, Сумская ДЕЙНЕГО) sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised область Ukraine.
Serbian) In this capacity, he has actively supported actions and policies which (Алексей Юрьевич undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Мильчаков) Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
Donetsk Александрович БАСУРИН) In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has therefore actively Eduard Oleksandrovych supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, BASURIN (Едуард sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Олександрович БАСУРІН) Ukraine.
Chairman of the ‘Central Election Commission’ of the so-called ‘Luhansk People’s Republic’ since October 2015.
Luhansk ШУБИН) In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has therefore actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
Michurinsk, (Сергей Юрьевич Tambov oblast In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has therefore actively ИГНАТОВ ) supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, Мичуринск, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Тамбовская Ukraine. область 141.
Krasnoarmëisk ФИЛИППОВА) In taking on and acting in this capacity, she has therefore actively Kateryna Volodymyrivna supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, FILIPPOVA sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
Nevinnomyssk, (Александр Юрьевич Stavropol Krai In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has therefore actively ТИМОФЕЕВ) supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, Невинномысск, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Oleksandr Yuriyovych Ставропольский Ukraine.
Kherson (Виктор Вячеславович In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has therefore actively ЯЦЕНКО) supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Viktor Viacheslavovych Ukraine.
Lugansk БЕСЕДИНА) In taking on and acting in this capacity, she has therefore actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, Olha Ihorivna BESEDINA sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised Ukraine.
Krasny Luch, In taking on and acting in this capacity, he has therefore actively Voroshilovgrad, supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, Zaur Raufovych ISMAYILOV Lugansk region sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and further destabilised (Заур Рауфович Ukraine.
Anatoly Ivanovich DOB 15.5.1955 Former Deputy Minister of Defence and, in that capacity, involved in 16.2.2015 ANTONOV (Анатолий supporting the deployment of Russian troops in Ukraine.
Omsk Иванович АНТОНОВ) According to the present Russian Ministry of Defence structure, in that capacity he participated in shaping and implementing the policy of the Russian Government.
Currently employed by Rosatom. 60/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 149.
GDR Валерьевич Картaпoлoв) the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
Actively involved in shaping and implementing the military campaign of the Russian forces in Ukraine.
Currently First Deputy Chairman of the State Duma Committee on Culture. 61/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 151.
Bekabad, Uzbekistan SSR Deputy Chairperson of the Duma Committee on ethnic affairs.
Simferopol (Константин Михайлович Ukrainian SSR Member of the Duma Committee on Financial Markets.
He has been awarded with the order ‘For loyalty to duty’ by the ‘authorities’ of ‘Republic of Crimea’. 63/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 154.
For his involvement in the annexation process he has been awarded with Russian State order ‘For duties to the motherland’ — II degree. 64/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 155.
Simferopol (Андрей Дмитриевич Ukrainian SSR Member of Duma Committee on Financial Markets.
For his involvement in the annexation process he has been awarded with a medal ‘For the defence of Republic of Crimea’ by the local ‘authorities’. 65/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 156.
Belogorsk (Светлана Борисовна Ukrainian SSR Member of the Duma Committee on Culture.
She has been awarded with Russian State order ‘For duties to the motherland’ — II degree in 2014 and with the order ‘For loyalty to duty’ by the “authorities” of ‘Republic of Crimea’ in 2015. 66/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 157.
Simferopol (Павел Валентинович Ukrainian SSR Member of the Duma Committee for CIS Affairs, Eurasian Integration and Relations with Compatriots.
Andrey Vladimirovich Vice-Minister for Shares responsibility for the decision to transfer gas turbines that had 04.08.2017 CHEREZOV Energy of the been delivered by Siemens Gas Turbine Technologies OOO to OAO VO Technopromexport, to be installed in Crimea.
Salair, Kemerovskaya Oblast 68/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 159.
Evgeniy Petrovich Head of Department Responsible within the Ministry of Energy of the Russian Federation for 04.08.2017 GRABCHAK in the Energy the development of electro-energetic projects in Crimea.
These projects Ministry of the contribute to establishing an independent power supply for Crimea and Грабчак, Евгений Петрович Russian Federation.
Ust-Labinsk, Krasnodar Region 69/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying Reasons Date of listing information 160.
Sergey Anatolevich TOPORDirector General of In his capacity as Director General of OOO ‘VO TPE’, he led the 04.08.2017 GILKA OAO ‘VO TPE’ until negotiations with Siemens Gas Turbine Technologies OOO regarding the purchase and delivery of the gas turbines for a power plant in Taman, its insolvency, Топор-Гилка, Сергей Krasnodar region, Russian Federation.
He was responsible for the Director General of Анатольевич transfer of the gas turbines to Crimea.
The Ministry of Fuel and Energy of the Republic of Crimea (Министерство топлива и энергетики Республики Крым). 71/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 2.
Responsible for organising the illegal республика' referendum on 11 May 2014.
It is also involved in the recruitment to the separatist 'Army of Southeast' and other illegal armed separatist groups, thus undermining the stability or security of Ukraine. 73/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 4.
So called 'Donetsk People's Official information, including the The so called 'Donetsk People's Republic' 25.7.2014 Republic' Constitution of Donetsk People's Republic was declared on 7 April 2014. and the composition of the Supreme 'Донецкая народная Responsible for organizing the illegal Council республика' 'Donétskaya referendum on May 11 2014.
It is also involved in the recruitment to illegal armed separatist groups, thus threatening the stability or security of Ukraine. 74/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 5.
Associated with Mr, German PROPOKIV, active leader who is responsible for taking part in the seizure of the building of the Lugansk regional office of the Ukrainian Security Service and recorded a video address to President Putin and Russia from the occupied building. 76/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 9.
Associated with Mr Vasyl NIKITIN, responsible for the separatist 'governmental' activities of the so called 'government of the People' s Republic of Luhansk' 77/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 10.
Prospect Zasyadko. 78/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 11.
Responsible for fighting against the Ukrainian government forces in Eastern Ukraine, thus threatening the stability or security of Ukraine.
Actively participated in the military operations resulting in the seizure of Donetsk Airport.
State Unitary Enterprise of the Nakhimov Square 5, 299011) Sevastopol The ownership of the entity was transferred 25.7.2014 City of Sevastopol, 'Sevastopol contrary to the Ukrainian law.
The Government of Sevastopol . 80/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 14.
State Unitary Enterprise of the Aeroflotskaya Street 5, 295024, The ownership of the entity was transferred 25.7.2014 'Republic of Crimea' 'UniversalSimferopol contrary to Ukrainian law.
The Ministry of Transportation of the 'Republic of Crimea' (Министерство транспорта Республики Крым). 82/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 16.
Federal State Budgetary The ownership of the entity was transferred 25.7.2014 Enterprise ""Sanatorium contrary to the Ukrainian law.
The Administration of the President of the Russian Federation (УПРАВЛЕНИЯ ДЕЛАМИ ПРЕЗИДЕНТА РОССИЙСКОЙ ФЕДЕРАЦИИ). 83/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 17.
Crimean Republican Enterprise 40 Zeleznodorozhnaya str., The ownership of the entity was transferred 25.7.2014 'Azov distillery plant' contrary to Ukrainian law.
Managed by Sinergiya. 84/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 18.
Federal State Budgetary 298650, Crimea, Yalta, Massandra, The ownership of the entity was transferred 25.7.2014 Enterprise 'Production-Agrarian str.Vinodela Egorova 9. contrary to the Ukrainian law.
Federal state budget institution 298600, Kirov Street 31 Yalta, Crimea The ownership of the entity was transferred 25.7.2014 for science and research 'Allcontrary to the Ukrainian law.
State enterprise of the 298032, Crimea, Sudak, urban village The ownership of the entity was transferred 25.7.2014 'Republic of Crimea' Sparkling Novy Svet, str.Shalapina 1. contrary to Ukrainian law.
The Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Crimea (Министерство сельского хозяйства Республики Крым). 88/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 21.
JOINT-STOCK COMPANY 41 ul.Vereiskaya, Moscow 121471, Almaz-Antey is a Russian State-owned 30.7.2014 ALMAZ-ANTEY AIR AND Russia; company.
The Email Address antey@almaz-antey.ru Russian authorities have been providing Акционерное общество heavy weaponry to separatists in Eastern «Концерн Ukraine, contributing to the destabilisation of воздушно-космической Ukraine.
These weapons are used by the обороны «Алмаз – Антей separatists, including for shooting down (a.k.a.
As a State-owned company, ALMAZ-ANTEY; Almaz-Antey therefore contributes to the ALMAZ-ANTEY CORP;k.a. destabilisation of Ukraine.
ALMAZ-ANTEY JSC; Концерн ВКО «Алмаз – Антей; ) 89/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 22.
DOBROLET aka Airline code QD Dobrolet is a subsidiary of a Russian state30.7.2014 owned airline.
Since the illegal annexation of DOBROLYOT International Highway, House 31, building Crimea Dobrolet has so far exclusively 1, 141411 Moscow Добролет/Добролëт operated flights between Moscow and 141411, Москва г, Международное ш, Simferopol.
By buying or taking over from branches of retreating banks operating in Crimea, RNCB supported materially and financially the actions of the Russian government to integrate Crimea into the Russian Federation, thus undermining Ukraine's territorial integrity. 90/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 24.
Donetsk Republic (Public Public ""organisation"" that presented 29.11.2014 organisation) candidates in the so called ""elections"" of the so called ""Donetsk People's Republic"" on 2 Донецкая республика November 2014.
Headed by Igor PLOTNITSKY. 91/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 26.
People's Union (Narodny Public ""organisation"" that presented 29.11.2014 Soyuz) candidates in the so called ""elections"" of the so called ""Luhansk People's Republic"" 2 Народньй союз November 2014.
In participating formally in the illegal ""elections"" it has therefore actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and to further destabilise Ukraine. 92/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 28.
Luhansk Economic Union ""Social organisation"" that presented 29.11.2014 (Luganskiy Ekonomicheskiy candidates in the illegal so called ""elections"" Soyuz) of the so called ""Luhansk People's Republic"" 2 November 2014.
Cossack National Guard Armed separatist group which has actively 16.2.2015 Казачья Национальная supported actions which undermine the Гвардия territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine and further destabilise Ukraine.
Reportedly part of the so-called ‘2nd Army Corps’ of the ‘Lugansk People´s Republic’. 93/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 30.
Sparta battalion Armed separatist group which has actively 16.2.2015 supported actions which undermine the Батальон 'Спарта' territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine and further destabilise Ukraine.
Somali battalion Armed separatist group which has actively 16.2.2015 supported actions which undermine the Батальон ‘Сомали’ territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine and further destabilise Ukraine.
Zarya battalion Armed separatist group which has actively 16.2.2015 supported actions which undermine the Батальон 'Заря' territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine and further destabilise Ukraine.
Prizrak brigade Armed separatist group which has actively 16.2.2015 supported actions which undermine the Бригада ‘Призрак’ territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine and further 94/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing destabilise Ukraine.
Kalmius battalion Armed separatist group which has actively 16.2.2015 supported actions which undermine the Батальон ‘Кальмиус’ territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine and further destabilise Ukraine.
Death battalion Armed separatist group which has actively 16.2.2015 supported actions which undermine the Батальон ‘Смерть’ territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine and further destabilise Ukraine.
This contributes to establishing an общество independent power supply for Crimea and Внешнеэкономическое Sevastopol as a means of supporting their объединение separation from Ukraine, and undermines the Технопромэкспорт territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine 98/101 dhdsh PRESS Council of the European Union EN Name Identifying information Reasons Date of listing 39.
Limited Liability Company Registration date: 8.5.2014 ‘VO TPE’ transferred the gas turbines to be ‘Foreign Economic installed in Crimea.
