On Nov., three Ukrainian military ships entered the Kerch Strait, a narrow waterway linking the Azov and Black seas in eastern Europe, where a recently completed bridge connects Crimea with the Russian mainland.
The ships veered into Russian territorial waters, ignoring warnings from the Russian side.
The Ukrainian vessels uncovered their artillery guns and rotated them into firing position.
In a Nov. interview with the German newspaper Bild, Poroshenko called on NATO to deploy war ships to the Azov Sea.
Ukraine’s right-wing, NATO-armed regime staged a dangerous provocation.
And there’s every reason to believe this was done with Washington’s prior knowledge and approval.
In 2014, a coup actively supported by Washington overthrew Ukraine’s legally elected government.
Since then, Kiev has issued an unending torrent of threats against Russia, allied itself with NATO, banned workers’ organizations and waged a bloody war against the Donbass region at the cost of over 10,300 lives.
Some of the first measures enacted by the new regime were meant to strip the country’s Russian speakers ― the majority in eastern and southern Ukraine ― and other national minorities of their language rights.
In a 2014 referendum held there, people voted overwhelmingly to leave Ukraine and rejoin the Russian Federation.
Moscow accepted the vote, while Ukraine and its Western allies still refuse to recognize it.
Since breaking off its historic trade relations with Russia, Ukraine’s economy has become dependent on International Monetary Fund loans.
These are contingent on deeply unpopular austerity measures that benefit United States and western European capitalists.
Meanwhile, the U.S.-dominated NATO military alliance trains and “advises” Ukraine’s military.
All of this to say, Poroshenko couldn’t dream of carrying out such a dangerous maneuver, risking open conflict with the more militarily powerful Russia, without Washington’s consent ― assuming the whole thing wasn’t dreamed up in the halls of the Pentagon.
Poroshenko, one of a small circle of oligarchs who enriched themselves off the suffering of Ukrainian workers and farmers after the destruction of the socialist Soviet Union in the 1990s, faces re-election in early 2019.
With little domestic support and stiff opposition from ultrarightists, he’s eager to prove himself useful to his masters on Wall Street and in Washington.
For Washington, ratcheting up the conflict in Ukraine has proven a useful way to put pressure on Russia for that country’s support of Syria ― and to draw attention away from the crimes of the Pentagon and U.S.-backed rebels there.
But most of all, Ukraine’s Kerch provocation was another step in United States imperialism’s long march to surround and ultimately break up the Russian Federation — a goal pursued relentlessly by both Republican and Democratic administrations since the early 1990s.
Russia’s capitalist government, though based on the counterrevolution that overturned socialism in the USSR, and often carrying out reactionary policies at home, has opposed United States aggression in Syria and Ukraine as a matter of survival.
In the aftermath of the Kerch incident, Ukrainian parliamentary deputy Ivan Vinnik admitted an intensification of behind-the-scenes talks between officials in Kiev and Washington on the establishment of a United States military base in eastern Ukraine, following the example of Poland.
It is the anti-fascist, anti-imperialist resistance waged by the Donbass republics and inside Ukraine that deserves our support.
We need money for better-paying jobs, health care and schools, infrastructure repairs and environmental cleanup ― not more military bases and provocations that threaten to pit workers against each other for the benefit of war profiteers.
