US Air Force F-15C Eagles and C-130J Super Hercules arrived in Ukraine to participate in the international military exercises Clean Sky-2018, aimed at strengthening peace and security,"" the embassy said.The main base for the training of combat aircraft will be the airfield in Starokonstantinov Khmelnitsky region.
This is today, October 7, with reference to sources in the British security services, writes the newspaper The Sunday Times, informs Censor.NET.According to journalists, this opportunity was discussed at a secret meeting held by the British government this week.In Britain, there is not enough power to resist Russia without using nuclear weapons.
We can attack and disconnect the light in Moscow so that they understand what's wrong, ""said Sunday Times, a top-notch source.This week, the Netherlands announced the deportation of four Russians suspected of cyberattacking by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the World Anti-Doping Agency, as well as attempting to steal documents of the investigation into the Boeing MH17 disaster over the Donbas.
When I say that I do not consider Russia as an aggressor, it's not just a tricky phrase, because I'm going to Moscow, negotiating, and I have a lot of friends here.
I say that because I believe that this is an objective truth"", added the politician.He also spoke about sociological research showing the attitude of Ukrainians towards Russia.
Thus, the confirmed number of dead and wounded wounds of Wagner mercenaries as a result of the clash of 07.02.2018 is already 58 people.In addition, the SBU reported information about Wagner's mercenary from Uzbekistan Mamadzhanova Dilshod Mashrabzhanovich.
A soldier of the Bundeswehr was killed in an exercise in Lithuania as a result of a tragic event"", informs the publication.The driver of the armored vehicle crashed into a tree during the maneuvering at the Pabrad landfill.
The purpose of the maneuvers is to demonstrate that NATO troops are at the helm of the Alliance's eastern flank.The publication reminds that after the annexation by Russia of Crimea, NATO decided to strengthen the Baltic States and Poland with the presence of its troops, fearing further Moscow's aggressive actions.
So, among the participants of 29 Allies and two of its partners Finland and Sweden.Training will become the largest in NATO during the past 16 years.
They successfully passed the stages of theoretical training and operational coordination, and will soon go on to carry out assignments in their areas in Naples, Rammstein and Stavanger.Under the scenario of exercises, NATO's multinational coalition carries out a large-scale military operation to liberate the illegally occupied northern part of the Kingdom of Norway.
