February 2020 Perspective EXPERT INSIGHTS ON A TIMELY POLICY ISSUE ANDREW RADIN, ALYSSA DEMUS, KRYSTYNA MARCINEK Understanding Russian Subversion Patterns, Threats, and Responses R ussia is suspected of having undertaken a wide range of subversive activities against the United States, and its partners and allies since 2014— examples include military support for the separatist republics in eastern Ukraine, an attempted coup in Montenegro, and influence campaigns in the 2016 United States and 2017 French elections.
Responding to Russian subversion is difficult, in part because the threat is, by its very nature, not clearly known.
In this Perspective, we review past RAND Corporation and other relevant work and synthesize overall insights about why and how Russian undertakes subversion.
This review and synthesis offer insights about the likely threat of Russian subversion to the United States and its partners and allies.
Russia likely finds subversion—which we define as efforts intended to influence the domestic politics of other countries—attractive because it could help achieve multiple Russian foreign policy interests at relatively low cost.
The threat of Russian subversion to different countries varies based on the intensity of Russia’ interests and the resources available to undertake subversion.
There is former communist countries, Russia uses a wider range substantial debate about these terms—for example, critof military and economic tools.
To better deter Russian ics have argued that hybrid warfare does not accurately subversion, we suggest concentrating defensive efforts on characterize Russian thinking on this issue.
A wide that punishments in response to subversion are clearly range of somewhat coordinated Russian activities seeks linked to specific Russian actions.
We also propose focusto influence and undermine countries’ politics and instiing on addressing covert or denied Russian activities, both tutions in undesirable ways, including Russian support because they are particularly harmful and because targetof separatism in Ukraine; computer network operations; ing overt Russian activities could delegitimize Western backing pro-Russian nongovernmental organizations; and outreach to populations that are on the fence about their publicly acknowledged information campaigns executed by support for Western institutions.
Russian subversion The first section of this Perspective defines subversion often exploits political or social divides within Western and explains why we focus on this category.
Russian subversion activities may also leverage we build from existing RAND work to characterize Russia’s concepts and tools that were established to protect deminterests in undertaking subversion.
The third section ocratic societies (e.g., freedom of speech and freedom of traces how contemporary Russian subversive activities assembly) to undermine these institutions. find their origins in the Soviet period and Russia’s recent To be sure, there are differences in the intensity, threat, history.
The fourth section characterizes the elements of and legitimacy of particular Russian subversive activities.
In state power that Russia can use for subversion, including general, overt and attributed activities, such as diplomacy political, military, informational, and economic.
The fifth or public messages, may be seen as relatively more legitiprovides a framework for deterring Russian subversion mate, especially since there are parallel efforts by Western through denial and punishment.
We By subversion, we mean activities intended to influence see denied and covert subversive activities as especially a target country’s domestic politics.
For example, people may be more receptive offers a useful and concrete way to understand the threat to a tweet from someone who seems to be a normal citizen of Russian activities.
Other works use such terms as hybrid rather than from RT or the official account of the Russian warfare, active measures, hostile measures, the gray zone, foreign ministry.
The Kremlin’s financial and human 2 resources give it a unique ability to mimic and influence may lead Russia to adopt subversion as a desirable foreign legitimate social groups in ways that are often not discovpolicy tool. ered until long after they are perpetrated, if they are recognized at all.
Clear attribution of denied or covert activities Defense of the Country and the Regime to Russia can limit the effectiveness of these actions.
Russian officials and analysts, dating back to the Soviet Union, have often seen a connection between external milWhy Russia Might Undertake itary threats and internal opponents of the ruling regime.
Subversion In the post–Cold War era, Russian analysts have observed that the United States has engaged in democracy promoSubversion is one possible activity that Russia, like any tion through its support for “color revolutions” in former other country, may use to pursue its foreign policy interSoviet states and for the Arab Spring.
Subversion appears to be disruptive but is relatively drawn a connection between these efforts and possible low cost.
It allows states to achieve foreign policy goals United States intentions to engage in a color revolution, or regime when diplomacy and overt soft power are insufficient and change, in Russia, especially following the 2011–2012 when large-scale violence may be unlikely to succeed or prodemocracy protests in Russia and the events in 2014 in is otherwise undesirable.
Russian subversion because these interests guide Russia’s For the Kremlin, subversion may play a triple role in decisions about when or when not to choose subversion responding to what it perceives as Western efforts at regime instead of other foreign policy options. change.
First, subversion of Moscow’s adversaries may disIn their study on Russian hostile measures of influtract or deter them from interfering in the domestic politics ence, Cohen and Radin identified core, interrelated of Russia or of those in its sphere of influence.
Second, forRussian foreign policy objectives . eign subversion may have an intended or unintended posFirst and foremost, Russia seeks to defend its territory and itive influence on popular support for the Russian regime, regime.
Russia seeks recognition as a great power, which especially if subversion achieves popular Russian foreign involves maintaining influence in its immediate region. policy goals.
Note, for example, the increase in Putin’s Stopping European Union and North Atlantic Treaty popularity during the Ukrainian crisis in 2014, although Organization enlargement is perceived as essential Russia’s activities in Ukraine may have been simultaneto Russian security, preservation of its sphere of influence, ously limited by perceived brotherhood between Russians and status as a great power.
Third, subversion may weaken goals also contribute to the first and primary goal, the presWestern institutions that are perceived as a threat to the ervation of the country and regime.
Adapted from Radin and Reach, 2017, 11 Subversion may help to pursue that goal in several ways that are related to the assessment that Russia seeks Russia as a more attractive alternative to the West.
This to undermine the U.S.-led liberal democratic order. approach could backfire; the targets of Russian subversion Subversive tools may be a low-cost means of demonstratoften become less supportive of Russia. ing Russia’s ability to cause harm.
From this perspective, Moscow may use subversion to demonstrate that Russia Maintaining Russia’s Sphere of Influence, cannot be ignored.
Second, Russia’s meddling in both eastern Europe and in the United States or western Europe Stopping EU and NATO Enlargement, and may seek to demonstrate the weakness of the West and, Assuring Russia’s Economic Prosperity consequently, to undermine the hopes United States partners and Russia’s desire to maintain a sphere of influence is based allies place in the United States.
If the West becomes a less on its understanding of itself as a great power, uninterappealing partner, some countries may begin to perceive rupted from its time as an empire.
Maintaining a sphere 4 of influence may also be a means of guaranteeing both a security buffer zone and a base for economic prosperity.
The circles in the figure on 4, replicated from Radin and Rather than using Reach’s 2017 work on Russian views of the international subversion to tear down order, illustrate one approach to understanding Russia’s vision of desired influence, based on accounts of Russian Western institutions, identity and identification with particular countries.
Russia’s use of subversive activities outcomes in other within the countries in these rings can help ensure that countries in less extreme regimes in these countries adopt friendly policies toward Russia, including guaranteeing that the countries consult ways.
Russia when making important decisions; are responsive to Russian desires; or, in the case of the inner rings, particicould also destabilize Europe, introducing unpredictpate in Russian-led organizations and do not join Western able and significant risks to the Russian economy and its institutions . security.
Subversion efforts targeting countries outside these Rather than using subversion to tear down Western rings, such as the United States or western Europe, may institutions, it seems plausible that Russia may use subveralso stop EU and NATO enlargement, especially if the sion to shape domestic political outcomes in other counefforts can create divisions among the Western allies about tries in less extreme ways.
But the destruction of the EU and NATO party in Germany or Marine Le Pen in France.
Following the Soviet and That said, it may be difficult, or impossible, to idenYugoslav split in 1948, the Kremlin employed several forms tify the particular motivations behind a campaign and of subversive activities to counter Yugoslav dictator Josip link them to the pursuit of specific interests.
Indeed, it is Tito’s efforts to exercise independence and undermine his possible that there may be multiple or disputed intentions position.
These included Soviet infiltration of Yugoslav among the Russian actors to pursue them.
Instead, Russia may underpanied Soviet efforts to address instability early in each take actions with the hope that they may eventually bring country’s revolution, in 1956 and 1968, respectively (CIA, about its goals.
Yet, in all three cases, these Russian subversion more or less effective, but may make it efforts failed to achieve the Kremlin’s aims.
In Hungary more difficult to identify or evaluate. and Czechoslovakia, Soviet attempts to quell political unrest via subversion also failed, and the Kremlin was forced to use conventional means to regain control in both Origins of Contemporary Russian states.
Likewise, Moscow was ultimately unable to unseat Subversion Tito through subversive means.
In the developing world, the Soviets used subversion Contemporary Russian subversion is not new—it builds to promulgate Communist ideology and influence, shape from foreign policy and activities of the Soviet Union and states’ political events, and curb Western influence.
Prior before, as well as Russia’s domestic and foreign policy since to the 1970s, Soviet subversive activities in Africa involved 1990.
Over time, the regional scope and ambition of Soviet “training cadres, infiltrating the trade union movement and Russian subversion has varied, but where it is most . . . encouraging the growth of radial nationalist parties ambitious, it has focused on pursuing control in eastern and factions,” and attempting to establish “Communist Europe, a degree of influence in other parts of the world, adherents in positions of influence” (Director of Central and shaping Western policy to reduce the threat at home.
The Soviets provided military aid The Soviet regime, like the Tsarist one before it, used and advisors but relied on Cuban forces to intervene in subversion internally and externally for many purposes but internal African conflicts in the 1970s and 1980s because with mixed success.
For example, even though much of the African said, without evidence of whether survey respondents were intelligentsia supported communist ideology, they did not exposed to or influenced by the Soviet rumor, it is difficult necessarily align with Soviet ideology or policy (Director of to link these outcomes to Soviet efforts.
After the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia continued Soviet subversion efforts targeting the United States to use subversion, but its geographic and political ambiappeared intended to tarnish perceptions of the West tion refocused on domestic politics and the former Soviet domestically and globally, drive a wedge between the Union.
Wilson notes how these techniques fears surrounding the newly discovered acquired immubecame a Russian export in the late 1990s and early 2000s, nodeficiency syndrome virus.
However, Russia’s farms for domestic purposes, such as maligning political efforts to foster support for communist ideology among opposition and activists in the eyes of domestic audiences.
Disinformation With the Ukraine crisis in 2014, and the 2016 United States elecefforts, such as the AIDS rumor, may have been more tions, Russia seems to have broadened the ambition of successful.
Instead, we will focus on what Russian can Western analysts have, in part, attributed Russia’s do by considering the different elements of state power at increased use of nonmilitary tactics, some covert and Russia’s disposal. denied, to ideas expressed in a 2013 article authored by Russian Chief of the General Staff, General Valery Gerasimov.
The article indicates that Russia’s increased Subversion by Different Russian adoption of subversion and other nonmilitary tactics Entities seems to have been based in large part on the observation The table on 9 categorizes the organizations that underof parallel, threatening Western activities.
The role of nonmilitary means are most powerful within Russia’s immediate neighborof achieving political and strategic goals has grown, and, hood , working downward toward capabilities in many cases, they have exceeded the power of force of that play a larger role around the world.
His writing implicitly advocates for the development in Russian subversion, from organizations that are part of of Russian forces that can respond in kind to these increasthe Russian government; to organization that are not part ing nonmilitary threats . of the state but act on Russia’s behalf, with different degrees Since its publication, Gerasimov’s article has been of attribution; to independent groups that share an interest interpreted as evidence of the existence of a “Gerasimov with Russia and may work, knowingly or not, in collaboradoctrine” guiding Russian use of subversion.
However, in tion on a particular issue. practice, Russia’s approach appears to be far less disciplined In many cases, covert or denied subversive activities or organized.
In fact, Mark Galeotti, a leading analyst of and overt ones are used in tandem.
In Syria, where Moscow Russia’s intelligence activities who popularized the term has not denied its military presence, overt Russian activGerasimov doctrine, apologized for developing the term in ities represent the main lines of effort, although some of a 2018 article.
Russia’s ability to undertake significant operations in subversion will be quite NATO countries, however, is likely to be more challenging, as the case of the Baltic states demonstrates.
Such a Russian force would need to be sufficiently small to prevent clear attribution of Russian armed aggression, which would justify Ukraine would also likely undermine some of the main a strong response from NATO allies under Article 5 of the lines of Russian messaging, such as defending noninterNorth Atlantic Treaty.
Given the performance of even the ference in states’ internal affairs and critiquing military ill-prepared Ukrainian military against Russian-backed operations without UN Security Council approval.
In separatists in Ukraine, the more-capable Baltic forces March 2014, Russia claimed that ousted Ukrainian preswould likely have a good chance against Russian-backed ident Viktor Yanukovich had asked for Russian help, but paramilitaries.
It seems that opti. mal conditions for an effective military subversion require The politically sensitive subversive military operations geographical proximity, weak border control, weak counin Ukraine, and possible future military actions, draw on a terintelligence, lack of strong allies, easy access to firearms, range of Russian light infantry forces, including the VDV, sociopolitical divisions, and the element of surprise.
This GRU-Spetsnaz, and Special Operations Forces Command. analysis indicates that Russian military subversion will The forces appear to have been a significant priority in be quite difficult in NATO countries and is most likely to Russia’s larger modernization efforts, which began in 2008 occur in the non-Baltic former Soviet republics. following the military’s disappointing performance in Georgia.
The former group is primarily, but not nationalist, Euro-skeptic parties that might weaken or, at exclusively, found within the former communist countries. a minimum, decrease the ambition of the EU and NATO Cohen and Radin, for example, highlighted the oppor.
In western Europe, tunity from Russia’s historical and cultural ties within Russia has also reportedly supported parties that support Central and Southeast Europe.
However, historical ties are far from determinative—in the case of Poland, for example, elements of shared history Economic have resulted in predominantly negative views of Russia.
Estonia and Latvia, which have substantial minorities Russia is a major economic power.
Russia’s economic of Russian speakers (meaning migrants from the Soviet influence especially comes from its major presence in the Union and their descendants), also have political parties energy market—state-owned Gazprom and Rosneft and that are largely supported by Russian speakers.
These parstate-backed Lukoil are major Russian international energy ties had not been able to join government coalitions until companies.
Despite role as an energy supplier is, in principle, not subversive as their historic links to Russia, these parties do not advocate we have defined it.
While there are some allegations that Russian economic that remain particularly investments may be for intelligence-gathering or other political purposes, there are also strong indications that dependent on Russian Russia’s primary goal is sustaining its economic interests in the region.
Russia has less leverage in regions in such counHowever, there are instances of Russia using energy tries as Germany, in which energy exports from Russia supplies or infrastructure subversively.
The Russian pipeline operator attributed the The Russian government also attempts to use the control of issue to a leakage caused by an accident.
But Lithuanian information as a means of influencing audience perceptions authorities claim that the report of an accident was an and behaviors, adversary decisionmaking, and political attempt to sabotage the deal and maintain control over outcomes in ways that serve its interests.
Indeed, many Russian writers see the control of More recently, Moscow has used information-driven information as central to the achievement of political subversion tools against targets in its far abroad, primarobjectives.
The closely related concepts of informational ily to influence the outcomes of political campaigns in struggle and reflexive control describe ways to persuade western Europe and the United States.
Although now one’s adversary to make specific choices that are favorable exposed as a likely Kremlin affiliate, the St.
These concepts suggest Internet Research Agency secretly masqueraded as U.S.altering the target’s perceptions of reality or otherwise based social and political organizations around the 2016 influencing their decision-making process.
One line of this effort involved the use of a robust subversion efforts.
Some, such as the Russian intelligence network of social media groups to disseminate antigovservices , are part of the state.
These ernment rhetoric in Ukraine, such as calling for a “Third actors may work in concert with overt state-owned media Maidan,” likely in an effort to undermine the authorities in organizations, such as RT and Sputnik, to support denied Kyiv .13 Investigative journalists or covert activities.
Other nonstate organizations, such as 13 troll farms , are likely audiences can access a wide range of media sources and, connected to the Kremlin through personal, political, or therefore, are less dependent on any one media channel, financial ties, although the state does not acknowledge meaning that the Kremlin faces competition for audience these ties (United States of America Internet Research attention.
In other cases, Moscow fosters relationFinally, the global scope of information technoloships with individuals or organizations that are unaware gies allows Moscow to reach audiences in its near and far they are interacting with Russian actors.
However, influence via idiots, as they are sometimes called, unwittingly participate information requires an intimate and nuanced understandin Russian subversion efforts, while others unknowingly ing of the target audience, which may favor Moscow more amplify Russian messages by retweeting, reposting, or with audiences in the near abroad than with those farther “liking” subversive messages without knowing their true from Russia geographically and/or culturally. origin.
Measuring the success of information-driven Russian Cyber Means subversion efforts is inherently difficult.
In today’s information-saturated environment the Kremlin’s target Cyberattacks are a specific type of information-related audiences are exposed to countless messages from various subversion activity that offers a flexible tool for covertly stimuli.
Isolating the effect of any one of these messages achieving a range of objectives.
While in Western military outside a controlled environment is nearly impossible withthinking cyber means are often conceived of as a distinct out a baseline of attitudes and behaviors and clear specififield, Russian doctrine tends to treat this area as one elecation of Russia’s desired objectives.
This makes it are commonly used for classic espionage operations but more difficult to disaggregate the effects of the Russian may also be used to contribute to diverse efforts to shape effort from those of the legitimate political campaign. foreign narratives.
Another striking case is the false attribution of Russian Overattribution is also a risk—other state or nonstate hacking of the computers and phones of the wives of U.S. actors could leverage a Western tendency to attribute informilitary personnel to Islamic State’s “Cyber Caliphate.” mation operations to Russia.
The accessibility of the online The apparent intent of this campaign was to divert U.S. environment allows Russian actors to directly research attention away from Russia toward the Islamic State (Satter, Western audiences without needing to foster relation2018). ships with journalists as the Soviets did.
Cyber analysts rarely have The first widely known cyberattack attributed to clear, smoking-gun evidence.
The attack itself was not attributed to disagree about attribution . any specific recognizable group, and the early phase of the Still, as the previous examples indicate, there is sometimes attack appeared relatively amateurish.
But the timing of the a high degree of confidence that particular Russian actors end of the campaign points to some degree of coordination are behind particular attacks, even where there is false flag(Connell and Vogler, 2017, 13.
However, it remains unclear how broad Surkov’s authority is and to what degree his activities might be coordinated Coordination and Command and Control with the Russian Ministry of Defence or intelligence Russia may achieve the greatest results when it is able agencies.
According to Mark Galeotti, no institution is to combine multiple tools in one campaign, but Russia’s singly responsible for command and control of Russian command and control of subversion does appear to have subversion.
In Ukraine in higher-level coordination, such as from the presidential 2014, Russia used diplomatic persuasion to try to convince administration, many efforts originate from bottom-up Kyiv not to align with the West, amplifying the message via initiatives based on varied interpretations of the governa large-scale information campaign.
Concurrently, intelment’s broad goals . ligence organizations created false social media accounts, Evidence from other incidents also betrays a lack of armed separatists, and directly engaged in kinetic activihierarchical command and control.
Russian subversion less effective, it also may make subverThere is some evidence of control from the top, such as sion more difficult to detect and counter. through the Russian presidential administration.
Vladislav Surkov, a former Deputy Prime Minister and now special advisor to the President of the Russian Federation, appears A Framework for Deterring Russian to be responsible, among his other duties, for overseeing Subversion the campaign in Ukraine.
These criteria draw from existing analyses of policies may be expected to have a varied effect on the challenge of Russian subversion, as well as criticism of vulnerabilities to Russian subversion in the short existing United States deterrent activities discussed later.
Carefully and long terms. evaluating proposed deterrence options is essential because • Achieving other socially desirable objectives.
For the costs and risks of an activity to improve deterrence example, initiatives that introduce new media litercould exceed the potential benefit of the activity for reducacy training into education programs may address ing Russian subversion.
While there may be insufficient a broader concern about social media beyond information to make a full evaluation of these factors, it is concerns related to Russian subversion.
Similarly, advisable to conduct at least a rough assessment. reducing European dependence on Russian gas may Deterrence by denial involves actions that make also increase European consumption of AmericanRussian subversion less likely to succeed or more expensive produced liquid natural gas. or challenging to undertake.
For example, border security costs its allies, and partners to the full range of Russian subvermay include both the costs of hiring new personnel sive activities.
Examples include improving cyberdefense, or buying new equipment and a second-order cost reducing dependence on Russian energy, strengthening of reduced trade. border security in countries neighboring Russia, and media • The alignment between the proposed program and literacy training to reduce peoples’ susceptibility to Russian Western norms and values.
Such a policy, however, therefore, presents a lower risk of provoking undesired would be incompatible with Western democratic Russian responses.
However, investing in defensive activivalues that prioritize the free flow of information. ties probably cannot eliminate all vulnerabilities to Russian • Shaping Russian decisionmaking.
It may be cheaper and easier for Russia to find to predict whether activities intended to reduce new avenues of subversion than for the West to address Russian subversion are likely to produce an escalavulnerabilities. tory Russian response.
Absent rapid and clear attribution, fordeployment, may also lead to a security dilemma mulating, justifying, and communicating punishin which Russia responds to what it perceives as a ments may be difficult. threat to its own interests.
Is there clear evidence that Russia was 18 As in the case of Western defensive activities, neither appear to impose high enough costs relative to Russia’s a definitive list of punishments nor an evaluation of these other interests to be effective deterrents.
For making or are not linked closely enough to Russian subverexample, after Russia’s seizure of Crimea in early March sive activities.
These problems do not mean that existing 2014 the United States introduced sanctions in response to punishments of Russia should be abandoned; even imperthe violation of the “sovereignty and territorial integrity fect punishments may have a deterrent effect.
However, many of the individuals or companies sanctioned are based in Russia or Crimea decisionmaking or are and either do little business with the United States or depend far more on their status in Russia.
While forgoing not linked closely enough access to Western capital and technology is damaging to Russian companies, Russian interests in Ukraine likely to Russian subversive exceed such concerns.
These sanctions are thus likely to have little effect on Russia’s decision to continue its policy activities. in Crimea and Ukraine.
However, it is highly unlikely that less of its behavior . those indicted will ever face trial in the United States.
The Overall, a key ongoing challenge for United States policy is to indictments overall had little prospect of seriously affectdevelop sufficiently effective responses to Russian subvering the lives of individuals and organizations operating in sion and to ensure that these responses are indeed linked to Russia under the direction of the Kremlin.
A second category of punishments has great consequences for Russia and could motivate a change in policy, but these are less clearly linked to changes in Russian Conclusion behavior.
For instance, the 2017 Countering America’s Russia has engaged in a wide range of subversive efforts Adversaries Through Sanctions Act provides to influence U.S., allied, and partner domestic politics. broad powers to sanction a variety of Russian entities, many Contrary to descriptions of a coherent Gerasimov doctrine, of which are important contributors to the Russian econRussian subversion lacks a single organizing principle. omy.
For example, Oleg Deripaska and the companies he Instead, Russian foreign policy interests motivate different controls have been identified as potential targets of United States forms of subversion; Russian subversive capabilities vary sanctions.
Despite these challenges, our earlier United States sanctions are highly complex and difficult to interpret, observations point to some recommendations for how and there is ambiguity in how existing sanctions will be to better deter and respond to Russian subversion in the implemented or under what conditions they will be liftfuture. ed.
The Russian We recommend improving deterrence by denial by focusleadership may wonder whether these sanctions would be ing United States programs to build resilience in the most vulnerable likely to be lifted if Russia were to reduce its information countries and institutions.
Efforts to deter by denial must 20 be tailored to account for the varying intensity and types of Russia can change its behavior to remove a punishment is threats each state faces.
To change Russian behavior, punishments be most useful, it is necessary to evaluate existing vulnermust also be significant or meaningful enough to convince abilities, trace past United States efforts, and consider where United States these actors that it is not worthwhile to pursue subversive assistance may be the most effective.
In some cases, it may be necessary to enact a punNATO former Soviet states, such as Ukraine, Russia is able ishment even if that is unlikely to convince Russia to modto wield the broadest range of its subversive capabilities, erate its behavior.
In these circumstances, it may be worth including the use of military and political proxies.
While there are limits of the effectiveness of United States foreign Overt activities, such as RT or Russian energy investments, assistance, United States efforts to improve Ukrainian defense could certainly be harmful to United States interests.
Russia is able to use fewer States is against everything Russian or that it is pursuing tools for subversion in former communist countries that a Cold War–style, zero-sum competition with Russia. have joined NATO, and its means of subversion are even Sanctioning overt activities also puts at risk parallel U.S. more limited in the West.
Still, efforts to improve the rule activities in Russia or its neighbors, such as United States social of law, strengthen alternatives to Russian energy exports, media companies, other business investment, and U.S. and strengthen cybersecurity may be valuable where there foundations . are particular gaps.
Avoiding punishing overt Russian economic activities makes it easier to imagine a transition to a less adversarial U.S.-Russia relationship.
Improving Deterrence by Punishment One potential, but ill-advised, route for respondThe United States can also better deter Russia by more ing to Russian subversion is to intensify United States efforts to clearly linking punishments to specific Russian subversive subvert Russia.
To be most effective, punishments of Russian ernment in Russia could hypothetically make Russia subversion should be threatened and enacted in an increpursue a less adversarial foreign policy and could lead mental way, with each additional element clearly associated to dramatic improvements in the well-being of Russia’s with an identified Russian subversive action.
Given Russia’s belief that the United States is ent logic of why a punishment is being enacted and how already engaged in subversion, there may also seem to be 21 little to lose from increasing United States effort to achieve regime effects of Moscow’s efforts are more evident.
However, intensified United States subversion has several of political, information, and economic tools is less well potential downsides.
It is unlikely to succeed; despite past understood, as the uncertain effectiveness of Russian interUnited States efforts, Putin remains popular and in power (e.g., ference in the 2016 United States election clearly shows.
Intensified United States subversion its effectiveness, Russian subversion is clearly undesirable. could also result in undesired Russian escalation, up to and But without understanding the actual effects of subversion, including kinetic military action against the United States, it is difficult to fully articulate a proportionate response its allies, or its partners. or to understand how this response should be prioritized among other United States efforts.
Any response to Russian subversion will have costs, such as establishing new government Additional Research About When Russian bodies, increasing regulation for social media, or building Subversion Is Effective new infrastructure.
Evaluating the effectiveness of Russian There is significant uncertainty about when and to what subversion is essential to determine whether to accept such extent Russian subversion is effective.
Such an evaluation may be difficult but is possible Russia’s disposal, like military activities in Ukraine, the through further study, including increasing understanding Russian objectives; evaluating how Russian activities affect countries’ security; and applying alternative methods, such Without understanding as social media analysis and survey research. the actual effects of Improving Attribution subversion, it is difficult Rapid attribution is critically important—it makes covert activities overt and makes it harder for Russia to deny its to fully articulate a actions.
For example, if the campaign led by proportionate response the Internet Research Agency had been rapidly attributed to the Russian government, the credibility and effectiveor to understand how ness of the campaign messaging would likely have been diminished.
The Internet Research Agency’s involvement this response should be ultimately became publicly known, but that organization had a great deal of time to shape public attitudes before prioritized among other being unmasked.
A delay in attribution can therefore be United States efforts. almost as harmful as a lack of attribution.
Attribution is also critical for justifying the imposition of punitive measures.
One possible way to facilitate APT advanced persistent threat faster attribution is to strengthen coordination within and CAATSA Countering America’s Adversaries Through across governments to better combine disparate sources Sanctions Act of information.
With improved defense and more targeted CIA Central Intelligence Agency punishment, better attribution may be effective at persuading Russia not to undertake subversion in the future.
Since then, actors affiliated with the Russian government have attempted to incite unrest in Ukraine 2 Interviews with Russian analysts, Moscow, July 2017.
A troll is defined as an individual who “posts a deliberately proactive 5 For the original text of the article, see Gerasimov, 2013.
For an message to a newsgroup or message board with the intention of causing English translation with commentary, see Galeotti, 2014. maximum disruption and argument,” according to NATO Strategic 6 Other Russian writers, such as Igor Dylevski, have also published Communications Centre of Excellence, 2016, 9. work on particular elements of subversion, such as information con15 Attribution in this case was based on political indicators.
Similarly to Gerasimov, Dylevski believes that the United wave of the attack was a response to the removal of a Soviet war memoStates is responsible for the spread of information threats.
Russians traditionally celebrate the victory over Nazis in the Second 7 This breakdown draws from the framework of the United States instruments World War.
Russian officials denied any involvement in the attacks but of national power outlined in Joint Publication 1, 2017, I-1, includpraised the perpetrators of the attack.
Europe’s Counter to Fake News and Cyber Attacks,” Washington, D.C.: Adamsky, Dmitry, Cross-Domain Coercion: The Current Russian Art of Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2018.
International Forum for Democratic Studies, 2018: National Endowment for Democracy, December 5, 2017.
Los Angeles Central Intelligence Agency, “Soviet Radio Propaganda About Times, February 18, 2019.
Understanding the Threat, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Estonia 2018, February 9, 2018.
The Third World Petroff, Alanna, “U.S.-Russia Business Ties: 5 Things You Need to War That Almost Was, 1950,” Cryptologic Quarterly, February 24, 1998.
United States Congress, Soviet Covert Action: The Forgery Offensive, 1980.
Zengerle, Patricia, “ United States Senators Introduce Russia Sanctions ‘Bill from Hell,’” Reuters, August 2, 2018.
First, we would like to thank MG Christopher McPadden, MG William Hix, and Walter Vanderbeek for funding and supervising this project.
At RAND, we also would like to thank Sally Sleeper, Karl Mueller, and Abby Doll, the project leaders, for providing us the funding and guidance for this research.
We very much appreciate the helpful peer reviews by Raphael Cohen of RAND and Jeffrey Edmonds of the Center for Naval Analyses.
Her work a project entitled Comprehensive Strategy for Meeting Five Russian focuses on Russian and Eurasian security and political issues, the use Challenges, sponsored by the Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff, of information efforts to influence populations, and deterrence.
The purpose of the project was to develop a Krystyna Marcinek is an assistant policy researcher at RAND strategy to assess the connections and interactions among the major Corporation and a Ph.D. candidate at the Pardee RAND Graduate problems and challenges the United States and NATO might face with Russia School.
Her research focuses on Russia and the future environment of in a war or other hostile environment, and provide policy options for warfighting. decisionmakers.
His work This research was conducted within RAND Arroyo Center’s Strategy, has focused on Russia and European security, including the threat of Doctrine, and Resources Program.
RAND Arroyo Center, part of the Russian political warfare, hybrid warfare, and measures short of war.
RAND Corporation, is a federally funded research and development center sponsored by the United States Army.
RAND operates under a “Federal-Wide Assurance” and complies with the Code of Federal Regulations for the Protection of Human Subjects Under United States Law , also known as “the Common Rule,” as well as with the implementation guidance set forth in DoD Instruction 3216.02.
As applicable, this compliance includes reviews and approvals by RAND’s Institutional Review Board and by the United States Army.
RAND’s publications do not necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors. is a registered trademark.
