Wed Feb 14, 2018 10:04 amWEDNESDAY HEADLINES:Putin is preparing a large-scale invasion of Ukraine, but in Kiev, this threat is underestimated.
It was said in the Russian press that it would take them three more years to prepare for the west, get enough weapons and train.
It is possible that they will not attack, that everything they will do will place their weapons around and threaten the country simply by saying"" We can break you tomorrow.
I do not just confirm, I claim, that it was the direct bribery "", he stressed.According to Ponomariov, his acquaintances from the bodies of the Russian government, in particular from the environment of Deputy Prime Minister Igor Shuvalov, said that the task was to financially interest representatives of the ""family"" of Yanukovych.
At the very least, we expect Russia to continue to use propaganda, social media, arsonists, sympathetic speakers and other means of influence to try to exacerbate social and political barriers in the United States,"" said the director of the National Intelligence Agency.
For the first time from Labitnangi, Oleg called, saying that transfer and money to the account are not needed yet.
And NATO provides strong political support, strong practical support to Ukraine.
As a result, he Lost power, and the country sharply"" swung ""to the west, that is, it was not better, but worse.
Join a single team at this stage lasted about 10 seconds, then stopped.After about 50 seconds, at an altitude of about 2000 meters, this one-time team was registered again, with this time the speed from the MVP3 was larger and continued to increase, while the speed from the MVP1 continued to decrease.After the second appearance of the specified one-time command , the crew shut off the autopilot.
All further flight was in manual mode.The speed reading from the MVP1 continued to fall and after 34 seconds after the autopilot off, they began to equal 0.
VIDEOBatkivshchyna leader Yulia Tymoshenko resorted to statistical manipulation during an interview with one of the Ukrainian TV channels.According to Tsensor.NET, a video recording on which Tymoshenko voices the wrong figures is published online.The politician reported a substantial increase in the national debt and said that it had occurred for four years.
Such a concentration of troops is not needed only for defense, TurchinovWed Feb 14, 2018 12:05 pmThe Russian Federation has placed a very powerful military potential in the occupied Crimean territory.
They are concentrated in the occupied territory of Crimea is a very powerful military capability, such concentration of forces only for the defense is required.
We analyze the situation and see a danger not only to the north and east but also south it is also a fact.
Therefore, we must be able and willing to fight back in all directions, from south to north,"" said Turchinov.On January 24, 2018, military anti-diversion training of Russian invaders and artillery units of the Army Corps of the Black Sea Fleet took place at the Angarsk range in Crimea.Russia occupied the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in 2014.
Moreover, the Russians recognized the defeat after seven days.The game started with a good ending performed by the British who earned three points.
Sat Apr 13, 2019 10:43 pmAdminIn Washington, a man set fire to himself in front of the White HouseSat Apr 13, 2019 8:46 pmAdminHackers broke several FBI-related sites and posted thousands of federal agents to the networkSat Apr 13, 2019 8:30 pmAdminUkraine News.
