The Russian Federation is ready to exchange Ukrainian serviceman and a people's deputy Hope Savchenko, if Ukraine acknowledges the validity of the sentence handed down to her by a Russian court.
However, the mother Hope Savchenko noted that the leadership of Ukraine is making every effort to return to her home.
When I was at it, he said that the 24 hours thinking about Nadia and decide on how to get her back, ""said Ukrainian mother.
She's too proud and won't admit to it, as it was all fabrication to begin with.
Mark Feygin, the lawyer of Ukrainian pilot Nadiia Savchenko illegally tried in Russia and held hostage by the Kremlin, has been unable to visit her in the remand prison for two hours.
Ukrainian pilot Nadiia Savchenko, who is kept in the Novocherkassk remand prison in the Rostov region of the Russian Federation, continues her dry hunger strike.
Before the sentence she had been on a dry hunger strike for six days and she made it.
In order to give the deceitful dogs, who watch her with surveillance video cameras, no chances to distort the truth in the Russian media, she does not use the shower and does not come close to the sink.
Lawyer Ilya Novikov is expecting good news about the fate of his client, Ukrainian pilot Nadiia Savchenko, who was sentenced to 22 years in prison in the Russian Federation.
He said live on Chorne Dzerkalo TV show on Inter TV channel, Censor.NET reports citing Interfax Ukraine.
But it comes down to the fact that good news may come in one of the next few days.
According to Novikov's information, Savchenko will not be transported in the coming days.
I have to be careful, but I can say that they are likely to move in the right direction, albeit more slowly than we would like.
I think that everyone understands, Russia in particular, that an attempt to convoy Nadiia in the current situation and her present condition would mean an attempt to disrupt such negotiations.
Novikov reminded that Savchenko went on a hunger strike three days ago.
In the center of the Russian capital Moscow near the monument to Yury Dolgoruky, police detained three participants of pickets in support of the convicted in Russia Ukrainian citizen Hope Savchenko.
According to one activist Mark Halperin, the detention took place when protesters, who succeeded each other at the monument, were about to leave.
Later, the site ""ATS-Info"" reported that Halperin, Artem Zvyagin Michael Kadanera and released from office.
On Saturday during pickets in support Savchenko was detained near the building of the presidential administration in Moscow.
In the ""China Town"" section was taken Lyudmila Lyubomudrova Love Nowosielski.
Subsequently, they were released from the police, a report on violation of the order of public events.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine has stated that the state of Hope Savchenko in the Russian prison has deteriorated sharply.
Foreign Ministry stressed that Russia will not allow for any Savchenko Ukrainian doctors or consular officers persons.
The Foreign Ministry believes that in this way Russia is trying to hide the real state of health Savchenko, to mislead the international community and poses a direct threat to her life.
The United States defense department announced its intention to buy from Russia 18 rocket engine RD-180.
It is noted that after the illegal annexation of Crimea, Congress banned the use of Russian engines for military purposes until 2019.
However, the United States intends to purchase them before the time, until their will.
The lawyer held in the Russian Ukrainians Hope Savchenko Mark Feigin called unsubstantiated talk of its imminent release.
Ukrainian defender said that ""fundamental news"" waiting for the next week.
After more than five hours of standby counsel Nicholas Hope Savchenko Polozova missed in prison, and her sister Hope and Faith are not allowed.
Of course, drip effect on the test results, the blood became less viscous, but it is a palliative.
Water shortages in the body on the ninth day of dry hunger strike destroys the hopes of the internal organs.
He also said that after several days of pressure and demands of the Federal Penitentiary Service today gave consuls the test results, which were taken from the Hope on Monday and today.
I'm afraid that the refusal to allow the facility director Vera serve as a catalyst for the adoption of Hope these decisions "", said the lawyer.
Nadia Savchenko's lawyer Mark Feygin does not believe in fast swap of his client.
Nadia Savchenko's lawyer Ilya Novikov says his client has been put on a drip after her sister, Vira Savchenko, managed to persuade her into having intravenous infusions, but Nadia's condition is critical, she's completely exhausted.
I have repeatedly said I'm ready to set the wheels in motion so as to return Nadiia Savchenko and other Ukrainian citizens back to Motherland.
I underline that when it comes to human life, one needs to put aside all sorts of politics and ensure the return as soon as possible,"" the president said.
I guess we managed to agree on a certain procedure of releasing Nadiia"", Poroshenko said.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko called illegally convicted in Russia Nadezhda Savchenko and persuaded her to stop the hunger strike.
He said Savchenko details of his conversation yesterday with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Petro Poroshenko, Ukraine’s pro-western president, hinted strongly on Tuesday that he had reached an agreement by telephone with his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, to secure the release of a Ukrainian pilot sentenced to 22 years in a Russian jail.
Nadia Savchenko was detained in June 2014 by Russian-backed separatists in the breakaway region of eastern Ukraine.
Her lawyers said her health had deteriorated sharply since she went on hunger strike following the end of her trial last month.
Addressing journalists on Tuesday, Mr Poroshenko said the phone call with Mr Putin had been the Ukrainian president’s idea.
She says she had to write a lot of letters to their destinations, ""said runners.
As explained by the lawyer, while Hope was holding a hunger strike and severely weakened, it could not reply to the letters of people who support it and write in prison.
Once Savchenko little stronger, he sits down at the letter to respond to all these people.
In accordance with international conventions Russia has a month to give an answer to the request for the extradition of Ukrainian People's Deputy of Hope Savchenko.
By convention, the requested State has one month to respond, plus another month it may further request.
But based on political decisions, of course, these terms can be accelerated.
The only question is whether the Kremlin agrees to fulfill part of its obligations "", said Polozov.
He also added that there is no progress in the admission of both Ukrainian and German doctors to Savchenko.
Activist of ""European Belarus"" Yulia Stepanova April 18 announced a hunger strike in solidarity with the Ukrainian aviatrix.
Despite the fact that, after much persuasion, the family and personally Peter Poroshenko Savchenko agreed to stop the hunger strike, the Belarusian activist plans to starve until 1 May.
His plans Stepanova ready to change only in the event that Hope Savchenko released.
According to his Facebook Yulia Stepanova now can not attend the rally in support Savchenko at the building of the Russian Embassy in Minsk, as a young child brings.
Russian Ministry of Justice has received a request for the documents required for the transfer to the National Deputy of Ukraine Hope Savchenko, convicted in Russia.
Request the Ministry of Justice of Ukraine on the eve of the provision of documents entered by facsimile.
At the same time the Ministry said that the Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons of 1983 does not regulate the terms of consideration of requests.
Ukrainian pilots Hope Savchenko, which a Russian court sentenced him to 22 years in prison, in the prison visited by the consul of Ukraine.
She suspended a hunger strike at the request @poroshenko Hope holds, and we do everything in our power, ""wrote Klimkin.
On March 22, the Russian court convicted Savchenko, awarding her '22 'imprisonment and a fine of 30 thousand rubles.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted a resolution and recommendations of the discussion of the report on the humanitarian problems of people during the military conflict in Ukraine.
In particular, questions were raised during the discussion of Ukrainian political prisoners in Russia and its annexed Crimea.
In a resolution adopted by 65 votes, there is also a demand to the Russian authorities to immediately release the citizen of Ukraine, a delegate to the PACE Hope Savchenko.
The document also refers to the strengthening of sanctions against Russia.
The adopted amendment to the resolution proposed to the member states of the Council of Europe to impose additional sanctions.
Similar measures should be considered in relation to other Ukrainian prisoners detained by the Russian authorities on trumped-up charges, ""the document says.
Moscow and Kyiv have agreed to swap Ukrainian pilot, MP and member of the Ukrainian delegation to PACE Nadia Savchenko for two Russian GRU officers, Alexander Alexandrov and Yevgeny Yerofeyev, convicted in Ukraine.
They will be transferred to serve their sentence at home until the end of May, Russian news agency RBC reported.
According to a federal official and a source close to the leadership of the Federation Council, Moscow will transfer Savchenko to Ukraine to serve her sentence, and Kyiv will return two Russian nationals, convicted in Ukraine.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko expects Ukrainian aviator Hope Savchenko be able to return to Ukraine for a few weeks.
I think for me personally and for many Ukrainians it will be a big celebration, ""he said.
Poroshenko urged politicians not to make statements on the case Savchenko.
After a few times it was before, when it was reckless comments of politicians harmed business and moved the resolution of this issue "", said the president.
Lawyer Mark Feigin submits a complaint to the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Hope Savchenko.
She was sentenced to 22 th years in prison for the murder of Russian journalists.
The chief officer of Russia's Novocherkassk detention center has given Nadiya Savchenko a package of documents needed for her extradition to Ukraine.
Vira Savchenko, the sister of the imprisoned Ukrainian pilot, reported about it speaking to the Ukrainian TSN news outlet after having met with Nadiya.
Kalganov, the prison director, told her it is necessary for the extradition.
Vera Savchenko is in the consulate, its fate is now being decided at the highest diplomatic level.
Since she was in a car with diplomatic plates, guards could not keep her.
Frankly, the consuls actually it recaptured the border guards, ""said Novikov.
The lawyer believes that her sister Vera Savchenko Ukrainian pilots' today or in the coming days ""will be able to leave the territory of Russia.
US does not have a clear deadline with respect to the holding of elections in the Donbass, but they insist on full compliance with international standards.
Our main concern, to conform to international standards and the Constitution of Ukraine.
However, it is important to fulfill two fundamental conditions "", said Toner.
Federal Penitentiary Service has started collecting documents necessary to further address the issue of extradition to Ukraine Hope Savchenko servicewoman convicted in Russia.
On Wednesday, May 4, TASS reported the press service of the department.
Russian Federal Penitentiary Service said it agreed to refer to the court for the issuance of documents Kiev Ukraine Hope Savchenko citizen only if the Ukrainian side assures the execution of the sentence.
Ukrainka was found guilty of the murder of Russian journalist Igor Korneliuk and Anton Voloshin and the attempted murder of their colleagues.
The representative of Ukraine to the Dmitri Kuleba told the Council of Europe, can be lifted sanctions against Russia after being illegally detained Ukrainian aviator Hope Savchenko will be transferred to Ukraine.
According to him, the lifting of sanctions against Russia after the transfer of Ukraine, Verkhovna Rada deputy of Hope Savchenko does not relate to each other.
I do not think that Russia is now very close to a weakening or lifting of sanctions, although it is making significant efforts to achieve this "", he said Kuleba channel"" 5 live.
Good news about the fate of Ukrainian political prisoners in Russia may appear before the end of May.
We look forward to positive news on the fate of Nadiia Savchenko by the end of month, as well as on the fate of other political prisoners held in the Russian Federation Yurii Soloshenko and Hennadii Afanasiev.
I would like to note that the president keeps the issue of their release on personal control,"" she said.
So far the process of their release is blocked as the militants demand amnesty,"" she added.
By the end of May expected positive news regarding illegally sentenced to Russia Ukrainian Nadiya Savchenko, George Soloshenko and Gennadiy Afanasyev.
We look forward to the end of the month positive news about the fate of solving Hope Savchenko and political prisoners held in Russia Yuri Afanasiev and Gennady Soloshenko.
March 22 so-called Court of Savchenko sentenced to 22 years in prison for the alleged murder of Russian journalists who were illegally in the east of Ukraine for information support of Russian fighters.
Poroshenko said that Ukraine is ready to transmit RF detained in the Donbass Russian commandos Alexander Alexandrov Evgeny Erofeev and in exchange for Savchenko.
Later, Ukraine's President even said that Vladimir Putin agreed with terms of release.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko, commenting on the possibility of exchanging Ukrainian pilots Hope Savchenko said that the head of the SBU Basil Hrycak instructed on the technical execution of all necessary legal conditions for this process, the press service of the President.
Poroshenko said that he is ready to use any of its constitutional powers to return home hope.
The President also noted that during today's talks much of his attention was devoted to the liberation of Hope Savchenko.
There will be no politics involved, but our foreign partners, ""he said.
Recall, the Russian court March 22, 2016 Hope Savchenko sentenced to 22 years colony.
Lawyer Mark Feigin Ukrainian reported that on April 27 Savchenko got extradition papers.
Poroshenko also said today that is ready to sign a pardon Russian Alexandrov HRUshnykam Erofeev and if it will return to Ukraine Hope Savchenko.
Lawyers illegally convicted in Ukrainian Nadiya Savchenko not informed that in the coming hours may occur HRUshnykiv exchange for Russian.
I think you better turn to the official representatives of the state "", said the"" Interfax ""on Wednesday lawyer Savchenko Nikolai Polozov.
Earlier on Wednesday, informed sources told"" Interfax ""that the plane of President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko in the coming hours will land at the airport of Rostov-on-Don , where it expects sentenced in Hope Savchenko.
It was reported that on board are HRUshnyky Yerofeyev Eugene and Alexander Alexandrov.
Recall that today President Poroshenko was filed petitions for clemency HRUshnykiv Erofeeva Eugene and Alexander Alexandrov.
Vera Savchenko, sister illegally convicted in Ukrainian Nadiya Savchenko has no official information about the possible exchange.
If, for example, are the troops and say they are here now will perform tasks, they will not do it.
Earlier on Wednesday, informed sources told"" Interfax ""that the plane of President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko in the coming hours will land at the airport of Rostov-on-Don , where he expects sentenced in Hope Savchenko.
Recall that today President Poroshenko was filed petitions for clemency HRUshnykiv Evgeny Erofeev and Alexander Alexandrov.
Lawyers Savchenko not informed that in the coming hours may occur exchange for Russian HRUshnykiv.
Lawyer illegally convicted in Hope Savchenko Ukrainian Ilya Novikov is now located in Rostov-on-Don and promises to report important news for two hours.
The Ukrainian President's plane has landed in Russia's Rostov city to take home Ukrainian pilot Nadiya Savchenko, who was illegally convicted and jailed in Russia.
She is expected to be swapped for two Russian special forces servicemen, captured and convicted in Ukraine.
This is reported by the Ukrainian news outlet UNIAN with a reference to their source in Russia.
Savchenko should be swapped today, on May 25"", UNIAN quotes a source as saying.
Nadiia Savchenko’s release and return to Ukraine was the result of agreement reached by the leaders of Ukraine, France, Germany, and Russia during the telephone conversation on May 23.
The Elysee Palace announced on Wednesday, Censor.NET informs citing Interfax-Ukraine.
The negotiation, in particular, helped return Ukrainian pilot Nadiia Savchenko back to Ukraine,' Hollande's administration reports.
Ukrainian pilot Nadiia Savchenko has met with President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko in Presidential Administration following her arrival in Ukraine.
The meeting was also attended by Savchenko's mother and sister as well as Nadiia's fellows-in-arms.
Most journalists were putting questions to Iryna Herashchenko at that moment.
Savchenko thanked all her supporters as well as enemies and indifferent people.
Girlfriend liberated Ukrainian Deputy Hope Savchenko Irina Yuzyk told how Hope was the first night in freedom and its future plans.
Nadia says a lot, says a 5:00 sitting in a paddy in the ""glass"", as the latter did not know where she was being taken whether on stage or on the exchange, ""writes Yuzyk.
For Lions also mentions more than once) Well, get ready, dear powers ""said Yuzyk.
Mama Hope Savchenko Maria Ivanovna after meeting the daughter stated that her daughter had not seen since 24 December.
She said she does not know about plans for Hope, including on rehabilitation.
As you know, May 25, Nadia Savchenko took the presidential plane from Russia, Ukraine along with Russia sent Russian spetspryznachentsiv Alexander Alexandrov and Eugene Yerofeyeva.
US Vice President Joe Biden says Nadia Savchenko example for the Ukrainian people and all people.
As you know, May 25, Nadia Savchenko took the presidential plane from Russia, Ukraine along with Russia sent Russian spetspryznachentsiv Alexander Alexandrov and Evgeny Erofeev.
In June 2014 it seized the militants so-called ""FSC"", then it forcibly moved to Russia, where the March 22 court illegally sentenced her to 22 years in prison for the death of two Russian journalists in the zone of fighting in eastern Ukraine, as well as a fine for "" illegal border crossing ""of.
Savchenko has repeatedly declared a hunger strike, including dry , protesting against the illegal detention of its jailed in Russia.
One Russian soldier was killed and one wounded during a raid by the enemy reconnaissance group belonging to 11th Infantry regiment, Makiyivka.
SBU, Ukraine’s security service, denied access to UN team to visit its rayon offices in the Donbas war zone, SBU chief Vasyl Hrytsak told journalists in Lviv May 26.
The team was allowed to visit pre-trial detention prisons where suspects are held but not the SBU offices in the war zone, he said.
In the USA, you cannot visit CIA or FBI offices where operatives work and where secret documents are held, he said.
The UN team on fighting torture cut short its visit to Ukraine when it was banned to visit the prisons where, they believe, SBU holds suspects.
The Interior Ministry has unveiled the details of yesterday's attack on the wife of Ukraine's NSDC Secretary Oleksandr Turchynov.
As established, the attacker appeared to be Volodymyr Olentsevych, a resident of Donetsk and a lawyer.
He is known for his claims to abolish the decrees on conferring Stepan Bandera and Roman Shukhevych the title of Hero of Ukraine.
Moreover, in 2014, Olentsevych sued Oleksandr Turchynov for the illegal dismissal of Viktor Yanukovych as the president of Ukraine,"" the statement notes.
As reported, the attacker knew the woman only by photos from the Internet, showing her with short hair.
As a result, Olentsevych assaulted another woman with a similar hairstyle.
Taking advantage of the moment, a security officer that made his appearance after Hanna Turchynova started to scream, knocked the knife from the criminal's hand and detained him.
During a search of Olentsevych, the police found Hanna Turchynova's personal data and a copy of the decree by Acting President of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov on the start of anti-terrorist operation dated spring 2014, which the attacker planned to leave at the crime scene.
According to investigators, Olentsevych has had contacts with ""government members"" of the so-called ""DPR"" and the leaders of propagandist media in the temporarily uncontrolled territory of Ukraine.
President Vladimir Putin of Russia reckons with the opinion of Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko after all.
Nadiia Savchenko's lawyer Mark Feygin said at a press conference, Censor.NET reports citing Vlada.io.
Mark Feygin commented in such a manner the reasons that affected Nadiia Savchenko's release.
But, in his opinion, it was the night talks in the Normandy format that determined the fate of the pilot.
Earlier, the lawyer said that Russia, unlike Ukraine, had got no law enabling to pardon people.
Therefore, the decision on Nadiia Savchenko was a kind of exception to the general rule.
Former representative of Ukraine in the UN Human Rights Vladimir Vasilenko said that the Kremlin freed hostage Hope Savchenko has to appeal to the European Court of Human Rights.
May 25, 2016 Ukrainian pilots that zaґratamy illegally detained in Russia finally liberated.
On the morning of the presidential plane flew to Rostov for Hope Savchenko.
Instead of two Russian aircraft HRUshnykamy, previously spared the president, headed for Moscow.
