We tried to discuss all of this with Gleb Pavlovskiy, the founder and director of the Effective Politics Foundation, who worked for many years during the ""managed democracy"" period as an expert presenting political ideas and implications to the country's top leaders.
And who has for this reason studied the mechanisms for taking decisions very well.
On the other hand, the seizure of Crimea and the ""suspended"" instability in Southeast Ukraine remove the threat of NATO bases appearing in Sevastopol and make Ukraine joining the European and North Atlantic structures unrealistic in the near future the latter will not want to accept a country burdened with territorial problems, with a nuclear neighbour, and the very difficult problems of overcoming its disintegration.
With the best will in the world, it is impossible to note anything more positive in the Kremlin's gains in its current Ukrainian policy all of the other numerous consequences, moreover in virtually all spheres, look like complete and utter losses and often catastrophic ones.
Not to mention what it is quite terrifying to talk about the prospects of a quite real and non-camouflaged war, at the very least on a European scale.
We believe this theoretically, but we do not much like encountering it in fact, and Putin does not like it either.
What shook Ukraine more or less up to the second half of January the beginning of February, appeared in general to be comprehensible and took place within the bounds of Ukraine and the previous world order.
But then, to the general amazement everything somehow proceeded wrongly, not as usual.
Many people are arguing about whether there was a revolution in Ukraine or not.
This really spontaneous revolution took everyone unawares, in particular those who were playing in the Kyiv field.
And Putin was playing on this field and at that moment he was already ""up to his ears"", as it were, in this field.
So when the Ukrainian president suddenly, after jumping out of the window of his own dacha, turned up at our base in Sevastopol, the mould was broken.
Something quite unusual happened, after all everything that had occurred up to then both the tender organized by Yanukovych between Russia and the EU, and afterwards between the Maydan as well, at first a happening and then something more serious was interpreted within the framework of the previous discourse.
I mean that now the position of ""let's put everything back in its place and do as our grandfathers did"" will not work.
Even if all the world leaders meet at Yanukovych's dacha near Kyiv, they will not restore the previous status quo.
In fact, Putin himself reacted for too long, and in general everyone reacted.
The poor quality of European politicians was just registered with the Crimean improvisation.
And a moral evaluation of Russian actions in March in Crimea will not suggest anything now about what to do in September.
But surely the decision on the ""annexation"" of Crimea was taken not by Kyiv, not by Obama, but by Putin.
So responsibility for the consequences of this decision and for what to do in September lies in the first instance with us.
As far as who takes the decisions is concerned, that is an interesting question in general.
It would seem that Putin in his third term has ascended to a level where he is almost invisible but everyone is forced to discuss only him.
We understand that his decisions have a strong influence on everything but we do not really know which decisions or about what.
It is obvious not only from the twists and turns but even from the style of the wording that they are prepared in different places.
Something like a system for authorizing Putin's various decisions operates in the Kremlin, with the secretariat certifying copies.
Putin is spread thinly throughout this system but you can surely not take a step without a signature stamp.
I am already finding it difficult to distinguish his personality, where he is there himself, and who is really operating.
And I cannot see this process slowing down it is continuing and will evidently progress further.
The circle is very well defined and has been narrowed downas far as possible, but beyond that it is no longer clear.
But in the USSR the politburo did actually know that it was the only institution of succession.
And we do not have this in the hall of fame either, everyone is immortal there now.
Incidentally that is why it has become unfashionable to have your own opinion on principle.
Since it is not the accepted thing to pit yourself against Putin and you do not know what opinion Putin has in each individual case, it is better not to do this at all.
When someone opposes on principle -in relation to any issue -the very fact that he has voiced an opinion causes hostility.
We see people becoming tense even when you, say, are at war with Sobyanin's deputy, it is the same thing as being at war with Putin.
It is clear that only Putin could have taken the final decision on Crimea.
It is not for nothing that the myth about the two versions of the speech, which he kept in his pocket, is so popular.
I think that there was nevertheless one speech, but not everything was actually clear until the last moment.
And the decision was ultimately no longer dictated by concern about the fate of the regime but, however sad it might be, by fear.
Because the regime was in general placed in a very difficult position after March.
Fear that our system would not be able to control any of the moderate decisions.
The Kremlin already knows very well that it, generally speaking, controls nothing but that it is able to function in conditions where everyone expresses loyalty to it.
So in actual fact, a moment of fear arose that, they said, we will not be able to deal with this.
And the fear then prompted a wrong decision -include it and then we will see.
According to our Russian rules, including means removing the problem of control.
If something is part of the Russian Federation it is inevitably controlled.
In Kyiv back under Yanukovych, the regime took the initiative of setting the so-called ""titushky"" -that is effectively unofficial security detachments -loose on the streets.
It first pushed the opposition into self defence, and then the relevant detachments emerged.
I do not now want to look into the situation inside Ukraine although it is very interesting in itself.
But I want to say that a large number of ""findings"" and ""discoveries"" were made in Ukraine and then exported to us with our Russian help.
But in actual fact there is a front without a frontline here, where groups using force, defined neither by territory nor by form, nor by ideology, hold clubs in some cases, bogeymen in others.
In the first instance, a position in Ukraine, which our propaganda has made to look like his personal position.
Because we have got used to the channel of influence in Ukraine passing only via its president.
We had got used to this, it was more convenient for us to exert influence like that -via the president and his staff.
A power vacuum arose in Kyiv under which new forms of influence could have been organized if this had been necessary.
Especially since after the flight of the president a war among the elite, the old elite, who are very well-known to us, started there.
We get the world reaction, moreover initially -for something that changes the borders in Europe -an unusually mild one.
This is also an interesting point that for some reason is not being noticed.
Despite all the national fervour, which all forms of Ukraine's media are demonstrating, the real will to resist was low.
Yes, while everything there was stolen, the mice have eaten everything.
But there was not really any mass willingness to defend Ukraine since there was too diverse an idea of what Ukraine was and over all the past 20 years no-one inside the country had bothered about the question of how to sew it together.
While people were fighting for the vertical of power here, Kyiv was boring out the horizontal -transit.
The fight for proximity to the pipeline and to the financial allocations from it.
This proved to be a fatal fact for us because we were sucked in further than we wished.
Europe is growling at us here about Crimea but if there is a problem in the south east then they will forget about Crimea.
Russian citizens are filtering through and joining these so-called pro-Russian groups that initially, generally speaking, had little influence and the source of whose support was not clear.
They are the people who did not go through the mangle of the managed democracy of our previous decade.
For a long time they were not admitted to anything, they were outside the mainstream, outside of Putin's consensus.
There were not heard on the television, and if they were admitted into someone's office it was by the back entrance, rarely, and in such a way that no-one saw them.
They were people excluded from the meagre political process and from any of the pathetic political debates.
By the end of the era of managed democracy, several people had been cautiously brought out into the open, Prokhanov and several others -here, they said, are some stupid people, we have such tame enemies who can be allowed on air.
During this time many different mutations arose, and we are now seeing these mutations in the east of Ukraine.
This also includes, incidentally, representation of a significant part of the spectrum at Bolotnaya, not only nationalists.
A significant section of the opposition spectrum, the real street one and not of course those represented in the Duma, switched over here.
And there is only one way to find out what is really happening -talk to it personally.
Not just interviewing Russians in the east of Ukraine as if they were exotic animals.
And until a language is developed, other people will supply a language, and then there is no need to complain.
They will evidently also ask questions, only not within the framework of a dialogue but within the framework of action.
You do not re-import many of the actions from Ukraine, but there is no doubt that our mainstream is shifting.
I repeat, if we do not consider calmly who these people are, a significant number of whom believe in what they are doing , if there is no such dialogue, then that means trouble.
The state of the political atmosphere, which is foul now anyway, will become impossible.
It is somehow quite difficult to imagine a dialogue between these people and the so-called national traitors.
Although in my opinion there are more deserving contenders for them -those who dragged our country into this dangerous escapade.
Ostankino Archipelago I would like to return to the start of our conversation, to the motives for the Kremlin's behaviour in the Ukrainian crisis.
That is, it appears to be not only diplomatic discourse but also discourse allowing for dialogue.
But at the same time the Ostankino archipelago with its ultra-propaganda lives and works.
It is seen all the time as a loudspeaker broadcasting from Putin's office, as if Putin himself is saying all of this.
And a psychologically inevitable infection with his own propaganda is occurring.
Moreover, this is no longer simple propaganda now, it has gone beyond all the limits of good and evil.
Ernst himself comes up with more images for him than Putin has found in Pikul in his entire life.
Such things exist but you know the stories that we see cannot be written in line with the rule books, we are seeing a serial, it is Hollywood with special effects, only not with pine trees and flowers.
And its main source is to force its way through our brains to the largest possible audience.
I do not know of any media which after creating a large audience using whatever you like -a TV series, a revolution, military atrocities -would give it up.
Just as a politician cannot give up a high rating -it is a drug for him.
In the same way television will not give up a big audience -it is also a drug.
Especially since it is a commercial drug -an audience is a commodity, sold for advertising.
I think media ratings are real, while political ratings are fakes, produced from audience ratings.
There is nothing good about the fact that people are being bludgeoned mentally, moreover not young children but adults.
The fact that they are being bludgeoned irreparably, and that they are being bludgeoned deliberately and irresponsibly, is obvious to me.
I try to imagine these people who are at the head of the television channels.
They possibly think that it does not matter, the viewer will come round later.
The schedule will change, there will be more family programmes with seals on the screen, and everyone will become peaceful and friendly.
But peace does not provide an audience and hence ratings for politicians.
It is interesting that it has closed in on itself now because the oligarchic media, which everyone repeatedly cursed did not create such a closed drugs loop -because a battle between oligarchic groups was underway there.
While he is a great and powerful military president conducting a desperate war on behalf of NATO, alone against Russia, against a super-power, he is a major figure, he will not be eaten up.
As soon as a truce starts he just turns into the Ukrainian president, and they have always, however many of them there were, been eaten up by their own oligarchic groups and forced to negotiate.
There is one protected position in Ukraine today -the position of a war president.
And since only the Russians can be ""infinitely superior"", all the militias, without exception, need to be included in the Russian regular forces.
But Russia really is helping the separatists with both weapons and people.
I do not only not rule it out, I think that this is the main problem today.
Television controlling a war permits things that people simply would not have dared do a year ago.
Well they would not have switched on such a machine during Putin's election campaign, but today a blood bath in the evenings is the political norm here.
Courage is needed, on the contrary, to switch it off, even to reduce its volume, considerable courage is needed, which, alas, our leaders no longer have.
In this regard they are as weak as all the new generation of European leaders.
They admire their own strength on the television, it has replaced a mirror for them.
Firstly, the habit has arisen of what I would call an absolute rating, a rating of total support.
And habits in politics always grow into groups of interests, finance, and tools.
Previously, say five years ago, those who encroached on the prerogatives of power were considered a threat.
While today it is those who have encroached on half a per cent of the rating who become the threat.
Each risk of the regime losing one per cent is simple -like NATO in Crimea.
After all, there is quite little real confrontation for the time being.
In people's heads missiles with Ukrainian warheads are already approaching Moscow.
I am sorry but this plan, like Putin's plan 10 years ago, is just a kind of ideology.
However, there were the 12 Minsk points and then everything suddenly went magically quiet.
The truce consists of Putin and Poroshenko expressing satisfaction about its existence.
And, generally speaking, the entire world is becoming similar to the Ukrainian-Russian crisis.
They will not be allowed to return with sub-machine-guns and ""Buks"" , after all.
The issue is another one -it is that the country's agenda is changing absolutely.
At the same time, the everyday apathy and total contempt for reality remain.
People have started to throw themselves at one another, they are simply losing it.
On the one hand, Ukraine does not in fact interest them in their daily lives.
The population of Crimea ceased to interest citizens immediately after Crimea was annexed.
We have ceased to evaluate our political scene at all -even in an ideological way, even incorrectly.
It seems to me that it is quite difficult now for us to be described as participants in a punitive operation.
Because the audience does not know anything real now, apart from enemies.
Television programmes have long been boring downwards and will continue to simplify everything.
This is a surprising experiment on a country where there were once village reading rooms.
At this level it is not only modern civilian and military technologies that cannot be developed, at this level it will soon be impossible even to deliver bread to bakeries.
Our leaders do not want an open direct invasion, according to information from various sources.
Everyone is blowing on the water of the truce today, and I am blowing on it too.
A day afterwards he was killed, and in another three days the First World War started.
A false sense of control arises, although in actual fact it has decreased.
In Europe people already know where this will all end and they are promising measures that are really devastating for us and for the market in general.
No-one knows, firstly, whose nerves will hold, and, secondly, in precisely what form.
I think that a real risk is growing of a spasmodic, sudden enlargement of the conflict without any intermediate links.
Control is now needed to ensure the militias are not smashed and Poroshenko is scared off the idea of surrendering Donetsk.
The Kremlin and Putin personally have to all intents and purposes tied themselves to the protection of this very Novorossiya.
Previously if they had lost -it would have been the militia, but today the outcome is that only he can lose.
It is very difficult to do this when so many false targets such as the ""junta"", the ""participants in a punitive operation"", and especially ""terrorists"", have been introduced.
But I repeat, everyone is playing the game of ""Putin has had a chat with Poroshenko"", and they have started to kill fewer people.
I am sure that neither the words ""junta"", nor ""participants in a punitive operation"" were pronounced during their talks, nor ""terrorists"" either.
But the point is that this conversation means little for those who are shooting.
Poroshenko cannot allow an election now, so that he is not a war president.
There are almost two months until 26 October, and all sorts of things can happen in this time.
While we did not define our strategy, what aims we had in general, we are starting to adapt our aims to the reality.
If we had had such an aim then it would have proposed a whole programme of action after Crimea's separation, in order to somehow convince, force everyone to swallow this in one way or another.
In addition to the fact that it cannot retreat and this priority is hanging over everyone.
Everyone must win -Poroshenko must win, Putin must win, Novorossiya must win.
We are already seeing how they are paying -with their lives and a collapse.
And we are also already paying in a variety of ways, the budget is just the beginning.
We are conducting a huge campaign for what I would call controlled Russophobia in the world today.
Moscow is now the generator of Russophobia and, even worse, a kind of, I would say, almost racial hatred of everything that is linked to Russia.
And since their own degeneration of politics is, alas, also underway in Europe and the Western world , the role of populism and populist parties and movements is growing.
A little more and we really will turn into the image of the enemy, which we were moving so far away from.
So I think that the risk of an escalation of the dispersed, combined para-war, this paramilitary phenomenon, into a real war is high and that it is still growing.
And the fact that it is still growing, despite the talk of peace and truces, is a bad sign.
Let us try to return to political bookkeeping, to Russia's losses and gains from the Ukrainian crisis.
Which it is not worth going into, you can drop down into the sea together with a valuable historical monument.
We gained, in a terrible way, knowledge about ourselves, about our society, about Ukraine, about states of minds, about what opposition in Russia can and cannot be.
We also understand something now in the Russian world -the real one and not the fantasy one.
How it is evident in the Kremlin, in a cell of the Chudov Monastery when it is built.
