It is possible to understand what is happening in Ukraine, it is much more difficult to evaluate and forecast the development of events.
Blood, death and destruction are the most serious emotional blows, but if you follow your emotions, neither proper assessment nor correct forecast will result.
The United States and the West are facing of the strongest crises in its history.
The strength and depth of the problem are compounded by the fact that ... the West has won.
It incorporated practically all of Europe, crushed, to varying degrees, the whole world with a few exceptions.
Now those who can be robbed are fewer and fewer, and those with whom it is necessary to share the ""stolen goods"", that is the standard of living that rests on unrestricted dollar emissions, are more and more.
In the United States it is 18 trillion dollars, but such debts, and even worse ratios of the national debt to GDP, exist in all so-called developed countries.
As a result the United States must eliminate two threats to its power China and Russia.
To do this the United States need to change regime in one of these countries.
Obviously, the Americans think that the regime change in Russia is an easier task.
Orange technologies did not work in 2011, Putin became president again.
What the West does when it loses in any territory is most important for understanding the events in Ukraine.
When we talk about a Western loss we mean the failure of its plans and loss of control over a certain area, full or partial.
Before leaving the British set up the Anti-India a new state of Pakistan.
Evacuate there the army of Chiang Kai-shek under the protection of the United States Navy.
Tensions, the permanent possibility of war between China and the Anti-China ensue.
In the geopolitical game to grant a diplomatic recognition is to follow the current 'national' interests, and nothing more.
But later Washington changes its position, recognizes Beijing and ceases to recognize Taipei.
At the same time it strongly supports Taiwan and prevents the reunification of the two ""Chinas"" Let's not stray far into history.
In 2011 the West loses control of Russia not completely yet, but its plans to deny Putin another presidential term fail.
The dismantling of the fifth column begins, Russia strongly defends its interests in the world.
And the Anglo-Saxons start creating it, the soil is prepared in Ukraine.
Propaganda starts in 1991 and even earlier, militants are trained, money is allocated, the elite is bought and well fed.
According to the United States plans, Yanukovych should be removed during the elections in 2015.
Remove him in such a way as to launch anti-Russian hysteria and begin to create the Anti-Russia from Ukraine.
What is happening today in Ukraine is nothing more than the creation of the Anti-Russia.
Propaganda, hate, readiness to destroy and kill on the part of the nationalists and some deceived common citizens.
When they pump up the Ukrainian army, equip it, create it, and prepare it.
After that the United States will try to pit the two parts of the same nation against each other, set Ukraine against Russia.
Were the Crimea not reunited with Russia, it would still remain an excuse.
Basing the Russian army in Crimea, pro-Russian population living there would give a lot of opportunities for the organization of conflicts and provocations.
Therefore, regardless of the actions of Putin and the people of Crimea the Western plan would remain the same.
Support of those in Ukraine itself who do not agree with this turn of events.
The West creates the Anti-Russia, Russia must help and support the Anti-anti-Russia.
When in the Southeast of Ukraine the people who do not agree with the Kiev's coup rose up, few had a clear idea that they were “blocking the road” of such a terrible scenario.
The presence of the Anti-anti-Russia as a part of a federalized Ukraine, refusing either to arm for the West, nor to pull the chestnuts out of the fire for it, blocked the Western plans to unleash the Ukrainian-Russian war.
Moscow's insistent calls for the territorial integrity of Ukraine, for federalization, for negotiations.
Moscow needs a unified Ukraine, where the pro-Russian part of the society will ""tie"" the hands of the militants and bought politicians, and will not allow to draw the whole Ukrainian people into the war.
It needs a militarized state with an aggressive ideology in the form of hatred directed against Russia. To draw Russia into war, forcing her to send troops into Ukraine.
And the more Ukrainian citizens will die in the fratricidal war, the better for the West – the rebellious Slavic nation eliminates itself.
All of it in order to take the course toward preparation of the war between Russia and China.
Neither military success nor the military invasion by Russia and its participation in the civil conflict was achieved.
The existence of the DNR and LNR as Anti-anti-Russia is the key to inability of the West to start a war between Ukraine and Russia.
The cannonball on its leg does not let the United States to push Kiev toward this Great War with tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of victims.
That is why Moscow is helping Donbass in every way possible that is why Sergei Lavrov says that we are for the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
That is why Russia does not recognize the DNR and LNR as independent states.
To recognize them, to let them secede means to launch countdown for war with Ukraine.
In case of incorporation of Donbass into Russia, those in Washington will stand up and give a standing ovation.
In today's situation the Russian tactics in Ukraine are the only correct ones.
United States must pay to support 40 million people, Russia must help 3 million people in the Donbass and 1. million refugees.
Moscow constantly insists on negotiations, not allowing the aggressor being shaped by the west to ""remove the weight"" from its leg, not allowing DNR and LNR to be defeated militarily.
Even to the militants in Chechnya in the 90's they gave no dollars, instead they gave them clichés for printing fake dollars.
Self-financing is the principle of the Anglo-Saxon politics, in extreme cases a refund within a short period of time.
The bet of the West – to organize a new Maidan in Russia, now that the path to war in Ukraine was blocked by the courage and determination of the DNR and LNR militia fighters.
The bet of Russia – wait till the West loses its interest in Ukraine because of high costs without any tangible benefits.
Washington wants to use the instability of Ukraine at least for a possibility of gas blackmail of Moscow.
Few in today's Ukraine understand what a tremendous role the courage of the Donbass residents plays in today's world politics.
And the paradox, they save the lives of hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian citizens.
The same children that today are ""jumping"" in Ukrainian schools, whose parents collect money for ATO, support the Kiev authorities, in case of defeat Donbass, in a very short period of time they will become gun fodder, according to the United States plan.
That's what all of us need to remember, regardless of our current citizenship.
There is no doubt my mind that MH17 was shot down by a Ukrainian SU-25, possibly one of several Su-25s patrolling the skies that day to intercept a civilian airliner the downing of which was to become the ""surprise"" Poroshenko promised and which Kolomoiskii probably organized.
