In both Belarus and Kazakhstan he originally sent troops to quell popular protests against their dictators.
Then he demoted those dictators to little more than provincial governors.
While nobody really knows what is going on in Putin's mind, here are some thoughts on the invasion of Ukraine.
After the Mongol invasion of the 13th century, Kiev's kingdom disintegrated.
While Moscow was picking up the pieces of various small principalities and the south was still controlled by Mongols, Ukraine's territory was occupied first by Lithuania and then by Poland, which eventually united.
So most of Ukraine was now ""united"" within the Russian empire, except Galicia.
Ukraine was actually one of the causes of World War I The Austrian Empire and the Russian Empire had been quarreling about the Balkans, and, being rivals, each supported rebellion in the part of Ukraine controlled by the other.
There were Ukrainians who wanted Russia to invade Galicia, the only part of Ukraine not controlled by Russia, and there were Ukrainians who resented being occupied and colonized by Russia and would have preferred to be under Austrian rule.
World War | started after the assassination in 1914 of archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria by a Serbian nationalist.
Russia sided with Serbia while Germany and the Ottoman Empire sided with Austria.
Some Ukrainians saw an opportunity to split Ukraine from Russia and formed a volunteer unit in the Austrian army.
Russia quickly occupied Galicia and extended the ban on the Ukrainian language to that region.
In 1917 the Russia revolution deposed the czar and installed a provisional government.
What is generally known as the Russian revolution of October 1917 was actually a coup by Lenin that overthrew that government and started a civil war for the control of Russia.
When Lenin seized power in Russia, this parliament declared the independence of Ukraine from Russia.
Lenin's Bolsheviks didn't recognize the independence of Ukraine and invaded Ukraine.
The Ukrainian parliament signed a peace treaty with Austria and Germany so that Austria and Germany intervened to protect Ukraine from Lenin's invasion.
Germany turned out to be a double crosser and installed its own puppet government in Ukraine.
Luckily for Ukraine, Germany and Austria lost the war, so that in 1918 the puppet government resigned and the Ukrainian parliament was in control again.
War erupted in western Ukraine between Ukraine and Poland while at the same time Lenin's Bolsheviks were trying to invade eastern Ukraine.
Both reds and whites committed atrocities against Ukrainians, and the whites restored the anti-Ukranian laws wherever they took control.
In 1919 Poland also invaded most of Lithuania and Belarus, and in 1920 briefly invaded Ukraine.
The Bolsheviks had largely defeated the whites and finally sued for peace with Poland.
The peace treaty of Riga split both Ukraine and Belarus between Poland and Russia.
The Ukrainian government went into exile as Russia turned Ukraine into a communist republic which in 1922 dutifully joined the newly born Soviet Union.
The good news is that the Soviet Union recognized the Ukrainian language and Ukrainian cultural traditions.
The bad news is that the Soviet Union relocated a lot of Russians to Ukraine, and that's why eastern Ukraine today is mostly ethnic Russian.
After World War II Ukraine expanded a bit to the west and in 1954 Soviet leader Khrushev gifted Crimea to Ukraine, despite the fact that 75% of its population was ethnic Russians.
At the time that gift was meaningless because Ukraine was part of the same Soviet Union as Russia.
At the end of World War | several new countries were created by the disintegration of the Austrian and Ottoman empires, like Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and Iraq.
When the Spanish empire collapsed in the 19th century, a lot of countries were created in Latin America that had never existed before, from Mexico to Argentina.
When the British empire collapsed after World War Il, several countries were created that never existed before, like Pakistan and most African countries.
When the Dutch Empire collapsed, Indonesia was created, a country that never existed before.
Up until then Crimea was mainly populated by Tatars, a Turkic-speaking ethnic group descended from the Mongols.
The Tatars became a minority and were almost completely eliminated during World War II when about 200,000 were deported by Stalin to Siberia.
In 1954 the Soviet Union, which ruled both Russia and Ukraine, moved Crimea from Russia to Ukraine.
So if you start from 1783, and ignore the fact that Crimea was stolen from the Tatars, Putin is right.
Putin made a big mistake in 2012 when he gave a speech in Kiev in which he told the Ukrainians that Russians and Ukrainians are one people.
That offended many Ukrainians and two years later the Ukrainians revolted against their pro-Russian president.
Another mistake was to support Yanukovych when he ran for president in 2010.
Ukraine is better off without Crimea, and perhaps even without Donbass.
By stealing Crimea and now Donbass, Russia has removed millions of ethnic Russians from Ukraine.
Russia may have helped solve one of Ukraine's two big internal problems, by making Ukraine more western-leaning than ever.
Ernst & Young ranks Ukraine amongst the most-corrupt nations of the world.
The only country in Europe that is more corrupted than Ukraine is Russia.
Zelenskyy, who was elected to fight corruption, he has been slow to make progress on fighting corruption precisely because of the Russian threat, that constituted a graver danger for the nation and for himself personally.
The oligarchs have been lining up behind Zelensky because they realize that a puppet regime installed by Putin would mean that the Russian oligarchs would replace them.
Better to be poorer oligarchs in an independent Ukraine than be nobody in a Ukraine controlled by Putin's mafia.
People like Rinat Akhmetov and Vadim Novinsky , Ihor Kolomoyskyi (now disgraced but a former supporter of Zelenskyy and the original financial supporter of the neofascist Azov militia), Viktor Pinchuk , and Petro Poroshenko himself, who was president of Ukraine before Zelenskyy defeated him, are nationalist out of personal interest and likely to be more malleable if Ukraine remains independent, having realizes what they have to lose.
If it is ok for Russia to regain Crimea on the basis that it has been Russian for two centuries, then it is ok for Finland to demand the return of Karelia, stolen by the Soviet Union in 1940, and for Japan to demand the return of the the Kuril islands, that were Japanese until 1945, and for Germany to demand the return of Kaliningrad, which used to be the German city of Koenigsberg until 1945.
In 2014 the events that overthrew Ukraine's president Yanukovych were not a coup at all.
A coup is carried out by either the military or the police, by someone with guns.
Yanukovych was convinced to resign and leave the country by international diplomacy, including Russia.
The politicians who took over were all elected members of Ukraine's parliament, and they were mostly Russianspeaking Ukrainians, notably the one chosen as temporary president, Oleksandr Turchynov.
One month later Russia, taking advantage of the chaos in a divided country where pro-Russian and anti-Russian groups were shooting each other, invaded and annexed Ukraine's Crimea.
Three months later, in May, another ethnic Russian, Petro Poroshenko, won presidential elections.
It is true that initially the European Union had agreed with Russia on a plan to keep Yanukovych in power, but the European Union does not control the will of the Ukrainian people.
What certainly irked Putin was that the revolution happened during the Winter Olympic Games that were being held in Sochi, Russia.
If Russia were ruled by a more appealing leader, or quite simply if Russia were a regular democracy, the Ukrainians may be more willing to federate with Russia, the same way that Italians federated with France in the European Union.
The Russians of Crimea, who are now part of Russia, have lost all their freedom.
If Putin truly wants Russia and Ukraine to unite, all he has to do is to resign.
If he disappears , there's a good chance that the two nations will reunite.
The longer he remains in power the more likely that the rift becomes irreversible.
Putin points out NATO's promise never to enlarge after the fall of the Soviet Union.
While that was never put in writing, there are lots of documents that show how Western leaders misled the Russians to believe that a promise had been made.
In exchange for the Soviet Union's acceptance of German reunification , the West verbally promised that there would be no NATO enlargement to the east.
Notably, in February 1990 the United States secretary of state James Baker said so to Russia's foreign minister Eduard Shevardnadze during the ""Open Skies"" conference in Ottawa and to Gorbachev himself during a visit to Russia.
The discussion about possible NATO expansions was never raised in the following years because Russia assumed that the matter had been settled in 1990.
Two years later NATO admitted Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary in clear violation of the spirit of all previous conversations.
Nonetheless, in 2001 Putin's Russia helped the USA invade Afghanistan in retaliation for Al Qaeda's terrorist attacks.
Two years later NATO underwent the largest expansion in its history, admitting seven more Eastern European countries, including the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania which had been part of the Soviet Union.
Clearly, for more than a decade Russia had offered the olive branch and NATO had taken advantage of it to carry out actions that surrounded Russia.
So it is likely that Putin personally resents that NATO broke its promise to him.
Putin's Russia learned again not to trust the word of the USA in 2002 when the USA asked Russia to support United Nations resolution 1441 to give Iraq an ultimatum.
That resolution never authorized the use of force, but four months later the USA used it as the legal justification for a full-scale invasion of Iraq.
In 2008 the USA accused Russia of invading Georgia but every observer agreed that it was Georgia that started that war, and of course Putin too knows so, hence he knows that the USA lied about it.
In 2011 the USA got Russia's approval to enforce a ""no fly zone"" over Libya during the revolt against dictator Qaddafi.
Incidentally, it is false that the USA engineered the disintegration of the Soviet Union, another common Putin complaint.
George H Bush was president at the time and he tried to convince the leaders of Ukraine and other republics to remain federated with Russia.
NATO and Russia negotiated directly and whatever they decided was never approved by the Ukrainian people or by a democratically elected parliament.
Ditto for all the other eastern European countries that decided to join NATO after they truly became democratic and their governments truly represented the will of the people.
Any agreement between NATO and Russia about other countries that did not involve legitimate representatives of those countries is null and void.
The Russians are right to feel that the USA didn't keep its promise, but the Ukrainians are right to ignore whatever was decided about their country without consulting them.
When Russia carries out similar actions in Georgia and Ukraine, the West is outraged.
It is true that, after Russia's invasion and annexation of Crimea in 2014, Ukraine's government has often spoken of joining NATO, but as recently as June 2021 NATO's secretary general Jens Stoltenberg gave Zelenskyy no hopes that Ukraine could join NATO any time soon and in September 2021 Zelenskyy met with United States president Joe Biden in Washington but again he got no hope of Ukraine becoming a NATO member.
Obviously Putin knew that attacking Ukraine would increase NATO presence, not decrease it, and increase, not decrease, support of Ukraine within the European Union.
Ironically, it is Putin's invasion of Ukraine that may lead to the first expansion of NATO in more than a decade.
Sweden and Finland are ostensibly neutral and neither country is a NATO member, but they regularly join Denmark, Iceland and Norway in military exercises and in 2014 Sweden woke up to a Russian submarine incursion.
Sweden fears that Russia could grab the island of Gotland, strategically located between Kaliningrad and Sweden, and deploy missile systems that could block access to the Baltic nations.
There's a difference between defensive missiles and offensive missiles.
Defensive missiles need to be placed in the territory that they are meant to defend.
Offensive missiles, unfortunately, can be based anywhere because they can travel long distances at supersonic speed with their nuclear loads.
Russian missiles can hit the USA in ten minutes even if launched from far away.
These cruise missiles, similar to the Tomahawk cruise missiles of the USA, don't need to be deployed near the borders of Eastern Europe in order to reach most of Europe.
In any event, Russia has missile bases in Vilyuchinsk , very close to Alaska.
At the time NATO had not deployed any air defense in these Baltic states.
In 2017 Russia held its massive quadrennial Zapad military exercise and in 2019 the Russian navy staged its large-scale Ocean Shield exercise, further alarming its former satellite nations.
In 2017 Russia deployed the 9M729 missile in Kaliningrad in violation of the Intermediate Nuclear Forces treaty, which restricts the range of missiles, signed by the Soviet Union and the USA in December 1987.
In February 2018 Russia announced that it had deployed the nuclear-capable Iskander missiles to Kaliningrad, and in October 2018 satellite imagery from Israel's ImageSat International showed the extent of Russia's military buildup in Kaliningrad.
Incidentally, all the Russian missiles aimed at Ukraine may as well hit Turkey, which is a NATO member.
Meanwhile, the USA had repeatedly accused Russia of violating the Intermediate Nuclear Forces treaty.
This is one of the treaties that Putin accuses the USA of violating, but the truth is that Russia violated it first and in any case Russia withdrew from it just like the USA did.
Russia was very angry when in 2017 the USA deployed a battery of Patriot long-range anti-aircraft missiles in Lithuania but it was there only for NATO wargames.
In September 2019 Poland asked the USA for a permanent United States military base in Poland, but that was in response to the Russian military buildup in Kaliningrad, and that base still doesn't exist.
In January 2020 NATO conducted its largest exercise in 25 years, but, again, that followed Russia's Zapad and Ocean Shield exercises.
This has been happening while Japan has not added a single missile to its defenses.
So in reality Russia is guilty of doing exactly what Putin accuses NATO of doing.
More likely, Putin's real concern was not NATO expansion but a prosperous and free Ukraine, that could even become a destination for Russian emigrants.
What was indeed going to happen soon was a Europeanfunded economic program to help the Ukrainian economy.
GDP per capita in Lithuania is about $20,000 and in Estonia $23,000 compared with Russia's $10,000.
The last thing that Putin wants to see is that the ethnic Russians in Ukraine get richer than the Russians across the border in Russia.
Of course, it all depends on what Putin's real motive is, but, if he is worried about having a prosperous and democratic Ukraine next to Russia, he will be equally wary of a prosperous and democratic Romania or Poland once Ukraine becomes part of the Russian empire.
The mother of all problems in Europe is that Russia views Europe as a hostage.
In the event of war with the USA, Russia sees itself losing unless it holds Europe hostage.
Russia thinks that the main condition of its own security is that Europe be insecure.
North Korea holds South Korea and Japan hostage the same way Russia holds Europe hostage.
In 2009 United States president Obama gave in to Russian pressures and canceled the plan.
The other cause of Russia's insecurity is that nobody wants to be ruled by Putin's Russia just like nobody wanted to be ruled by the Soviet Union.
There might be more neofascist Fox News viewers in the USA who like Putin than people in the entire Eastern Europe who like Putin.
Ukraine does have a far-right neo-nazi group, but those are precisely the ones who voted against the current president, Zelensky, and his government.
By comparison, the far-right Donald Trump won 46% of the vote both in 2016 and in 2020.
The far-right party Svoboda holds one seat in the Ukrainian parliament, whereas Trump supporters hold 100s of seats in the United States congress.
The most famous neo-nazi militia in Ukraine, the Azov battalion, founded by white supremacists like Andriy Biletsky, became heroes when in 2014 they fought against Putin's army.
The Russian occupation of Donbass has simply provided this neo-nazi militia for an opportunity to gain popular support.
Nonetheless, Azov has one thousand soldiers compared with 50,000 Ukrainian national guards and 250,000 regular Ukrainian soldiers.
The risk is that Putin's new invasion of Ukraine under the pretense of ""denazify"" Ukraine will turn into a self-fulfilling prophesy because it will make the militias more powerful and respected.
That said, Putin is calling for the ""denazification"" of Ukraine simply because Russians think of ""nazists"" as threats to the existence of Russia.
Most Russians can't clearly distinguish between Hitler's nazism and their own regime at the time, Stalinism.
The clear distinction is that nazist germany attacked communism Russia, and that's the distinction between nazism and communism that is clear to all Russians.
Most of Russia's news coverage has been claiming for years that Russia is at war against fascists and nazists.
Russian fascists base their fascist theories and activities on the premise that Russia is under attack by foreign fascists.
Putin forgets to mention that Vladimir was open to all religions, but opted against Islam because Islam forbade alcohol , Vladimir married a Christian woman (the sister of the Byzantine emperor) against her will as a prize for helping Byzantium put down a rebellion, and that Vladimir had many wives and hundreds of concubines throughout his life.
Viewed from the West, Ukraine is vastly more democratic than Russia, and Putin's Russia should first de-nazify itself.
World War II was a ""world"" war (not just one of the many European wars of past centuries) because Japan joined Germany and Italy, and attacked the USA which then joined the war too.
Imagining a third ""world"" war means assuming that China (Russia's only friend outside Europe) will attack the USA if the USA attacks Russia in Europe, or that Japan will attack Russia.
Besides the fact that there is no defense pact between China and Russia, it is hard to imagine what China would gain from joining such a war.
The chances of annexing Taiwan would be even lower in a military conflict with the USA than they would be in a one-on-one with Taiwan.
Japan has no offensive army and his population is strongly opposed to any kind of war, let alone an invasion of Russia.
In reality, a United States direct attack on Russia would ""only"" be a war between NATO and Russia.
United States surveillance of Russia is so good that it can ""hear"" what Putin says; 2.
Too much of this invasion sounds irrational for a man like Putin who has been known for being an astute calculator.
One wonders if that was the beginning of a serious deterioration in Putin's ability to judge what was going on in the world.
After all, Putin has been increasingly isolated in his palaces and in his dacia, surrounded by people who are too afraid of contradicting him and therefore feed him the stories he wants to hear.
Both Macron and the Finnish president talk of a different, paranoid Putin.
The images of Putin meeting with Macron and even with his own generals at that very long table speak allegorically to his isolation and his paranoia.
Sergey Naryshkin, head of a spy agency, dared suggest negotiations with the West, and Valentina Matviyenko, chairman of the federation council, was visibly uncomfortable.
Since the protests of 2012, Putin has progressively shrunk the circle of advisors.
It seems like both defense and foreign ministry were caught off guard by the invasion of Ukraine.
In fact, it sounds like Biden knew more about Putin's plans than Putin's own people.
For years there have been rumors that Putin is obsessively re-watching the video of the humiliating assassination of Libya's dictator Qaddafi in 2011.
Putin says he is motivated by NATO's expansion but there has been no NATO expansion in many years and no NATO expansion was planned.
On the other hand, there have been ""color"" revolutions in almost all the former Soviet republics.
He may sense that many of the people around him would be happy to replace him with someone younger and less megalomaniac.
Putin's problem today is that he can't find anyone whom he could trust the way Yeltsin trusted him in 1999 when Putin promised never to go after him.
Putin senses that all the people around him could betray him, jail him or even kill him.
Preparations for the invasion of Ukraine began in 2021 when Putin lost two key allies.
First, it became clear that Trump's claims of electoral fraud were not going to help him regain the White House.
Basically, Putin started planning the invasion when he realized that his buddy Trump was gone forever.
Putin's original plan was probably to wait for Trump to withdraw from NATO and then to attack Ukraine and possibly the Baltic states.
When it became obvious that there will be no second Trump term, Putin decided to act.
Second, in May 2021 Ukraine arrested Viktor Medvedchuk, the leader of Ukraine's main pro-Russia party who owned three pro-Russia TV stations.
The other international event that may have increased Putin's fervor for an immediate invasion was the retirement of German chancellor Angela Merkel.
Maybe Putin viewed Europe as exhausted by the covid pandemic with zero appetite for another economic crisis, and at the same time Putin is facing one of the worst covid death tolls in the world and needed a distraction.
The West just invented a new weapon of mass destruction: global sanctions on a scale never seen before.
The global sanctions of March 2022 will be remembered as a new type of weapon of mass destruction, except that this is not a weapon that kills people but a weapon that kills economies.
Machine guns are now as common as pistols, every major country has an air force, several countries have a stock of nuclear bombs, and military drones are already everywhere.
In this case however the econocide cannot be easily duplicated by nations that don't control the flow of capital.
Rather than trying to develop a similar ""econo-cide"", the rivals of the West will try to decouple their economy from the West.
The West has unleashed an unprecedented culture war against all Russians.
An Italian university has suspended a course on Dostoevskij and Italy's famous opera theater La Scala has fired conductor Valery Gergiev.
Eurovision, FIFA and the Paralympic Games have banned Russian singers, soccer teams and even disabled athletes from participating in their competitions.
EA Sports removed the Russian national team and Russian clubs from its popular soccer videogames.
And, comically, some Western supermarkets have removed Russian vodka from their shelves.
It is precisely by inviting Russians to the West that Russian citizens could appreciate the level of alarm and outrage outside Russia.
Iran and Venezuela suddenly look less like enemies and more like opportunities.
The reason why Russia became so important in oil production is that the oil production of these two oil giants has been crippled by United States sanctions.
If the USA reaches some kind of deal with Iran and Venezuela, the importance of Russian oil will greatly diminish.
During covid the European Union suddenly realized that it depended on China for medical supplies, even for face masks.
Now the European Union finally wakes up to the fact that it depends on Russia for oil and gas, especially thanks to its suicidal anti-nuclear policies.
Russia is a small economy that makes money by selling oil and gas to Europe and then invests all the money in weapons which it then uses to threaten Europe.
The European Union is also belatedly waking up to the fact that it is vulnerable to Russian propaganda, in particular to cyberwarfare.
Brexit happened mainly because of Russian trolls and bots that influenced British public opinion.
Hopefully, the European Union will also wake up to the fact that it cannot count on the USA to defend it, that the USA (whether ruled by an honest man like Obama or by a scumbag traitor like Trump) is a different country, a country more focused on China than on Russia.
Germany has decided to increase to 2% the share of GDP that it will spend on defense.
On one hand it sounds like China knew exactly what Putin was going to do.
Putin attended the Winter Olympics in Beijing and spoke with China's president Xi.
It is likely that Putin told Xi what he was going to do, and simply promised to wait until the end of the games.
On the other hand, before the invasion, China kept accusing the USA of creating panic over nothing, which sounds like China didn't know Putin's intentions.
The only countries that sided with Russia were Belarus, Eritrea, North Korea and Syria.
On the other hand, Chinese media are the only media that are faithfully re-broadcasting Russian propaganda.
When Russia alleged that the USA was sponsoring Ukraine's chemical and biological weapons labs , China's foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian stated that there are 26 bio-labs in Ukraine managed by the USA, a clear attempt to justify Russia if Russia uses chemical and biological weapons.
China is benefiting from the crisis because now Russia, having been mostly outlawed from the West, has to sell its goods (mainly natural resources) to China, obviously at a discounted price.
Russia's future is to become a client state of China, providing China with all the natural resources it needs.
Russia will never be a rival again to China in Central Asia or anywhere in Asia, and eastern Russia itself will gradually fall under the Chinese sphere of influence.
China probably views Russia as a tactical ally whereas the USA is the strategic long-term rival.
In less than 10 years Russia may change dramatically under a new leader.
The anti-European and antiUS stances are relics of the Soviet Union, in which Putin was raised, whereas the leader who succeeds Putin is likely to be someone raised outside that state of mind and more inclined to become a partner, not a rival, of the evil West; maybe even an oligarch with villas in the French Riviera.
That's another thing that the Chinese, who tend to think long term, are probably considering.
There is continuity between tzarist Russia, communist Soviet Union and neofascist Russia.
Perhaps precisely because of its size, Russia has remained essentially a vast, centrally-controlled, bureaucratic empire.
Stalin was a great bureaucrat who rose from the ranks, and Putin was a great bureaucrat who rose from the ranks.
The Soviet Union and Putin's Russia seem to be very different from tzarist Russia but they are actually very similar in one aspect: it is still a colonial empire.
When a Russian politician tries to defend the right of Russia to exist as it is, it's like an Austrian politician trying to defend the right of reforming the old Austrian empire that ruled from Spain to the Balkans, or a British polician arguing that Britain is entitled to half of Africa and most of North America. | am sure all empires did something good and that many countries were better off under the British or the French than after independence, but a colonial empire in the 21st century may not make much sense anymore.
Putin claims that Ukraine makes no sense but maybe it's Russia that makes no sense.
Yet again, a nuclear power has invaded a country that gave up weapons of mass destruction.
In 2003 the USA invaded Iraq and deposed Saddam Hussein claiming that he had weapons of mass destruction but in reality the invasion worked precisely because he didn't have them.
In 2011 Libya's dictator Qaddafi was overthrown and killed after he voluntarily surrendered his weapons of mass destruction.
On the other hand, the USA never even tried to invade or overthrow North Korea's dictator because North Korea has nuclear weapons.
China threatens to invade Taiwan because Taiwan gave up its nuclear program in the 1960s.
On the other hand, nobody threatens to invade Israel because Israel does have nuclear weapons.
Europe let an impoverished authoritarian Russia rearm to the point that Russia decided to use those weapons.
