Kharkiv-based translator Zaven Babloyan is executive director of the Oko publishing house.
He was born in Moscow and spent his childhood and teenage years in Luhansk and in Shchastia, a town in the Luhansk region that has recently featured prominently in news bulletins from the war zone.
Babloyan has been a translator, literary editor and publisher for over twenty years.
He has translated books by Serhii Zhadan, Natalka Sniadanko, Taras Prokhasko, Lubko Deresh and other contemporary Ukrainian writers into Russian.
He has also translated the works of western psychoanalysts – including Robert Hinshelwood, John Steiner and Ronald Britton – from English into Russian.
Babloyan was an active participant in the Kharkiv Maidan protests from the day they began.
His regular commentaries have made him popular in the Ukrainian Facebook community.
In September 2014, he was a guest of the Institute for Human Sciences in Vienna.
He was interviewed by IWM Fellow Tatiana Zhurzhenko, who was born and lived in Kharkiv before moving to Vienna in 2002.
You live in Kharkiv, where you not only witnessed the dramatic events of 2013-14, but also actively took part in them.
I think that, for me, just as for the other protesters, it was a classic case of moral imperative.
However, on each occasion, I sensed that my personal efforts were insufficient, and this feeling has remained with me ever since.
Our Maidan was not permanent like in the one in Kyiv; nor was it as confrontational and bloody.
The violence against us broke out only after the victory of the Revolution in Kyiv.
This provoked a night-time attack by the ‘Oplot’ against a small group of Euromaidan supporters, mostly organised local football fans … And so it went on.
By the latter, I mean a collective sense of self in which symbols and names may be inherited, but the essence appears through our actions.
The escalation of violence in Kharkiv was a reaction to this emerging new Ukrainian identity.
In our city, violence did not take the most lethal of forms, like in Kyiv, but it was nevertheless frightening and ugly.
One need only bring to mind the public humiliation and violent beating of hundreds of Euromaidan demonstrators by separatists – some of them local, others imported from Donbas or Russia.
Or think of that nurse from Chuhuiv kicking a man lying on the steps of the metro with his head split open.
I am not sure that any sociological analysis has been done on them, so I will highlight some of the groups that were most visible.
There was the middle-aged intelligentsia, mostly women – people who later selflessly cared for refugees.
There were the young, creative people , musicians and designers who now look after the wounded, help the army and contribute to the ‘Ukranianisation’ of the city.
They are one of the discoveries of the Revolution, and have had an impact nationwide.
As it turns out, predictions about the growing role of ‘football patriotism’ made two or three years ago, before the Euro-2012, have been vindicated, even more than we expected.
There was the relatively quiet ‘Samooborona’ group or groups; some of those involved have now joined the army.
There is our own ‘Automaidan’ ; there were mostly men involved in this, ‘serious men’, mature, quite prosperous and many of them business owners.
With regard to the students, with the rare exception of the supporters of the ‘Democratic Alliance’ – I was disappointed.
I can fairly say that there were no students, as an identifiable group, on the Kharkiv Maidan, and I know people who took part in them.
But altogether Kharkiv students proved to be as much of an inert, grey and cowed mass as Kharkiv’s ‘biudzhetniki’ ; they are a chip off the old block.
Whether or not there was an attempt on his life in May 2014, he did disappear from public life in Kharkiv for a while, which was only to the benefit of the city.
But then Gepa reappeared in a wheelchair and went back to his old ways.
We saw the same loutish speeches, the same demonstrative, triumphalist hypocrisy, the same flirtations with demoralised ‘biudzhetniki’, the same proprietorial attitude, the same adulation from what is left of the city’s ‘elites’, the same fuehrer-style neo-Sovietism, the same pushiness and impunity.
Gepa is not a sword of Damocles hanging over Kharkiv; he is a cancerous growth within the very body of the city.
The Yanukovych cult of personality failed – indeed, it seems that his PR team had not even been entrusted with such a task.
Destroying the image of Yanukovych’s main rival, Yulia Tymoshenko, was far more important.
But the creation of the Gepa personality cult has been utterly successful.
The price was that Kharkiv has been trampled into the mud and has become a rotten city.
He successfully acquired a ‘saviour’s’ halo and the image of ‘a nice guy’, especially in the eyes of the small-time crooks and old women in Saltovka, Kharkiv’s industrial suburb.
As we know, the protesters on the Kharkiv Maidan were divided over the dismantling of the Lenin monument on Independence Square.
It survived the first wave of toppling Lenin monuments all over the country in the spring of 2014 and was removed only at the end of September.
I think that the ‘Lenin question’ has been blown out of all proportion by counter-revolutionary forces.
As we are talking, two weeks have passed since the removal of the monument and it has become clear that the plinth only needs to be wrapped in a green plastic fencing for everyone to be satisfied.
If it were not for the usual attempts by Mayor Kernes to destabilise the situation, then the disturbances would have died down earlier.
The Lenin statue in Zaporizhzhia was recently dressed up in a vyhsyvanka – the traditional Ukrainian embroidered shirt.
In Kharkiv, too, there are still about ten Lenins left, although their ranks have recently thinned noticeably.
The reason why the monument on Independent Square did not fall in spring 2014 was that Maidan activists in Kharkiv are exceptionally tolerant and civilised people.
I’d like to remind you that as far back as February 2014, Kharkiv officials were ‘authoritatively’ saying that the demolition of the monument would cause a major catastrophe by its sheer weight – the square would be destroyed, the metro station beneath would collapse, communications would be broken.
As it turned out, the statue was hollow inside and even the paving stones remained undamaged when it fell.
It is also worth mentioning that the authorities obviously had no intention of fulfilling the terms of an agreement about a ‘planned dismantling’ of the monument, signed six months ago.
Empty head of the toppled Lenin monument in Kharkiv, September 28, 2014.
The formula of ‘further political polarisation’ seems strange to me, and indeed suspect, to put it mildly.
The dismantling of the monument has a significance that corresponds to its previous presence.
If there were people who hoped that ‘everything would be as it was before’, then it is right and good that their expectations should not be fulfilled.
And I continue to hold that, had this process begun earlier, it would have developed at a more calm and even pace.
Old woman weeping in front of what is left of the Lenin monument, September 29, 2014.
It was important to me that the monument should be dismantled – not in order to put something else in its place, but simply in order not to have it there.
I don’t think that the issue of what to do about ‘the absence of the monument’ is particularly urgent.
In Kharkiv, there is no public debate about what monuments should be dismantled and what memorials should be erected.
In this, as in everything else, we simply follow the lead of the country.
It would be a mistake, in my view, to seriously consider the protagonists of the ‘Russian Spring’ to be philosophers, historians and writers.
There is perhaps one professional writer there in the background –Fyodor Berezin , but that professional Santa Claus, Pavel Gubarev , puts him in the shade.
I believe that military and security professionals play a greater role in the ‘Russian Spring’, but I’m no expert.
Incidentally, I suspect that, in this war, Berezin is known as more of a former military figure than a writer.
Pro-Russian demonstration in front of the Lenin monument, March 23, 2014.
In other words, I’m inclined to think that the literary mantle around the ‘Russian Spring’ is pure simulation, mimicry and bluff, it’s just bogus.
In this context, the appearance of any literature, history or philosophy serves only to cover up the illiteracy, dehumanisation and philistinism of the pro-Russian part of the society.
It matters little what sick ideas exist in the head of any particular re-enactor.
But it was the degradation of the Russian culture into the ‘Russian world’, a 21st century revival of the principle of lebensraum, that created the conditions for an ugly and cynical war.
The roots of the war lie in mass-produced propaganda with a strong visual focus and in a neo-Soviet ideology.
All those endless texts about our darling Russia’s victories in the past, in the future and in space are a symptom of this pathology.
In the early 1990s, the post-Soviet intellectuals experienced a fashion for postmodernism, psychoanalysis and feminism.
Nationalism was viewed as something primordial, archaic and almost embarrassing, to be deconstructed at the very best.
The post-Soviet intellectuals, in particular the Russian-speaking ones, sought to legitimize their new role and often dissociated themselves from the autochthone Ukrainian intelligentsia, which saw its own mission in nation building.
But now that many intellectuals have had the existential, physical experience of involvement in mass protest, resistance and solidarity, nationalism is no longer an abstract concept.
If anything, in Ukraine we are witnessing a process that is the opposite of balkanisation, and more along the lines of national consolidation.
The communities that have ‘fallen away’ from Ukraine evidently belong nowhere.
I would add in parenthesis, as a former inhabitant of the Luhansk region, that I have never sensed any distinct regionalism in Donbas.
The sense of identity there was generally built on the notion of ‘shared territory’, no more than that.
As I mentioned before, this space of non-identification was occupied by a neo-Soviet myth in response to the Orange Revolution and the emerging national identity.
So I would contrast the hypothetical ‘new Ukrainian nationalism’ against a neo-Soviet nationalism, with a Russian Nazism looming on the horizon.
If we look at the left-wing groups that discredited themselves during the Ukrainian Revolution , we can see time and again that Western leftist anti-nationalism also acts as camouflage and covers up a Russian imperialism that is the same as ever.
It seems to me that Ukrainian intellectuals have already laid the ground for reflecting this constellation.
The personal, physical experience of collective action is a logical extension not only of 2004, but of the protest movements of the 1990s and of the 2000s.
It has not been, by any means, monolithic and has included separate sub-ideologies in a way characteristic of all Maidan Square protests – though always within a patriotic consensus.
The Maidan protests have quite naturally developed into voluntary movements, in which each group chooses its own direction.
This trajectory is now widely accepted as a basis for the development of a new Ukrainian citizenship, even nationhood.
The Russian-speaking population has proved to be the weak point of the Ukrainian project, and that is where Putin has struck.
By and large, the Russian-speaking East is now paying a terrible price for our short-sightedness.
You have written that ‘Russian speakers’ represent a double-edged sword that could be used against Russia.
The double-edged sword that the Russian-speaking population represents undoubtedly can and should be applied to the destruction of the ‘Russian world’, but in the first instance, this should happen within Ukraine.
At the time of the 2014 Revolution, Russian-speaking Ukrainian culture – in its literary dimension, at least – was already fairly autonomous from the Russian one, even though Ukrainian-Russian authors were often published in Russia.
But a culturally autonomous, Russian–speaking Ukrainian is someone who has been through the early phases of the post-colonial drama, at the very least.
With regard to the issue of mutual understanding between Russia and Ukraine, I am more than sceptical.
We cannot expect any understanding from the Russian side until it shakes of its neo-Soviet cocoon.
Even the so-called ‘fifth column’ in Russia – courageous people who challenge the official discourse and risk a great deal – is still preoccupied by internal Russian problems, in which Ukraine is only of secondary significance.
Even the most desperate Russian fighters against Putin’s regime often shock us with their colonial high-handedness.
As a rule, intellectuals make pretty poor warriors , but now we have Ukrainian poets, scholars, businessmen, managers and programmers fighting at the front.
Mutual understanding is something that we need in the first instance within Ukraine.
And it is happening, thanks to the efforts of people who are dealing with supplies for the army, looking after the wounded, supporting refugees, fighting against an old, criminal, pro-Russian neo-feudal system against which we are being forced to hold on a second front.
And these people, Ukrainian and Russian speakers, understand each other – there is no language barrier.
As regards guilt and responsibility… If we are to talk about collective guilt, then it has to be the guilt of the Donbas before the rest of the country.
All Ukrainians, regardless of regional differences, are being forced to pay a terrible price for the acquiescence shown by the Donbas in the face of neo-Sovietism.
What is happening to the Donbas region itself is, alas, a natural consequence of this.
One could also mention the failed policy of Ukrainisation in the years before the revolution, and before the reckless surrender to Russia.
It seems that, in Ukraine, this imagined community has never been a political subject to merit blame.
Psychoanalysis has a strong tradition of theorizing the phenomena of war and totalitarianism, beginning with Freud’s Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego and his correspondence with Einstein , and Wilhelm Reich’s Mass Psychology of Fascism.
All these resources can help us to grasp how people come to take ‘the path of Evil’, why they make the choice to do so, and how far it is a choice at all.
In my view, the fact that vast numbers of people supported the criminal and authoritarian Yanukovych regime, and were further prepared to dissolve in the similarly malignant body of the ‘Russian world’, is reprehensible.
The relegation of the self into the hands of an internal ‘mafia’ leads to serious consequences in life.
Applied to the whole of society – where the ‘mafia’ exists externally and is wholly concrete – the same process leads to a condition where the population that has been exposed to induced psychosis, deprived of a real historical identity, and demoralised in the most literal sense of the word, descends into a grotesque and criminally violent form of neofeudalism.
There was no officially declared boycott of Russian books at the Forum, but since the Russian-Ukrainian war is underway, the decision had been made that there should be no Russian publishers’ stands at the Forum.
And anyway, even in good times, they could have been counted on the fingers of one hand, the ‘official All-Russian’ stand included.
Second, the organisers wanted to avoid provoking Ukrainian society at a time when it was suffering so acutely as a result of the war.
However, Russian authors did come to L’viv and participated actively in events at the Forum.
By the way, this recommendation was ignored by many booksellers without any consequences.
The problem is that the Ukrainian book market is 85% dominated by Russian production, if one excludes educational publications and, to some degree, specialized literature, like on fiscal policy, accounting and law.
The lion’s share of Russian book production represents an alien culture, which currently tends to be hostile against Ukraine.
However, most Ukrainian publishers are cautious about the radical ban of Russian books – it could lead to the collapse of the Ukrainian book market.
But in the long run, I believe that the Russian book trade in Ukraine is effectively finished.
The question is only how quickly Ukrainian publishers will be able to organise a substitute trade for home-produced publications.
There are no fundamental obstacles that cannot be overcome as we go down this route.
The phrase ‘is it acceptable’ in your question seems to me to be slightly naïve.
It has been widely noted that this lexicon not only mocks and humiliates, but ‘dehumanises’ the opponent.
We should recognise, however, that this dehumanisation only reflects the desperate situation when you have no choice but to pull the trigger.
To be fair, Ukrainian society has never been particularly politically correct.
To think of cultivating political correctness under conditions of war would be naïve.
Taking the Odessa episode out of context is a Russian ideological tactic.
There was a no less horrible fire in the Kyiv House of Trade Unions, in circumstances that were far clearer than in Odessa.
The meme that ‘Russian people are victims’ has marked this war ever since the first stone was thrown on Maidan Square.
Most of these writings, whose authors are often refugees or people caught in the midst of a military conflict, reflect a civilian’s perspective.
Another genre is reports written by volunteers who work in the conflict zone.
These are usually witness accounts, fragmentary reports that often contain colourful details.
If there are reports from the front, they often come as a cry – a scream of horror, a plea for help, weeping for the dead.
The reality of war breaks all conventional patterns of understanding; it is too merciless and volatile for us to be able to produce any kind of structured narrative.
Obviously it is extremely hard for those taking part in military action to write , and it seems that writers working away from the front find it impossible to identify with those who are there.
No doubt the problem lies in the extreme experience, far beyond the boundaries of what most people know; it is something that cannot be ‘appropriated’ in absentia.
I would assume that even at the front, the effort to articulate this experience can easily result in truisms and clichés.
For the time being, despite all the selfless support offered to the army and all the patriotic fervour, belles lettres from the front are absent.
It may be that, in time, war prose will appear on the scene – although it seems to me that we need it now.
On the other hand, I have the impression that our attempts to make sense of the war are hampered by a premature work of mourning.
Symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder normally appear in the wake of a trauma – while we are still in the throes of it.
When there is a temporary pause in the fighting , even the media cannot find an adequate formula to express what is happening.
We are under the pressure of war, and of events that are moving too rapidly.
Or perhaps our confusion results from the inadequacy of our psychological resources to deal with war.
After all, this is the first experience of full-scale military conflict for almost all of us.
For the time being, the few precise texts that we have show the very shock of the war reflecting the fragmentation, fracture, the collapse of the physical and mental world.
We have heroes, however, even if it is easier for us to identify with the victims, whoever they may be.
We were not ready to take the burden of responsibility, to recognise the justice of our resistance.
Fear of active resistance, of an adequate response to violence has been haunting us since the Maidan.
But if we look at Europe, it seems it is no longer capable of any kind of robust resistance to evil.
We have had our independence on credit for too long and now we are paying the interest in blood.
