While the rhetoric escalated between Ukraine and Russia, various intelligence estimates suggested a Russian offensive against Ukraine was unlikely.
Field camps, which would be needed to deploy Russian troops into eastern Ukraine during an invasion, had not been built on Russia’s border with eastern Ukraine.
Additionally, a civilian intelligence and security firm told The Daily Signal that Russian forces staged on the Ukraine-Russia border have fuel and ammunition for about one day of fighting—insufficient for a large-scale offensive.
The ceasefire between Kiev and the Russian-backed separatists is fraying badly.
Russia has positioned military units with thousands of troops to the north in Bryansk, to the east near Rostov, to the south in Crimea and to the west in the separatist Moldovan region of Transnistria.
Last week, people in Crimea began posting online about a large deployment of artillery and tanks in the north of the peninsula and within range of Ukraine.
Ukrainian intelligence agencies say a Russian air defence regiment has been embedded with the separatists in Donbass.
A photograph from Ilovaisk railway station shared online on Tuesday morning and verified by defence analysts interviewed for this article showed a train in the sidings, laden with heavy Russian tanks.
Sergei Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister, vowed that “exhaustive measures” would be taken against Kiev in reprisal for what Russia called an attempted terror attack by Ukraine’s defence ministry.
That analysis is shared by many in Ukraine and among the western defence and intelligence community.
Russia wants elections in the Donbass before any ceasefire — a move that would probably cement the semi-autonomy of the region and fatally weaken Kiev’s ability to politically stand up to Moscow.
Russia’s military build-up, he says, is a likely precursor to the Group of 20 summit on September 4 when Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, will inevitably meet Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, and François Hollande, the French president, to discuss Ukraine.
Russia is dialling the tension in the region up and down — as it has done in the past — ahead of another round of diplomatic negotiations, says one senior European intelligence official.
The sabre-rattling is about reinterpreting the Minsk agreements in Russia’s favour, the official says.
While such a purpose might rule out an overt land-grab, it does not preclude serious military conflict — in fact, many intelligence analysts believe it probably depends on violence.
Russia may seek to bring its anti-aircraft capabilities to bear too, or it could declare a no-fly zone to goad Kiev into fighting.
The 25th anniversary of Ukraine’s independence on August 24 could be a powerful and symbolic moment at which fighting might erupt, says Mr Kokcharov.
Mr Putin may be betting that with more violence — and a provoked, angry Ukrainian response — he can make them break ranks and recalibrate the Minsk protocol to his advantage.
KYIV, Ukraine—In a familiar cycle of brinksmanship, Russia and Ukraine once again edged toward the brink of open war last week, only for the bellicose rhetoric and military posturing to dissipate rapidly, leaving the conflict in eastern Ukraine no closer to a long-term solution.
Russia’s successor spy agency to the KGB, the Federal Security Service, or FSB, claimed to have thwarted terrorist attacks Aug. in Crimea, which Russian authorities pinned on the Ukrainian government.
A Russian soldier also died in a separate, cross-border firefight, the spy agency said.
A war of words followed between Kyiv and Moscow, edging the two countries to the brink of a military conflict more serious than the ongoing one in eastern Ukraine.
Heightening fears of all-out war were reports of Russian troop movements inside Crimea, north toward the Ukraine border, as well as the buildup of Russian forces on the border with Ukraine’s embattled southeastern Donbas region.
Consequently, Ukraine’s military went on high alert, and Ukraine’s ambassador to the United Nations requested an emergency closed-door session of the United Nations Security Council last week.
Russia has supported two pro-Russian separatist republics in the conflict with the Ukrainian government.
According to Ukrainian and United States officials, as well as numerous media reports, Russian troops have participated actively in combat against Ukraine’s armed forces.
Moscow, however, denies having deployed troops to fight inside Ukraine.
Last week’s Crimean incident was textbook Kremlin tradecraft—manufacturing an event to justify a large-scale military intervention.
Ukrainian media highlighted past instances of such operations by Russia, including frequent references to a series of apartment bombings across Russia in 1999.
Those bombings boosted public support in Russia for the second Chechen War, as well as bolstering the profile of Putin, then prime minister.
United States government officials and media reports have since suggested Russia’s Federal Security Service was likely behind the 1999 bombings, which killed 300, as part of an effort to gin up support for military action in Chechnya.
Some in Ukraine speculated that last week’s Crimean provocation might have been a Kremlin gambit to delegitimize Ukraine’s post-revolution government in order to pressure Western countries to lift punitive sanctions against Russia.
The United States and the European Union placed sanctions on Russia after its illegal annexation of Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula in March 2014.
Ukrainian officials, however, are not taking the Russian threat lightly.
This is roughly on par with the 45,000 pro-Russian separatists and regular Russian troops deployed inside eastern Ukraine and the approximately 45,000 Russian troops staged across the border in western Russia.
Ukraine has about 10,000 troops deployed in southern territories near the Crimean border; Ukrainian officials estimate Russia has about 45,000 military personnel inside occupied Crimea.
So far, the war in Ukraine has remained quarantined to the embattled Donbas region and has not spilled over into open conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
After two cease-fires, the prospect of open war between Russia and Ukraine has faded incrementally.
At times, however, it seemed the two countries were on the brink of a major conflict.
In September 2014, Kyiv residents were instructed to use the city’s subway system as a bomb shelter.
Spray-painted signs pointing to the nearest bomb shelter became common sights on the sides of buildings throughout the capital city, as well as cities across the country.
Last week’s spat over the alleged terrorist plots in Crimea temporarily revived dormant worries of a major Russian offensive.
Those worries paralleled a sharp uptick in the overall violence of the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine.
The cease-fire signed in February 2015, called Minsk II, markedly reduced the overall intensity of the conflict.
Casualties, including military and civilian deaths, are still a weekly occurrence.
As part of the Minsk II cease-fire’s terms, heavy weapons and rocket systems are supposed to have been pulled back a prescribed distance from the front lines.
Yet, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, or OSCE, the multinational group charged with monitoring the cease-fire, says the banned weapons are still frequently used.
Despite being only miles from the front lines, and with artillery frequently audible, life in the southern industrial city of Mariupol continues on.
According to United Nations data, 57 percent of the conflict’s 73 civilian deaths in July were due to heavy weapons presumably banned from the conflict under the cease-fire’s terms.
A wave of fresh violence in the Donbas followed last week’s flare up in Crimea, which fed into fears of a larger offensive in the making.
That same day, the Ukrainian military reported nine heavy armor attacks against its positions in the area around Mariupol, as well as separate artillery attacks and firefights northward along the length of the front lines.
The crisis at the Crimean border brought the Ukraine war briefly back into Western media headlines and editorial pages.
On Aug., the day before the Crimea incident, Putin hosted Turkish President Recep Erdogan for a meeting in Moscow.
And on Tuesday, Russia launched airstrikes in Syria from an airbase inside Iran.
Once again, Putin’s diplomatic and military moves left foreign affairs experts and military analysts reading the tea leaves to speculate about the Russian president’s larger strategy.
One week on, the threat of a Russian offensive on Ukraine appears to have cooled off.
On Aug., Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said Russia would not cut diplomatic ties with Ukraine over the Crimean incident.
Lavrov and Steinmeier also discussed restarting the Normandy Four peace process, in an apparent move to walk back Putin’s threat to withdraw from the talks.
As we contemplate the lazy days of late August, we need to bear in mind that a reckoning is coming sooner rather than later in Western relations with the Russian Federation.
It is easy to feel the slow burn in Moscow watching the Olympics unfold with so many Russian athletes justifiably barred from the competition.
Russia also feels intense frustration over the ongoing sanctions imposed following the invasion of Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea, as well as the increasing costs of Syrian operations in support of the brutal dictator Bashar al-Assad, which also continues to sour relations with the United States and Europe.
There are indications that Russian President Vladimir Putin is preparing to shake up the game as he has done in the past during the distractions of summer vacations in the West.
These August surprises have included the invasions of Ukraine in 2014 and Georgia in 2008.
He continues to seek a “grand bargain” with the West that would include negotiating a mutually acceptable endgame in Syria; directing Russian firepower more strongly against ISIS; creating an international accommodation on Ukraine that ends the fighting, recognizes Russian sovereignty in Crimea and ensures the rights of Russian-speaking minorities throughout the rest of the country; freezing NATO both in terms of additional members and operational practice; and above all lifting the economic sanctions directed against his nation and various senior Russian leaders.
As always, when trying to understand Russia, go back to Russian literature.
We are in danger of approaching that point with Russia, and now is the time to think more coherently and realistically about a unified and strategic Western approach to Putin’s Russia.
First, we must reassure our NATO allies and solidify the Alliance position concerning Russia.
This means engaging constantly with our NATO allies and ensuring that we reassure the understandably nervous Eastern Europeans—principally Poland and the Baltic nations, but also our allies along the Black Sea littoral.
We can do this most effectively through a program of exercises and military operations, including rotational stationing of ground forces, warship deployments to the Baltic and Black Seas and defensive air patrols to counter Russian incursions into NATO airspace.
It is by far the most important point of leverage with Russia, and the work of German Chancellor Angela Merkel thus far holding the European Union together has been impressive.
We need to actively support the Chancellor as she battles on the European front with maintaining E.U. solidarity, especially given the uncertainties engendered by the recent vote for Brexit.
Third, the United States should continue to leverage the broader international community in condemning Russian behavior when it steps clearly beyond the limits of international law.
This includes using a wide variety of international fora to highlight everything from the penalties applied to Russian doping in the Olympics and other international competitions to publicizing illegal cyber hacks of sensitive internal political processes here in the United States to the ongoing fermenting of violence in Ukraine.
We should confront where we must to uphold such widely regarded standards of international behavior.
Fourth and most important, in the midst of this summer of discontent emanating from both sides, we must keep open our communications pathways, which are increasingly in danger of shutting down.
It is in no one’s interest to stumble backwards into another full-blown Cold War, but that possibility seems more likely with each passing week.
There are a group of distinct issues upon which cooperation is possible with Russia.
Certainly Russia and the West share a common hope of stabilizing Afghanistan, and our cooperation there is not insignificant.
Additionally, we have well-trodden mechanisms for reducing the dangers of military confrontation through accidental or inadvertent collisions at sea or in the air, including “hot lines” between senior military leaders.
We have in the past shared a reasonable level of intelligence in fields like counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics.
We have operated together in counter-piracy, the subject of many discussions I held personally with senior Russian civilian and military leaders.
In the end our best hope for a “grand bargain” is not in a sweeping package that comes together at a single point in time.
While attractive to contemplate, such a sudden strategic outcome is a chimera.
Our best hope lies in adopting a transactional approach that says we will confront where we must—when violations of international law are truly egregious—but cooperate where we can.
Such an approach will afford us the best hope of steering through this summer of discontent and finding, over time, a meaningful modus vivendi with Russia.
Ukraine has put its troops on high alert; some think Russia may be preparing to invade its western neighbor.
Though President Obama joined the EU in imposing sanctions and warned Vladimir Putin of impending isolation after the seizure of Crimea, the Russian leader has continued to thumb his nose at the United States Recently, for instance, despite “stern” United States warnings, Moscow began delivery of an S-300 air defense system to Iran – a system that could in the future be used to protect nuclear sites.
From harboring former NSA worker and WikiLeaks activist Edward Snowden to reportedly orchestrating the email leaks which revealed corruption at the DNC, the former KGB operative has repeatedly provoked the president, knowing that he has, weirdly, the upper hand.
That, however, has been ignored by a media frenzy over Trump’s supposed links to the Russian bully.
This preposterous story line emerged after Trump said at a rally, “Russia, if you’re listening, I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing,” referring to those communications that Hillary Clinton deleted from her personal server.
Emails that, for the record, should not have been destroyed and that she lied about.
The narrative is that by expressing admiration for Vladimir Putin’s leadership ability and because he has had meager business activities in Russia, Trump might somehow cede power to the former KGB operative if he became president.
In those words Obama signaled that post-election he might abandon plans for a European missile defense system, which was meant to defend against Iranian nukes.
Early on he had scrapped plans to install 10 Interceptor missiles in Poland and a radar network in the Czech Republic.
A substitute program, meant to be more efficient and strategically superior, was expected to be installed by 2018.
Meanwhile, in 2013 Obama waffled when President Assad in Syria used sarin gas against his own people -a line that our president had warned him not to cross.
Instead of attacking Syria, Obama turned the mess over to Putin to resolve.
This was a remarkable decision, which became even more costly in 2014 when, bolstered by his newfound alliance with Obama, Putin invaded Ukraine and seized Crimea.
Secretary of State John Kerry met with his Russian counterpartSergey Lavrov 20 times in the next twelve months and visited Moscow twice to meet with Valdimir Putin, just to be sure he wasn’t getting too lonely.
Obama could not afford to isolate Putin, because he was losing the fight against ISIS and his approval ratings were plummeting.
Obama had permitted an offensive against the terrorist organization but so hobbled the military that bombing sorties returned home with 75 percent of their munitions on board, for fear of civilian casualties.
ISIS thrived and grew, spawning attacks around the world, so Obama allowed Putin to take over the battle.
In March, The Guardian reported that Russian airstrikes had killed 2,000 Syrian civilians, including children, in the prior six months.
Moscow’s attacks targeted not just ISIS, but also hit U.S.-trained and U.S.-allied opponents of Assad.
ISIS-held territory began to shrink, and Obama’s approval ratings rose.
One approach would have been an all-out effort to break Europe’s dependence on Russian natural gas.
This, however, would bolster the fortunes of our energy producers -an outcome anathema to the Obama White House.
Putin is flying high, overcoming a shrinking economy and widespread international opprobrium.
He has manipulated President Obama into giving him an important seat at the table.
