President Viktor Yanukovych, 1 Stephen Blank, “Perspectives on Russian Foreign Policy,” Army War College Strategic Studies Institute, September 2012.
Land area approximately 315,028 sq. mi.; slightly Poroshenko, a pro-Western billionaire, smaller than Texas. took 54.7% of the vote.
He consistently reiterated that a key focus of his government would be to fight corruption, including by reducing government regulation and the size of the bureaucracy along with minimizing the influence of certain elements of Ukraine’s society.
He stated that the government would cut the number of taxes it collects and devolve more budgetary power to local authorities.
United States Ambassador Pyatt, along with several other European ambassadors, praised Abromavicius for his efforts and expressed disappointment with the resignation.
The same day, parliament chairman Volodymyr Groysman announced that beginning on February 16, 2016, the legislature would conduct a review of the cabinet’s work, which would precede a vote of no confidence on the Yatsenyuk government.
The outcome of the vote further complicated the political environment because although Poroshenko argued that change was necessary to reassure the 6 Testimony of Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland, in United States Congress, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, Ukraine Reforms Two Years After the Maidan Revolution and Russian Invasion, hearings, 114th Cong., 1st sess., March 15, 2016.
However, Ukrainian law prohibits the Rada from considering additional no-confidence votes for six months, so Yatsenyuk was given time to make changes and move the reform process forward, if possible.
Their mutual hostility paralyzed the government, alienated voters, and delivered the presidency to Victor Yanukovich in 2010.11 For these observers, history seemed about to repeat itself.
Although Yatsenyuk initially survived the political uprising, a new level of disenchantment on the part of an already skeptical public as well as among some within the Rada who felt Yatsenyuk no longer held a mandate for governing made it unclear just how much success in addressing corruption Yatsenyuk, or a successor, could achieve and how much trouble was in store for Poroshenko.
He also 12 Testimony of Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland, in United States Congress, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, Ukraine Reforms Two Years After the Maidan Revolution and Russian Invasion, hearings, 114th Cong., 1st sess., March 15, 2016.
According to the EIU, this target is in line with the government’s commitments made as part of its April 2014 IMF loan of $17 billion.
The IMF also wanted a commitment to make rapid progress on reforms, including further energy price increases, bank restructuring, governance reforms of state-owned enterprises, and legal changes to implement anti-corruption and judicial reforms.
In late December 2015, the central bank of Poland announced that it would establish a zloty/hryvnya currency swap line with the National Bank of Ukraine.
The EIU forecasts a growth of around 1% in 2016.21 On January 25, 2016, the Ukrainian Central Bank issued its own revised forecast, estimating that growth would only reach 1.1% in 2016.
Senior U.S. officials and NATO Supreme Allied Commander General Philip Breedlove stated that they believed Russia had played a leading role in the activities of the armed separatist groups in eastern Ukraine by providing arms, troops, and material support.
In late August and early September, Russia stepped up its support to the separatists, including by deploying thousands of Russian troops to fight in Ukraine (a contention that Russia still denies despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary).30 Although mostly denied by Moscow, Russian troops and the separatists were apparently supplied with tanks, armored personnel carriers, artillery, surface-to-air missiles, and other military equipment from Russia.
Withdrawal of all heavy weapons by both sides, to be protocol to end the conflict and begin the completed within 14 days. process of achieving a political resolution to 3.
Pardon and amnesty of figures involved in the conflict. early February 2015 to try to secure a new agreement to stop the fighting.
Release of all hostages and other illegally detained people, based on the “all for all” principle. 12, a cease-fire agreement was signed to take 7.
Safe delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need, effect on February 15.
The Minsk-2 agreement based on an international mechanism. entered into force on February 15, 2015 (see 8.
Full Ukrainian control over its border with Russia similar to those of the original Minsk-1 throughout the conflict zone. protocol, which failed to secure the peace, 10.
Withdrawal of all foreign armed groups, weapons, and mercenaries from Ukrainian territory. some observers expressed skepticism about 11.
Constitutional reform in Ukraine with whether this agreement was any more likely to decentralization as a key element; a new constitution by be implemented than the previous one. the end of 2015.
The agreement called for local held according OSCE standards. elections in rebel-held regions and, more importantly and controversially to Kyiv, for legal and constitutional reforms to be negotiated with the rebels to give a special “decentralized” status to the region.
U.S. imports from Ukraine include iron and steel, inorganic chemicals, oil, aircraft, and agricultural products.
In it Congress called on the President to increase the pressure on Russia by targeting Rosoboronexport and Gazprom, and prohibiting ExportImport Bank programs, government procurement contracts, exports of arms and dual-use goods and services, access to property, the United States banking system, or entry into the United States.
