Institutions shape people, but then again people change and, at times, subvert the institutions in which they sit.
The US-Russia Confrontation over Ukraine from the Center for the National Interest ,which is now on the hot reading list of Washington insiders, if its promotion by Johnson’s Russia List may be taken as an indicator.
In the brief mission statement which NI places on all its publications, management reminds us that the institution began its life as the curator of the political legacy of President Richard Nixon.
And though its present interests are global hot spots, the Center’s core mission was reflected in its founder, Russian émigré Dmitri Simes, who had served as Richard Nixon’s go-to man on his post-presidential trips to Russia and became his designated president of the Center.
For these reasons the booklet Costs of a New Cold Warshows just how far the legacy of Realpolitik has been clipped and marginalized by the resurgent forces of Neoconservatism in Washington and in the think tanks spread across the country.
Although this collection has authors expressing various points of view, and is structured to present 2 Russian and 2 American perspectives on the East-West confrontation, I would draw attention to the introduction by editor Paul J Saunders, and more especially to the essay by Thomas Graham, a director of Kissinger Associates and probably the most powerful and influential of the contributors.
Graham’s ""Dangers of a New Containment Policy for Russia” sets out almost without comment the official American policy directed at degrading if not destroying Russia’s economy with further ratcheted up sanctions from which the only way back appears to be regime change.
Graham makes it plain that Washington is determined to break every bone in the Russian body politic.
Both his essay and that of Paul Saunders are imbued with American triumphalism and assume as a given American global hegemony.
Such hegemony, of course, is the very antithesis of Realpolitik policies such as Richard Nixon pursued, where balance of power is the assumed script.
Thus, Kissinger Associates is now run by the supporter of a political philosophy totally at variance with the much more nuanced and genuinely Realpolitik views of its founder.
Thus the National Interest is putting into circulation Neoconservative views that run totally counter to what its nominal publisher and president Dmitri Simes says on Russian state television.
The assumption that the United States can and will do far more damage to Russia and that Russia, in the short term, can do little or nothing to retaliate is supported by the feeble essays representing the Russian side.
Fedor Lukyanov is an IR theorist who directs his attention to medium or long term Russian efforts to change global governance, though the confrontation will likely be resolved in the short term.
Igor Yurgens’ main concern is how the sanctions damage the position of his fellow Liberals and give control over the Russian economy and polity to their opponents in the Kremlin camp.
The authors of the book all believe that Washington is calling the shots and it is Russia's lot to suffer, largely in silence and ineffectually because it is by far the weaker party in the fight.
But then they are assuming total rationality, they are not thinking about the unthinkable.
In that regard, let us remember that none other than the great Realist Richard Nixon demonstrated in his Christmas bombing of North Viet Nam that seemingly irrational behavior can be used by great powers when they are pressed.
Over the past quarter century Thomas Graham has earned a deserved reputation as one of the most experienced and skillful American diplomats dealing with Russia.
This makes the program he outlined for ""containing” Russia in The National Interest so extraordinary and even alarming.
The first flaw to be pointed out in Graham’s program is that it assumes total passivity and passive acceptance on the part of Russia’s leaders and its people in the face of the program he outlines.
On the contrary, if we are to accept any validity to Hans Morgenthau’s political science model of ""realism,” we must acknowledge that great powers will always follow what they perceive to be their best interests.
However, the unavoidable conclusion to be drawn from the Graham program is that any attempt at accommodation or passive acceptance by Russia of that program would be a waste of time.
For if the Graham program were to be implemented by the Obama administration or any future one, Russia would be left with no option except to oppose the United States program with reciprocal or greater force in the very real interest of its own survival.
Graham, after presenting these possibilities, neglects however to consider how such openly expressed goals would be perceived in Russia, and what policies the Russians might feel constrained to follow in opposing them in the interest of their own survival.
Within the past 25 years, well over 20 million Russians died prematurely in the dark decade of the 1990s, now falsely represented by United States pundits and even some Russian liberals, as a lost ""golden age” of freedom.
They died because of the catastrophic results of the crash privatization program urged on Russian President Boris Yeltsin, and adopted by him, by United States President Bill Clinton and his Undersecretary of the Treasury Secretary Lawrence H Summers.
For the current generation of Russian leaders, therefore, the issue of resisting and defeating openly expressed plans in the Untied States and the West to ""degrade” or ""overthrow” their government, represents a real threat that could quickly lead to the deaths 20 million of their people, and great suffering for all of them.
Third, Graham also makes the extraordinary comment that the Ukraine crisis should be seen as a ""godsend” for NATO, helping the alliance focus on the alleged new Russian threat after its withdrawal from Afghanistan and Iraq.
There are so many gaping holes in this line of alleged reasoning, one is almost at a loss to point out the most egregious ones.
NATO’s operations out of theater in Afghanistan and elsewhere have been catastrophic failures.
The last thing that the exhausted and weakened military forces of the alliance need is to be forced to confront a new artificially generated enemy that they cannot contain, and cannot even rely on popular support in their home countries for the increased levels of military spending that would be necessary to even initiate such a course of action.
It is all too easy to project a scenario in which destructive economic warfare by the United States and the EU will finally trigger a military response from Russia, such as a strike that ends in the capture of Kiev and overthrow of its government.
That the military confrontation between United States and NATO forces directly facing Russia in Eastern Europe will set off a land war which would rapidly escalate into a full-scale nuclear exchange.
On October 8, one of the world’s leading experts on the dangers of nuclear weapons, Dr.
Apart from an NPC employee recording her presentation, there were only six individuals in the entire audience, none of them from any significant United States news organization.
But she also warned that it reflected the astonishing levels of denial among United States policymakers and media leaders about the very real and rapidly growing dangers of nuclear war.
Graham in his National Interest article shows a similar extraordinary insouciance.
In America, the policy-makers say it’s not a Cold War, because they don’t want to take responsibility for it, because their policies since the 90s have led directly to this point.
That political dispute, after the coup in February, became a Ukrainian civil war, generally speaking between Kiev and the South-East of Ukraine.
The civil war then became what we call a ""proxy war,” with the United States and NATO supporting Kiev and Moscow supporting the eastern Ukrainian rebels.
Some people think the ceasefire has averted the danger, but the ceasefire is not solid.
The danger is that the proxy war would lead by accident or intention to the intervention of Russian military forces in the East and NATO forces in the West.
Suddenly in the past few days it appears that Kiev shelled Donetsk and it did that on the day that school began.
Let’s say, Kiev attacks the Donbas again and Russia feels the need to help the Donbas militarily.
Inside NATO they are discussing the possibility of NATO forces entering Western Ukraine in such an eventuality.
You would have the America-led NATO forces in Western Ukraine, whether on the ground or in the air, it doesn’t matter; and Russian forces in the air or on the ground.
Russia has the doctrine; they’ve had it since the 90s, because Russian conventional forces are weaker than American-NATO conventional forces.
Russia reserves the right to use nuclear weapons if Western conventional forces threaten the Russian state and Russia.
We’re in a new Cold War, we’re beginning a new nuclear arms race, and the danger is now immense.
Russia has tried to compromise on where this missile defense would be located.
They gave the missile defense project to NATO, so missile defense is now part of the NATO expansion.
It’s not just NATO bases coming towards Russia, it’s the missile defense.
Of course, the United States says the missile defense is not directed at Russia.
But American scientists have said that in its fourth stage it will be able to strike down Russian missiles as they rise towards their ultimate trajectory.
For at least 15 years there was an agreement between NATO and Moscow that even if NATO would expand there would be no NATO permanent military bases in the countries that came in closer to Russia.
They’ve seized the Ukrainian crisis at the NATO Wales summit, a month ago, to create this so-called rapid deployment force of 4,000 men.
And that would be not only NATO expansion politically, which is what it was previously.
It’s not too late, if leadership does what leadership is supposed to do, if statesmen and women do what they are supposed to do.
Judging from the latest booklet by the Center for the National Interest and, indeed, from mainstream analysis coming out of the US, Washington’s foreign policy-making establishment badly needs a reminder of the basic realities of great power politics – as well as a few elementary lessons in history.
As Gilbert Doctorow notes, the booklet is imbued with American triumphalism.
The notion that America could, in fact, be on the losing side is simply not considered.
Let me first list several reasons why the establishment should think again and then draw some obvious conclusions.
Any self-appointed ""exceptional” and hence ""indispensable” nation, ""global leader” or primus inter pares is sooner or later going to encounter determined resistance from the ""lesser” nations; and if the ""leader” insists on pressing hard, the rest will form an alliance against him that will prove his undoing.
This is why, despite centuries of permanent conflict, Europe never came to be governed by a stable centralised authority and why recent attempts at such control ended in disaster for would-be hegemon.
It is surprising that today’s Washington seems to be completely ignorant of Yale historian Paul Kennedy’s common-sense notion of ""imperial overstretch”, especially given the intractable crisis of the Washington Consensus economic model.
Instead of charging headlong towards military confrontation with Russia, Washington should carefully examine whether in the coming decades its ambitions of global hegemony will correspond to its economic power.
Similarly, Washington fails to see that its allies – in particular ""Old Europe”, Japan and Korea – will inevitably be seduced by the dynamic China-driven non-Western economy.
Their political – and, to a far greater extent, business – elites will increasingly resent Washington’s demands for anti-Russian sanctions, especially if those sanctions appear structured to enhance United States economic interests at the expense of its allies.
Hence they will do their utmost to resort to well-tried and -tested creative ways to circumvent or gradually erode any such sanctions.
The National Interest booklet gives a disturbing sense that the United States establishment has irrevocably entered an advanced stage of intellectual sclerosis, not unlike that seen in Brezhnev’s Soviet Union, where dissent had no place in the highest reaches.
If the pamphlet really is on ""the hot reading list of Washington insiders” as Doctorow notes, then we must truly fear for America, its allies and indeed for the entire planet.
It looks like the Empire will stagger on blindly expanding, until it finally over-reaches and implodes, causing huge collateral damage.
While I share Doctorow’s scathing assessment of the booklet’s contents, I would take issue with his blanket dismissal of the value of the Russian contributions.
Yes, Igor Yurgens, speaking for Russian pro-Western liberals, has come up with the usual platitudes about the sanctions misfiring by strengthening the hand of Putin’s anti-Western hardliners.
But Fyodor Lukyanov has, in my opinion, written a highly sophisticated analysis of the Kremlin’s actual or potential ""asymmetric response” to America’s increasingly aggressive campaign against Russia.
Excessive power leads to triumphalism and arrogance; arrogance breeds intellectual degeneration and myopia; intellectual blindness causes overestimation of one’s strength and underestimation of that of your adversary; intelligently targeted strikes by a nimble adversary can knock you off-balance; and, finally, your excessive weight and faltering coordination will ground you.
I would recommend to Washington insiders that they carefully study Lukyanov’s piece and don’t waste their time on the remainder of this disappointing compendium.
American policy makers recognize that Putin is a judo master, but they are oblivious to the rules of this sport.
If Washington paid attention to details, it would avoid applying its full weight on Moscow, for the fear of falling flat on its face.
In the competition of weight against evasion, weight wins if it manages to limit the maneuverability of its smaller but more agile opponent.
Russian trade statistics do not show any significant changes for August-September 2014.
The total value of energy exports has decreased because of falling oil prices, but the total trade surplus has remained positive.
Yes, Gazprom has shelved plans to expand LNG production and Exxon Mobil Corp. or BP PLC may not participate in oil projects in the Arctic or in shale oil in the Volga region.
Western petroleum majors try to find ways to avoid sanctions, for example by insisting that they are searching for gas that is not sanctioned rather than for sanctioned oil though the two types of operations are indistinguishable.
Up to now, such giants as Baker Hughes or Halliburton have monopolized the Russian petroleum service industry, but this time Moscow is obliged to raise the question of ""naturalizing” their local units.
They have highlighted the fact that Visa or MasterCard process Russian transactions in centers overseas and Moscow is not pleased to be so closely monitored.
It has ordered that the processing be localized, which would immunize about 90 percent of total banking operations against foreign interference.
Washington may count on the remaining 10 percent that require trans-border transactions using SWIFT, but this victory may prove to be Pyrrhic in the long run.
It prompts Russia to join forces with China to develop a comparable trans-border banking system.
In general, the sanctions create the impression that they are sabotaged by all parties.
Europe knows that, China and Latin America remain alert to the trade opportunities in Russia if its relations with Europe will really sour.
In short, Washington has failed to limit the room for maneuver for Moscow in trade.
Now, they have become colored like Gram-positive bacteria stained with aniline dye.
For example, when former Vice Premier of Russia Boris Nemtsov opined that sanctions push Russia towards becoming a ""Chinese colony,” the average Ivan or Masha ask immediately why Boris prefers seeing Russia as a ""colony of the West” instead.
The sanctions have consolidated Russian society to a degree not seen since 1945.
People who are normally at each other's throats – from nationalists to communists – show astonishing consensus viewing the sanctions as an act of aggression.
Now it is common for the former opponents of Putin’s regime to speak up against the United States pressure and for grassroots NGOs to denounce funding from foreign governmental bodies.
Even oligarchs, facing the stark choice to repatriate their ""hard-earned” capital or to risk losing it to the sanctions, feel obliged to pledge loyalty to their newfound motherland.
Paradoxically, Washington has helped Moscow to gather in its lands and people.
If we look at the other side of tatami, western unity is hardly present.
I have already mentioned that Paris and Berlin seem to be content at sabotaging the sanctions and for good cause.
If Washington fails to bring Moscow to its knees, America’s frontrunners – most of all Berlin –are the ones who risk bearing the full brunt of animosities.
Having spent the post-war time as an American ally, Germany increasingly favors neutrality instead of unwavering United States support in Washington's squabbles with Moscow.
The largest problem that Putin faces nowadays comes not from the West, but from the Ukrainian soil.
The Putin’s concern has nothing to do with Washington meddling in that country’s political affairs.
He should be sensitive to irrational behavior that the Russians of all stripes show from time to time.
A Westerner will always misinterpret such behavior as ""a riddle, wrapped in a mystery” when a Russian will immediately recognize the issue.
How do we imagine Russia can strike back at short term existential threats which the American scenario of ""containment” sets out? We should not forget that the majority of Russian elite still wants the things to be back to square one, with relations and economic cooperation with the United States and the EU restarted.
The first vice-premier Igor Shuvalov, finance minister Siluanov and the chairwoman of the Central Bank, Elvira Nabiullina, they all try to counteract the rumors about the possible limitations on free flow of capital to and from Russia.
If Putin had been indeed intent on shutting the door to the West, he should have got rid of the Gaidar-style liberals – Siluanov, Nabiullina and especially the economic development minister Alexey Ulyukayev – long ago.
So, the Russian elite will start to act decisively only in the worst of cases – when harmful actions from the West become truly existential.
Arresting the foreign assets of individuals connected to Putin or conducting NATO’s exercises in the Baltic countries and even in Ukraine are not existential threats.
And even after such an escalation, turning against the United States and the EU will be a gradual process for Russia.
In that sense, Fyodor Lukyanov’s predictions of ""aikido style” response from Russia are pretty realistic.
Russia will stop supplying energy to Germany only in case Germany stops paying.
However, there are many possible variants of ""force majeure,” which may hamper Russian supplies to Germany.
The Ukrainian government has been stealing gas from the pipelines leading to Germany even in much calmer times – beginning from the 1990s.
In 2009, when Ukraine under its then president Viktor Yushchenko siphoned off gas from the pipelines, countries of South-East Europe suffered, especially Bulgaria.
I hope now even the EU bureaucrats will realize the stakes are too high now, after the civil war in Ukraine.
At what point can destructive economic warfare by the USA and the EU trigger a military response from Russia, such as a strike that ends up in the capture of Kiev? Russia will not be the side that starts military action.
And of course Russia will not try to take Kiev as some sort of a reprisal for Western economic pressure.
It is a clear and sad fact, that 25 years of anti-Russian propaganda – these years have transformed many of our brothers in Kiev beyond recognition.
The Russian elite understands it and it realizes that trying to correct this tragic situation by force would be a fateful mistake.
And if Russia is attacked by the NATO, it will target the attackers, not Ukraine.
Wherever there are cracks in the Western-led international order, Russia should present itself as the attractive alternative, thereby wedging the gap even wider and weakening the entire Western structure.
Russia can deepen its strategic partnership with China and work on formalizing one with Iran, with the former being global and the latter being in the West’s most vulnerable theater.
A Russian-Iranian strategic partnership would extend beyond Caspian and nuclear energy issues and see implicit cooperation between the two in the Mideast, especially in Syria, Iraq, and Yemen.
It can even carry over into Afghanistan after the NATO drawdown by year’s end.
BRICS could be expanded to include the MINT countries, thus furthering the organization’s scope and creating opportunities for a long-term strategic ‘flip’ of those states from their largely Western orientations.
The SCO is already enlarging with the forthcoming admission of India and Pakistan, so this will present many more unforeseen advantages for Russia’s foreign and economic policies.
Russia should support integrating its multilateral partnerships even further, as the interests of these organizations and their members largely coincide with Russian foreign policy.
The rush that non-Western countries were in to fill Russia’s counter-sanction agricultural void testifies to the interest that many states have in penetrating the Russian market.
Moscow can use this, and every other counter-sanction, to help build an alternative non-Western-centric trade network that can bolster Russia’s complex economic interdependence with other states.
Russia has the geostrategic opportunity of being an air, land, and sea bridge between Europe and East Asia.
In line with China’s Silk Road and New Eurasian Land Bridge projects, the concept of the Northern Sea Route, and international air routes traversing Siberia, Russia can use its geographic position to reap the resultant dividends of East-West trade and thereby increasing its middleman importance.
In the case of air travel, it can also prohibit American military overflight from Afghanistan and sanction Western air carriers.
The EU is rife with both leftand right-leaning groups that preach a form of ‘Euroscepticism’ that endangers the current Atlanticist establishment.
Whether or not they are explicitly Russian-friendly, their existence, such as that of the UKIP and the National Front, sends quivers down the Eurocrats’ spine.
Moscow can use its information channels to provide implicit support for these movements and their supporters, thereby irking the West in the same manner that it does Moscow through its support of Navalny and others.
All things considered, the Russian government has weathered the geopolitical storm quite well.
This has been done in a confident manner, which conforms with present and likely future realities.
With other options in the global economy, combined with Russia's own ability, Russia-West trade relations aren't the one way street as some suggest.
Besides dealing with themselves, Russia and the West each have other geopolitical concerns to ponder issues that have some convergence of interest between the two.
Practically speaking, there're limits to what Russia and the West can and can't do.
Post-Soviet Russia during Putin's leadership reveals a clear understanding of this situation.
On a related note, it's ironic how some believe that the Kremlin has been pursuing a zero sum game stance.
Prior to the overthrow of Ukraine's democratically elected, albeit imperfect president Viktor Yanukovych, the Russian and Ukrainian governments sought three way talks on how to best develop Ukraine.
In contrast, the EU and the Obama administration pursued an all or nothing approach, which disregarded the counter-Euromaidan perspective in Ukraine.
Yanukovych's overthrow contradicted the internationally brokered power sharing agreement, on how Ukraine would be governed for the remainder of this year.
Had a reasonable course of political action been pursued in Kiev, Crimea might very well still be a part of Ukraine.
As is, Moscow has ample reason to feel well premised about Crimea's reunification with Russia.
For the time being, it looks like the situation in the Donetsk and Lugansk areas of eastern Ukraine could be in a prolonged frozen conflict status.
Simultaneously, there's the probability that this part of eastern Ukraine will not achieve a formally recognized independence from Russia, or an offer to become a part of that country.
Russia has good reason to not risk getting so entangled in a prolonged messy setting.
At the same time, the Kremlin can't be too passive to a nearby unstable condition, that can create increased problems for Russia.
Outside Donetsk and Lugansk, the rest of Ukraine remains problematical.
It's not in the interests of Russia or the West to see things in that former Soviet republic get too chaotic.
Hopefully, Ukraine itself can eventually see a rise in a better political outlook one that can successfully balance the different historical, cultural and geopolitical preferences in that former Soviet republic.
Russia and the West can't be completely blamed for the imperfections in Ukraine.
I'd be no surprise to see this difference become even more evident in the coming months.
In the foreseeable future, the relationship between Russia and the West will continue to have up and down trends.
As time progresses, there will be added examples to review and analyze, for further guidance on how to best proceed.
When things heat up, expect the usual suspects to advocate a more confrontational approach.
On the subject of hypothetical future occurrences, we're IMHO distant from the aforementioned scenario of a Russian military presence in Kiev.
For now, there seems to be enough of a Russia-West understanding to limit the chance for that move.
As a frequent geopolitical commentator, Clark isn't known for being sympathetic to pro-Russian interests.
Since the end of WW II, that city has experienced a noticeable migration of people from the not so pro-Russian areas of Galicia and Volhynia.
The Kiev regime still has sway over Odessa and Kharkov, which are more pro-Russian than the Ukrainian capital.
I think Russia is far less vulnerable to United States bullying than people like Graham realize.
Russia simply too big and too connected with other countries to be bullied like Iraq, Libya, or Yugoslavia.
Instead of thinking in terms of military muscle and economic clout, , Russia should be putting more effort into winning over hearts and minds in the West through media.
Ultimately this is more valuable than the biggest of defense budgets or largest of economies.
Efforts to force Russia to adhere to Washington’s wishes have been so far, and will continue to be, a spectacular failure.
The Russia-hostile government in Kiev is tottering on the verge of collapse.
Economic sanctions have had little effect, and in many ways are helping Russia.
The world media landscape is very different today than it was even in 2008 when the Georgian war happened, and has changed beyond recognition since Iraq and Yugoslavia.
Information now crosses national borders with ease, and it is much harder to enforce a certain line in national media.
In the information wars regarding Russian issues, the West is spectacularly vulnerable, because their media have wandered so far from the objective truth, that it is child’s play to shoot down the nonsense.
We’ve also thought a lot about why Western media has failed its readers so miserably, and understand how it happened, and understand how realistic it is to influence what the western media says.
