It is not permitted to be sold in electronic format under any circumstances.
Taras Kuzio and Paul D’Anieri offer a refreshing look at the sources of Russian conduct toward Ukraine.
They challenge conventional analyses by exploring deeper roots of Russian-Ukrainian conflict and placing Russian tactics against Ukraine in a broader historical context.
Taras Kuzio and Paul D’Anieri provide an invaluable guide of the complexities of current developments in and Russia’s military aggression against Ukraine.
The book draws on comprehensive field research, demonstrates deep knowledge and understanding of Ukrainian-Russian relations, and presents an alternative to much of the Western writing on the crisis.
Two of the West’s preeminent Ukraine scholars have written an indispensable book that clearly, concisely and persuasively demonstrates that Vladimir Putin’s war against Ukraine is not a response to Western behaviour but the product of longstanding tendencies within Russian policy.
You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
Please contact info@e-ir.info for any such enquiries, including for licensing and translation requests.
Other than the terms noted above, there are no restrictions placed on the use and dissemination of this book for student learning materials/scholarly use.
Michael Tang Cover Image: Maksymenko Nataliia A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Stephen McGlinchey Copy-editors: Agnieszka Pikulicka-Wilczewska & Cameran Clayton Editorial Assistants: Gaia Rizzi, Farah H Saleem, Patricia Salas Sanchez & Shaghayegh Rostampour Vajari E-IR Open Access is a series of scholarly books presented in a format that preferences brevity and accessibility while retaining academic conventions.
Each book is available in print and digital versions, and is published under a Creative Commons license.
E-IR’s daily publications feature expert articles, blogs, reviews and interviews — as well as student learning resources.
The West has slowly come to understand that Russia’s annexations and interventions, interference in elections, cyber warfare, disinformation, assassinations in Europe and support for anti-EU populists emerge from Vladimir Putin’s belief that Russia is at war with the West.
This book shows that the crisis has deep roots in Russia’s inability to come to terms with an independent Ukrainian state, Moscow’s view of the Orange and Euromaidan revolutions as Western conspiracies and, finally, its inability to understand that most Russian-speaking Ukrainians do not want to rejoin Russia.
In Moscow’s eyes, Ukraine is central to rebuilding a sphere of influence within the former Soviet space and to re-establishing Russia as a great power.
The book shows that the wide range of ‘hybrid’ tactics that Russia has deployed show continuity with the actions of the Soviet-era security services.
USF funding enabled 15 research visits to cities, villages and military frontlines in Eastern and Southern Ukraine and the ATO conflict zone which became the basis for the publication of this book and the earlier published Putin’s War Against Ukraine.
Paul D’Anieri acknowledges the generous support of the Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute, where he spent the fall semester of 2017 as the Eugene and Daymel Shklar Research Fellow in Ukrainian Studies.
The Institute provided exceptional academic resources and a congenial atmosphere for work on this project and on a more in-depth study of Ukraine’s relations with Russia since 1991.
We have written this book to fill what we see as important gaps in the literature, beginning with the question of why the war happened.
We contend that the roots of the crisis go back further than is widely understood and therefore we see the cause of the conflict in long-term factors underlying Russia’s policy toward Ukraine.
We trace Russia’s goals and tactics from the beginning of the post-Soviet era in 1991, and in some cases to the Soviet era.
Rather than focusing on historical breaks, we stress the continuity between the Soviet era, the early post-Soviet era, and the crisis since early 2014.
The key break was that Russia, in pursuing goals that it held since 1991, chose to use military force in 2014.
Therefore, we contend that Russia’s actions in 2014 were not a response to specific events, such as NATO enlargement, EU policy, democracy promotion or revolution in Ukraine because the main drivers of Russian policy were visible prior to those events.
The events of 2013-2014 in Ukraine certainly spurred resentment, and may have created a sense that a window of opportunity was closing, but they created neither Russia’s desire to regain Ukrainian territory nor the tactics that would be used in doing so.
Except for using the most recent technology, we argue, there is not much new about Russian hybrid warfare.
Rather, it shows considerable continuity with both the goals and tactics that the Soviet intelligence services used during the Cold War and that Russia deployed in military interventions from 1991 onwards in Moldova and Georgia.
Our focus is not on Putin’s personal history in the Committee for State Security and its successors, but on the endurance of norms, practices, and institutions from the Soviet to the post-Soviet era to the present.
The crisis has exposed a fundamental disagreement over what a European order should look like.
The European Union remains wedded to principles that both stress the sovereign equality of large and small states and reject the use of force.
Russia seeks recognition of a Russian ‘sphere of xii The Sources of Russia’s Great Power Politics influence’ beyond its borders and stresses that Russia as a great power is entitled to a veto over what happens in the region.
Whether or not the West should accept Russia’s claim has been a main topic of discussion, and here again we believe some important perspectives have been missing.
Our critique focuses not on the broad question of when realpolitik should and should not trump principle, but on how realism applies to this conflict.
Put simply, it is not at all clear that realism would find the causes of the conflict in Western action nor would it find the solution in acquiescing to a Russian sphere of influence in Ukraine.
Some of the most prominent applications of realism to the Ukraine-Russia crisis contradict basic tenets of realist theory.
We show that realist theory fits equally well, if not better, with a policy of opposing the expansion of Russian influence.
Applying realism to reach specific conclusions about this case relies crucially on additional assumptions, most importantly concerning Russia’s aims.
Chapter one reviews existing literature on the conflict, identifying different schools of thought on why Russia annexed the Crimea and launched military aggression against Ukraine in 2014.
We argue that realism has been applied to the case in a way that does not seem realist at all.
We also identify the major gaps that we address in the following chapters, particularly the need to look more deeply into the early post-Soviet era and at the role of Ukraine in Russian national identity.
Chapter two traces the evolution of hybrid war from Soviet to post-Soviet Russia.
While cyber warfare is based on fundamentally new technology, the tactics of dezinformatsiya and maskirovka have a long history.
We point out the similarity in rhetoric used by the Soviet Union and Russia against the goals and policies of the Ukrainian national movement.
Chapter three addresses Ukraine’s relations with Russia from 1991 to 2013, highlighting that Russia sought to control Ukraine from the very beginning, that it sought greater control over Crimea in particular, and that these goals were rooted in claims about the very essence of Russian national identity.
Chapter four examines the conflict in Crimea and Donbas, beginning with the Orange Revolution in 2004.
The chapter shows both the medium-term build up to the conflict and the application of specific Russian tactics in 2014.
Chapter five surveys the international repercussions of the crisis and international efforts to resolve it.
Like many others, we are pessimistic because we see little common ground between Russia, Ukraine and the West over either principles or territory.
In the EU, sensitivities about a ‘new Yalta’ will make that very hard to accept.
A brief conclusion then poses several questions that remain unanswered.
Having written this book in the belief that important questions have been overlooked and important perspectives neglected, we make no claim to have addressed all of them.
We do hope to have raised issues that will stimulate productive discussion.
If this new cold war is anything like the original one, the debates will continue for some time.
Assessing the Debate 1 1 Causes and Consequences: Assessing the Debate The crisis in relations between Russia and the West following Russia’s annexation of the Crimea and military intervention in Eastern Ukraine has led to a large number of publications written by scholars and commentators from a wide variety of perspectives and specialities, including Russian and Eurasian area studies, international relations and security studies.
As one of the most important crises of recent decades, the conflict has attracted the attention of many scholars, regardless of whether they have worked extensively on Ukraine or Ukrainian-Russian relations.
Newcomers to this conflict are forced to take at face value some facile characterisations of the situation, rather than recognising the complexity and contestation of many of the key drivers of the conflict.
We identify two gaps in the literature, both of which stem from viewing Russia’s actions as a response to recent events.
As a result, phenomena with deep histories are sometimes seen as recent events.
Second, and related, the issue of national identity is often treated superficially leading to an underweighting of national identity concerns as a factor underpinning Russia’s actions.
A tradition has persisted from the Soviet era whereby scholars specialising in Russian politics claim expertise on the non-Russian countries which emerged as independent states after 1991.
For these reasons, many of the works on the crisis use few primary sources from Ukraine (whether in Ukrainian or Russian) and few show evidence of extensive fieldwork in Ukraine.
See also ‘Russia’s “Hybrid” War — Challenge and Threat for Europe’, special issue of the Razumkov Ukrainian Centre for Economic and Political Studies Magazine 2 The Sources of Russia’s Great Power Politics dearth of Ukrainian sources and fieldwork in Ukraine naturally leads these works to rely heavily on secondary sources and quotes from official Russian sources.
While understandable when the Soviet government restricted travel beyond Moscow to sensitive republics, and when information about the nonRussian republics was difficult to access, there is less reason today to approach countries such as Ukraine via Russia and the Russian media.
The web sites of the Ukrainian government, president and parliament are in both Ukrainian and Russian.
Scholars writing about this conflict face a choice in perspectives that is likely to lead them to being criticised no matter what they do.
Those who blame the conflict on Russia’s aggression face the accusation that they ignore the actions of the US, NATO, the EU and Ukrainian nationalists, all of which supposedly left Russia little freedom of action to do anything other than intervene militarily.
Those who blame the conflict on the West and Ukraine can be accused of defending an attack on a weaker neighbour that clearly violates international law and to many resembles Germany’s aggression towards its neighbours in the 1930s.
Those who try to take a more ‘balanced’ perspective risk being seen as naive or as apologists by both of the previous groups.
While these perspectives compete fundamentally, they tend to share two underlying characteristics.
First, they are largely focused on assigning blame, regardless of where they locate it.
Second, many, though not all, in their efforts to make their cases, provide clear and simple explanations of the conflict.
This leads them to choose and assemble facts and interpretations to support their argument rather than exploring the many areas in which causes are intertwined, interpretations are contested, and ‘facts’ are interpreted completely differently depending on one’s pre-existing perspective.
A good example is the question of the rightful ownership of the Crimean Peninsula.
Prior to the crisis, few scholars of international politics paid much attention to it.
Those who blame the West for the crisis (both from leftist and realist perspectives) see Russia’s annexation of the Crimea as returning the National Security and Defence, nos.
Relatively few scholars in the West have a command of Ukrainian, increasing the likelihood of relying on Russian sources.
Zerkalo Nedeli and Ukrainska Pravda, for example, are published in both Russian and Ukrainian.
This rests on focusing on certain facts — Russian control of the territory from the 1780s to 1954, the notion that the 1954 transfer was a ‘gift’ or even a whim and the predominance of the Russian language in the peninsula.
The viewpoint of the Crimea being more ‘Russian’ than Ukrainian remains widespread, particularly among Western scholars of Russia and it is commonplace among critics of United States foreign policy and realists.
Those who blame the conflict on Russia focus on a different set of facts.
The territory was legally part of Ukraine, and thus its seizure violated international law, and to judge Russia’s seizure legal on historical or linguistic grounds would set a disruptive precedent.
When Crimeans had a chance to vote on their future in a well-prepared referendum, as they did in the 1991 referendum on Ukrainian independence, 54% voted for Ukraine’s secession from the Soviet Union.
As Paul R Magocsi and Andrew Wilson both point out, if length of time within a State is the criterion we use to decide to whom Crimea should belong, then it should be returned to the Tatars who ruled the peninsula from the 13"" to the late-18"" century.
The peninsula was Ukrainian for a slightly shorter period of 60 years, but under Tatar rule for four hundred.
The March 2014 referendum claimed an unlikely ‘Yes’ vote of 97% when Tatars, who make up approximately 15% of the population, boycotted it.
Unfortunately, rather than doing so, most analyses choose the version that supports the allotment of blame that has already been predetermined.
The first emphasises Western expansion as the cause of the conflict, portraying Russia as a passive victim compelled to respond.
This includes both those arguing primarily from a leftist position against American influence in the world and those invoking realism to indict Western policy.
The second and third schools are complementary in that they both see Russia as the driver of the conflict, but they diverge on the drivers of Russian policy.
The second school focuses on Russian geopolitical expansion — its desire to undo at least some of the results of 1991.
Rather than criticising the West for doing too much, some in this school criticise it for not doing more sooner to help integrate Ukraine in the West.
International Institute for Strategic Studies, Causes and Consequences: Assessing the Debate 5 final approach sees the conflict as an effort by the Russ-ian government to reassert a particular notion of Russian national identity which sees Russia not as a nation-state but as a ‘civilisation’, that extends beyond the boundaries of the Russian Federation and is incompatible with an independent Ukraine.
This perspective fits with others that blame Russia, but we save it for last because it is relatively underdeveloped and we seek to give it extra attention.
We stress that while in theory these causal factors are distinct, in practice they tend to be combined.
Russian leaders, for example, could be motivated by both the geopolitical and domestic payoffs of seizing Crimea.
Because almost all of the literature seeks to apportion blame, there is a strong tendency to combine different analytical arguments that support the conclusion.
For example, the legality of the annexation of Crimea, the role of local Ukrainian versus Russian forces in the Donbas secessionist movements, and the wisdom of NATO enlargement are three entirely distinct questions, and yet there is a strong tendency to join them together.
Those who downplay the international legal aspect of the annexation of the Crimea also tend to argue that the Donbas conflict was essentially domestic and that NATO enlargement was at best foolish and at worst aggressive.
These positions correlate well with views on Western sanctions against Russia.
Similarly, the work of Richard Sakwa, Stephen Cohen, Jonathan Steele and John Mearsheimer among others, focuses on NATO, the United States and Ukrainian nationalists in explaining the outbreak of conflict.
Russia is a great power, and because of its power and history is entitled to respect and to rights that other states are not.
By enlarging NATO into countries that Russia (as the Soviet Union) once controlled, the West was a threat to Russian national security.
Different scholars focus on different policies and events, but the list of misdeeds by the US/NATO/EU includes multiple rounds 2017). i Taras Kuzio, Putin’s War Against Ukraine.
They claim that Yanukovych’s ouster was illegitimate, and that the presence of radical nationalists among those on the Maidan created an immediate threat to ethnic Russians or Russian speakers in Ukraine justified Russian intervention.
The strength of these perspectives is that they capture many of the same points made by Putin and other defenders of Russia’s policies.
The primary difference between the ‘leftist’ and ‘realist’ versions is that the realist claims to invoke the timeless lessons of realist theory, and to identify Western missteps in those countries’ theoretically-misguided adoption of liberal international relations theories.
Realists in particular prioritise the immediate external environment and therefore largely ignore domestic factors in Russia and Ukraine.
These perspectives are as notable for what they do not discuss as for what they do.
While it is understandable why realist scholars downplay the importance of Ukraine’s sovereignty or international law, it is less clear why those claiming to criticise the dominance of the United States do so.
Assessing the Debate 7 another thing to say that this caused or justified Russia militarily invading a third country, Ukraine.
Advocates of these two positions have also interpreted data concerning Russian involvement in Eastern Ukraine selectively.
This has become more problematic as an increasing volume of evidence from satellites, NATO, Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe observers, Western journalists, think tanks , Ukrainian military intelligence and captured Russian soldiers that have all documented Russia’s military involvement.
Ukrainian military intelligence estimates there are up to 6,000 Russian forces in the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic with an additional 35,000—40,000 proxy forces.
De Ploeg cites on thirty occasions Ivan Katchanovski’s claims that ‘Ukrainian nationalists’ were responsible for the sniper killings on the Euromaidan**; Katchanovski in turn draws on a highly selective use of sources gleaned from all corners of the Internet and YouTube, to the exclusion of other accounts.
De Ploeg, Ukraine in the Crossfire also frequently cites Sakwa who endorses the book on the cover.
A similar conspiracy theory blames ‘Ukrainian nationalists’ for the deaths of 42 pro-Russian protestors in Odesa on 2 May 2014.
Put differently, in many respects the realist analysis of the Ukraine conflict is not realist at all.
Thus, Mearsheimer’s current views have evolved from the 1990s when he supported Ukraine keeping the nuclear weapons it inherited from the USSR??, a step which was seen at the time as being highly provocative towards Russia.
The gist of their argument is that the West's movement towards Russia constituted a threat to which Russia Times, 4 January 2015 and Tom Parfitt, ‘Families of victims in Ukraine massacre slate investigation into deaths’, The Daily Telegraph, 19 February 2015.
Mearsheimer, ‘Why the Ukraine crisis is the West's fault’ and R Menon and E Rumer, Conflict in Ukraine.
However, it is not clear the enlargement of NATO and Western policy toward Ukraine actually go against the dictums of realism.
Realism finds that states live in an insecure world, and counsels that the smart ones will always try to increase their power.
If that is the case, then realism would likely have advised the United States and its allies to expand their alliance while they had the possibility to do so.
Similarly, it is a contradiction of realism to argue that United States policies and NATO enlargement somehow made Russia more aggressive, because in realist theory, states are always seeking to expand their power.
Thus, realists would expect Russia to take advantage of the opportunities open to it regardless of whether Russian leaders were angry or felt betrayed by the West.
Oddly, the arguments made by self-described realists regarding Ukraine not only contradict realist theory, but they also adopt the position of liberalism, which realists have scorned for generations.
A key concept in realism (and liberalism) is the ‘security dilemma’, the idea that when a state takes steps to make itself more secure, it undermines the security of its neighbour, thus spurring a reaction.
Realists regard this as an immutable characteristic of the system, one that is foolhardy to try to overcome.
States that refrain from pursuing power are likely to find themselves endangered.
Liberalism, anticipating an escalating cycle of response, counsels that both sides can be better off through restraint.
Liberals, not realists, advocate that states try to mitigate the security dilemma by either unilaterally or via a formal agreement limiting efforts to increase their power relative to their potential adversaries.
Thus, in saying that NATO should have refrained from enlargement, and assuming that this could be counted on to prevent Russia from itself trying to expand, Mearsheimer is adopting a liberal, not a realist, position.
Those invoking realism are applying it more consistently when they criticise the West for adopting policies recommended by liberalism; namely, relying on 10 The Sources of Russia’s Great Power Politics the spread of democracy and on international institutions to maintain security.
Hopes by Western policymakers that the problem of security would be solved in Central Europe have not held up.
Again, however, it is not clear that realism would counsel a carve-up of Eastern Europe on Russia’s terms rather than an effort to strengthen resistance to potential Russian expansion.
The argument made by Mearsheimer and others retains another important aspect of realism as well; namely, that international politics is about the interests of the ‘great powers’, and that interests of non-great powers should and inevitably will be secondary to those of great powers.
Because great power war is so deadly, avoiding it is a moral imperative that justifies subjecting the needs of lesser powers to those of great power accommodation.
Leaving morals aside, because great powers can force the lesser ones to bend to their needs, they will.
In this case, the implication is that preserving some kind of great power condominium between the United States and Russia requires dividing Europe in a way that leaves Russia satisfied, and hence a ‘status quo’, rather than a ‘revolutionary’ state, to use former United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger’s terms.
This aspect of the argument, unfortunately, has received relatively little attention, for this is the point on which much of the debate over who is to blame and what should be done next hinges.
It is in large part a normative debate, but it also points back to the long-standing disagreements between liberalism and realism.
Liberalism (represented in this debate by the position of the EU) believes strongly that respect for international law and state sovereignty is essential to maintaining the security order in Europe, and is the only way to maintain a long-term peace.
This is what has brought peace, for example to France and Germany after they fought three wars in 70 years.
Liberals find Russia’s invasion of Ukraine not only destructive for peace but normatively appalling.
Most realists would hold that lasting peace simply is not possible in international affairs.
Assessing the Debate 11 ‘The Russians Went Ape’*> The second body of scholarly work focuses upon Russia seeking to expand its influence and gain recognition of its status as a great power.
This body of work on the crisis views Russia’s hybrid war in Eastern Ukraine as the continuation of its long-standing policy of creating frozen conflicts since the early-1990s in Moldova, Georgia and Azerbaijan.
This literature also analyses Russia’s revanchist policies within the context of Putin lamenting the disintegration of the USSR and the Russian desire to build new unions, in this case the Eurasian Economic Union.
In this respect, those blaming Russia draw on a set of events and policies that those who blame the West largely ignore.
Surprisingly, little of this scholarly work drills down deeper to pursue the national identity issues that lead many in Russia to view Ukraine as being an artificial country and failed state.
There may be insight from comparing Russia’s view to that seen in previous cases of colonial collapse, such as that of the United Kingdom's colonial relationship with Ireland and France's relationship with Algeria.
In both of those cases as well, the colonial power viewed these territories more as an integral ‘Near Abroad’ rather than as distinct colonies.
The British, French and Russians differentiated between peoples closely bound to the metropolis and foreign colonies further afield.
Russia appears not to view Ukraine and Belarus in the same manner as Georgia or Uzbekistan and especially the three Baltic States.
De-colonisation in the Near Abroad, whether Ireland, Algeria or Ukraine, was more intense and bitter, producing a strong sense of betrayal in London, Paris and Moscow respectively at the independence of regions considered to be part of the metropolis.
The third body of scholarly work agrees that the conflict is largely driven by Russian behaviour, but sees that behaviour rooted in Russia’s autocratic domestic politics rather than in its international aspirations.
Mark Galeotti believes there is no inconsistency between widespread corruption and nationalism in Putin’s Russia; after all, kleptocrats in many parts of the world are also nationalists.
There is often the ‘thinnest of lines’ between organised crime and paramilitaries in many conflicts.
Similarly, Wilson writes that Russia’s hybrid war is ‘foreign policy as raiderstvo’ , extending beyond Russian borders the same techniques that define the mix of business and organised crime that prevails in Russia.
Evidence for this is seen in the massive corporate raiding of the Ukrainian state and private assets following Russia’s annexation of the Crimea.
Nor is this form of politics alien in Ukraine itself, where it was regionally prominent in the Donbas before 2010, and where Yanukovych as president undertook a systematic campaign to gather key business assets among his family and a small circle of allies.
The search for the domestic sources of Russian policy goes all the way down to the individual level and Putin himself.
Assessing the Debate 13 East Germany during the fall of communism tell us a great deal about Putin as a leader.
Putin took away from the GDR a uniformly negative view of political instability under Presidents Mikhail Gorbachev and later in the 1990s under President Boris Yeltsin, one reason being because political strife could be used by Western intelligence agencies and governments to foment regime change.
Clifford G Gaddy and Fiona Hill write that Putin’s roots in the Soviet secret services go much deeper through his father who was one of only a few who survived as a member of an NKVD unit sent behind enemy lines in Nazi occupied Estonia.
Geopolitics The fourth perspective sees the conflict as part of a broader geopolitical competition between Russia and the West.
This perspective focuses on relations between the West and its institutions on the one hand and Russia on the other, and tends to reduce Ukraine’s role to that of a battleground in a competition between Russia and the West.
While specific assertions vary, a primary focus is the extension of Western institutions eastward and increasing opposition to this in Russia.
This school of thought sees the source of the conflict in the reliance of the West on a postCold War security architecture in Europe that excluded Russia.
While Menon and Rumer see this ‘architecture’ problem as the fundamental cause of the conflict, Charap and Colton see it as only a permissive cause.
Just as many criticised NATO for assuming its enlargement could not be seen as a threat by Russia much of this literature criticises the EU for ignoring what Charap and Colton call the ‘geoeconomic’ consequences of its expansion eastward.
By 2013, it was the EU, not NATO, that was taking the lead in pushing into territory that Russia considered vital to its security.
Moreover, including Ukraine in a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement with the EU would undermine Russia’s long-term efforts to build its own Eurasian Union trade bloc that included Ukraine.
Many of these authors, including Menon and Rumer, Charap and Colton, and Toal, strive to be even-handed in criticising both Russia and the West for their roles in the conflict.
This is captured in the title of Charap and Colton’s book Everyone Loses.
These factors included a Ukrainian ‘nationalising state’, colour revolutions in Russia’s neighbours, NATO and EU enlargement and state dynamics.
Assessing the Debate 15 The final body of scholarly publications, which is also the smallest, analyses national identity in Ukrainian-Russian relations and Russian chauvinism towards Ukrainians.
In light of the large literature on Russian nationalism, it is odd that it has been underemphasised as a source of Russian behaviour in Ukraine, while scholars and journalists, especially those defending Russia or criticising the West, put great emphasis on nationalism in Ukraine, where nationalism is much less salient and extreme nationalists much less influential than in Russia.
Meanwhile, no Ukrainian nationalist party managed to cross the threshold to enter parliament in the 2014 elections — in the same year Russia invaded Ukraine.
In Ukraine, civic patriotism rather than ethnic nationalism has greater public support because of the country’s regional and linguistic diversity.
Polls show that three-quarters of Ukrainians hold negative views of Russian leaders but not the Russian people — which would be expected if ethnic nationalism was dominant in Ukraine.
The relative imbalance in attention to nationalism in Russia and Ukraine might stem from two factors.
That is especially true in light of a second factor, the concerted effort by Russian leaders to exaggerate the role and extremism of nationalism in Ukraine.
In this section, we review the role of nationalism and national identity in explanations both of Russia’s and Ukraine’s behaviour.
The role of Russian nationalism underpins, to some extent, the literatures discussed above focusing on Russian great power aspirations and Russian domestic politics as sources of the conflict.
Some also see nationalism as the direct cause, Ivan Krastev writes, ‘It is Putin the conservative and not Putin the realist who decided to violate Ukraine’s sovereignty.
In the 1990s, the red-brown coalition opposed to Yeltsin, the regime’s controlled ‘nationalist opposition’ Vladimir Zhirinovsky and Aleksandr Dugin had been on the extremes of Russian politics.
In this view, Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians are parts of a single Russkii Mir civilisation, the division of which into separate states is artificial.
In Russia’s domestic minorities policy, which recognises a wide array of groups, there is no recognition of Ukrainians, who by numbers are the second largest minority, simply because they are not seen as distinct and do not possess autonomous territorial institutions.
It is this Russkii Mir civilisation which Russian nationalists fear is under threat from the West.
Putin embraced nationalism after the colour revolutions, and went further after widespread street protests to his return to the presidency in 2012.
Assessing the Debate 17 view in his February 2007 speech to the Munich security conference.
While it is not surprising that Russian nationalists are on the same page as Putin, the majority of opposition democratic political leaders, such as Alexei Navalny, also support Russia’s annexation of the Crimea.
This is significant because it indicates that Russian nationalism, and in particular its views toward Ukraine, are not isolated to Putin and his team, and therefore will not automatically pass when he eventually leaves office.
The role of nationalism in Ukraine has attracted more attention, primarily from those who see Russia’s intervention as justified.
First, the coalition that came to rule in Ukraine after the Euromaidan was illegitimate and threatening because it contained representatives of extreme nationalist parties.
Second, the role of those groups in the protests constituted sufficient danger to ethnic Russians and Russian speakers to justify their desire to secede and Russia’s intervention to protect them.
These arguments appear in ‘Cultural Contradictions’ in Sakwa’s Frontline Ukraine, p.0—277.
A common framework for understanding the crisis is to portray Ukraine as divided between governments pursuing pluralist policies and governments pursuing what Sakwa calls ‘monist’ policies — by which Sakwa means policies that reject pluralism.
In this view, the ‘civil war’ was caused by pluralism being overthrown by ‘monist’ nationality policies which are intolerant of Russian-speakers and espouse Russophobia.
As scholars of Ukraine have explored for over two decades, however, simple binaries (e.g. between ‘monist’ and pluralist or between ethnic and linguistic categories) are highly misleading in Ukraine.
Moreover, these critics of ‘monism’ oddly ignore the politics of Yanukovych, who was assiduously trying to eliminate any potential political competitors as well as economic rivals.
The desire to stop him before he fully consolidated autocracy in the country was one of the underlying sources of support for the Euromaidan protests, and helps explain why various oligarchs supported his ouster.
In addition, talk of multiculturalism in Russian-controlled regions, whether the Crimea or the DNR and LNR, is a myth.
In the Crimea, Tatars have come under sustained repression, its leaders banned from returning to the Crimea and their unofficial parliament Mejlis has been banned.
In the DNR and LNR, Ukrainian language schools and media have been closed down and Ukrainian Orthodox Church-Kiev Patriarchate and Protestant Churches banned.
Upwards of a quarter of citizens in Eastern Ukraine considered themselves to have mixed Russian-Ukrainian ethnicity, and the majority of Ukrainians speak both Russian and Ukrainian, depending on the circumstances.
Moreover, even Russian/Ukrainian is in some cases a false distinction, as people often intermingle the two.
Predictions of Ukraine disintegrating into a civil war between its eastern and western regions have been published since as long ago as the early 1990s.
Because nationalism can be used by politicians instrumentally, it is compatible with various explanations concerning underlying driving forces.
Even if we believe that nationalism is exploited by the Russian leadership to build support for itself, the fact that it appears to work so well means that nationalism must be part of our understanding of the current conflict.
Similarly, even if Ukrainian nationalists are adept at gaining attention, they may not be having much influence on policy.
A major difference between Russia and Ukraine is that invoking nationalism is a successful strategy to win votes in Russia but not in Ukraine; indeed, no Ukrainian president has ever won an election with a nationalist programme.
Tied to the question of nationalism is that of identity which can be either ethnic or civic or, as is the case in most Western democracies both.
Although there is a similarity between one and two to the difference between ‘English’ and ‘British’, the confusion lies in the use of only word to describe both.
Ironically, Putin’s military aggression has strengthened Ukrainian identity and made Russian understanding of Ukraine and Ukrainians even more obsolete.
Conclusion As the fragmented nature of this literature review has demonstrated, the field has not yet developed a clear set of analytical debates that define the topic.
The dominant debate — over who is to blame — is one that is unresolvable.
Analytically, so far, the works on the topic come from a bewildering array of paradigms, levels of analysis, geographical foci, and conceptualisations of the problem.
Underlying these, however, is a series of issues that seem to shape much of the discussion even if they are not addressed directly.
A first basic problem concerns the principal of the sovereign equality of states.
Russia’s position, and that of many works on the topic, answers the question clearly in the negative, or at least with considerable qualification.
But many others who do not claim to be realists accept, to some degree or another, the idea that Russia has special rights or privileges due to its size and power.
For those who do not espouse realism, the question is what are those privileges and where do they end.
One suspects that the ‘legitimacy’ claim does us little good, because it runs head on into other legitimate claims.
Thomas Graham and Menon, for example lay out a compelling case that Russia’s concept of its role as a power has been consistent over time, and has been impinged by the events of the post-Cold War period.
But they leave unaddressed the crucial question of how far we should impinge on other states — including Ukraine — to satisfy Russia’s conception of its great power status.
Assessing the Debate 21 one country’s interests are beyond its borders, and how far they extend geographically.
Absent any shared agreement between Russia and the West on that question, a second question presses.
There may be too few historical cases to arrive at good empirical generalisations.
As a result, analogies will be used, and in this case the comparison to Germany’s territorial demands in the 1930s has been made.
Russia’s behaviour since 2014 is ambiguous enough to be consistent both with the view that it stopped where it did because it was satiated, and the view that it stopped where it did because of pushback, both from within Ukraine and from the international community.
In terms of territory, there is a good case to be made that Russia can be satisfied somewhere within the boundaries of the former Soviet Union.
Normatively, however, Russia shows signs of being a revolutionary power, hoping to overturn both the prevailing distribution of power and the rules of the game that others in Europe have accepted for some time.
Perhaps no task is as urgent as correctly assessing the extent to which concessions will satisfy, or stoke, Russia’s ambitions.
If the questions above seem to push the answers into the realist court, we have to acknowledge as we did earlier in this chapter that realism too has its limits.
Mearsheimer’s argument points directly to such a ‘grand bargain’, but he and others are silent on where the new line should be, and how it should be redrawn when constellations of power change in the future.
Another series of important questions relates to the relationship between the domestic and international sources of Russian foreign policy.
Those who see Russian behaviour as the main cause of the conflict can draw on both its great power aspirations and several aspects of its domestic politics.
In this instance, those arguments are complementary, but that complementarity makes it hard to say which might have more influence in the longer term, or what might happen when those motives conflict rather than reinforce one another.
In particular, the notion that a change in government in Russia would 22 The Sources of Russia’s Great Power Politics lead to a less assertive foreign policy causes fear among some in Russia and hope among many in the West, but it is not clear that the prediction will come true.
In the 1990s, Yeltsin was often exhibiting autocratic control, not democracy, when he held back the mix of communist and nationalist revanchists that came to dominate the State Duma.
Frozen conflicts in Moldova, Georgia, and Azerbaijan happened on Yeltsin’s watch in the 1990s.
The assumption that a democratic Russia could be part of a ‘Europe whole and free’ has yet to be decisively tested.
We need to understand the domestic dynamics of Russian foreign policy better than we do.
These are not the only questions one can pose, but these are questions on which we can imagine fruitful debate and in some cases, progress on empirical questions.
Moreover, by framing these issues as specific instances of broader problems, these questions would allow us to bring to this case large literatures in international relations, history, and comparative politics.
The Soviet Origins of Russian Hybrid Warfare 25 Z The Soviet Origins of Russian Hybrid Warfare This chapter analyses the Soviet origins of Russia’s use of hybrid warfare, assassinations, information and cyber warfare.
Ukraine and Ukrainian nationalism were — and continue to remain — key targets for Soviet and Russian hybrid and information warfare.
The EU’s weekly Disinformation Review documented nearly 1,000 fake news stories issued in one small period October 2015—July 2016 directed against Ukraine and the three Baltic States.
Putin actively intervened in the 2004 Ukrainian presidential elections, visiting Kiev during the first and second rounds, lending Russian political technologists (Gleb Paviovsky, Marat Gelman, Igor Shuvalov, Sergei Markov and others) and providing hundreds of millions of dollars in assistance to the Yanukovych campaign.
Andrew Wilson’s study of Russia’s political technologists’ manipulation of the media and election campaigns was published a decade before the 2014 crisis.
AS Brian Whitmore writes, Estonians were getting hacked by Russia long before it was cool.
Ukrainians had to deal with Kremlin interference in their elections before it became trendy.
It’s a good idea to pay very close attention to what Russia does to its neighbours, because it often foreshadows things Moscow will later try out farther to the West.
The first is a comparative study of Soviet and Russian hybrid and information warfare.
The second and third sections analyse Soviet and Russian approaches to non-linear warfare through goals, tactics and results.
The Soviet Union and Russia Compared Very active periods of Soviet and Russian hybrid and information warfare have taken place during periods of conservative and nationalist retrenchment, when the USSR was ruled by Leonid Brezhnev, Yury Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko from the mid-1960s to mid-1980s and under President Putin since 2000.
Putin was socialised into the Soviet system during the Brezhnev era when he joined the KGB in 1975.
Soviet conservatives and Russian nationalists look with nostalgia to the Brezhnev era and denigrate liberal anti-Stalinist reformers Nikita Khrushchev and Gorbachev who ruled before and after.
The myth of the Great Patriotic War was created during the Brezhnev era and such a myth required praise of Joseph Stalin as the Soviet leader who built a modern, industrialised Soviet superpower that won the war and with its mighty nuclear arsenal was feared by the West.
Anti-Western xenophobia and Russian great power nationalism, coupled with Putin’s anger at the West’s alleged unwillingness to respect Russia as a great power, are driving forces underpinning the information warfare against NATO and EU members.
The 2003 and 2004 Rose and Orange Revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine respectively influenced Putin’s first move to the right.
Putin’s second turn even further to the nationalist right came after his re-election in 2012 when he focused on integrating Ukraine into his Eurasian project, began describing Russians and Ukrainians as ‘one people’, promoted a conservative values agenda and aligned Russia with anti-EU extreme right and left political forces.
Putin believed the Rose and Orange Revolutions and large street protests in Moscow in 2011-2012 were Western conspiracies directed against Russia.
The protests came during the midst of what Moscow viewed as the Western orchestrated Arab Spring in Libya, Egypt, Yemen, Syria and Bahrain.
Shekhovtsov argues the colour revolutions, Moscow protests and Arab Spring generated widespread paranoia in the Russian leadership culminating in the need to find international allies.
This in turn led to a predilection to Russian cooperation with populist nationalists and neo-fascist groups in Europe and North America.
The USSR had long undertaken ‘wet actions’ against opponents of the Soviet regime.
Ukrainian nationalist leader and social democrat Symon Petlura was assassinated by a Soviet agent in Paris only four years after the USSR was founded.
The USSR undertook hybrid warfare in pursuit of regime change in Afghanistan, Africa and Central and Latin America.
The USSR long deployed Special Forces in developing countries in advance of invasions or to train local forces and national liberation groups.
Modern technology and social media provide Russia with greater opportunities to use hybrid, informational and cyber wars.
The term has often been used to describe British socialist George Bernard Shaw and Duranty.
Unlike the USSR, contemporary Russia does not just offer an alternative truth but also deconstructs the very idea of objective reporting.
Russia’s postmodern approach to information warfare propaganda has been undertaken alongside an increasingly effective use of digital media.
Russia has invested large resources in its information and cyber warfare capabilities.
The biggest nationalist threat came from Ukrainians and the three Baltic States.
From the 1960s to the 1980s, Soviet propaganda and ideological campaigns had attacked Ukrainian and Baltic dissidents and nationalists and émigré diasporas by portraying them as ‘Nazi collaborators’, ‘bourgeois nationalists’ and agents of Western and Israeli intelligence agencies.
The Polish communist regime, which had fought a brutal war against Ukrainian nationalists in its Southeast from 1944-1947 and ethnically cleansed 150,000 Ukrainians in Akcja ‘Wista’ , also attacked Ukrainian nationalism.
The Soviets expended huge expense on these ideological campaigns through the KGB-controlled Society for Cultural Relations Abroad which published the free weekly newspaper News from Ukraine/Visti z Ukrayiny. |n addition to lauding Soviet achievements and praising Soviet nationalities policies, they published ideological tirades and stories about Ukrainian ‘Nazi collaborators’ and their ties to Western intelligence services.
The term ‘Banderite’ (follower of the controversial World War II-era nationalist leader Stepan Bandera), used by the Soviet regime to denote a sadist, murderer and Nazi accomplice, was revived by Putin’s regime in its information war against Ukraine.
A Nezavisimaya Gazeta Russian journalist writes ‘The idea of an independent Ukraine is Russophobic by definition.
In August 1991, the Russian SFSR did not declare independence from the USSR and the annual ‘Russia Day’ holiday is based on the June 1990 Russian Declar-ation of Sovereignty.
NATO was always viewed as a major threat to Soviet security and therefore an important target for all manner of Soviet active measures.
Russia’s use of poisons and other agents predated the attempted assassinations of Yushchenko and Alexander Litvinenko by more than seven decades.
Yevhen Konovalets in Rotterdam in 1939 and Lev Rebet and Bandera in Munich in 1957 and 1959 respectively.
The assassination of Rebet was viewed as a trial run for Bandera, using a cyanide poison gun that the KGB had developed which left no traces and simulated a heart attack.
Despite the embarrassment produced by the defection of KGB assassin Bohdan Stashynskyy in 1961 the USSR continued to undertake ‘wet operations’ through to the mid-1980s.
In 1978, Bulgarian BBC journalist Georgi Markov was murdered in London using ricin poison administered by an umbrella.
In 1981, an attempted assassination of Pope John Paul II, whom the Soviet Union feared was supporting the anti-communist Solidarity movement in Poland, by a far right Turkish nationalist failed.
The plot revealed many details of how the USSR used false flag operations to disguise its involvement.
Soviet archives brought to the West by KGB defector Vasili Mitrokhin showed the extent of the Soviet penetration of Italy and other European countries and how the GRU was behind the attempted assassination of the Pope.
The USSR also backed national liberation movements in Africa and Central and Latin America.
The Soviet Union employed extensive dezinformatsiya, producing false stories and conspiracy theories.
Soviet active measures actively fanned anti-Americanism during the 1980s.
Results The USSR imprisoned and executed Ukrainian nationalists as late as 1987 and its anti-nationalist propaganda declined in intensity only in the late-1980s.
The Soviet Union’s decades of antinationalist propaganda had successes and failures.
On the success side, the stereotype of the Western Ukrainian nationalist who collaborated with the Nazis and is a Russophobe was established among many in Russia, some in Eastern Ukraine, and even among many in the West.
In Eastern Ukraine, old stereotypes were enhanced by Russia’s information warfare in 2013-2014 and contributed to transforming protests into an insurgency.
Amnesty International described the summary executions of Ukrainian prisoners as amounting to war crimes.
Today, civic nationalism remains strong, and popular support for the extreme right in Ukraine is comparatively low by European standards.
In large part due to Russia’s actions, greater numbers of Ukrainian citizens have re-identified as ethnic Ukrainians increasing their share from 72.7% and 77.8% in the 1989 Soviet and 2001 Ukrainian censuses respectively to 92% today.
Ukrainian scholar Volodymr Kulyk has outlined the increase in popularity of Ukrainian over Russian language media, film and books since 2014.
Moreover, the role of new technology, beginning with the use of mobile phones and text messaging during the colour revolutions alerted Russian officials to the power of social media.
The response has been a concerted effort to develop these weapons for the purposes of the state, and they are now deployed systematically to promote Russia’s revival as a great power and to sow dissension within the Western alliance and international organisations.
If the West can interfere in the 2012 Russian presidential elections and foment regime change during the Euromaidan, Russia believes it can intervene in United States and European elections.
The details of these efforts and of their impact are still being uncovered, so rather than dig into this episode in detail, we simply note that it comprises an important example of Russia’s broader strategy.
A second goal is to use information and cyber warfare to undermine the world order which was created after 1991 and which, Putin believes, was meant to keep Russia down and weak.
This means challenging the norms on which United States hegemony relies, and in particular promoting the idea of a multipolar world guided by traditional norms of non-interference as preferable to a world led by the West and promoting universal values of human rights and liberal democracy.
Russia continues a long-standing Soviet objective of seeking to replace NATO with a pan-European security organisation led by the OSCE where it would hold a veto.
Russia’s efforts to promote separatist movements in the West are in tension with its own determination to prevent Chechen independence and to integrate the post-Soviet region, but so far the contradiction has not appeared to be a problem.
Russia has supported a range of separatist movements in the UK and elsewhere who have been invited to congresses in Moscow organised by the government-backed Anti-Globalisation movement in September 2015 and August 2016.
Since then former SNP leader and First Minister of Scotland Alex Salmon has launched a chat show on Russia Today.
France and Germany have been key targets of Russia’s information and cyber warfare.
Russia undertook a range of ‘active measures’ against Macron during the election campaign that included the opening of 70,000 Facebook accounts and tens of thousands of ‘bots’ to spread anti-Macron content through social media.
Thousands of emails were hacked from Macron election campaign servers and dumped on the Internet two days before the second round.
The KGB was divided into parts separating foreign and domestic intelligence into the SVR and FSB respectively, and creating independent structures for government communications and Border Guards.
The driving force was distrust in the KGB which had backed the August 1991 putsch and hope the president could control the new institutions better.
The Soviet Origins of Russian Hybrid Warfare 37 sometimes separately, with the Presidential Administration in central control.
In Georgia, former Soviet intelligence officers provided support to Abkhaz separatists in Georgia who were on the verge of being defeated.
A ceasefire was called, Russian proxies were re-armed by Russia and provided with Russian FSB and GRU advisers.
The proxies then re-launched the war, winning territory and forcing Georgia to accept the freezing of separatist control.
When Russian proxies prove too weak to win, Russian regular army forces have been used repeatedly, as in Moldova’s Trans-Dniestr in 1992, Georgia's Abkhazia and South Ossetia in 1992 and 2008, and Ukraine’s Donbas in 2014-2015.
Russia’s promotion of proxies in contested regions within its neighbours’ borders has foreshadowed its tactics in Ukraine, bolstered by the Russian view that Ukraine itself is an artificial construct.
Alexander Solzhenitsyn’s ‘Rebuilding Russia’ published in 1990 and his appeal issued a year later during Ukraine’s referendum on independence both called into question Ukrainian control over Eastern and Southern Ukraine.
All of these were intended to bolster the notion that Yushchenko was an extreme anti-Russian nationalist, and even a neo-Nazi.
In other words, many of the strategies pursued in 2014 were already being pursued a decade earlier in Ukraine at a time when Ukraine was not on the radar of NATO and EU enlargement.
Russia’s reaction in both cases far surpassed its typical response after the expulsion of Russian spies from Europe and North America.
Following the expulsion from Ukraine, President Medvedev sent an open letter to Yushchenko with a long list of demands to change its domestic and foreign policies.
Russia’s information war continues to disparage Ukraine’s official views of the Holodomor.
The Soviet Origins of Russian Hybrid Warfare 39 ‘Wet operations’ by intelligence agents, Russian proxies and organised crime working on behalf of the Russian government have continued into the present day with the assassinations of Chechen leaders and FSB defectors abroad.
Russian intelligence conducts assassinations and terrorist campaigns inside Ukraine®® and assassinations and attempted coups d’état abroad.
There are close parallels between the attempted poisoning of Yushchenko in 2004 and that of former KGB agent Alexander Litvinenko in London in 2006, with the dioxin and radioactive polonium used in their poisoning produced in Russian laboratories inherited from the USSR and run since 1991 by the Russian secret services.
The Ukrainian authorities accused Russia of being behind the poisoning of Yushchenko but it remains unclear exactly who carried out the attack and whether the intention was to murder or incapacitate him.
An extensive British government enquiry into the assassination of Litvinenko blamed the murder on Russian authorities, and the investigation concluded that Putin ‘probably’ approved his murder.
Since 2014, Russian intelligence services have conducted a targeted series of assassinations in the West and Ukraine.
United States intelligence ties fourteen assassinations abroad to Russia.
In March, Russian exile Denis Voronenkov, who had fled Russia into exile in Ukraine and was a key witness in the criminal case against former President Yanukovych, was murdered in Central Kiev.
In March and June, Colonel Maksym Shapoval, commander of Ukraine’s military intelligence Special Forces, was murdered in a car bomb in Kiev.
Colonel Oleksandr Kharaberyush, also Ukrainian military intelligence, was assassinated in Mariupol and Security Service of Ukraine Colonel Yuriy Voznyy was killed and three others wounded in a car bomb in the village of Illinivka, near the anti-terrorist operation front line.
In June, Chechen exile Adam Osmayev, who had led a battalion fighting Russian forces in Chechnya, was seriously wounded in an attack by a Chechen organised crime leader from St.
In October 2017, a second attempt assassinated his wife Amina and wounded him while they were driving a car in Kiev.
Four months later, Timur Mahauri, a Chechen with Georgian citizenship and a volunteer fighter in the Chechen battalion of Sheykh Mansur, was killed in a car bomb in Central Kiev.
Invasions are conducted with stealth, deniability and confusion with the blurring of the truth about the presence of forces, their objectives, combat readiness and numbers.
This is not new as the USSR always denied it was behind terrorist groups active in Europe and used a false flag operation to blame Turkish nationalists for the assassination attempt on the Pope.
When asked about ‘little green men’ in the Crimea, Putin sardonically replied, ‘There are many military uniforms.
Putin’s repeated denials of Russian troops in the Donbas have been replicated in news stories broadcast and printed by Russian, Crimean and DNR-LNR media, as have reports of clearly staged Ukrainian ‘terrorist attacks’ that have been supposedly foiled.
Russia, Trolls, and the Information War against Ukraine’ in Olga Bertelsen ed., Revolution and War in Contemporary Ukraine: The Challenge of Change ,261.
A wounded tank driver, Dorji Batomunkuev from the Russian fifth tank brigade in Ulan-Ude, sensed they were being sent to Ukraine to fight.
Oscar Jonsson and Robert Seely describe Russian hybrid warfare as ‘full spectrum conflict’ where military and non-military factors are placed under one command and directed to a single strategic goal.
Political subversion — seizing of state buildings, sabotage, assassinations, terrorism, propaganda and insertion of agents.
Proxy — consolidation of continuous areas, arrival of volunteers, creation of ‘self-defence militias’, destruction of government infrastructures and beginning of recruitment of local proxies.
Intervention — threats and preparations for invasion, destruction of government security forces, provision of logistics and support, and disruption by cyber-attacks.
Coercive Deterrence — shows of force by the larger neighbour, nuclear posturing and hints and threats of escalation to pressure the country under attack to capitulate.
The massing of Russian troops on the border has been used in Georgia and Eastern Ukraine as a deterrent against an attack on its proxy forces as they represent a security guarantee to Russian proxy-controlled regions.
They are also meant to deter the West from Ukrainian ruin’, Christian Science Monitor, 30 July 2014.
Escalation — from camouflaged hybrid warfare to intervention which is the least preferred outcome as it is easily detected.
Galeotti points out this tradition goes back as far as the role played by Stalin’s secret police, the NKVD, in the Spanish Civil War.
Similarly, in the 1940s, the NKVD had created fake UPA units, which committed massacres of villagers and stole food to turn the local population against the Ukrainian nationalist underground.
From the 1920s through to the 1980s, the Soviet secret police had created fake underground organisations in the USSR which gave their support to émigré groups in order to gather intelligence on the Russian and Ukrainian diasporas, infiltrate their political groups and lure their agents back to the homeland where they could be arrested and if possible turned.
Myron Matviyeko, head of the émigré Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists’ Security Service was captured in 1951 after parachuting into Ukraine and rather than face execution agreed to work with the Soviet secret police, pretending he was running a nationalist underground through to 1960.
In the Donbas, the GRU oversee Russian forces and Russian proxies while the FSB keep everybody in line.
The Soviet Origins of Russian Hybrid Warfare 43 A major group drawn upon by the Russian authorities in the Donbas have been Cossacks who have a tradition going back to the Tsarist Empire of acting as the state’s vigilantes.
The FSB permitted the smuggling to take place in return for the criminals being ready to provide favours in return.
Civilians — information warriors and hackers, pro-Putin oligarchs, and domestic and international bankers infiltrate targets in various ways.
This huge amount of capital purchases real estate, buys places in private schools for the children of oligarchs and corrupt state officials, and hires legions of investment bankers, lawyers, consultants and accountants.
Former KGB officer Alexander Lebedev is the owner of the UK’s The Independent, Independent on Sunday and London Evening Standard newspapers.
The goal is to gain entry and begin shaping the interests and views of the target country’s elite.
As events played out in the Donbas, there were clear stages to the escalation of combat.
Mass anti-Ukrainian propaganda on Russian TV and social media helped transform public protests in the Donbas against the ousting of Yanukovych into an armed rebellion whose militias were then strengthened by Russian Special Forces.
Nationalist volunteers were recruited by Russian intelligence services and by Russian TV propaganda.
Russian intelligence officers had also been financing and training anti-Maidan vigilantes in Kharkiv and elsewhere in Eastern Ukraine.
Many of these vigilantes moved to join Russian proxies in the Donbas after the failed attempt to create a Kharkiv People’s Republic.
In July, artillery in Russia pounded Ukraine and the following month, with its proxy forces on the verge of defeat, Russian forces invaded Ukraine.
What made Ukraine different from the frozen conflicts in Moldova and Georgia was that Kiev could have defeated Russian proxy forces.
Since the signing of the Minsk 1 accords in September 2014, Russia is conducting a full-blown proxy war against Ukraine.
The separatist movement at this point is a de facto extension of the Russian military and an instrument of Russian national power.
The Russian military has put in place a robust command structure in Eastern Ukraine, ranging from Russian General Staff officers overseeing operations down to junior officers.
Russian personnel conduct communications, intelligence gathering, direct military operations, and help correct artillery fire.
Separatist fighters have publicly acknowledged that they are operating under instructions from Moscow.
With neither side defeated in the Donbas and the war on-going, it cannot be defined as a frozen conflict.
The Russian Imperial Movement, with links to Igor Girkin and paramilitaries fighting for Russian proxies in the Donbas,®® is training neo-Nazi groups from Central and Western Europe.
Russia attempted to halt Montenegro from joining NATO through a coup attempt and assassination plot against Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic.
Russia’s GRU provided United States dollars, sophisticated encrypted mobile telephones, a large arsenal of weapons, and training.*t The plot brought together nationalist Serbs and Russian Cossacks who had fought for Russian proxies in the Donbas.
Cossack General Viktor Zaplatin, a Russian citizen, told a rally in Montenegro, ‘The Orthodox world is one world.
Twenty Serbs and Russians were arrested by Montenegro which issued an international warrant for a further two Russians and three Serbs.
One of the Serbs sought by Montenegro, Nemanja Ristic, was photographed next to Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs Sergei Lavrov during his 12 December 2016 visit to Belgrade.
Serbia arrested Ristic and another Serbian nationalist Predrag Bogicevic for their involvement in the Russian-backed coup.
Montenegro accused GRU officers at large Eduard Shishmakov and Vladimir Popov of being the main instigators of the failed coup d’état.
Twitter, Facebook and other forms of social media became central to mass protests in Iran, the ‘Arab Spring’, Russian mass protests and the Euromaidan Revolution.
Authoritarian regimes fought back by imposing controls on the Internet and turning social media around to work towards achieving their strategic objectives by using trolls and unleashing bots to flood social media with false and biased information.
Social media that were used to undermine states a decade ago are today being used by states to undermine their critics.
In Russia, the long Soviet tradition of ‘agitation and propaganda’ is being empowered by social media.
The EU’s External Action Service began publishing a weekly Disinformation Review in 2016 to keep abreast of the large volume of disinformation originating in Russia.
An example is that of a highly realistic counterfeit article apparently from The Guardian featuring provocative comments attributed to the head of Britain’s MI6 intelligence service about using colour revolutions against Russia.
The article was reprinted in the Russian media and elsewhere in the world.
In 2016, the Russian media widely disseminated a false story that a 13-year-old Russian-German girl had been kidnapped and raped by Muslim migrants, triggering protests in Germany.
A high-level diplomatic spat broke out between German officials and Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs Lavrov, who publicly fanned the false story.
Russia's aim was apparently to increase the popularity of the anti-EU extreme right Alternative for Germany.
Ukraine is a frequently occurring target in pro-Kremlin disinformation.
Some of the more astonishing allegations were even brought to us by the TV channel owned by Russia’s Ministry of Defence.
Through the years we have seen some truly outrageous claims about Ukraine, from the ludicrous — for example the claim that the Ukrainian army have zombies fighting within their ranks — to the utterly offensive — most infamously the false claim that Ukrainian forces crucified a three year old boy in Eastern Ukraine.
Similarly, Russia presented the downing of Malaysian Airlines flight 17 as having been carried out by Ukrainian forces attempting to assassinate Putin.
The disinformation was repeated in several outlets, and in one it was illustrated by a photo of a soldier eating a hand.
But, the most repeated piece of disinformation was the old favourite linking Nazis and Ukraine.
So, the country was accused of being a neo-Nazi monster created by the West, as well as being occupied by Nazis who follow in the footsteps of Joseph Goebbels.
There was no specific mention of the actual occupation of parts of Ukraine.
Ukraine was also presented as a victim of the ‘Evil West’ in some outlets — another recurring disinformation theme.
Similarly, just prior to the invasion of Georgia in 2008, 50 journalists from Russia’s leading television channels and newspapers arrived in Tskhinvali, South Ossetia.
After the conflict had ended, Russia accused Georgia of committing ‘genocide’ against South Ossetia, an accusation similar to the many Russia has made against Ukraine since 2014.
Russian propaganda and information warfare mobilised antiUkrainian hysteria in the Donbas and Crimea to fever pitch levels during the Euromaidan and spring 2014.
During the height of the crisis, a hacked mobile phone conversation between United States Ambassador to Ukraine Geoffrey Pyatt and US Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland was released.
Nuland was captured uttering a vulgarity about the EU, complicating US-EU collaboration.
The image presented by Russia’s information warfare of Ukraine in spring 2014 is of a mortal threat to Russians and Russian speakers.
In Putin’s 18 March 2014 address welcoming the Crimea as part of Russia he said the Euromaidan revolutionaries resorted ‘to terror, murder and riots.
While Russia has been exploiting social media itself, it has been strengthening control of the Internet in Russia, a practice with deep roots in the Soviet regime.
Luke Harding points out how the FSB inherited KGB-style paranoia, xenophobia and conspiratorial worldview and is obsessed with searching for domestic and foreign enemies.
To appease them, the Soviet Ministry of Communications suggested that callers dial not only the number they wanted to call, but also their own, so that no one would go unidentified.
Today, it seems that for the people on Lubyanka Square nothing has changed.
Seven years earlier Russia had initiated a cyber and information warfare attack on Estonia, ostensibly in retaliation for Estonia’s decision to relocate a Soviet memorial to World War ll.
The cyber-attack affected Estonia’s functions for a month, and the information campaign prompted riots against the relocation of the memorial.
A year after the attacks, NATO opened a Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre in Tallinn.
Coping with cyber warfare and hacking is a difficult undertaking when countries are as closely intertwined as were Ukraine and Russia until 2014.
For a number of years after the 2014 crisis, Ukrainian officials continued to use Russian email addresses , Russian mail servers, and Russian search engines, such as Yandex.
In May 2017, a Ukrainian presidential decree banned VKonakte, Yandex and Russian email servers.
Cyber-attacks cut off electricity to nearly a quarter of a million Ukrainians just before Christmas in 2015, another attack hit Ukraine’s power grid in December 2016 and a third was unleashed in June 2017.
In France, Greece and elsewhere in Europe, extreme left anti-Americanism has a long pedigree.
UK Labour and Conservative MPs have been also criticised for accepting large fees in exchange for agreeing to appear on Russia Today.
Registering with FARA is usually only a requirement for lobbyists and consultants working on behalf of foreign governments.
Registration under FARA automatically led to the removal of Russia Today and Sputnik’s official accreditation to attend press conferences and undertake media activities in the United States Congress.
To what degree Russian information warfare can be credited for the growth of pro-Putin sentiments is difficult to say as they could be a product of many factors, such as the domestic populist backlash against the liberal establishment.
Anti-Americanism and support for Putin have also grown among the extreme right in Europe.
In the US, it is not clear whether Russian information operations or other factors are the cause of a notable flip in attitudes toward Russia and Putin.
Fully a third of Republican voters expressed confidence in Putin in 2017, up from 17% in 2015, compared to only 13% of Democratic voters.
While nearly two-thirds of Democratic voters see Russia as a threat to national security only 46% of Republican voters do.
This reverses a long historical trend in which Republicans have been more hawkish on Russia.
Another success was the use of disinformation to swing a close referendum vote in the Netherlands on approval of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement.
Numerous theories about the shooting down of MH17, the most colourful of which was that the flight was full of shop floor dummies rather than real people, failed to change Western public opinion about who shot down the airliner.
Russia’s English-language television station RT has been an increasingly visible tool of Russian information efforts.
RT has sought to build its Western audience by luring Western journalists and public figures to work at its English-language television channel.
CNN senior anchor Larry King was paid $250,000 to interview Ukrainian Prime Minister Nikolai Azarov, who is in exile in Moscow and wanted by Interpol, after which he received his own show on Russia Today.
The adoption of new tougher United States sanctions in summer 2017 was a backlash against Russia’s interference in the United States 2016 elections.
France and Germany, once broadly supportive of Russian interests in Europe, are now opposing Russia’s position on Ukraine and supporting sanctions.
There are two potential difficulties with the pursuit of hybrid warfare.
In the Crimea, Russian hybrid warfare found perfect conditions which were far less prevalent in Eastern-Southern Ukraine.
Critical views of Putin and Russia are especially prominent in the US and Europe.
RT has been unable to capture large audiences in key Western states such as Britain, Germany, the United States and Canada.
In the UK, RT has 0.04% of viewers, according to the Broadcast Audience Research Board.
The second problem is a backlash from the country that is the object of Russia’s hybrid warfare.
Russia’s unprecedented intervention in the 2016 United States presidential elections mobilised support in both houses of Congress for far tougher sanctions against Russia, numerous ongoing investigations of President Trump’s ties to Russia and suggestions the United States may be considering sending military equipment to Ukraine.
Peacefully integrating Ukraine with Russia is less likely now than ever before.
The different outcomes of Russian hybrid warfare in the Crimea and the Donbas shows how local conditions matter.
In the Crimea, there was a near complete Russian penetration of the security forces that were locally recruited, a large Black Sea Fleet base and a receptive Russian-speaking population with a history of supporting separatism in the 1990s.
None of these six factors existed in the Donbas and South-East Ukraine.
Kent believes that Kiev looked upon the Crimea as ‘a region apart’ and the ‘Cinderella of the Ukrainian state’.12° Added to this important difference with Eastern Ukraine is that the country’s military and Ukrainian nationalists (in the latter case, contrary to Russian propaganda) were not willing to fight for the Crimea.
In Eastern-Southern Ukraine, Russia appears to have achieved only limited success, failing to spur a more decisive rebellion in Donbas or a broader rebellion into Novorossiya.
Russia’s need to maintain a permanent military commitment to the Donbas will be a continuous drain on resources and a continuous sore spot in its relations with the West.
Moreover, while the effect should not be exaggerated, the invasion has strengthened the Ukrainian state and civil society.
Ukrainians volunteered in a wide range of areas to support the war effort and to fight Russia on the battlefield, in the information sphere and collecting for and delivering supplies to Ukrainian forces.
StopFake,’*° established by academics and students at Kiev Mohyla Academy, began exposing Russian disinformation three years before the EU set up its own unit.
By the 2016 United States elections, StopFake had gone from ‘provincial do-gooders to international media stars’ offering advice to European countries.
The Ukrainian authorities have also undertaken a wide range of policies to reduce ties with Russia.
Even as sanctions were being imposed in 2014— 2017, polls showed that Ukrainians had become more sceptical towards Russian media sources.
Sanctions against Russian media outlets, journalists, artists, books, films, social media and numerous Russian television channels have reduced Moscow’s ability to pursue information warfare against Ukraine, while also raising concerns about freedom of speech.
Russia is using the newest information technology for influencing people’s minds in Ukraine, aiming to inflame national and religious tensions, spread propaganda, advocating aggressive war, to violently change the constitutional order or violate the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Ukrainian state.
The most contentious areas where Russia’s actions have led to Ukraine pushing back has been in the sphere of national identity.
As chapter three and chapter four show, Ukraine’s relations with Russia will no longer be ‘fraternal’ and ‘brotherly’ — at the very least while Putin is in power.
An important area for Ukrainian national identity has been the establishment of a distinct Ukrainian mythology of World War II to replace the Soviet/Russian version.
While the Russian/Soviet version refers to the Great Patriotic War beginning with Germany’s invasion of Russia in 1941, Ukraine’s version focuses on World War II, beginning with the Nazi and Soviet invasion of Poland/Eastern Ukraine in 1939, which fits with the broader European narrative of the war.
Since 2015, Ukraine has celebrated the end of the war on the 8"" of May — as in Europe, rather than on the 9"" of May — as in Russia.
This symbolically refutes Soviet history, replaces the notion of a common wartime experience with Russia to that of a distinct Ukrainian experience and links Ukraine’s suffering in World War II to the current war in Eastern Ukraine.
Ukrainian TV advertisements have brought together veterans from both wars with fathers sending their sons off to fight the latest invader of Ukraine.
Conclusion In contrast to the view that Russia’s use of hybrid warfare in Ukraine was novel, this chapter has sought to show that Russia’s behaviour in 2014 and since in Ukraine had deep roots in the practices both of the Soviet Union and in Russia before 2014.
During the Cold War, dezinformatsiya, and maskirovka were constantly employed to undermine the regime’s challengers, especially national independence movements such as those in Ukraine and the Baltic States.
While employed more sporadically, imprisonment and assassination of Ukrainian opponents of Soviet rule was also part of the Soviet repertoire, even after the death of Stalin in 1953.
In addition to undermining internal threats to Soviet rule, these tactics were aimed westward, providing finance and disinformation to support the groups that most undermined Western unity.
When the Soviet Union disintegrated in 1991, the Russian government took over its institutions, including the KGB and GRU, essentially intact.
And while the KGB was renamed and reorganised into the Federal Security Service and Foreign Intelligence Service , it was not fundamentally reformed.
This is especially true since Russia under Putin is increasingly run by people whose roots were in the Soviet security apparatus.
The tactics we see in Ukraine since 2014 bear strong resemblance to those employed from the beginning of the post-Soviet era, in Trans-Dniestr and Georgia.
They include sponsoring and arming proxies to pursue separatism, supporting them when needed with regular Russian army forces, denying the involvement of Russian forces, and seeking to insert Russia as a peacekeeper or mediator.
The focus on hybrid operations, while its roots are deep, took on new life due to three factors.
The first was the increasing Russian focus on the concept of its understanding of ‘soft power’, and the mutation of the concept from one of passive influence to promoting active control.
The Soviet Origins of Russian Hybrid Warfare 57 interpretation of the colour revolutions as ‘hybrid’ operations driven by external actors that both justified and demanded hybrid responses.
The third factor has been the explosion of new media, including social media that have opened up considerable new opportunities for disinformation while also creating the potential for cyberwarfare.
Understanding the long-term continuity underlying Russian hybrid operations is important because it shows that what happened in 2014 was not an improvised response to a temporary challenge.
Rather, it was a way of doing business that has long-standing precedent and will likely continue until something very substantial happens to disrupt it.
If we perceived a lull in activity after 1991, that period now appears much more likely than the current one to appear anomalous in the long term.
Kuzio, T., ‘Soviet Nationality Policies in Soviet Ukraine’ and ‘Nationality Policies, Regionalism, and the Crimea in Ukraine’ in Ukraine.
Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 61 ) Russia-West-Ukraine: Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 Perhaps the most misunderstood aspect of the origins of the Russia-Ukraine conflict is the idea that there was a clear post-Soviet order in the region that subsequently collapsed.
The fundamental problem with these perspectives is that these putative causes emerged well after the initial signs that Russia did not accept the political independence of Ukraine and the territorial loss of Crimea and the Donbas.
In this chapter, we examine Ukraine’s relations with Russia from the Soviet collapse in 1991 to the 2013-2014 crisis.
This analysis shows that Russia never voluntarily accepted Ukraine’s independence, made several attempts in the 1990s to assert control over part or all of Crimea, and showed elsewhere tactics very similar to those employed in Crimea and in the Donbas in 2014 and beyond.
President Putin, justifying the seizure of Crimea in a 2014 speech, referred back to the adoption of Christianity by the Kievan Rus Grand Prince Volodymyr the Great in 988.
One strand concerns geopolitics — about threats and opportunities now and in the future.
A second concerns international law, which on this case is unambiguously in favour of Ukraine.
We leave these two issues aside for the moment to consider arguments about history and about people, because these profoundly affect claims about what state should control a particular territory and the people who live on it.
The literature on the topic is immense, and here we simply identify themes that are relevant to Russia’s claims.
The overarching point is that history helps explain both why Russians take at face value claims about Russia’s rights in Ukraine and why Ukrainians find those claims so threatening.
Similarly, today’s ‘facts’ about demographics and language use are based on histories which lead to conflicting interpretations.
The territory that became independent Ukraine in 1991 had spent various lengths of time under rule from Moscow.
The Western region of Galicia had been ruled from Moscow only since 1939, when the Soviet Union, under the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, invaded what was at that time Eastern Poland.
Crimea had been part of Ukraine since 1954, when control was transferred from the Russian SFSR to Ukraine.
This transfer is often referred to as a ‘gift’ but appears to have been a matter of administrative convenience for the Soviets, as Crimea was connected to and supplied from Ukraine, not Russia.
Crimea (along with much of Southern Ukraine, including Odesa and the region that Putin has referred to as Novorossiya) was seized in the late 18"" century from the Ottoman Empire and Crimean Tatar Khanate.
Kiev and most of the territory to the east of it had been part of Russia since 1667.
The region west of the Dnipro River was mostly acquired as a result of the partitions of Poland in the late 18"" century.
While the history is complex, it is not hard to see why many in Russia regard much of Ukraine as ‘naturally’ part of Russia.
First, nearly all this territory was gathered by Russia by the use of force, so the legitimacy of Russian control was never uncontested.
For example, despite the fact that the Baltic States were controlled by Russia for many years before their post-World War | period of independence, their ‘Russianness’ was never accepted uncritically.
Second, and related, many of the people on this territory did not identify as Russians, a matter that became complicated over time.
Therefore, the national identity of the residents of different parts of Ukraine has become an important part of discussions over who the territory should belong to.
Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 63 Ukraine, what language people speak, and whether they are ‘really’ Russians or a separate Ukrainian people.
This is not that unusual as it may sound, for Polish nationalists led by Roman Dmowski through to the 1940s believed that Ukrainians were not a nation.
Russian and Polish nationalists both saw evidence of foreign conspiracies lurking behind Ukrainian attempts to claim a separate national identity and build an independent state.
National identity, language, ethnicity and regionalism have been the most thoroughly researched topics concerning Ukraine.
The results of this research show a complicated and nuanced mixture of identity factors.
The language question becomes politicised when a choice must be forced, an issue that comes up primarily in schools and in government business.
Ukraine’s tumultuous history has made it harder to address these issues today.
The question of whether the Ukrainian language should be promoted either for its own sake or for the interest of the country’s unity is made much more fraught by the legacy of Russian and Soviet policy in Ukraine.
The Tsarist Russian government in 1876 passed the Ems Ukaz , banning publications in Ukrainian, in order to block a rise in Ukrainian national sentiment.
After the Soviets took control and briefly allowed a flourishing of Ukrainian cultures, Stalin cracked down, imprisoning Ukrainian nationalists and national communists and promoting Russian.
The Holodomor fell heavily on the Ukrainian-speaking peasants of Central and Eastern Ukraine and the Kuban region of Northern Caucasus.
The result — and this is a history everyone in Ukraine knows, even if it is rarely discussed in Russia or among newcomers to Ukrainian politics in the West — is that the current high level of Russian-speaking in Eastern Ukraine is a direct result of the suppression of the Ukrainian language and the starvation of millions of Ukrainian speakers under Soviet rule, which many Ukrainians regard as Russian rule.
The Russian government disclaims responsibility for Stalin’s repression and points out that many Russians suffered as well, even as Putin increasingly praises Stalin’s legacy.
The result is that simply ratifying the status quo seems to some to acquiesce in and perpetuate the results of Tsarist and Stalinist repression.
Those seeking to promote the Ukrainian language see it as undoing that oppression, while others see oppression in efforts to change the language in which people are schooled or interact with the government.
One might simply hold a plebiscite, as Russia did in Crimea under very questionable conditions.
Language policy is a very complicated question in Ukraine, and it has been made more complicated by politicians using it to try to instil fear and mobilise voters in elections.
The broader point, however, and it is essential, is that the Russian Empire and then the Soviet Union controlled vast swaths of Ukraine for many years before 1991.
It is not hard to see why many in Russia regard the idea that Ukraine — and especially Eastern Ukraine and Crimea — is not part of Russia as hard to comprehend.
It is precisely these attitudes that convince many in Ukraine that there is something to fear from Russia.
The same history that shows some that Ukraine is part of Russia shows others that Russia is a threat to the language, culture and lives of Ukrainians.
Ukrainian distinctiveness persisted despite the concerted efforts of two very autocratic regimes to eradicate it.
In this view, Ukraine is a distinct place and a distinct people, but was always ruled by foreigners, and will be again if it does not guard its independence jealously.
Put differently, much disagreement about the appropriate relationship between Russia and Ukraine, both within the region and outside it, comes down to one’s prior beliefs about the relationship between Ukraine and Russia.
Stalin deported the entire Tatar population from Crimea in 1944, increasing the Russian ethnic majority now observed in the peninsula.
Of 13 ‘Hero Cities’ identified by the Soviet government after World War II, four were in Ukraine.
Two of these, Sevastopol and Kerch, are in Crimea and are now controlled by Russia.
Supporters of Russia and critics of the West tend to fall back on the first view.
Supporters of Ukraine, and of Western support for Ukraine, tend to fall back on one of the latter two views.
Ukraine and Russia Since 1991 With this brief review of history and national identity issues, we turn to the period since 1991.
Russia objected to Ukrainian sovereignty from the very beginning of this period, and repeatedly contested it in the following years.
Russian objections to full Ukrainian sovereignty predated NATO enlargement and the rise of Putin, and were shared across almost the entire Russian political spectrum, with only a very narrow group of pro-Western reformers advocating that Russia write-off Ukraine for the sake of concentrating on domestic reform.
This wide consensus was obscured by the fact that one of those who sought to put the Ukraine issue behind Russia was Boris Yeltsin, President of Russia from 1990 to 1999.
Yeltsin sought to prevent Ukraine from becoming fully independent, but once it seemed beyond his control, he sought to move forward, even as many in his government continued to seek revision of 1991 arrangements.
This chapter reviews several key periods and incidents between Russia and Ukraine since 1991.
Rather, it highlights several key episodes that provide insight into the historical depth of contention over the proper relationship between Ukraine and Russia.
The long contentious struggle over ownership of the Black Sea Fleet and its base at Sevastopol, in Crimea.
The 1997 Friendship Treaty between Russia and Ukraine, which appeared to signal Russia’s acceptance of Ukraine’s independence.
The treaty was ratified by the state Duma and Federation Council in 1998-1999 with Russian deputies linking the question to the Black Sea Fleet, Crimea and Sevastopol.
Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov voiced territorial claims against Ukraine and intervened in Crimean affairs throughout the two decades leading up to the crisis in 2013-2014.
Combined 66 The Sources of Russia’s Great Power Politics with ‘colour revolutions’ in Serbia, Georgia and Kyrgyzstan, this episode increased Russian sensitivity to the threat of transnational diffusion of prodemocracy movements to Putin’s rule.
The Collapse of the Soviet Union and Formation of the CIS Both Soviet leaders and Russian leaders (led by Yeltsin) opposed Ukraine’s independence in 1991.
But the battle between Gorbachev and Yeltsin for control in Moscow provided Ukraine with the leverage to insist on complete independence.
When Ukraine’s parliament declared independence on 24 August 1991, it scheduled a referendum on independence for 1 December, to be accompanied by elections for President.
In one of these, Yeltsin sought to seize control of the levers of power from President Gorbachev in Moscow.
As a result, the Soviet foreign, defence, finance and other ministries became Russian ministries.
In the second contest, Moscow tried to retain some form of devolved control over Ukraine, while Leonid Kravchuk rejected any new agreements until after the 1 December 1991 election and referendum.
On 1 December 1991, Ukraine’s citizens voted decisively for independence and for Kravchuk as president.
First, of the leading candidates, Ukrainians chose the less nationalist one over the former dissident and nationalist leader Vyacheslav Chornovil.
Second, while the independence vote was regionally skewed, with higher support for independence in the West than in the East and South, every oblast of Ukraine, including Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk, voted in favour of independence.
These results left Kravchuk in a powerful bargaining position when he met with Yeltsin and Belarusian leader Stanislav Shushkevych on 7-8 December to agree on a new formal relationship between the three states.
Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 67 dissolving the Union Treaty, legally, meant total independence for Ukraine and Belarus.
The only way to square the circle for Yeltsin was to simultaneously negotiate a new agreement to create a looser union.
Yeltsin faced the choice between finding another way to defeat Gorbachev or accepting Ukraine’s independence for the time being and trying to reach a new agreement later.
He chose to sign the agreement, which led directly to the cessation of the USSR as a subject of international law and prompted Gorbachev's ignominious resignation on 25 December, accompanied by the replacement of the Soviet hammer and sickle by the Russian tricolour over the Kremlin.
The deal that cemented Ukraine’s independence and the collapse of the Soviet Union was not welcomed by Russian leaders, Yeltsin included.
Rather it was accepted because there was no other clear way to complete Yeltsin’s takeover of the government in Moscow.
In the subsequent months, Russia sought with growing frustration to reel this concession back in, insisting that certain prerogatives belonged to the CIS or to Russia, rather than Ukraine.
Of particular concern were the armed forces, which Russia sought to maintain as a single military, while Ukraine, seeing a separate army as a defining attribute of an independent state, insisted on dividing.
The same was true of nuclear weapons and monetary policy, among other issues.
There were very good reasons to maintain a single currency and monetary policy, but Ukraine, again citing sovereignty (and due also to a lack of enthusiasm for macroeconomic stabilisation), refused, leading to hyperinflation in 1993.
In the years after 1991, Russia continued to contest Ukraine’s sovereignty along two different axes, the CIS and the ownership of the Black Sea Fleet and its base at Sevastopol.
The CIS Throughout the early post-Soviet years, Russia promoted a federal role for the CIS, which would have legitimised a hegemonic role for Russia in the region.
In the first and third of these, Russia’s goals were at least in part supported by the international community.
But there was a fundamental conflict of goals on how any cooperation would be organised.
Russia was unwilling to create an organisation which limited its power , while several others, including Ukraine, refused to be part of an organisation which limited their newly established sovereignty.
While the Soviet economy was badly in need of structural reform, fragmenting it into 15 separate economies created a separate economic shock, as the gains from trade were lost.
Just as Western Europe was implementing the Single European Act in order to gain the advantages of a larger single market, the post-Soviet states were moving in the opposite direction.
The collapse of the single currency, as the Soviet ruble became the Russian ruble, caused further economic harm.
Each of the new governments was capable of emitting currency and credit, creating a massive collective action problem.
As each paid its salaries in newly created credit, the effects were spread across the entire region.
On the currency question, Russia and Ukraine oddly ended up supporting the same policy.
Russia was trying to implement structural adjustment, or ‘shock therapy’, which meant controlling the money supply to limit inflation.
Ukraine continued to create currency and credit to keep enterprises afloat, causing inflation in Russia as well as Ukraine.
When Ukraine created its own currency, and Russia introduced a new ruble, essentially kicking the other states out of the ruble zone, they both gained monetary autonomy.
The downside was that volatility of these two currencies considerably undermined trade in what was still a highly integrated economic space.
As the European Union had concluded, a functioning economic union required delegating some sovereignty to an international or supranational organisation.
Ukraine and some others were unwilling to do this, given their historical record of briefly lived independent statehood, their recent experience with Russian dominance of the Soviet Union, and their ongoing experience with Russian questioning of their sovereignty and independence.
On top of that problem, there was a fundamental conflict of interest involving voting rules for any supranational decision making.
Ultimately therefore, Ukraine did not participate extensively in much of what the CIS did, and this caused great frustration in Russia.
Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 69 and rejecting Russia’s natural leadership in the region.
For Ukraine, Russia was trying to reassert the control that Ukraine had only recently escaped.
Conflict had broken out between Armenia and Azerbaijan even prior to the Soviet collapse, and in late 1991, Russian speakers (as in the Donbas, mobilised by their Soviet rather than ethno-cultural identity) in the Trans-Dniestr region of Moldova had declared their independence, supported by the Russian 14 Army, which continued to be located there after Moldovan independence.
Further unrest was taking place in Georgia, where separatists in Abkhazia, supported by Russian forces, were fighting Georgian government forces.
Russia requested permission to be identified as a peacekeeper for these conflicts, based on the argument that only it had the capability and interest to provide the needed peacekeeping forces.
However, both the Georgian and Moldovan governments resisted Russia being identified as a peacekeeper, as Russia had also been involved in supporting one side in the conflict.
Ukraine also opposed Russian peacekeeping, as it feared what Russia might do either in Crimea or Eastern Ukraine.
In sum, already by 1993, the basic pattern that was exhibited in 2014 was already in place, and was already a source of tension between Russia and Ukraine.
In both Moldova and Georgia, Russia fomented separatism, supported it militarily , and then proposed that more of its troops enter the conflict zone as peacekeepers.
Nuclear Weapons More important for many in the West was the question of control over nuclear weapons.
Ukraine’s inheritance of the weapons on its territory gave it the third largest nuclear arsenal in the world , and the same principle, applied to Belarus and Kazakhstan, meant that the number of nuclear powers suddenly grew from seven to ten.
Bush and Bill Clinton, viewed Ukraine primarily through the lens of nuclear weapons.
From the United States and Russian perspective, Ukraine’s July 1990 Declaration of Sovereignty, which stated Ukraine’s desire to become an independent and non-nuclear state, was a binding commitment to denuclearise.
By 1993, Russia’s assertiveness in the region had already convinced many in Ukraine that it should either keep the weapons or at least insist on ‘binding’ security guarantees in return for surrendering them.
A related issue was who would benefit financially from the reprocessing of the uranium, and Ukraine’s insistence that it be compensated for the material in weapons that had already been transferred to Russia led to the impression in the United States that the Kravchuk government was seeking to extract as much money as possible.
With the Ukrainian economy in freefall, partly due to the Soviet legacy, partly to the breakup of the Soviet economy, and partly due to the absence of reform, Ukraine was in an increasingly desperate position, and found that the nuclear weapons issue kept it isolated.
The final issues holding up an agreement were the amount of compensation and the nature of security guarantees Ukraine would receive.
Ukraine sought something akin to the NATO Article V guarantee, a commitment that an attack on Ukraine would be regarded as an attack on all NATO members.
The United States and others were unwilling to make such a commitment, and Ukraine had to settle for security assurances by Russia, the UK and the United States that they supported Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
The fact that these commitments were a crucial issue in 1994 shows the deep roots of Ukraine’s security fears.
Ultimately, however, the absence of a mechanism for enforcing the commitments left Russia free to violate them in 2014 and the United States and Britain uncommitted to doing anything about it.
This was as they wanted it, and Ukraine had few options to change the deal, which prevented Ukraine’s ostracism and reduced economic pressure, but left it militarily vulnerable.
Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 71 from the beginning of the post-Soviet era, with Russian officials making it clear that they believed even less in Crimea’s separation from Russia than in the rest of Ukraine’s.
Thus, in January 1992, having just signed the deal that dissolved the Soviet Union, President Yeltsin stated ‘The Black Sea Fleet was, is and will be Russia’s.
The issue was not just the fleet (the ships of which were mostly obsolescent), but rather Crimea, where it was based.
Russia’s claims on Crimea were based partly on history (the territory had only been formally part of Ukraine since 1954), partly on ethnicity and language, and partly on strategic military importance.
Regardless of the exact motives (and different Russians likely emphasised different reasons), Russian demands concerning Crimea persisted throughout the entire post-Soviet era.
Thus, in keeping with Yeltsin’s position, the Russian Congress of People’s Deputies passed a resolution in January 1992 questioning the 1954 deal that gave Ukraine sovereignty over Crimea.
In June 1992, the two sides agreed to split the assets of the fleet, but the details of the split and of basing rights continued to prevent a deal from being finalised.
In September 1993, Russia cut off the gas supply to Ukraine and offered to restore it on the basis of receiving a favourable division of the fleet and rights over the Sevastopol base.
The problem was complicated during this period by a move among some Crimean leaders to secede from Ukraine.
In May 1992, the Crimean parliament declared Crimea’s sovereignty (it already had been upgraded in 1990 from oblast to autonomous republic within Soviet Ukraine), but a compromise was reached in which Crimea’s autonomy was increased and the Crimean parliament rescinded the sovereignty declaration.
In 1995, President Kuchma, an Eastern Ukrainian who had been elected on a moderate pro-Russian platform the year before, dissolved the institution of the Crimean presidency and, combined with in-fighting among Russian nationalists, this took the wind out of the sails of Crimean separatism.
That essentially resolved the question of secession from within Ukraine, but the conflict over Sevastopol continued.
Russia insisted on its right to continue basing its part of the fleet there, and Ukraine resisted.
In 1997, the two sides finally reached a compromise which gave Russia 8 Sobchak and Yeltsin were quoted in John Rettie and James Meek, ‘Battle for Soviet Navy’, The Guardian, 10 January 1992.
The Russia-Ukraine Friendship Treaty With the issue of the Black Sea Fleet and Sevastopol apparently resolved, Russia and Ukraine were able to sign a Friendship Treaty later in 1997.
This treaty was seen as putting the two states’ relations on a clear basis in international law, addressing many issues that had been left hanging.
In many respects, this was the high point in post-Soviet Russian-Ukrainian relations, as it appeared to signal Russia’s recognition that the disintegration of the USSR in 1991 would not be reversed.
However, while Yeltsin said at the signing that, ‘My friend President Kuchma and | vow at this sacred place, at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, that the treaty that we sign today will be fulfilled’“, other Russian leaders asserted a revisionist policy.
In 1999, when the Friendship Treaty finally came to the Federation Council for ratification, Luzhkov and others opposed it, fearing that it would reduce Russia’s leverage over the region.
In 2010, after Yanukovych extended Russia’s lease on the base, Luzhkov continued to assert that Sevastopol is a ‘Russian city’.1* In sum, the issue was never really settled for many Russian elites, including moderates as well as radical nationalists.
The hope was that the treaty would put that contestation to rest, but it did not.
From our post-2014 perspective, it demonstrates nearly the opposite of conventional narratives that see the Ukraine-Russia conflict as something that arose after a period of relative comity.
In actuality, the relationship was fraught from the beginning due to Ukraine’s insecurity and Russia’s dissatisfaction with the status quo of an independent Ukraine.
There can be little doubt that NATO expansion irritated Russia and that Putin’s approach to democracy, to Ukraine and to the West did not help, but they cannot have been the root causes of the tension that was present from the moment of Ukraine’s independence.
This was rooted more fundamentally in Russia’s conception of its national identity, its borders, and its role in the region.
First, NATO added three new members (Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland) in 1999, over Russia’s objections.
Second, at almost the exact same time, NATO engaged in a bombing campaign to force the government of Serbia to stop ethnic cleansing in Kosovo.
Third, Putin replaced Yeltsin as president, and initially had very constructive relations with the West, even as he methodically reduced pluralism in Russia by gaining control over the press, the oligarchs and the regions.
In doing so, he sought to emulate Russia in reducing competing sources of power, and he sought to do this while maintaining good relations with both NATO and Russia.
In both Ukraine and Russia, politics in the years before 2004 were increasingly about whether democracy would survive.
In Ukraine, President Kuchma’s efforts to consolidate power encountered considerable opposition, but he seemed to have won a decisive victory when a constitutional referendum in 2000 appeared to have strengthened his power over the parliament and the prime minister.
Kuchma decided not to seek to circumvent a constitutional ban on a third term as elections approached in 2004.
His opponent was Yushchenko, another former Prime Minister under Kuchma, who supported a much more pro-Western policy and had very late in the game joined the broader anti-Kuchma opposition, together with Yuliya Tymoshenko.
There was wide consensus that Yanukovych would align Ukraine with Russia, and that Yushchenko would align it with the West, and so the country appeared to be at a tipping point.
Yanukovych’s campaign team was largely composed of Russian political technologists.
Russian media, which were widely watched in Ukraine, gave extensive favourable support to Yanukovych, and Putin personally travelled to Kiev to support him in both rounds of the elections.
Shortly before the first round of the election, Putin appeared at a military parade in Kiev, standing shoulder to shoulder with Kuchma and Yanukovych.
Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 1 leader Bandera, whose legacy was highly contested.
Russian media also helped present Yushchenko as a pawn of the United States (his wife is an American-Ukrainian), which after the invasion of Iraq was unpopular in Ukraine.
These were themes to be used in Russia’s information warfare again in 2014, and they resonated in Russia.
After the exposure of fraud in the second round of the 2004 election, Russia continued, along with Yanukovych, to insist that the election was valid and should stand.
When a compromise to end the crisis led to the second round of the election being re-run, a Commonwealth of Independent States election monitoring team deemed it illegitimate.
The Orange Revolution was a turning point in Russia’s relations with Ukraine and the West, but not for the reasons people expected at the time.
In 2004, the hope or fear, depending on one’s preferences, was that the Orange coalition was going to reform Ukrainian government, reduce corruption, build a more ‘European’ state, and align itself with the West.
While the immediate danger to Russia posed by Yushchenko’s election receded, the example it set worried Putin and other Russian leaders.
The lesson from the ouster of Slobodan Milosevic in Serbia in 2000, of Eduard Shevardnadze in Georgia in 2003, and then of the blocking of Yanukovych coming to power in the Orange Revolution, was that colour revolutions were camouflage for the real purpose of regime change of authoritarian leaders in the post-communist world.
In response, Russia began a series of domestic and international initiatives aimed at preventing such protests in Russia.
Internationally, Russia collaborated with China to form the Shanghai Treaty Organisation, among the missions of which was to promote the value of a pluralist international order in opposition to the West’s universalist claims about liberal democracy.
From the ‘prehistory’ of Ukraine’s independence, it was clear that Ukraine was important to the West in terms of the West's relationship with Russia, and not as an important factor in its own right.
This frustrated Ukrainian leaders, and took them some time to come to terms with, as Ukrainian leaders (including Yanukovych) have tended to exaggerate Ukraine’s importance to the West.
Ukraine’s relations with Russia have always interacted with Russia’s relations with the West, and while Ukraine has sometimes used this linkage to its advantage, the eroding relations between Russia and the West increasingly made Ukraine a battlefield, rather than the bridge that it hoped to be.
In the early post-Soviet years, the United States was the primary external actor in the Ukraine-Russia relationship because Europe was focused on its own transformations.
These included implementing the Single European Act and single currency, managing the reunification of Germany, and making the transition from state planning and communism to a market economy and democracy in Central Europe.
Ukraine struggled to find an important place in United States foreign policy for three reasons.
First, the United States was focused on Russia, the success or failure of which was seen as much more important than that of Ukraine.
Second, United States interests in the international politics of the region were essentially conservative — both the Bush and Clinton administrations were focused as much on preserving the status quo in arms control and political stability than in transforming the region.
The threats the United States feared — breakdown of Soviet-era arms control agreements, nuclear proliferation and ethnic unrest — seemed better prevented by preserving Russia’s dominance than by undermining it.
Ukraine’s reconsideration of its nuclear status played into this conservatism.
The notion that Ukraine might provide a necessary check on Russia was not widely shared, though Zbigniew Brzezinski articulated this argument cogently in early 1994.18 Several things happened to change this.
First, the signing of the Trilateral Agreement on nuclear weapons removed the primary obstacle to a closer United States relationship with Ukraine.
Second, a series of events in 1993 and 1994 undermined United States confidence both in Russian economic and democratic reform, and in Russia’s willingness to join the Western community in foreign policy.
If there had been a tension before between doing what was right by Ukraine and pursuing United States interests vis-a-vis Russia, those two concerns increasingly aligned in favour of supporting Ukraine, both because of its intrinsic importance and because it provided a hedge against Russian reassertion.
Domestically within Russia, events called into question both whether Russia could reform economically and whether it could adopt democracy in some form.
The two issues were joined in the violent conflict between Yeltsin and the Congress of People’s Deputies in 1993.
A sizable majority in Russia’s parliament steadfastly opposed Yeltsin’s reform plans, and criticised the role of the West in promoting them.
If democratic norms were followed, economic reform would likely cease, and hardliners might return to power.
Western leaders were torn between their desire to see Yeltsin triumph and their distaste at the means needed to do so.
Ultimately, however, believing that there could be no Russian democracy and reform without Yeltsin, most strongly supported the measures he undertook.
At the same time, however, the need to think about other contingencies was clear.
It was reinforced even more beginning in late 1994, when Russia sent its armed forces into the republic of Chechnya, beginning a brutal campaign to prevent its secession.
The arrest of Aldrich Ames for spying for Russia was substantively a minor matter, but received huge attention in the United States because it appeared to show that Russia still considered the United States an adversary, and was spying on it even as the United States was propping up Russia’s economy.
Bush for focusing on international affairs at the expense of the US economy, and as President he chose to focus on energising the United States economy rather than Russia’s.
All those events pale in long-term importance next to the outbreak of war in the former Yugoslavia.
This conflict was central to the worsening of relations between the United States and Russia, with far-reaching consequences for Ukraine.
In December 1994, Russia vetoed a UN Security Council Resolution intended to limit Serbian economic support for forces fighting in Bosnia.
Over the next few years, as efforts to limit the conflict continued, two things became apparent.
First, Russia and the United States supported very different outcomes in the conflict, undermining the notion that they had become partners rather than adversaries.
As a result of the Yugoslav wars, the notion of including Russia within an expanded NATO appeared increasingly problematic.
This toxified the discussion of NATO enlargement, because the discussion was increasingly about expanding NATO but not including Russia.
That inevitably but inadvertently raised the question of where NATO enlargement would end, and as disagreement over Yugoslavia peaked in 1999 with NATO’s intervention over Kosovo, the stakes seemed ever more important.
Along with Yeltsin’s struggles to consolidate domestic reform, the Russian position on the Yugoslav conflict convinced many United States policy makers that they needed to hedge against the possibility that reform would fail or that Russia would become an adversary in Europe.
Russia’s second war in Chechnya, beginning in 1999, fed that perception.
For Russia, these episodes gave weight to the view that events since 1991 were undermining Russia's international role, and that Russia was becoming sidelined in a Europe increasingly dominated by the United States.
This made both the United States and Russia more interested in Ukraine, which throughout the 1990s maintained pluralist politics and a ‘multi-vector’ foreign policy.
Throughout the period prior to 2013, there was an imbalance of interest in Ukraine.
Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 79 regarding the European Union and the West more broadly, where Ukraine was seeking closer integration with Europe and the West but was being held at arm’s length due to the absence of reform.
Especially during Kuchma’s first term , the IMF struggled with the dilemma of whether to continue aiding Ukraine even though it had not met the conditions of previous loans, or to cut off aid and risk an economic crisis that might drive the country into Russia’s arms.
Similarly, in the realm of military reform, NATO found that programmes for transformation of the military were consistently unimplemented, but hesitated to cut off aid and the accompanying military contacts.
Kuchma had used various tactics to limit the competitiveness of the 1999 election, but as with Yeltsin, the fact that his second-round opponent was a communist led the United States to support him anyway.
But as he threatened civil liberties and political competition, the West’s concern grew more intense.
The first was the murder of the journalist Georgiy Gongadze and the crackdown on the opposition of which it was a part.
The second was the revelation that Ukraine had made a deal to supply Kolchuga air defence radar systems to Iraq in the run-up to the US-led invasion in 2003.
This infuriated the Bush administration, which responded by dramatically reducing interaction with Kuchma’s government.
Increasing suppression of Kuchma’s rivals, including the incarceration of Tymoshenko , deepened the sense that Kuchma could no longer be a partner.
Those hopes were 18 It is not clear whether the Kolchugas were ever delivered to Saddam Hussein’s regime.
For democracy promotion advocates, the Orange Revolution justified further investment in their programs.
For Russia, the United States role bolstered the notion that the revolution was sponsored from outside rather than being internal and hence more legitimate.
Western governments were disappointed and mystified when Yushchenko appointed Yanukovych, who had been responsible for attempting to steal the 2004 election, to the position of Prime Minister in 2006.
At this point, the West in general and the United States in particular lost interest, amid what was often known as ‘Ukraine fatigue’ and preoccupation in the United States with wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The 2008 global financial crisis further distracted the United States and Europe from Ukrainian affairs.
On the agenda was the question of whether to extend Membership Action Plans , which would pave the way to membership to Georgia and Ukraine.
Both German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicholas Sarkozy advocated deferring a decision in order to placate Russia.
While Putin appeared pleased to have avoided something Russia was strongly opposed to, many viewed this as a deferment of a decision, not as a decision against extending MAPs, and eventually offers of membership, to Georgia and Ukraine.
The communique issued at the summit stated the intention of offering membership to Ukraine and Georgia in the future.
Out of forty-five million people, in line with the official census, seventeen million are Russians.
According to the most recent census, 8. of Ukraine’s roughly 48 million citizens identified as ethnic Russian, comprising 17% of the population, down from 22% in the 1989 census.
Similarly, he overstated the portion of Russians in Crimea in the next sentence.
Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 81 the Russian population lives, for instance, in the Crimea.
Ukraine, in the form it currently exists, was created in the Soviet times, it received its territories from Poland — after the Second World War, from Czechoslovakia, from Romania — and at present not all the problems have been solved as yet in the border region with Romania in the Black Sea.
Then, it received huge territories from Russia in the East and South of the country.
If we introduce into it NATO problems, other problems, it may put the state on the verge of its existence.
We do not have any right to veto, and, probably, we do not pretend to have.
But | want that all of us, when deciding such issues, realise that we have there our interests as well.
There were not even any state procedures on transferring this territory.
Following the election of Yanukovych in 2010, the EU supplanted the United States as the main Western interlocutor with the Ukrainian government, and the topic shifted from NATO membership, which was clearly a distant prospect at best, and one that Yanukovych did not support, to deeper integration with the EU, which was more popular and less divisive in Ukraine, and which would have a much more significant economic impact.
Until then Russia had only opposed NATO enlargement, but from 2010, Russia strongly objected to the EU Association Agreement and to the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement that it envisioned, because such an agreement would preclude Ukraine from joining the CIS Customs Union, as one country cannot be a member of two customs unions.
The EU was adamant, however, that no third party could effectively veto an agreement between the EU and another country.
This norm was extremely important, as it underpinned the notion of a Europe governed by norms and rules rather than by great powers.
Russia believed the exact opposite, namely that Russia as a great power should wield an acknowledged veto over arrangements, especially in its sphere of interest.
This combination of incompatible economic plans and contradictory norms set the international stage for the events that took place in the fall of 2013.
First, Russia’s desire to limit Ukraine’s independence and to retake control of at least some part of Crimea did not emerge during the Putin era.
Second, the example set by the Orange Revolution was seen as threatening to Russia because such a revolution might be replicated in Russia.
Democracy in Ukraine would undermine the claim that democracy could not work in Russia and would undermine Russia’s geopolitical position.
The first point is significant because it undermines two arguments about the source of the 2014 conflict that are made both by critics of the West and by critics of Putin.
Critics of the West assert that Russia’s annexation of Crimea was the West’s fault.
The second point is significant because it recasts the feeling of insecurity that Russia felt in the years after the Orange Revolution.
While Russian concern about NATO enlargement was real, this was not an existential threat.
Colton, Everyone Loses, devote particular attention to the role of the 2008 NATO Bucharest Summit.
Triangle of Competition, 1991-2013 83 Increasingly, democracy was seen as a threat to the Putin regime and by extent to Russia.
This could undermine the legitimacy of Putin’s authoritarian model, and the Orange Revolution showed how street protests could turn dissatisfaction into regime change.
That some American officials openly hoped for such an outcome was not reassuring.
For Putin and for many Russian great power nationalists, a threat to Putin’s regime was tantamount to a threat to Russia’s national security.
The view that only Putin had been able to stop the decay in Russia, and that the West sought to weaken and surround Russia, meant that democracy was not only a political threat but an existential one.
The West can be faulted for not being more sensitive to Russian fears, but the alternative — accepting Russia’s right to rule its neighbours — was not without danger.
The deeper underlying problem was that as Russia receded from democracy, the assumption that common interests outweighed conflicting interests was reversed.
Thus, the disagreement over Ukraine’s status increased in salience just at the time that Yanukovych was indirectly forcing his own citizens to take a stand one way or the other.
That is a much harder question, and one can see arguments on both sides.
But, in terms of getting the historical and causal arguments right, instead of saying the West caused the crisis, it is much more accurate to say that Russia had claims on Ukraine, that the West and Ukraine resisted those claims, and that Russia used force to get its way.
Bukkvoll, Tor, ‘Off the Cuff Politics — Explaining Russia’s Lack of a Ukraine Strategy’, Europe-Asia Studies.
Russia’s problem with an independent Ukraine was not invented by Putin or brought on by NATO and EU enlargement and democracy promotion.
In this chapter, we analyse the annexation of Crimea and hybrid war against the Donbas in a longer historical context going back to the 2003-2004 Rose and Orange Revolutions.
We first address the question of whether the conflict in the Donbas is best defined as a civil or interstate war.
The chapter then analyses the Crimea and Donbas over five phases with the key drivers listed in each phase.
The phases are important for arriving at an understanding of the dynamics of the triangular relationship between Russia, the West and Ukraine.
This chapter shows that Russia’s actions in 2014 were consistent with long-term trends in its foreign policy aims and actions.
Similarly, as chapter two highlighted, Russian intelligence, political technologists, information operations and local proxies were as active in the decade prior to the crisis as were Western democracy promotion efforts.
Scholars have differed on whether to characterise events in Eastern Ukraine as a civil war or interstate conflict.
If the conflict there is a civil war, then its roots are within Ukraine.
If the conflict is seen as an interstate war, the involvement of Russian regular army forces becomes a Annexation and Hybrid Warfare in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine 87 natural focus.
In this case, while Russia must still be part of the solution, it must also be regarded fundamentally as part of the problem.
Its role in resolving the conflict will be as a belligerent, not as a mediator.
Equally important, whether the war is a civil war or interstate war changes our view of what is at stake.
If the war is an international war, then the question in large part is where the border will be drawn between Russia and Ukraine, though Russia's ability to determine certain aspects of Ukraine’s policies is also at stake.
If the conflict is a civil war, then it is more fundamentally about who will run the government of Ukraine and under what political system.
This was made clear again in 2017, when DNR Prime Minister Aleksandr Zakharchenko proposed a new territorial entity of Malorossiya to replace Ukraine.
Zakharchenko was not proposing secession from Ukraine, but the takeover of Ukraine by a new, fundamentally different regime.
The proposal reinforced the framing of the conflict as one among Ukrainians over the government of Ukraine.
Little Russia would be a weak federalised state with Donetsk as its capital city that would join the Eurasian Union and no longer seek NATO and EU membership.
Not surprisingly, those who tend to blame the conflict on the West see it is a civil war, and those who blame it on Russia as an interstate war.
The first is the chronology of events from the Euromaidan through to the invasion of Russian spetsnaz led by Alexander Girkin in the second week of April 2014.
The second is to what extent the evolution of the protests into an armed movement was a homegrown rebellion or was from the outset a Russian proxy war.
While many conflicts include both civil and interstate components, the ambiguity about this conflict is not accidental, as Russian strategy from the outset has been to obscure who is doing the fighting.
This was most visible with the ‘little green men’ deployed in Crimea, whose unit markings had been removed to obscure their origins, but has been the case in Eastern Ukraine as well, where both fighters and supplies from Russia have been hidden or disguised as coming from Ukraine.
These actions were coordinated with Russian information operations portraying both Crimea and the Donbas as internal Ukrainian secessionist movements.
Most also add the notion that one combatant in a civil war is the state, and another combatant aims to take power at the centre or in a region, or to change government policies.
Thus, the definitional question in the case of Ukraine is whether Ukraine is fighting domestic rebels or Russia.
In practice, it is fighting both, and judgments differ on whether Russia’s involvement is central or peripheral.
Our judgment is that, as was the case in Crimea, the conflict in Donbas is more fundamentally driven by Russia than by internal Ukrainian forces, and has lasted as long as it has, and has produced the level of casualties it has, largely because of the forces and supplies contributed by Russia.
Focusing on chronology, there is disagreement over when exactly Russian involvement in Eastern Ukraine became a driving force in the conflict in Donbas.
From summer 2014 onward, there is relatively little dispute, as there was extensive evidence of Russian involvement following artillery attacks from Russia, entry of Russian army forces into Eastern Ukraine, and supplying, training and leading of Russian proxy militias in the region.
Prior to that, however, there is less agreement, leaving some to argue that Russia intervened in what was already a civil war in Ukraine, rather than actually fomenting the conflict.
Scholars downplaying Russian intervention have tended to frame Ukraine’s conflict as a civil war between Russian and Ukrainian speakers brought about by Ukrainian nationalism.
A 2014 analysis by Laruelle differentiated between nationalist volunteers and mercenaries travelling to the Donbas, leaving out entirely the question of those sent by the Russian government.
A secondary reason was defining the conflict as a ‘war’ would require full scale mobilisation of military resources and mass conscription and a state of emergency which would limit democratic freedoms, and there was opposition to this within Ukraine.
This is not to say that there was not serious and organised opposition in Eastern Ukraine to the events taking place in Kiev in early 2014.
A central question is how these grievances were transformed into mass violence.
Whereas the violence in Kiev occurred when the state unleashed violence against protestors, in Eastern Ukraine the state had no ability to do so.
When Yanukovych fled from Kiev and Euromaidan revolutionaries took power, the Ukrainian state was too weak and fragmented to use its security forces to crush protests.
The vast literature on civil conflict focuses both on grievances — why people rebel — and on capacity — factors that sustain or undermine rebellion.
Ted Gurr has stressed the salience of ethno-cultural identities and their capacity to mobilise, levels of grievance, and availability of opposition political activities.
At the same time, the Donbas has been relatively passive and, as seen in the Orange and Euromaidan Revolutions, unable to mobilise on the same level as that of Western and Central Ukraine.
Weaker mobilisation might be explained by the fact that elites from the Donbas were always heavily influential in national level policy.
In terms of Albert O Hirschman’s traditional choice of exit, voice or loyalty, the Donbas never needed exit because its voice was so powerful.
Mobilisation would be assisted by relative levels of hostility, intensification of political cleavages, disintegration of institutions, and loss of government legitimacy.
High levels of tension during the Euromaidan and Russia’s barrage of propaganda and information war widened political cleavages further.
The influence of elites was shown by the ability of Rinat Akhmetov, Ukraine’s most powerful oligarch, to halt an attack on the city of Mariupol in the summer of 2014.
Akhmetov had chosen not to intervene when the conflict first emerged in the spring.
Donbas oligarchs were either working in collusion with radical protestors (e.g.
Donbas regional elites have been instrumental in mobilising protests in coalminers’ strikes in 1989, the transportation of ‘political tourists’ to Kiev to protest against the disbanding of parliament in 2007 and anti-Maidan protests during the Orange and Euromaidan Revolutions.
Foreign powers have intervened in the majority of civil wars and the longer the civil war continues the more likelihood there will be outside intervention.
All three factors highlighted by Sambanis exist in the Russia-Ukraine crisis.
In August 2014 and January/February 2015, Russia’s intervention was decisive, defeating Ukrainian forces at llovaysk and Debaltseve respectively.
Pro-Putin and opposition supporters have supported the annexation of the Crimea although Russians have mixed views of military intervention in the Donbas which has less symbolic value in Russian history and identity.
In spring 2014, for Putin and Russian nationalists the two historically symbolic and strategic cities in Novorossiya were Kharkiv and Odesa (although the former was never part of this Tsarist region) — not Donetsk or Luhansk.
In terms of aiding mobilisation, Russian support was crucial in three distinct respects.
First, Russia provided extensive ‘information’ support, using mass media to paint the new government in Kiev as illegitimate and as determined to oppress Russian-speaking Eastern Ukrainians.
Second, Russia provided organisational and material support, using its state capacity to infiltrate organisers and equipment to help coordinate opposition.
Sambanis, ‘A Review of Recent Advances and Future Directions in the Quantitative Literature on Civil War’,235.
One cannot definitively answer the counterfactual question of what would have happened to the anti-Maidan protestors in Eastern Ukraine without Russia’s support, but there is a strong case to be made that they would have lost out either to local elites or to Ukrainian government forces.
That is what nearly happened before increased Russian intervention in the summer of 2014.
The view that protests were internally self-sustaining raises the question of why Russia intervened at such high political cost if it were not necessary to sustain the conflict.
Similarly, it is hard to imagine the rapid takeover of Crimea succeeding without Russian forces taking a direct role, and it is hard to see how the annexation could have taken place so quickly without the Russian government coordinating processes as disconnected as the referendum in Crimea and the legislation of the State Duma.
From Orange Revolution to Annexation and Hybrid War The conflict over Crimea and Eastern Ukraine did not begin with the Euromaidan revolution and the ousting of Yanukovych.
Chapters two and three emphasised that the longer-term sources of the conflict reach back to the Soviet era and earlier.
The discussion in this chapter begins with the Orange Revolution and its impact on Russian views of Ukraine.
We analyse the process leading to violent conflict in five phases, with the discussion of each phase beginning with a list of key developments.
Russia’s turn away from the West was clearly spelt out in Putin’s 2007 speech to the Munich security conference which was unexpected and shocking to Western audiences, but ultimately ignored as not representing a harbinger of the future direction of Russian policies.
Russia’s turn away from the West has not been linear and has included two attempts at US-Russia resets after the 9/11 terrorist attacks and after Obama’s election.
The latter had been marginalised in the second half of the 1990s by President Kuchma, who would have never countenanced cooperation with them.
A resolution to that effect was adopted in the Crimean Supreme Soviet but a similar resolution failed in the Ukrainian parliament.
They were alone in the CIS in following Russia’s support for infringing Georgia’s territorial integrity.
Even Belarus and Kazakhstan, who have backed every integration project in the CIS, refused to recognise the breakaway regions’ independence.
The action of these three Ukrainian political forces foreshadowed Yanukovych’s support for Russia’s seizure of Crimea.
Russian propaganda against ‘Ukrainian nationalists’ did not begin during the Euromaidan; it was already underway during Ukraine’s 2004 presidential campaign.
In 2005, the transformation of the Walking Alone pro-Putin fan club into the Democratic Anti-Fascist Movement Nashi was a reaction to the widespread fear that Russia was next in line for a colour revolution.
The specific goal was to link Ukraine’s ‘orange’ revolutionaries with the anti-Soviet partisans from the World War Il-era who wv T Judah, In Wartime,150.
Annexation and Hybrid Warfare in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine 95 had long been demonised as Nazi collaborators.
The launch of the Russkii Mir was compared to that of the British Council but this was misleading as it always had close ties with Russian intelligence and pursued more overtly political goals towards neighbouring countries.
The CIS Customs Union/ Eurasian Union was directed at all CIS members while the Russkii Mir aimed to maintain the unity of Eastern Slavic Orthodox civilisation of the three ‘brotherly peoples’ who had descended from the medieval state of Kiev Rus.
Ukrainian-Russian relations became increasingly strained in the latter years of Yushchenko’s presidency.
President Yushchenko had infuriated Moscow when he had travelled with Polish and Baltic leaders to Georgia to voice their support in the face of Russia’s invasion.
The EU and US, in contrast, imposed no sanctions against Russia and continued with business as usual.
The EU’s September 2009 Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the Conflict in Georgia headed by Heidi Tagliavini blamed Georgia for the outbreak of hostilities.
The report failed to understand the dynamics of Russia issuing passports to inhabitants of separatist enclaves, its use of proxy forces, armed provocations, and Moscow’s desire for regime change.
Russian leaders may have believed they had been sent a signal by the West that invading neighbours would not lead to sanctions.
In any event, the West’s mild reaction to the invasion of Georgia apparently did not sufficiently reassure Russia.
This infuriated the supposedly more liberal-minded President Medvedev who penned an open letter to Yushchenko listing a whole raft of changes that Russia sought in Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policies.
Nevertheless, the EU’s interest in enlarging for the first time into Eurasia brought about competition from a Russian counter-proposal that the EU never took seriously.
But the reassurance offered by the election of Ukraine’s most pro-Russian president led not to an easing of Russian activity, but to an increase.
Although Yanukovych fulfilled all of the domestic and foreign policy demands laid out by Medvedev, Russia remained unsatisfied.
In Yanukovych’s first year in office he became the first Ukrainian president to eschew characterising the Holodomor as a famine directed by Stalin at Ukraine and avoided using the term ‘genocide’, which was particularly infuriating to Russia.
Although Ukrainian politics have been routinely presented as one of EastWest rivalry, presidential elections have generally been competitions between Eastern Ukrainian elites; only one of Ukraine’s five presidents has been from Western Ukraine.
Moreover, not all Eastern Ukrainians hold similar political views; it was Kuchma who organised a worldwide campaign in support of defining the Holodomor as a genocide on its 70"" anniversary and who first enunciated EU and NATO membership as Ukraine’s goals.
The 1997 Black Sea Fleet agreement had provided for a ‘temporary’ lease of the Sevastopol naval base until 2017.
The Kharkiv Accords extended the lease to 2042 (with the option of a fiveyear extension), in effect making this a permanent Russian naval base.
This was a major strategic achievement for Russia, where re-establishing Russian ownership of Sevastopol and Crimea had long been popular across the political spectrum.
In addition to pressuring Yanukovych to drop EU integration, Russia made further demands.
These included the creation of joint ventures in practically every area of Ukraine’s economy, especially the military industrial complex and energy.
Russia sought the same control over Ukraine’s gas pipelines that it had acquired in Belarus, Armenia and elsewhere.
Russia’s proposal for a consortium over Ukraine’s pipelines would have given Moscow a majority shareholding.
By the 2012 elections, Russia and Russian leaders had become even more nationalistic and anti-Western xenophobia had become a staple in the Russian media.
The US-Russian reset had again failed and Hillary Clinton’s support for protestors in Moscow made Putin suspicious that the West was fomenting another colour revolution with regime change in mind.
Putin’s reelection pushed him even further to the nationalist right and he increasingly added social conservatism to nationalism, espousing ‘conservative values’ and anti-Western xenophobia, aligning with anti-EU populist nationalists, neoNazi and fascist (Such as France’s Front National) political forces in Europe.
Putin began referring to Ukrainians and Russians as ‘one people’ with their joint origins in Kievan Rus that could not be allowed to be broken apart.
Russia’s chauvinistic rhetoric towards Ukrainians became more visceral and public after Putin’s re-election but they were by no means new.
Russian views of Ukrainians as not constituting a ‘real people’ and of Ukraine as a failed and artificial state have deep roots in Russian national identity.
Putin’s counter-attack against Western encroachment into what Russia sees as its ‘zone of privileged interests’ came in the creation of the CIS Customs Union in 2010, which would evolve into the Eurasian Union in 2015.
Ukraine would hold its next presidential elections in the same year the CIS Customs Union would transform into the Eurasian Union and Yanukovych’s re-election for a second term would be necessary for Ukraine to join Putin’s pet project.
Attempts to create CIS structures and unions had taken place throughout Yeltsin’s presidency.
In 1992, the Tashkent Treaty established CIS collective military forces that became the Collective Security Treaty Organisation a decade later.
Annexation and Hybrid Warfare in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine 99 In spring and summer 2013, Russian trade boycotts of Ukraine and other forms of pressure compelled Yanukovych to sign a memorandum in May making Ukraine an ‘observer’ in the CIS Customs Union.
The EU, meanwhile, dropped its earlier insistence that Yanukovych release Tymoshenko from prison before an Association Agreement was finalised.
By removing an obvious reason why the Association Agreement could not go forward, this concession actually increased pressure on Yanukovych.
Euromaidan Ukraine, 2013-2014 ¢« Yanukovych’s reversal on the EU Association Agreements prompts the Euromaidan Revolution. e Russian information warfare promotes portrayal of Euromaidan ‘fascists’. e Russian intelligence supports Ukrainian security forces in suppressing protests and training and financing anti-Maidan vigilantes. e Russian ‘political tourists’ are transported into Kharkiv, Donetsk, Luhansk and Odesa to swell the crowd numbers.
The Euromaidan and Yanukovych’s ouster destroyed Putin’s well-cultivated plans for Ukraine to join the Eurasian Union.
When Yanukovych ‘suspended’ discussion of joining the Association Agreement in November-December 2013, Putin believed he had successfully induced Yanukovych to join Russia’s regional bloc.
Russia followed up by offering to buy $15 billion worth of Ukrainian Eurobonds and by lowering the price of gas from over $400 to $268 per 1,000 cubic metres.
The latter price was still higher than that charged to Belarus but similar to what the Ostchem gas intermediary owned by gas tycoon Dmytro Firtash had been paying.
Russia’s support for paramilitary hybrid warfare on the ground was backed by a barrage of anti-Ukrainian, ‘anti-fascist’ and anti-Maidan propaganda that inflamed passions and reduced the chances for compromise.
Russian intelligence was not only training and financing anti-Maidan, proRussian vigilantes but also organising the transportation of protestors to Donetsk, Luhansk and Kharkiv from Russia and to Odesa from Russian-controlled Trans-Dniestr.
Russian nationalists were quickly on the scene and radicalised the crowds who captured state buildings in Donetsk and Luhansk.
The First Deputy Commander of Ukraine’s navy, Sergei Yeliseyev, was born near Moscow, graduated from a Soviet naval school in the Russian city of Kaliningrad and had served with the Russian Pacific fleet.
After defecting during the crisis, he was appointed deputy commander of Russia’s Baltic fleet.
Ukraine’s naval commander Denis Berezovsky also defected, along with several of his commanders, and was appointed deputy commander of the Russian Black Sea Fleet.
In Crimea, thousands of SBU and military officers, Militsiva and prosecutors defected to Russian occupation forces.
The only other Ukrainian region where the security forces defected en masse was in the Donbas.
Berkut riot police and Internal Troops from the local Militsiva had been sent to Kiev to quell the Euromaidan protests and returned home angry and bitter at the death and injury of their colleagues and the lack of political will to quell the protests.
One hundred thirty protestors and 18 Militsiya officers were killed on the Euromaidan.
In the majority of regions in Eastern and Southern Ukraine a large proportion of the security forces continued to operate and, assisted by local businessmen, Euromaidan activists and self-defence forces, they defeated proRussian forces.
In Moscow’s eyes, the key battleground cities and strategic prizes were Kharkiv and Odesa — not Donetsk and Luhansk.
In Kharkiv, Russian political tourists initially stormed the opera and ballet theatre mistakenly believing it was the city hall.
Interior Minister Arsen Avakov, who is from Kharkiv, oversaw the defeat of pro-Russian forces in his city by the end of the first week of April.
In Odesa, street fighting between pro-Russian and pro-Ukrainian forces ended after a day of violence on 2 May which killed 48 protestors by gunshots and fire.
Protests, Hybrid War and Annexation, 2014 e« EU peace deal falls flat after protestors are killed.
Having been prominent in roundtable negotiations during the Orange Revolution, the EU engaged in negotiations over the Euromaidan in February 2014.
Moreover, anger at the bloodshed that had taken place in the previous three days radicalised the crowds of protestors, who now insisted that Yanukovych had to step down rather than submit to early elections.
Yanukovych then fled to Donetsk and later to Crimea as it was being seized by Russian forces.
Scholars have debated whether Putin’s decision to invade the Crimea was pre-planned or a spur of the moment decision brought on by the victory of the Euromaidan, but the two explanations are not contradictory.
With all Russian political forces laying claim to Sevastopol and the Crimea, adoption of numerous resolutions by both houses of the Russian parliament, open interference by Moscow Mayor Luzhkov and extensive Russian intelligence activity in the Crimea by the Black Sea Fleet’s naval intelligence and FSB and GRU, it would be highly unusual for Russia not to have prepared a range of plans for militarily intervening in the Crimea.
Russia reacted sharply in 2008 after Yushchenko threatened to not allow Black Sea Fleet vessels that had participated in the invasion of Georgia to return to Sevastopol.
Before Russia’s invasion, Lukashenka claimed to have seen Russian plans for military intervention in the Crimea.
As mentioned earlier, Russia’s intervention in the Crimea was welcomed by many local residents because of their long-standing pro-Russian and proSoviet sympathies, as well as by the fear generated by Russia’s information war regarding Ukrainian fascists preparing to invade and massacre Russian speakers.
Russia’s forces consisted of GRU spetsnaz without country insignia, Black Sea Fleet marines and intelligence, defectors from the SBU, Ukraine’s military and Militsiva, Crimean Russian nationalists and organised crime enforcers.
The latter two had long been linked and the role of organised crime was reflected in the installation of former organised crime boss and Russian nationalist Aksyonov as Crimean Prime Minister.
Widespread pro-Putin and pro-Russian/Soviet sympathies in the Crimea did not necessarily translate into the ludicrously reported referendum result of 96.7% in favour of joining Russia.
That figure would require that the majority of Ukrainians and especially Tatars, who numbered approximately 15% of the population in Crimea, backed union with Russia.
According to leaked data, the real turnout was only 30% , and of these only half voted in support of union with Russia.
Throughout the post-Soviet period, support for separatism (understood as an independent Crimea or union with Russia) had never had majority support in the Crimea.
Russia’s hybrid warfare in Novorossiya, the name for the Tsarist-era gubernia that encompasses Eastern-Southern Ukraine (but not Kharkiv, which had been the centre of the province of Slobozhanshchyna), failed.
Pro-Putin sentiment and support for separatism proved to be weak in Kharkiv, Dnipropetrovsk (since re-named Dnipro), Zaporizhzhya, Odesa, Mykolayiv and Kherson.
ProUkrainian protestors outnumbered pro-Russian protestors in every one of these regions.
His actions and those of other Ukrainians with Jewish backgrounds belie the notion that Nazism was a major force in Ukraine.
Although a Russian speaker, Kolomoyskyy supported the Euromaidan and Ukraine’s fight against Russian military intervention.
Despite the rhetoric from Russia, anti-Semitism in the Soviet form of ‘antiZionism’ was more prevalent in the DNR and LNR, whose media routinely condemned the alliance of ‘Jewish oligarchs’, Ukrainian ‘fascists’ and Western governments.
Ukrainian leaders such as Poroshenko, Yatsenyuk and Tymoshenko were mocked for allegedly Ukrainianising their Jewish roots.
Perhaps as a result, Girkin’s spetsnaz made the strategic decision to concentrate their support in Donetsk, where pro-Russian protestors had made headway.
Girkin’s forces captured the towns of Slavyansk and Kramatorsk in western Donetsk oblast and were able to hold on to them for four months before being forced by Ukrainian forces to flee eastward to Donetsk.
Ukrainian forces also re-captured Mariupol in Southern Donetsk oblast with relative ease.
In Luhansk oblast’s Northern regions, which historically had been part of Slobozhanshchyna, pro-Russian forces had little local support.
Overall, the ‘Russian Spring’ engendered some local support in the Crimea, had limited appeal in the Donbas and barely any in Kharkiv and the remainder of so-called Novorossiya.
Ukraine’s ATO was launched a few days after Girkin’s invasion but only gathered steam the following month.
Two decades of neglect, corruption, and asset stripping, combined with Russian penetration of the SBU and military high command, left Ukraine a limited number of reliable military forces.
These did include elite parachute units who took the brunt of the fighting.
This was the case especially in Donetsk airport, which had been re-built for the 2012 European football championship, where they became immortalised as ‘Cyborgs’ after holding off Russian marines and spetsnaz and Russian proxies until early 2015.
With the Ukrainian armed forces in shambles, volunteers played a key role as fighters in the over 40 battalions that were 32.
Additionally, large numbers of largely women civilian volunteers* collected and transported supplies (uniforms, blankets, boots, telescopic lenses, night vision goggles, medical supplies, food and fresh water) to the front line.
Over time, Ukraine has strengthened its military capacity and volunteer battalions have been integrated into the army and National Guard.
Despite all these problems, the Ukrainian armed forces of the year 2017 now number 200,000, most of whom have come under fire, and are seasoned in battle.
They have no chance of winning a potential military clash with Russia, but they have a reason to fight.
The Ukrainian armed forces of the year 2014, in a situation where their home territory was occupied by foreign troops, were incapable of mounting an adequate response.
The changes since the Donbas war started mean that Ukraine now has the best army it has ever had in its history.
Changes in Ukraine’s Armed Forces since the Russian Aggression’, OSW Studies no.
Despite the agreement, intense fighting continues and leads to the signing of Minsk II in February 2015.
By July 2014, Ukraine’s ATO was successful in re-taking control of Western and Southern Donetsk oblast and in neutralising Russian proxy activity in Northern Luhansk.
At that stage, Putin had to choose whether to abandon his proxies to their fate or to assist them by invading Ukraine.
He chose the latter, further damaging Ukrainian-Russian relations and Russia’s relations with the West.
Artillery pounded Ukraine from Russian territory making it difficult for Ukrainian forces to maintain control over its border regions.
Instead, Russia sent surface-to-air missiles, such as the Buk, to shoot down Ukrainian Air Force planes.
This sophisticated military equipment could only be manned by trained Russian soldiers — not Russian proxies or Cossacks.
Russia’s increased military aggression and the shooting down of MH17 stiffened United States and EU responses to the crisis, leading to new sanctions against Russia.
Western government policymakers did not believe Putin’s claim that Russia was not militarily intervening in Eastern Ukraine.
Ukraine’s continued use of the term ATO, until a change in legislation in January 2018, was also confusing as it did not designate Russia and Ukraine as being in a state of war.
The EU (represented by Germany and France), Ukraine, Russia and the OSCE were parties to the negotiations.
In accepting Russia as a partner in the negotiations, the West was playing its own game of maskirovka.
While rejecting Putin’s claims that Russia was uninvolved in the war in Eastern Ukraine they were at the same time willing to include Russia as a mediator rather than as a participant in the conflict.
This led to a situation whereby Ukraine’s President Poroshenko sat down to negotiate peace with the Russian president whom he accused of conducting hybrid war against and invading Eastern Ukraine while Putin insisted that Russia was not a party to the conflict.
The Minsk process did not include discussion of Crimea, which for Russia is a closed question.
Some European leaders, echoing populist nationalists, have called for the EU to recognise Russia’s sovereignty over the Crimea.
During the 2016 United States presidential campaign, then-candidate Donald Trump, echoing former United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, said ‘But, you know, the people of Crimea, from what I’ve heard, would rather be with Russia than where they were’, hinting if he were elected he would recognise Russian sovereignty.
NATO and Ukraine estimate there are between 5,000—10,000 Russian soldiers in the Donbas with larger numbers stationed just across the border who provide a security guarantee.
In transforming proxy militias into standing armies, Putin’s policies towards the Donbas were little different to those pursued by Yeltsin in the Trans-Dniestr, South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
The West and Ukraine on one side and Russia on the other have held diametrically different approaches to the implementation of the Minsk accords.
Ukraine and the West have insisted on implementing the security provisions first, including the withdrawal of Russian forces, demilitarisation of proxy forces and reestablishment of Ukraine’s control over its border with Russia.
Putin disagrees, insisting Ukraine should first change its constitution to provide ‘special status’ for the DNR and LNR and hold local elections.
The holding of elections in today’s conditions could never be free and fair (Prime Minister Zakharcheko has said Ukrainian parties could not participate) and elections would therefore freeze and legitimise existing control of the DNR and LNR by Russia and its proxies.
The first is that there is an understandable absence of trust on the Ukrainian side towards any promises made by Putin that security steps in Minsk II would be implemented after Ukraine introduced constitutional changes and _ held elections.
Russia’s ability to bargain is undermined by its record of deception; it will be difficult to take Russian assurances seriously when Putin continues to claim there is no Russian military intervention in Eastern Ukraine.
A second factor is the potential for further political instability and possibly a third Maidan in Ukraine if President Poroshenko were seen as capitulating to Russian demands.
In contrast to Moldova, Georgia and Azerbaijan, Ukraine has not been defeated in the Donbas, so there is less basis upon which to give in to Russian demands.
The Ukrainian parliament’s attempt to debate the changing of the constitution in August 2015 to provide ‘special status’ to the DNR and LNR led to nationalist riots and the deaths of three National Guardsmen from a grenade thrown by a veteran of the war.
A new factor in Ukrainian electoral politics is the 15% of voters who are veterans and their families.
Charap and Colton point out that Russia’s overall goals for Ukraine have not changed since the 21 February 2014 agreement.
As this book has shown, Ukraine is viewed as one of three key countries in the Russkii Mir and central to the success of the Eurasian Union.
To the extent that Russia seeks Ukraine’s membership of the Eurasian Union — not a neutral successful democracy on its doorstep — ‘Finlandisation’ will not do.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov implied that neutrality might satisfy Russia, saying that ‘only a non-aligned Ukraine may escape further territorial disintegration’, but it is not clear that this is a firm offer.
Moldova and Azerbaijan have never sought NATO membership and yet Russian proxies have occupied the Trans-Dniestr and Nagorno-Karabakh since the early 1990s.
Similarly, in 2002, Putin proposed to Lukashenka that Belarus, a country which has never sought NATO or EU membership, unite with Russia in what would amount to a Russian Anschluss of Belarus.
In Georgia, Russian proxies took control of South Ossetia and Abkhazia more than a decade before Georgia raised the goal of NATO membership.
Georgia’s interest in NATO was an ex post facto justification for invasion, not a cause of it.
In the case of Ukraine, Lavrov was being doubly disingenuous as Russia’s understanding of returning Ukrainian territorial integrity did not include the Crimea.
Even outside Russia’s self-declared ‘sphere of interest’ in Eurasia, a country with no interest in NATO membership can become a target of Russian hybrid and information warfare, as the case of Sweden shows.
There is no way to bridge Ukraine’s insistence on independence and Russia's refusal to accept Ukraine as a fully sovereign country.
Russia’s plan is for Ukraine to be a fully-fledged member of the Eurasian Union.
Russia demands that the West recognises its droit de regard over Ukraine and Eurasia and seeks to negotiate a grand bargain with the United States over the heads of Ukrainians.
Brezhnev claimed Soviet satellites in Central-Eastern Europe possessed ‘limited sovereignty’ and Warsaw Pact countries invaded Hungary and Czechoslovakia in 1956 and 1968 to thwart colour-style revolutions.
While Russia’s capabilities have recovered dramatically since the 1990s, in terms of goals, Putin did not bring anything to the table that had not already been proposed by his Soviet and Russian predecessors.
Conclusion The conflict in Ukraine is going to be difficult to solve, for several reasons highlighted in this chapter.
First, the conflict is not primarily a civil war but an international war.
Russia is a party to the conflict, and therefore cannot effectively mediate it.
Second, Russia’s aggression in Ukraine was many years in the making, even if it took the events of 2014 to provide the opportunity.
Because the invasions of Crimea and the Donbas were not responses either to the West's actions or to the specific events in Kiev, resolving those issues will not be sufficient to secure Russian withdrawal.
This is particularly true in the case of Crimea, which, through its annexation, Russia has announced its intention to keep permanently.
Russia’s unwillingness to change its behaviour in the Donbas, never mind in Crimea, have been factored into the July 2017 United States sanctions.
These call on the Treasury and State Departments, along with intelligence officials, to analyse the ‘potential effects of expanding sanctions...to include sovereign debt and the full range of derivative products’*® which would represent a significant escalation of economic pressure on Russia.
Third, it appears that there is no path toward a negotiated solution; or rather that the existing path is a dead end.
Neither side accepts its basic commitments under the Minsk process, but neither Russia nor Ukraine (nor the EU or US) benefits from walking away from the process.
As emphasised throughout this book, regaining control over Ukraine is a long-term Russian foreign policy goal.
But the invasion of Ukraine has solidified Ukrainian opinion against Russia and in favour of stronger ties with the West.
That means that force and subversion will be more necessary than before, not less, to achieve Russia’s objectives.
Russia’s ethnic minorities and expansionist ethnic Russian nationalism’ in P Kolsta and Helge Blakkisrud eds., The New Russian Nationalism.
Command, Control, Crime and the Minsk Peace Process, Research Report no.
Tymchuk, Dmytro, Karin, Yuriy, Mashovets, Kostyantyn, and Husarov, Vyacheslav, Vtorhnennya v Ukrayinu.
Russia’s annexation of the Crimea, hybrid war and military interventions in Eastern Ukraine caused a dramatic transformation of the international landscape, especially in Europe, ushering in what some regard as a new cold war.
In summer 2017, just after new, tougher sanctions against Russia were adopted by the US, the traditionally liberal Washington Post ran an editorial entitled ‘We're on the road to a new Cold War’ which placed the blame for the deterioration in relations entirely on Russia.
What happened is a response to bad choices taken by President Putin of Russia.
This chapter reviews the international ramifications of Russia’s annexation of Crimea and hybrid war against Eastern Ukraine.
We summarise the Minsk | and Minsk II agreements, showing why the Minsk process is needed to manage the conflict, but cannot resolve it.
We then examine the politics of sanctions, stressing that the symbolic impact was more important than the economic effects.
We then pull back to examine the dynamics of the new cold war, which includes not only this conflict, but the one in Syria and the broader Russian information and cyber war against the West.
Ukraine is the central battleground in this new cold war, and the weakness of its government's commitment to reform causes difficult dilemmas for its supporters in the West.
Finally, we examine the prospects for settling the conflict, concluding that there is little likelinood of an improvement, because the different sides differ so profoundly in their goals.
Changing Attitudes On top of its intervention in Ukraine, Russia’s interference in European and US elections consolidated the view in the West of Russia as an adversary that could not be trusted and needed to be confronted.
For Russia, complaining about Western behaviour was replaced with confronting it, and the ostracism that resulted strengthened old fears about Western hostility and consolidated domestic support for confrontation.
These dire consequences did not result automatically from the annexation of the Crimea and interventions in Eastern Ukraine.
While those military actions spurred a rapid hardening in the US, Europe remained much more hesitant.
Even after the annexation of Crimea, many German elites supported a pragmatic policy of accom-modating a great power rather than sacrificing for a small one with little independent history.
Germans had a tendency, Timothy Snyder warned the German Bundestag, ‘to overlook a people which was not regarded as a people.
All of the language about Ukraine as a failed state, or Ukrainians not as a real nation, or Ukrainians divided by culture — in the German language — that is not innocent.
In March 2014, Chancellor Merkel, noted for her pragmatic relationship over many years interacting with Putin, described him as ‘in another world’ after a phone call discussing the Crimea invasion.
The downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 in July 2014 cemented the change in opinion.
Because the flight had taken off from Amsterdam, and because many of the passengers were Dutch, the war was brought home for many in Western Europe.
The fact that Russia supplied the weapons and the crew that downed the plane made it much harder to ignore Russia's role in Eastern Ukraine.
In Western Europe, it was now much harder for respectable politicians to counsel compromise with Russia.
By autumn 2014, Western Europe and the United States were more united on Russia than they had been since the days before West Germany’s Ostpolitik in the late 1960s.
From Normandy to Minsk In early June 2014, at a celebration of the anniversary of the D-Day invasion in World War II, Russian, Ukrainian and EU leaders agreed to form a Trilateral Group consisting of Russia, Ukraine, and the OSCE to try to negotiate an end to the violence.
The group began meeting within days, but not much progress was made until September, when battlefield developments forced everyone’s hands.
In August, Ukrainian forces nearly succeeded in separating Russia’s Donetsk proxies from those in Luhansk and threatened to completely surround and defeat them.
Russia was ready to consolidate its gains and Ukraine to cut its losses.
The agreement was based on a plan that President Poroshenko had advanced in June, calling for a ceasefire, a buffer zone from which heavy weaponry would be excluded, and OSCE monitoring.
Two political provisions were to cause considerable acrimony in the following months.
One committed Ukraine to giving the Donetsk and Luhansk increased self-rule.
This would require a change in Ukraine’s constitution, which Poroshenko could not unilaterally deliver, even if he wanted to.
In the short term, however, the priority was to stop the fighting before it got out of control.
In this, the agreement was only partly successful, but the international community breathed a collective sigh of relief that the recent escalation had been stopped.
The agreement was violated frequently in the coming months, particularly as Russia’s proxy forces attempted to improve their positions.
It broke down completely in December 2014/January 2015, when DNR proxy forces waged a new offensive that seized the Donetsk airport from Ukrainian government forces.
The offensive effectively killed the first Minsk agreement, but once the insurgents achieved their goal of seizing the airport, there was again potential for a ceasefire, and the Minsk II agreement was negotiated.
The terms were largely similar to those of Minsk I, but the ceasefire would be based on the new territorial reality.
The Minsk Il agreement has been in place formally since February 2015, though violations continued to occur on a daily basis, along with a public relations war in which each side tries to draw attention to the other’s violations.
At the same time, as a way of signalling a willingness to accept the prevailing lines of control, it may have some stabilising effect.
Politically, there appear to be costs for being seen as violating the agreement.
In particular, Ukraine is constrained from abandoning Minsk, even if it is widely viewed as dead, because doing so would likely trigger a move among some in the EU to remove sanctions on Russia.
In many respects, the West was a peripheral actor, with much of the impetus for ceasefires being driven by the interests of Russia and Ukraine.
Prior to both Minsk agreements, Russian proxy forces were making gains at the expense of the Ukrainian government.
When those gains had been achieved (saving the DNR in summer 2014 and seizing the Donetsk airport in January 2015), the Russian side was willing to consolidate its gains via a ceasefire.
The West's role was to encourage the ceasefire, to help broker the deal, and probably most important, to disabuse the Ukrainian leadership of the hope that significant Western military assistance would be forthcoming.
The OSCE also played an important role, providing the observers who were meant to report on whether heavy weapons had been pulled back in accordance with the agreement and whether the ceasefire was being followed.
It is important to recognise that these were observers, not peace-keepers, and they struggled to do their job effectively and safely.
Especially in Russian held areas, they repeatedly found themselves denied access and in some cases detained.
Sanctions The most notable Western response to the conflict has been the sanctions enacted against Russia by the EU and the United States.
The diplomacy around the enacting and maintaining of the sanctions has been complicated, and the fact that a relatively far-reaching regime of sanctions was enacted and has been maintained is testament to the breadth and strength of feeling in the West concerning Russia’s actions.
While the general consensus is that the sanctions have had only a modest effect on the Russian economy, we contend that symbolically the sanctions have been very important.
AS much as Putin and Russia sometimes seem to relish being cast as outlaws in the West, their reaction to the sanctions shows that they are very sensitive about their perceived international legitimacy.
These sanctions were the result of considerable bargaining within the EU and between the EU and the United States.
Most analysts agree that the effects on Russia’s economy have been limited’, and that the decline in the Russian economy in 2014—15 was driven primarily by decreases in global petroleum prices, not by the sanctions.
As Richard Connolly notes, measures aimed at the energy sector were not intended to have a short-term effect, but rather to deprive Russia of the capital and technology it will need to bring new sources of oil and gas on line in the long term.
Whether they have deterred other actions by Russia — such as further intervention in Ukraine, is a matter of speculation.
Russia’s countersanctions, which focused on food imports, may make Russia more self-sufficient and boost prices for domestic producers at the cost of increased prices for consumers.
To the extent that trade decreases, Russian oligarchs will be more dependent on the Russian economy, and therefore on Putin.
Those officials no longer allowed to travel to Europe or to buy property will find it much harder to develop a ‘Plan B’ in case they fall out with Putin, leaving them more dependent on him.
Moreover, many have argued that the sanctions have actually helped Putin by providing an excuse for the economic stagnation that has resulted from the absence of reform in the Russian economy.
Oddly, both Western governments and the Russian government have incentives to exaggerate the impact of the sanctions.
Connolly concludes that the likely long-term effect of the sanctions will be to turn Russia further away from a Westernstyle economy to one that is more closed and statist.
People, Politics, Propaganda and Perspectives (Bristol: E-International Relations, March 2015),213.
Because they have incurred significant costs for some Western businesses , they are a ‘costly-signal’, which is taken more seriously because it has been expensive to send.
While simply declaring opposition to Russia’s actions is inexpensive the sanctions signal both to Russia and within the West the seriousness with which Russia’s actions are regarded, and provide a message that more actions might be taken if the situation worsens.
Economic sanctions thus represent a middle point between ‘cheap talk’ and a military response, which would be a costlier signal.
Most importantly, the sanctions demonstrated that the West would come together rather than fragmenting.
Whether that unity can be maintained is a question, and for those reasons the symbolic importance of the sanctions will endure.
Finally, it is important to recognize what has been left out of the sanctions.
The German government has continued to support the Nordstream-2 gas pipeline project, which is wholly owned by Russia’s Gazprom, despite the impact it will have on EU and NATO members Poland and the three Baltic States as well as on Ukraine’s energy security.
Nordstream-2, when completed, will allow Russia to completely circumvent the Ukrainian pipeline network for its gas deliveries to Germany and much of Western Europe, thus removing the only lever Ukraine has against Russia in general, and making it possible for Russia to shut off gas to Ukraine without harming its customers further west.
Nordstream-2 will achieve a strategic goal that Russia has sought since the early 1990s.
This project demonstrates the strong interest that Germany and other European states still have in commercial relations with Russia, and the strong incentive they have to sacrifice Ukraine’s interests for their own.
In one of the earliest and most successful efforts by Putin to gain influence inside Western governments, he established a very close relationship with Merkel’s predecessor, Gerhard Schroeder, and then hired him to lead the original Nordstream project.
There is no agreed definition for a ‘cold war’, but the application of the label to the current era seems appropriate, despite the differences between the present era and that between 1945 and 1991.
Until 2003, it was widely believed that a modernising Russia might be accommodated into the international system as a constructive and benign actor.
Variations on this view have given way to the realisation that Russia, on its present course, cannot be a partner or ally, and that differences outweigh any common interests.
The change that the Ukraine crisis has brought about is not territorial, but rather strategic and mental.
Russia has finally quit its policy of trying to integrate into the West and become part of the Euro-Atlantic system.
That does not mean that there are not issues on which collaboration will be mutually beneficial, as with the extensive array of arms control and crisis prevention efforts during the first Cold War.
It does mean that rather than agreeing on the basic norms and rules of the game, and assuming that at the strategic level the two sides’ goals are compatible — the assumption that prevailed prior to 2014 — leaders and citizens on both sides now advance incompatible norms and believe that at the strategic level, the two sides’ interests conflict.
One wonders whether in the future the period from 1991 to 2013 will be regarded not as a period between two cold wars, but as a temporary lull, analogous to the era of détente in the 1970s, in one long cold war.
The dynamics of the present era resemble those of the first Cold War in other respects as well.
Russia once again is seen by many as a revisionist power seeking to overthrow widely accepted norms, and by some as a threatened state trying to defend its security.
Again, the conflict has a strongly domestic and normative component, with the West claiming that the conflict is in large part about the battle between democracy and autocracy, while Russia points at various elements of hypocrisy in the West's position.
In another sense, the current era shares a dynamic not only with the postWorld War II era, but of the much deeper history of politics in Central and Eastern Europe.
At the end of World War II, as at the end of World War | and as during the era of Catherine the Great, the question was where the line between Russia and the West will be drawn.
In each of those cases, it was determined by primarily troops on the ground.
Unsurprisingly, each side tends to see as normal or as the status quo the dividing line that best serves its interest today.
The West focuses on the status quo post-1991, when Russia was pushed from territory that it had held since the 17"" century.
From the realist perspective, all the rhetoric about self-determination and history is simply ammunition in a contest for territory.
Several important dynamics of the Cold War have returned, even if the boundary between Russia’s ‘sphere of influence’ and the West has moved eastward several hundred kilometres.
Russia complained bitterly about NATO’s eastward movement, and some Western authors blame NATO expansion for Russia’s military intervention in Ukraine.
That remains in dispute, but it is clear that Russia’s actions in Ukraine have ensured a renaissance of NATO and the deployment of more NATO forces to regions closer to Russia’s borders.
While there may have been good reason to assume that a post-Soviet regime would be less implacable that the Soviets were, there is less reason to be optimistic that a post-Putin government will be friendlier.
The available evidence is that Russia’s actions in Ukraine, and especially its annexation of Crimea, are highly popular in Russia, and not merely the project of an unpopular and autocratic government.
The majority of Russian opposition leaders and groups, including Alexei Navalny, support the annexation of the Crimea.
Ina summer 2017 television debate with proxy leader Igor Girkin, Navalny did not criticise Putin’s military policies towards Ukraine on principle but only in terms of the cost to the Russian economy.
More broadly, nationalism appears to be genuinely popular in Russia, as it is in many other states.
Thus, many have asserted that one reason for Russia to annex the Crimea was that doing so bolstered Putin’s popularity in anticipation of the 2018 presidential elections.
Moreover, with Putin’s power relatively well consolidated, he probably has more room to manoeuvre and to make deals with the West than would a successor seeking to build popularity and defend him or herself against nationalist challengers.
Overall then, given what has happened in post-Soviet Russia, we may have less reason to believe now than we did during the first Cold War that a change in regime will be sufficient to improve relations between Russia and the West.
Putin’s view that Ukraine is ‘Russian’ and is rightfully part of the Russkii Mir and Eurasia Union — rather than Europe — reflects a broad consensus among Russians.
NATO and the West may therefore need a long-term strategy that does not depend on Russian democracy solving the problem.
The EU Response The EU was inadvertently at the epicentre of the Ukraine conflict.
The same norms that blinded European diplomats to the danger Russia saw in Ukraine joining an Association Agreement led EU leaders to be outraged that Russia deployed naked force to seize Crimea. ‘he EU brought a low-politics toolbox to a high-politics construction site’.1° The EU was the central arena through which the West discussed economic sanctions and efforts to broker a resolution to the conflict.
These two issues were linked in a March 2015 resolution making the implementation of the Minsk Il agreement a prerequisite for lifting economic sanctions.
While the measure was intended to promote Minsk II, the fact that Minsk Il is widely viewed as dead means that the sanctions now look semi-permanent.
This is especially the case following the adoption of tougher United States sanctions in summer 2017.
Arkadiy Moshes argues that the reason that the EU rejected a Georgia-style response is not because of Ukraine’s particulars, but because Russia’s behaviour in this case appears to be a much more fundamental challenge to the European order.
In part this is about Russia, because there is considerable opposition in some quarters to entering a long-term conflict with Russia, which so recently seemed like a partner.
At the extreme, sympathy for Putin’s style of rule among the left and populist nationalists in various countries engenders opposition to sanctions and other measures.
The NATO Response The annexation of Crimea and hybrid warfare in Eastern Ukraine prompted European leaders to take a fresh look at their militaries, and to think about how to strengthen them.
The end of the Cold War and the presumption of a new order in which violence was ‘off the table’ in Europe allowed European states to focus on the non-military aspects of security, such as migration.
That changed rapidly in 2014, in particular for those states directly bordering Russia.
As NATO itself has acknowledged, while NATO sees its response to the Ukraine crisis as just that — a response, Russia is likely to see it as further proof of a Western plan to expand NATO at Russia’s expense.
Were Russia to engineer a rapid invasion in this region, NATO would be hard pressed to defeat it with conventional forces.
That reality had led many to oppose membership for those states to begin with, and the fact that they were admitted shows again the extent to which Western leaders believed the rules of the game had fundamentally changed.
Now, they had to face the imminent possibility of being unable to resist Russian invasion and hybrid warfare against a NATO member state.
Such a scenario was played out in a 2016 BBC drama where NATO forces responded to Russian hybrid warfare in Eastern Latvia.
A 60-mile-wide stretch of rural land called the Suwalki Gap between the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad and Russia's ally, Belarus, is NATO’s weakest spot.
From the Russian perspective, the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad is isolated being surrounded on all sides by NATO members.
The first major NATO response (after the suspension of collaboration via the NATO-Russia Council in April 2014) was the adoption of a series of ‘assurance measures’ beginning in May 2014 that evolved into a broader ‘Readiness Action Plan’ adopted at the September 2014 Wales summit.
In the immediate aftermath of the Crimea annexation, there was a particular fear that Russia might not take the Article V commitment to the Baltic States seriously, which could lead to a major war.
NATO increased fighter jet patrols, naval patrols, and training exercises in the region.
The Readiness Action Plan added a set of ‘adaptation measures’ intended to materially improve NATO’s ability to provide the defence to which it has committed.
Among the proposals has been Germany’s ‘Framework Nations Project’, an idea which predated Russia’s military actions but has become much more relevant because of them.
The idea is to strengthen the relationships by which the smaller militaries in Europe, many of which have specialised in particular missions, could be operationally integrated into the larger ones, which have a broader range of capabilities but are thin in many specific areas.
The centrepiece of this more coordinated army would be Germany’s Bundeswehr.
If these proceed, Russia’s military interventions in Ukraine would have undermined a key Soviet and Russian goal in place since 1946, namely to limit the military power of Germany.
While Russia’s military interventions in Ukraine have increased a sense of urgency within NATO, they have not solved the long-standing problems that have eroded the alliance’s military capabilities.
First, many of the member states spend relatively low shares of GDP on defence, an issue that has been raised in visibility by United States President Donald Trump.
German social democrats are opposed to increasing German military spending to reach the goal of two percent.
That is a major reason for the Framework Nations Project, but the issue, which has been salient since the 1960s, will not be resolved any time soon.
Russia’s Policy Russia has met the West’s outrage over the Ukraine conflict with defiance.
It has continued to maintain the legality of the annexation of Crimea, its noninvolvement in what it terms a ‘civil war’ in Eastern Ukraine, and the fault of the West for both conflicts.
It has also continued to sustain the conflict in Eastern Ukraine and to increase its capacity to act elsewhere.
Moreover, it has upped the stakes by increasing the extent and transparency of its influence campaign in Western capitals and by seeking to interfere in several Western elections.
From Russia’s perspective, its interference in Western politics is no different than the transnational support for democracy promotion in the post-Soviet region, including the colour revolutions, but this initiative has galvanized resolve in the West and contributed to the further deterioration in relations between Russia and the West.
Russian scholars and leaders focused for years on Joseph Nye’s concept of ‘soft power’, but interpreted it differently than did Nye.
Whereas Nye conceived of ‘soft power’ largely as a resource that increased one’s prestige and attractiveness,”’ Russian thinking on the topic tended to focus on it as an instrument, to be deployed to advantage in a conflict.
Therefore, rather than increasing Russia’s prestige or raising the likelihood that others would choose the policies that Russia wanted without being coerced, Russia’s deployment of its version of soft power has had the opposite effect.
One of Russia's central assertions that continues from the Soviet period is that as a great power it expects to have a veto on major international questions.
That helps explain its outrage at cases where the United States and NATO deployed force without UN Security Council approval.
Any solution, or any change from the status quo, must be something that Russia considers an improvement, because Russia has a great deal of ability to maintain the current situation, or to respond to something it cannot control by making things much worse.
Russia’s annexation of the territory and its rhetoric indicate that Russia intends to retain the territory permanently.
It is hard to imagine what would convince it to change its mind, or how Crimea’s status could change over Russia’s objections.
If there is to be normalisation at some point, it will almost certainly have to come via a Western and Ukrainian willingness to accept that.
On Eastern Ukraine, it is much less clear what Russia’s preferences are.
The status quo, that of a low-level conflict that can be escalated at any time provides Russia much leverage, and prevents Ukraine from tackling many of its domestic issues.
The Minsk provision that Ukraine’s constitution would be modified to provide for extensive regional autonomy and local elections also appears very good for Russia, as this would keep the most-pro Russian regions of Ukraine, over which Russia could likely retain extensive influence, within Ukraine.
The insistence upon autonomy for Ukraine’s Eastern regions has been one consistent aspect of Russian policy.
Either way, Ukraine would be prevented from doing anything to which Russia strongly objects.
But it is not clear whether Russia prefers a ‘frozen conflict’ or a reintegration of the territories into Ukraine with a high degree of autonomy and Russian influence.
Michael O’Hanlon has proposed the creation of ‘permanent neutrality’®° for countries currently not in NATO stretching from Finland and Sweden through Ukraine to Serbia.
While an interesting proposal, it relies on the questionable assumption that Russia views all of its neighbours in a similar manner.
While Russia does not contest Finnish or Serbian sovereignty, this is not true of Ukraine, making it highly unlikely that Putin would withdraw from the Crimea and abandon the Donbas.
That does not address the problem that joining the DCFTA with the EU would rule out joining the CIS Customs Union.
In 2014, Russia intervened in Ukraine when only this EU ‘enlargement-light’ was on offer.
A completely different problem with proposals to make Ukraine neutral is that doing so would rewrite the norms of European politics in a way that the EU has staunchly opposed.
Europe would be accepting a return to a world in which ‘great powers’ imposed rules and territorial revisions on the smaller states.
A third problem is that ‘non-bloc’ status is economically unviable in a globalised world economy.
After 1945, free trade areas were not so important, but in the last two decades, with the EU on one side and Eurasian Union on the other, the countries in the middle would be left in an untenable economic position.
A reasonable conjecture is that the Russian leadership has a better sense of its tactics than of its goals.
Both in Crimea and in Eastern Ukraine, Russia played a long game, waiting and preparing until the time was right to move.
In this view, even if Russia does not have a specific strategy, it may have a belief that with time, a more favourable settlement will be possible than now.
In terms of resolving the Ukrainian conflict, this may mean that Russia sees no need to make concessions.
The larger question for Russian strategy is whether another several decades of cold war is in its interest.
In particular, one wonders whether, as China’s power continues to grow, Russia will perceive as much threat from China, with which it shares a very long border, as it does from the United States and Europe.
Currently, and most likely for the indefinite future, Russia needs China more than China needs Russia.
The structure of international relations is becoming increasingly complex.
Globalisation has led to the formation of new centres of economic and political power.
Global power and development potential is becoming decentralised, and is shifting towards the Asia-Pacific Region, eroding the global economic and political dominance of the traditional Western powers.
While some of this rhetoric may be aimed at convincing various domestic audiences of the rightness and the likely success of Russian policy, there is no reason to think that many Russians do not believe the basic outline of the argument.
The notion that the United States and the West are declining relative to Asia, and that the liberal agenda of democracy and free markets is on the wane, is not limited to Russian thinkers.
As noted above, however, progress toward an EU-Ukraine Association Agreement and a DCFTA placed the EU in the key spot in the run-up to the crisis.
During the Euromaidan itself, the United States and EU struggled, generally successfully, to adopt common positions regarding a resolution of the crisis.
Both the EU and the United States sought an outcome to the protests that maintained constitutional and legal processes in Ukraine.
The EU, represented by foreign ministers from Germany and Poland, brokered a deal at the height of the crisis on 21 February that appeared to deescalate the crisis, as Yanukovych agreed to restoration of the 2004 constitution and holding of early presidential elections in December 2014.
The United States supported that deal, but opposition leaders on the Euromaidan (in contrast to the leaders of opposition political parties) rejected it, insisting that after the killings of protestors Yanukovych must leave office.
When Yanukovych subsequently fled and was stripped off his office, both the United States and EU accepted the act, rather than insisting on obeying the 21 February deal, a decision that Russia saw as evidence of bad faith.
This is consistent with the long-term differences in policies and with the fact that the EU had to find a solution amenable to its 28 members.
Thus, the United States supported further-reaching sanctions than did the EU, although the differences were not insurmountable, and the two sides were able to agree ona common front.
Similarly, the United States and EU were able to arrive at common positions on economic and financial support for Ukraine.
Following the imposition of sanctions, discussion in the United States turned to what kind of military assistance the United States should provide Ukraine.
Some policymakers and think tank experts supported supplying military equipment to Ukraine, in order to counter the advantage in weaponry that the Russian military was deploying and making available to its proxies in Eastern Ukraine.
Lethal weaponry might directly support Ukrainian fighters on the ground, and indirectly raise the costs of Russian intervention, making it less sustainable.
Such a policy would echo United States support for the Afghan resistance after the 1979 Soviet invasion, leading to high casualties and eventually forcing the USSR to withdraw.
Many others in the United States opposed providing military assistance to Ukraine.
Russia, it was argued, could match any increase in the quality or quantity of weapons being deployed in the conflict, so the only result of providing weaponry would be to increase the number of casualties from the conflict.
Many felt that increased United States involvement would validate Putin’s arguments about United States aggression and increase, rather than decrease, Russian resolve.
Moreover, opponents argued, Ukraine and the United States had to accept that Ukraine did not have a military path to resolving the conflict, but instead would have to rely on diplomacy.
On this question, the United States ended up choosing a policy that matched where the EU already was.
For the US, the Ukraine conflict became subsumed in a much larger set of conflicts with Russia, which together constituted the new cold war.
Even before 2014, the United States and Russia were supporting opposite sides in the Syrian civil war, and that disagreement only worsened.
Then, Russia’s actions surrounding the 2016 United States presidential election toxified the relationship dramatically.
Ukraine was increasingly a battleground in a larger conflict, rather than an objective of policy in itself.
Most important, perhaps, was the belief that Russia’s support for Trump’s election made it politically dangerous for his administration to do anything that might be seen as a concession.
The US Congress, generally bitterly divided along party lines, nearly unanimously passed a law requiring Congressional approval to lift sanctions.
Trump was reportedly inclined to veto the law as an encroachment on executive prerogatives, but feared being seen as soft on Russia.
Bipartisan support in the United States for a hard line on Russia is stronger than it has been in many years, perhaps since the divisions that emerged in the 1970s over détente.
Ukraine and the West If the conflict began in part because of Ukraine’s pivotal position between the West and Russia, the war has only increased Ukraine’s salience.
In particular, the EU began more seriously applying in Ukraine the same strategy it had applied in the remainder of post-communist Europe; namely, using the attractiveness of a closer relationship with the EU as a means of promoting and consolidating democratic transformation.
This notion was crucial to European notions of the post-Cold War order in Europe.
Russia’s insistence on this point, and its subsequent military intervention, therefore provoked opposition in Europe even among those generally sceptical about Ukraine’s European credentials and sup-portive of good relations with Russia.
As a result, following Russia’s military intervention, the EU became more committed to Ukraine’s success than it had been previously.
The United States position was compatible to that of the EU, though with different emphasis.
The United States was less focused on the principle of Ukraine’s freedom of choice, and more focused on the broader challenge that Russia’s action appeared to present.
However, that aid has likely helped the Ukrainian government to persist in power without seriously tackling either the general problems of corruption and the rule of law or the specific commitments it has made to its donors.
Under normal circumstances, donors, represented by the IMF, would stop aid programmes on the grounds of non-compliance.
The West has hesitated to do this in the case of Ukraine for fear of the government collapsing.
In 2014, there was some hope that the threat from Russia would change the political game in Ukraine and some promising steps were taken, including the appointment of Mikhail Saakashvili as governor of Odesa oblast and the formation of new anti-corruption bodies, such as the National Anti-Corruption Bureau.
But Saakashvili did not last and the anti-corruption bodies have been prevented from prosecuting high-level officials.
More progress has been made on economic, social, fiscal-monetary and energy reforms.
Efforts are underway to transform the Soviet-era Militsiya into a European-style Politsiya and Interior Ministry Internal Troops into a National Guard.
President Poroshenko has presided over the creation of a powerful army.
Nevertheless, Ukraine continues to lag in the fight against corruption.
A related question is whether a new round of protests might again induce turmoil in Ukrainian politics.
Prospects for Settling the Conflict The prospects for peace in Ukraine appear to be dim.
The minimally acceptable outcomes for the various sides are too far apart to bridge until something significant changes.
Moreover, the Ukrainian conflict is now subsumed in the broader cold war between the West and Russia, making it even harder to address.
None of the actors can reach a better solution without the acquiescence of other parties who have different preferred outcomes.
In such a situation, only the exercise of greater power, and the inflicting of higher costs, might persuade one side or another to change courses.
For Russia, the optimal solution appears to be that the DNR and LNR are rejoined with Ukraine, but with a high degree of autonomy, and with a political leadership controlled by Russia.
At a minimum, this would provide Russia with a direct and legitimised way to interfere in Ukrainian politics, which Ukraine would see as a threat to its sovereignty.
Moreover, any such deal would encounter stiff resistance from Ukrainian public opinion, including veterans of the war and their families and friends, who are growing in number.
Barring Ukrainian capitulation to this regional autonomy plan outcome, Russia appears to be well served by a conflict in which it can ratchet up or down the level of violence as it pleases, without having to take any responsibility for results, claiming the DNR and LNR are breakaway regions of Ukraine over which Russia has no control.
Ukraine’s government holds to the implausible position that it is going to retake control of the Donbas and Crimea as well.
Both politics and principle prevent Ukraine from dealing with the situation realistically.
Politically, the notion of recovering the territory is popular, and leaders cannot admit that the territory is lost.
In terms of principle, it seems wrong to acquiesce in what was a clear violation of international law.
However, Russia is exceedingly unlikely to give back Crimea, and Ukraine has never shown any inclination to fight for it.
The prospects in the Donbas are better, in that Russia has not formally annexed them.
Two other longdebated scenarios have been that Russian forces might seek to forge a ‘land bridge’ from Russian territory east of Mariupol to Odesa, which was widely discussed by Western commentators in 2015-2016, or that Russian forces invade Ukraine from Belarus.
The idea would be for Ukraine unilaterally to acknowledge the separation of the DNR and LNR from Ukraine, which would allow Ukraine to move forward with a much more cohesive polity and would leave Russia to deal with the mess in the Donbas.
This policy has been repeatedly advocated by Alexander J Motyl.s° Some steps were taken in this direction in early 2017, when trade between the occupied regions and the rest of Ukraine was significantly diminished, forcing Russia to step in.
Similarly, the cutting off of water to Crimea forced Russia to come up with a plan to address the peninsula’s water supply.
Such a strategy would include changing the legal definition of the war from that of an ATO to recognising the Crimea, DNR and LNR as ‘temporarily occupied territory’ with the concept of Russia as the ‘aggressor’ state introduced for the first time.
The new approach will permit the Ukrainian authorities to use the army in the ATO outside anti-terrorist legislation.
From this perspective, for the same reason that Russia would like to see the Donbas reintegrated into Ukraine, Ukraine would be better off without it.
In particular, the loss of Crimea and the Donbas dramatically shifts the balance of electoral politics in Ukraine away from Eastern Ukraine and Russia and toward Central Ukraine and Europe.
Again, however, both politics and principle make such a strategy implausible.
A variety of other possible settlements have been put forward by commentators in Ukraine and elsewhere in the West.
Many include a similar set of pragmatic proposals, such as a cease-fire that freezes the existing lines of control, the delaying of consideration of the permanent status of occupied regions and Crimea into the more distant future, and the neutralisation of Ukraine, in some form.
The second of these seems inevitable, but on both sides, there are strong feelings that these questions are already answered and are nonnegotiable.
Russians tend to believe that the annexation of Crimea is an established fact while many in Ukraine and in the West cannot accept the idea of legitimising it.
Former United States Ambassador to Ukraine Steven Pifer has argued that one danger for Ukraine is that Russia will actually implement its side of Minsk Il, withdrawing heavy weaponry and returning the border to Ukraine’s control.
This would obligate Ukraine to fulfil its side of the deal, including revising the constitution to greatly increase regional autonomy.
If the Ukrainian government could not deliver on that, Ukraine would be in breach of the agreement while Russia was not.
This might tip support in Europe toward normalising relations with Russia.
Pifer speculated that Russia has not chosen this gambit because it may get what it wants without any concession, given that United States President Trump seemed favourably inclined, that the EU would likely be occupied with Brexit, and that Marine Le Pen was expected to do well in French presidential elections in 2017.
What is less clear is whether all of those steps, which are not politically viable in Ukraine, would prompt Russia to withdraw and stay withdrawn.
A major pitfall of Pinchuk’s proposal is that Ukrainian distrust of Russian leaders is at an all-time record high.
A complicating factor for Ukraine is that its position is heavily dependent upon economic and financial support from the West, which may not last forever.
The West has a wide range of interactions with Russia, and it is not beyond the realm of possibility that Russia could offer something to the West that it wants more than Ukraine.
For example, credible and meaningful help with lran’s latent nuclear programme or North Korea’s active programme, or support for ousting Bashar al-Assad in Syria would be tempting to United States leaders in particular.
Russia has numerous possibilities to foment new problems, which it can then offer its help in solving.
So far, the heavy-handed way that Russia has played its cards, especially in interference in Western elections, has made a deal between Russia and the West at Ukraine’s expense unlikely, but that could change.
Because it seems inconceivable that Russia will return Crimea to Ukraine, a difficult diplomatic task for the various players in the coming years will be to find a way to accept Russia’s ownership of Crimea while not seeming to reward its aggression or undermine the principle that invading one’s neighbours and changing borders by force is not acceptable.
Put differently, if Russia, Ukraine and the West are ever to move beyond the Crimea annexation, some means must be found to legitimise what seems entirely illegitimate.
One alternative would be to follow the policy that the United States took relative to the Baltic States during the Cold War.
The United States never recognised the annexation of the three Baltic States by the USSR, and therefore treated their looming independence differently in the waning months of the Soviet Union.
At the same time, the United States did not allow the illegality of the Soviet annexation of the Baltic States to block normal relations with the USSR ona wide range of other issues.
Finding a solution of this nature will be much harder on the Donbas question, in large part because Russia, which can veto any arrangement, appears to want neither to annex the territory nor to completely give up control.
Trans-Dniestr, the status of which has been in limbo since Russia assisted its proxies to 39 Viktor Pinchuk, ‘Ukraine Must Make Painful Compromises for Peace with Russia’, Wall Street Journal, 29 December 2016.
Similarly, Russia supported the de facto independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia for several years before recognising their independence after it had invaded Georgia in 2008.
Russia’s policy of supporting proxy dependencies around its borders is in some respects reminiscent of the Cold War, in which nominally independent governments in Eastern Europe were wholly or largely controlled from Moscow.
As that example shows, it is sometimes hard to sustain that control over time.
In other respects, Russia’s policy represents a throwback to a much earlier period, before the twentieth century, when sovereignty was often incomplete and contingent on deals with great powers, and the borders of states like Poland were revised repeatedly according to the shifting balance of power and the diplomatic needs of more powerful neighbours.
It is precisely that system that the EU rejects, and that Russian scholars believe is returning.
Ukraine in the New Cold War Perhaps the best reminder we can apply from the first Cold War to the second is that it endured for 45 years.
The dividing line between East and West was determined largely by the disposition of forces in May 1945.
Regardless of whether anyone regarded that line as fair, legitimate or ideal, it endured because no one could change it unilaterally, and the changes that one side would have preferred were unacceptable to the other.
A major difference between the Cold War and the new cold war is that there is no ‘iron curtain’ separating the sides.
Information, cyber and to some extent hybrid warfare can be conducted in the ‘enemy’s’ territory much more easily than when the Warsaw Pact faced NATO in Central Europe.
In the absence of some new disruption, the current division of territory could last a very long time, with Ukraine playing a role roughly analogous to that of Berlin.
Trans-Dniestr has already persisted for a quarter of a century, and could not be resolved even when Russia and the West were at the height of post-Cold War comity or when Moldova elected a communist president.
However, just as the Hungarian revolution in 1956 and Prague Spring of 1968 threatened to undo the post-World War II status quo, the situation in Ukraine could still be disrupted, perhaps suddenly.
A new contest for power in Ukraine could lead to the fragmentation of the Ukrainian state, as in the Euromaidan Revolution.
Protests in Russia could give Russian leaders increased incentives to pursue a new adventure in Ukraine to rally domestic unity.
Alternatively, the growing popularity of the opposition could lead to declining support for Russian military involvement in Eastern Ukraine.
Russian efforts to foster separatism and terrorism in Ukraine beyond the Donbas could be renewed with the aim of pressuring Ukraine to acquiesce to changing the constitution to provide the DNR and LNR with special status and the holding of elections in Russia’s two proxy republics.
The DNR and/or LNR could unilaterally restart full-scale hostilities, dragging Russia with them.
This scenario would be similar to that in Georgia where provocations from South Ossetia led to Georgia’s attempt to militarily return South Ossetia to Georgian sovereignty.
Georgia’s leadership wrongly believed in the likelihood of United States military support, failed to appreciate Tbilisi had weak support within the EU and did not foresee that its actions would trigger a Russian invasion.
Western governments could move towards tacitly acknowledging Russian sovereignty over Crimea, as Trump hinted at during the 2016 election campaign.
The West could seek to broker a deal whereby Ukraine drops its claim to sovereignty over the Crimea in return for a deal on the Donbas.
Having claimed that there are no Russian forces in the Donbas, Putin could quietly withdraw them without being publicly backing down.
Putin might be threatened by a nationalist backlash from nationalist groups who already believe that he ‘betrayed’ Novorossiya.
What we should probably not expect is a repeat of 1991, which was a historically unique event.
Even if Russia were to have an anti-authoritarian revolution, it does not necessarily follow that a pro-Western government would result, and it is just as likely that Russian nationalists would take power.
One major difference between the first Cold War and this one is that in the first Cold War, the conflict appeared to be inexorably linked with communism as an ideology and form of government, so that leaders on both sides could assume that with communism gone, the grounds for conflict were gone.
Putin’s government is pragmatic rather than ideological; or rather its ideology is that of power politics.
There is therefore less reason to hope that a new Russian regime would want to give up territory that Russia has long claimed.
Moreover, we should also remember that Ukraine became independent not because Soviet or Russian leaders acquiesced, but because they could not prevent it.
While such weakness in Russia could emerge again, there is no good reason to expect it.
The longer they remain outside Kiev’s control the more difficult it will be to re-integrate them.
A strong, prosperous Ukraine closely connected with Europe might be more attractive, and that provides additional incentive for Russia to stymie progress that could someday emerge in Ukraine’s domestic politics.
We use the word ‘solutions’ carefully, because there is little prospect for re-establishing the level of confidence or the norms that prevailed prior to 2014.
In this brief conclusion, we set out some of the key findings of the book, and pursue their implications for the future.
First, this book has differed from many others in its understanding of the timeline of the conflict.
The conflict that emerged in 2014 had its roots at the very outset of the post-Cold War period, because from the very beginning, Russia sought to prevent Ukraine’s independence and, when this was unavoidable, sought to limit it both in terms of sovereignty and territory.
Yet each reset has ended in disappointment on both sides’.t Similarly, structural problems undermine efforts at re-setting Ukrainian-Russian relations; even the most pro-Russian Ukrainian presidents struggled to find a stable accommodation with Russia.
In terms of national identity and tactics, the story begins even earlier.
As chapter two demonstrated, the approach to information warfare and the use of unconventional tactics has deep roots in the Soviet era, even if the specific tactics of cyber warfare have taken advantage of modern technology.
As chapter three showed, Russia’s conception of its national identity — including the view that Russians and Ukrainians are one people — has sources going back centuries.
This is not to say that military conflict was inevitable, or that the events of 2013-2014 did not provide both added incentive and opportunity for Russia to use force.
But it does indicate that the desire to revise the territorial arrangement in Ukraine did not emerge in response to NATO or EU enlargement.
While those developments undoubtedly were seen as dangerous to Russian interests, Russian interest in controlling Ukraine predates them.
While the nature of Putin’s regime helps explain the decision to intervene in Ukraine in 2014, the notion that Ukraine is in part or entirely Russian territory is not limited to Putin or to a narrow slice of the Russian elite.
To the extent that the Russian creation myth centres on events in Kievan Rus, and to the extent that the territorial expansion under Catherine the Great is seen as the basis for Novorossiya, it would appear that Russia’s territorial aspirations in Ukraine have not been satisfied.
The effort to promote further separatism in Novorossiya in 2014 indicated that had the opportunity existed, a much larger slice of Ukrainian territory might have come under the sway of Russian proxies.
This leads us to a second important conclusion, which is that realist analysis, while it contributes much to understanding the dynamics of conflict, does not yield a clear policy recommendation without the help of further assumptions.
The most prominent realist analysis of the conflict, that of Mearsheimer, is based on the assumption that Russia was a defensive power, protecting the status quo.
To the extent that this assumption is true, the West’s acceptance of that status quo might be seen as the basis for a stable peace going forward.
However, the assumption that Russia seeks further revision of the status quo is equally plausible.
Territorially, the Novorossiya probe, threats against the Baltic States, and continuing pressure on the front lines in the Donbas indicate that Russia might take more territory if it can do so.
Just as few expected Russia to seize Crimea in 2014 despite its long record of claiming the territory, we should perhaps take Russia’s hints about Kiev and Novorossiya seriously.
Therefore, depending on whether we believe Russia is or is not satisfied with the status quo, realism points the West to opposite strategies.
If Russia is satisfied with Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, then the West can aid its own security by acquiescing to these gains and thus making Russia less aggressive.
But if Russia is not satisfied, then realism, as it traditionally has done, would counsel that power be met with power.
The most basic realist argument is that force is the ultimate determinant of outcomes, so if there is no agreement on the dividing line between Russia’s sphere and the West, then it will be determined by the use or threat of force.
In this view, the best way to prevent conflict is to deter it with the threat of force.
Clearly, the West erred in believing that Russia could be satisfied with a Ukraine integrated into Western institutions.
Russian leaders themselves may disagree, and they may not even have a fixed idea.
Just as the possibility of Ukraine joining NATO was not on the West’s radar screen in 1991, Russia’s notion of where its sphere of interest might end could well be determined as much by opportunity as by some pre-determined notion.
As hard as it is to assess intentions looking backwards (scholars still disagree on what motivated Soviet policy during the Cold War), it will be even harder to assess them looking into the future.
As a result, we should continue to expect that policy recommendations toward the Ukraine-Russia conflict reflect the authors’ assumptions as much as any analysis that comes from those assumptions.
Repeated attempts at ceasefires have not lasted more than a day, and a proposal by Ukraine to invite UN peacekeepers into the Donbas has been blocked by Russia.
Ukraine and the United States seek to have peacekeepers on the internationally recognised Russian-Ukrainian border while Russia proposed that they be based on the ceasefire line.
Perhaps, rather than thinking of how to resolve the conflict, we should be thinking about how to manage it.
It is in this respect that the analogy with the Cold War might be most fruitful.
While discussions on both sides about winning the Cold War never ceased, over time increasing attention was paid to managing the conflict to minimize the danger of it spinning out of control.
First, the various sides’ understandings of the sources of the conflict and the acceptable solutions remain far apart.
Even though many in the West recognise that Russia is extremely unlikely to reverse its annexation of Crimea, and are prepared to accept that, recognising it officially and legitimising it will be much more difficult.
Assuming the territory is not to return to Ukraine, finding a way to legitimise Russia’s annexation will be necessary for a complete resolution of the conflict, and it does not appear that many in the West or in Ukraine are near to finding that acceptable, in part because doing so might set a dangerous precedent.
The assumption after 1991 that a harmony of interests had largely replaced conflict of interest in the West's relations with Russia helped smooth over a large number of disagreements.
Now, the assumption that the two sides are adversaries again undermines cooperation.
Trust is at a minimum and bad faith is widely assumed, undermining the conditions to even search for common interests.
Moreover, in the United States and Russia (and perhaps in other countries as well), domestic politics rewards an adversarial stance toward the other.
Especially after Russia’s influence campaign in the 2016 presidential election, it will be very difficult for a United States administration to be seen as making deals with Russia.
This increased level of hostility means that even if a deal were brokered to recognise a new status quo including Russian sovereignty over Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, neither Russia’s relations with the West nor Ukraine could return to the antebellum state of confidence, low as that was.
Western governments would have to continue to live under the new assumption that military action is now part of relations among these countries.
Even if those who believed that war had been eliminated from European international relations were naive, that viewpoint had a powerful effect on the nature of relations between the West and Russia, and hence on Ukraine.
That confidence could potentially have become as powerful as that between Germany and France, where the belief that war is impossible helps make it so.
Instead, we are seeing the re-militarising of relations between East and West.
This discussion of conclusions belies the reality that at this point we have far more questions than answers about the evolving nature of relations between the West, Russia, and Ukraine.
First, how will the regimes in Russia and Ukraine develop, and second, how will that affect their relationships with each other and the West.
While Russia appears to be in a period of international ascendance, most observers believe that it is fragile domestically.
The economy continues to depend heavily on natural resources and to be plagued by corruption and crony capitalism.
The political system has become increasingly personalised, leading to the question of whether it can survive beyond Putin himself.
After two ostensibly democratic revolutions, the country’s oligarch-driven politics appear remarkably unchanged.
The contest among oligarchic groups for power and access to the benefits of corruption and rent-seeking drives the political system.
Sustained Western support for reform after the Orange Revolution produced few reforms and no structural change.
Following the Euromaidan, economic, fiscal and energy reforms have made headway but Ukraine continues to be characterised by oligarchic influence on the economy and media, limited progress in transforming Ukraine into a rule of law state and the slow fight against high-level corruption.
As a result, the country remains susceptible to Russian penetration and influence and reliant on Western financial support.
Poroshenko continues in a long line of Ukrainian presidents to support NATO and EU membership.
NATO remains cautious because of on-going territorial conflicts with Russia which if Ukraine was invited to join would become NATO’s war.
The West has additionally been routinely frustrated by Ukraine’s inability to meet all of its commitments to reform, particularly in the areas of the rule of law and corruption.
Since the Cold War, much policy has been based on the presumed link between democracy and peace, much to the derision of realist scholars.
Rather than rehearse that debate, we ask what the future might hold if Russia becomes more democratic; or if Ukraine does not.
That has been the guiding assumption of Western policy not only since 1991, but throughout history.
The assumption could never be put to the test until 1991, and the evidence since then is not conclusive.
But the electoral success of Russian nationalist parties, and the need of Yeltsin to use his extensive powers to push back against revanchists in the 1990s, provides some evidence against the argument that a democratic Russia would be pro-Western.
The majority of Russians, irrespective of their attitudes toward Putin, share a consensus that Russia has the right to control the Crimea and that Ukrainians are not a separate people.
People in both Russia and the West have assumed this, but the evidence is mixed.
Yanukovych was autocratic and sought Russian support for his autocracy, but he was not always a willing participant in Russia’s efforts at integration.
Kuchma, who moved Ukraine toward a competitive authoritarian regime® in the late 1990s and early 2000s, and paved the way for Yanukovych to try to steal the 2004 election, also drove a concerted effort to strengthen Ukraine’s ties with NATO and to consolidate Ukraine’s ‘multi-vector’’ foreign policy.
The West supported Kuchma’s heavy-handed methods of adopting a constitution with very strong presidential powers because it was seen as needed to overcome leftist conservatives in parliament.
Both policies rely on the assumed links between regime type and foreign policy, and both therefore rely on flimsy foundations.
Ironically, breaking the presumption of a link between regime type and foreign policy might help ratchet down tensions here and elsewhere.
You can then navigate through the search results and find what you are looking for.
In practice, this method can prove much more targeted and effective than consulting an index.
The 2014 Russia—Ukraine conflict has transformed relations between Russia and the West into what many are calling a new cold war.
