It is written by German politician Norbert Röttgen, head of the Bundestag foreign affairs committee…and it is simply massively dishonest and one-sided.
The Kerch Strait is incredibly shallow, it has a canal carved into to the sea bed to allow deep-draft ships to pass.
Using the canal requires a pilot, and ships can only go in single file.
Ships using the Kerch strait are required to give 72 hours notice, due to the narrowness of the passage and the shallowness of the sea.
There have been calls – both inside and outside Ukraine – to blow up the Crimean bridge.
The Ukrainian naval vessels were sailing with their guns uncovered and refusing to answer radio communications.
Petro Poroshenko, incumbent President of Ukraine, has an 8% approval rating heading into the Presidential elections in March of next year.
In response to this “incident”, Poroshenko has declared martial law in the 10 Eastern regions of the country.
Notably, these are the regions that voted for ousted President Yanukovych and will unquestionably vote against Poroshenko if the elections go ahead in march.
This, among other things, was directly related to the Nordstream 2 pipeline.
However, a totally accidental upshot of this drive to keep everyone on topic is that the usually fractious Guardian comments section seems to be broadly in consensus.
So don’t waste your time writing a comment that won’t get published over there.
Instead, discuss it here – where you won’t pre-emptively censored for disagreeing with the government line.
There is obviously a lot of organisation required to sort out the traffic flow and arrange for pilots, etc.
Thinking you can just rock up and “go for it” is like deciding you’re going turn up unannounced and land an aircraft at Heathrow. dear Jack, your “the Kerch Strait is an international waterway, subject to international law of the sea” is simply NOT TRUE, sorry.
Kerch&Azov have become internal waters since the 2003 bilateral agreement. dear Jack, do your homework better , pls.
Russian bridge or not, the Kerch Strait is an international waterway, subject to international law of the sea, not some Russian inland canal that they can police in any way they want.
Ukraine’s harbour on the Azov Sea is threatened by Russia-backed rebels in its hinterland; by constraining sea access to the port, Russia is effectively putting its considerable naval resources at the disposal of the ‘little green men’ whose existence Russia has repeatedly denied.
I suggest you read up on both concerning the two “Russian lakes” under discussion.
It is so shallow that the Kerch–Yenikale Canal was dredged inside it, where pilot assistance is mandatory.
Conclusion, the United States never gives up on regime change once a victim is on the enemies list.
United States will be there forever unless the American people finally rebel against all United States foreign bases, adventures and diversion of domestic resources to military.
I believe that there must a policy to have military presence in all countries, and paid for by these countries.
If this is true that the United States decreed a law pursuant to which sabotaging and disrupting pipelines of a hostile nation is legal then the United States quite literally declared terrorism legal.
A cursory perusal of USSA’S 2 centuries of genocide for profit should make that patently clear to even the most hubris bloated fan of the terror entity out there.
Whether they blow it up or stab their accountants in the back, it’s still sabotage.
What is a sanction, other than an allegedly legal means to punish, hurt, injure, cripple an allegedly illegal action of the sanctioned party.
This article in the Guardian, and the censoring of any comments shows that is now a sad remnant of a once great newspapers.
The violent coup instigated by Victoria Nuland using armed Fascist to violently bring down the elected Government, a short time before an election was due is the principle cause of Ukraine’s problems.
Certainly Yanukovych had been hopeless but an election would have achieved a much better outcome and one in which the people selected their leader, not Victoria Nuland or Geoffry Pyatt.
From Nulands recorded statements and subsequent admissions she spent billions on organising the coup and picking the leader.
NATO has been busily building missile bases close to Russia’s borders for years now including the United States missiles supposedly to stop nuclear attacks from a country without nuclear capacity, Iran.
Should he become PM he’d be taken aside and told ‘Congratulations, now we’ll explain to you how things are done in your new position.
Must have been something interesting because he avoided it to be in the open through registering.
How ridiculous, an obligatory red-tag for immediate fake news deletion.
She did exercise full spectrum dominance over the cookie platters though.
I think she instructed Tyahnybok in how to hold up that teetering old doddard on the podium too, that’s how he inadvertently showed up behind Sen.
I heard Nuland say once that she thought Tyahnybok was just an usher and not one of the co-founders of the leading neo-nazi party in Ukraine, along with the current Speaker of the Rada, Parubiy.
But that’s another interesting little factoid that Kathy Ashton missed, so we’ll just have to leave it to the historians to muddle over in 50 years time.
You know somebody has to be our watchdog, even when they moonlight as howling hyenas.
The Guardian seems to have made its choice to being pro-US, for commerce and ads.
The relentless EU/NATO expansion especially on the Balkan is never criticised because …. but it will backfire quite badly when people discover that EU/NATO only cost but provide no goodies.
Ukraine is a poor country of emotionally charged, not rational people – everybody who was rational has left.
EU country Bulgaria had 1/3 of their population unable to heat their houses this winter; nice one.
The acknowledgement that EU/NATO membership is not a panacea takes some time to filter through in Ukraine.
His incompetence is so glaring that they can’t possibly ignore it in the long term.
Nor can they hide the fact that even the other Banderastani parties, inclusive of the Nazis, are united in saying that Porky instigated the Kerch provocation to sabotage the March election.
If he loses it, he’s going to either have to do a Saakashvili and run for his life abroad or else go to jail because his partners in crime turned rivals are as vindictive as he is.
For NATOstanis, Yulia Tymoshenko would probably be a far better option on the face of it.
For one thing, she’s a woman and so will immediately command the knee jerk support of the western liberal warmonger caste.
Secondly, she can present herself as a far better option than the thuggish Porky.
However, Tymoshenko can *not* be trusted to maintain enmity with Russia indefinitely; she is known to speak Russian in private in preference to Ukrainian, and more likely than not will look for pragmatic adjustments to Banderastani relations with Russia.
Lyashko, Tyahnibok, and the other out and out Nazis will never get elected to a majority, though they will continue to have major influence – also, not one of them literally has his life and/or liberty riding on NATOstani support.
Obviously, these “tanks ” and “troops” are masked by the same Invisibility Cloak® that makes them immune to bring photographed by satellites , so no evidence is available.
However, what evidence does exist shows that the Ukranazis are readying for a renewed ground war against the Novorossiyan republics.
With their new weapons and NATO trainers , they can do major damage to the Donbass republics even if they can’t defeat them.
What I am expecting, in fact, is a renewed offensive in January or thereabouts by the Ukranazis against the DPR and LPR *on a limited scale so as not to trigger an actual Russian intervention*, because an actual genuine Russian intervention would mean Russian tanks rolling down the streets of Kiev in three days, and the end of Banderastan; and everyone involved knows this.
So there will be a Ukranazi attack on, say, the Donetsk airport, and if that’s taken , the attack will move on to Donetsk city and perhaps Lugansk as well.
If the city is taken, Porky presents himself as a war winning commander and can eke out a victory in the election.
If, as is likely, this second phase of the attack is defeated or fought to a standstill by the Novorossiyan republics, well, then…..the ground has already been prepared for claiming it’s another Evil Invisible Russian Invasion.
Let me repeat that all this could’ve been avoided if Putin had, in 2014, actually sent in a couple of battalions of Spetsnaz, overthrown the Ukranazi coup regime, reinstated Yanukovych, and withdrawn with the clear warning that if there were any more Maidans coups Russia would be back and this time to stay.
Right now I don’t see any solution that stops short of an actual full scale Russian invasion and occupation becoming necessary in order to get rid of this permanent threat to the Russian nation.
Today in an interview, Lavrov promised that Russia was not going to go to war with Ukraine, end of story.
Yes, and he also explained that Mother Russia wants ALL her Ukrop miscreants back in the warm embrace of Mr Bear and not just the decent folk of Novorossiya.
Imagine the Natostan cancer spreading all the way to Donbas and Donetsk and the inevitable Anglozionazi terror that would ensue using their trained Ukrop apes as they are using their I$I$ human organ eaters to terrorize Syria, Iran, Iraq, Yemen, Libya etc etc.
Meanwhile “Airstrip One” has more than enough of its own sickness to deal with.
Newsweek has a microphone permanently attached to Porkshanks’ shank and once a week, when he yet again proclaims “Russia is poised to invade Ukraine over blah, blah, blah”, it hits Newsweek’s presses faster than a speeding mortar round.
I’m pretty sure his last blah blah was the Kerch Strait but it might have been Bandera’s birthday, the founding of OUN, the anniversary of some visiting Nazi dignitary or some patriotic pogrom or other, while all true Ukrainian patriots are kneeling and distracted in deep prayer.
Theyd probably also have given the heads up to GCHQ to alert their army of trolls to agree with the article.
Incidentally, as ships have to pass through in orderly fashion, there is a queuing system.
Blowing up the Kerch bridge, or a section of it, would constitute a direct military attack on Russian territory.
This could be the big one, a provocation too far, or it could be the AZ-Empire testing Russia’s nerve.
After all there have been rumours of a Ukrainian offensive since 2015 which have never materialised.
The problem for Poroshenko and the UAF is that they face certain defeat.
How would that go down back home in Lviv, Kiev and Ternopil; it would mean the end of the Ukraine and the end of Poroshenko.
Of course the western media would go ballistic, that’s par for the course.
But that’s nothing new and from the Russian perspective you might as well be hung for a sheep as a lamb.
Eduard Basurin the head of the DPR militia has said they have intelligence reports that Ukraine intends to launch an invasion iminently using the pretext of a false flag drone bombing of a chemical works in Mariupol.
DONETSK, Novorusiya – The People’s Militia of the self-proclaimed People’s Republic of Donetsk reported on the concentration of more than 12,000 Ukrainian security forces and 90 units of military equipment in the south of the Donetsk region.
According to the information, in the opinion of the leadership of the RPD, the Armed Forces of Ukraine will start the attack on December 14.
Evidence was obtained on the preparation of an offensive in the region of the Ukrainian city of Mariupol by the Ukrainian military, according to the deputy commander of the RPD People’s Militia, Eduard Basurin, aiming at conquering the regions of Novoazovsk and Telmanovo on the ‘border’ with Russia.
The conflict in Donbass began in 2014 when Ukrainian authorities launched a military operation against the self-proclaimed People’s Republics of Donetsk and Lugansk, which refused to recognize the new government of Kiev.
The sides of the conflict later agreed to stop hostilities in the region through a truce agreement, but the situation remains tense with mutual accusations of cease-fire violations.
They could just say, sorry….it must have been one of those early United States drone prototypes that they used to bomb Serbian chlorine plants.
It had a solar-charged battery and just kept flying around for 19 years.
Just as believable as any other hooey coming out of what passes for ‘western civilization’ these days.
The US/UK/EU/Israel attempt to overthrow Assad has backfired – but the United States is still occupying part of Syria and clearly has no intention of leaving.
Trying to force it out militarily would be seen by the United States and its complicit allies as a casus belli.
I guess because they can control it better that way – also because it is a major source of income for Ukraine and some of the EU members are probably tired of throwing yet more money into Ukraine’s empty hole.
Ukraine certainly – and presumably the Atlanticist cabal, which hates anything that empowers Russia.
I think they will continue to play ‘three wise monkeys’ over Ukraine, largely because they control the narrative to a great extent.
The new EU/NATO unified military force needs Ukraine , so will likely continue to turn a blind eye to its fascism.
Germany will speak at the EU summit in favor of extending sanctions against Russia, German Chancellor Angela Merkel told the parliament, the Bundestag, on Wednesday.
We will call for extending sanctions,” Merkel said, voicing concerns over Russia’s steps.
The captain of the main vesser openly admitted that he had consciously ignored Russian warnings to retreat.
A large cache of arms, including machine guns and other assault weapons, was also found on the vessels, indicating that some sort of confrontation had been planned.
There are strict safety maritime rules for ships which want to pass through the narrow Kerch Strait, which lies between the Russian mainland and Crimea, and under international rules they must notify Russian maritime controls of their intention to pass.
Two years later President Barack Obama was forced to admit in a CNN interview6 that the United States had indeed been heavily involved in the crisis from the very beginning and had collaborated directly with Ukrainian Neo-Nazis and other right-wing and fascist groups in the illegal overthrow of President Viktor Yanukovych.
