The President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko, his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin and the leaders of the West continue to hide the true nature of the three-year military aggression of Russia against Ukraine, calling it anti-terrorist operation, not war.
From terrorist acts in the world killed far less people than the war in the Donbass.
Thirty years of conflict in Northern Ireland killed 3 thousand soldiers, police, terrorists and civilians.
First, it allows him and his oligarchic allies to continue to earn on the illicit trade in so-called DPR, LPR and the occupied Crimea.
Calling war anti-terrorist operation, the President Poroshenko and Prime Minister Vladimir Groisman justify their unwillingness to carry out reforms, allowing them to continue their own corrupt practices.
The latest report from Vox Ukraine has shown a complete lack of progress in any reform during the past month, while the recently published corruption perception Transparency International, Ukraine ranked fifth from last among the 15 former republics of the Soviet Union.
Second, “the state of anti-terrorist operation” allows the President to avoid the need to develop military strategy and plans to return control of the Crimea and occupied territories of Donbass.
Thirdly, it gives the SBU control over the fighting of Ukraine is corrupt and nedokomplekta institution.
Britain with a population 20 million bigger than in Ukraine, has 6 thousand employees of the intelligence services, while Ukraine — 34 thousand.
Westerners, in turn, it is convenient to use the term “ATO”, but not the war, because it allows them to step back from the conflict and do nothing to resolve it.
According to their official position that the West cannot provide Ukraine with defensive armament and with the expected implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Poroshenko could hold a referendum on joining NATO at any time during the three years of his presidency.
Putin this terminology gives an opportunity to get everything at once, being both the aggressor and peacemaker.
The Minsk agreement and the substitution of war “ATO” turn a blind eye to Russian occupation of Crimea and allow Russia to avoid legal responsibility for the occupation of the territories of Donbass.
After the signing of the Minsk-1, Putin gave complete control of Russia for economic, financial and security aspects of the functioning of the DNI, LC, grossly violating the document they signed.
The reluctance Poroshenko called the conflict in the Donbas, a Russian-Ukrainian war, and to consolidate the territories of the DNI, LC status occupied by Russia entails two negative consequences.
First, it demonstrates once again that politicians are insincere with their own citizens and don’t respect them.
According to survey results, the vast majority of Ukrainians believes that their country is at war with Russia.
As most know that on the territory of Ukraine are Russian occupying forces.
The second negative consequence is that the substitution of the war on the ATO gives a false sense of detachment from the terrible conflict that takes place in the plant and along the line of contact in Donbas.
Walking on Kiev, it is impossible to realize that the war in the country.
The PACE and the international criminal court referred to the conflict that is happening in the Donbass war.
Putin lies about the “civil war” and the absence of Russian troops on Ukrainian soil.
Secondly, it is necessary to call the conflict a war, not “ATO”, and enter the military situation in the conflict zone.
Third, in light of the available facts and evidence to the President Poroshenko has to declare that he had no confidence in the fact that the Russian President will once interested in the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Western experts, in particular former employee of United States state Department David Kramer, have long noted that the Minsk process should be to admit failure.
In the end, it is necessary finally to act according to conscience and to cease all trade with the Crimea and the DNI, LC, since Ukraine has no right to trade with the invaders of her land.
The first is to finally tell the truth about the Russian-Ukrainian war and implement the four steps.
Second — to hold early presidential elections, allowing another leader to show courage inherent in soldiers and volunteers on the front lines.
It’s time to declare publicly inside and outside of Ukraine that Russia is fighting with Ukraine.
