Since Turkey is now a dictatorship, in which no independent journalists are any longer permitted and the best of them are in prison and being charged with ‘treason’, the most reliable reporting about Turkey is coming from outside.
According to this Syrian report, «the situation in Turkey keeps getting worse.
Private debt is out of control, the tourism sector is in free-fall and the decline in the currency has impacted every citizen’s buying power.
Because of increasing pressures on the central bank and political storms, Turkey’s annual growth rate has already slowed.
Without Erdogan in power for Turkey to serve as the transit route into Syria for jihadists and American weapons for those ‘rebels’ as well as by Turkey’s sale of Syrian oil stolen by ISIS), there’s little hope to oust Assad.
The former CIA officer, now turncoat against the United States regime, Philip Giraldi, headlined in The American Conservative magazine, back on 19 December 2011, «NATO vs.
Syria», reporting that «NATO is already clandestinely engaged in the Syrian conflict, with Turkey taking the lead as United States proxy.
Ankara’s foreign minister, Ahmet Davitoglu, has openly admitted that his country is prepared to invade as soon as there is agreement among the Western allies to do so.
The intervention would be based on humanitarian principles, to defend the civilian population based on the «responsibility to protect» doctrine that was invoked to justify Libya.
No qualms were expressed at this being oil which was stolen from Syria, marketed by Turkey.
The Syrian people weren’t just being slaughtered; they were being robbed, by the Western alliance.
All of them were allies together, to overthrow Assad, an ally of Russia.
In 1957, my grandfather, Ambassador Joseph P Kennedy, sat on a secret committee charged with investigating CIA’s clandestine mischief in the Mid-East.
The so called ‘Bruce Lovett Report’, to which he was a signatory, described CIA coup plots in Jordan, Syria, Iran, Iraq and Egypt, all common knowledge on the Arab street, but virtually unknown to the American people who believed, at face value, their government’s denials.
One ‘justification’ was that he was corrupt, but they didn’t mention that all post-Soviet Ukrainian leaders have been corrupt.
And therefore Russia – not finding acceptable Obama’s soon-to-be seizure of their naval base – supplied protection for Crimeans to be able to hold a plebiscite on 16 March 2014 in order to exercise their right of self-determination on whether to accept rule by the bloody new Ukrainian coup-regime, or to regain membership in the Russian Federation.% chose the latter, and Western-sponsored polls in Crimea both before and after the plebiscite showed similarly astronomically high support for rejoining with Russia.
Saddam Hussein, Muammar Gaddafi, Bashar al-Assad, Viktor Yanukovych – and, of course, the central target, Vladimir Putin himself – and all of these targets have been demonized in the West, regardless of whether they’re actually more evil than, say, George W Bush and Barack Obama.
In the Middle East, things haven’t been going well for Obama’s plans, but, he still retains the example of Crimea as symbolizing a thus-far-successful excuse for economic sanctions against Russia, and, perhaps , ultimately for an invasion of Russia.
