The term ‘revolution’ has perhaps never been misused as frequently in the mainstream media as over the past few years.
No longer does it refer to a vast social upheaval of the oppressed and exploited masses against a oppressive regime.
Instead it is now used routinely to describe movements funded by United States government agencies to replace governments which have fallen into disfavour with United States puppets.
Although the Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovich had been democratically elected, he suffered from a fatal flaw.
His wing of the bourgeoisie tried to perform a balancing act between Russia and the European Union , while the opposition was intent on bringing Ukraine firmly into the orbit of the EU – and of the US, including NATO membership if possible.
Neither this reality, nor the involvement of the fascist Svoboda party, did anything to dim the enthusiasm of petit bourgeois leftists in Western Europe for this odious enterprise – even as the United States National Endowment Fund for Democracy poured funds into it.
SARU organised a protest against Ukrainian fascist Andriy Parubiy who was in Britain to meet the Minister for Europe David Lidington, Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport John Wittingdale and an inter-party group on relations with Ukraine in the British Parliament chaired by the extreme right-wing racist and homophobe Sir Gerald Howarth.
The racist imperialist British government has no qualms about meeting with fascist politicians.
In the year since the February 2014 coup against President Yanukovych over 6,000 Ukrainians have been killed in battle, 15,000 wounded and more than one million people displaced.
The second Minsk ceasefire agreement between Ukraine’s government and its opponents in the south east of the country came into effect on 14 February 2015.
However, the United States and NATO continue to provoke conflict and are using Ukraine to target the Russian state.
To justify the ongoing expensive and bloody war on the Donbass and aggression towards Russia, the Ukrainian ruling class and its imperialist backers have taken to rewriting history.
On New Year’s Day almost 4,000 people rallied in Kiev to celebrate Nazi collaborator Stepan Bandera as a ‘national hero’; in his 8 January speech in Berlin, Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk recast Nazi Germany as the victim of ‘Soviet invasion’ in the Second World War.
Rejecting a Russian plan for the removal of heavy artillery from eastern Ukraine, at 6am on 18 January Kiev’s pretences to a ‘ceasefire’ collapsed, as it resumed massive shelling of the People’s Republic of Donetsk.
Kiev’s strategy has cost more than 5,000 lives and involved the use of cluster bombs, missiles and aerial bombs on towns and villages in the Donbass.
Justification is sought in an ‘anti-terror operation’ against alleged ‘Russian aggression’, yet after a year of conflict there remains no solid evidence for Russian military operations whatsoever.
The imperialist countries remain silent on Kiev’s atrocities, instead offering it financial and military support.
The contrasts with the snap parliamentary election called by the Kiev government on 26 October could not be greater.
Virtually boycotted in the east, official accounts placed turnout at 52%, a historic low, for an election marked by ballot stuffing, voter intimidation and violent repression of opposition groups.
The result was a predictable victory for the oligarchy, as Prime Minister Yatsenyuk’s People’s Front party gained 22.14% of the vote and the President’s Petro Poroshenko Block took 21.82%; four of the five other parties meeting the 5% threshold to enter the Rada are openly fascist.
The announcement of a ceasefire between the Ukrainian military and the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic on 5 September 2014 , is a reflection of the utter failure of the Kiev government to crush opposition in the country’s east in a war that has left more than 3,000 people dead, 6,000 wounded and over a million displaced.
The imperialists and their Ukrainian allies are now forced to reconsider their tactical approach.
Events following the tragic crash of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 in eastern Ukraine have exposed the cynical depths to which the United States and its allies will sink to exploit disaster for political ends.
Within hours, without evidence, United States President Obama blamed the tragedy on soldiers of the Donetsk People’s Republic , who allegedly downed the plane with a missile using equipment and training from Russia.
These claims have resonated most loudly in Washington, London, Canberra and Kiev.
They are an exercise in political speculation familiar to the bellicose United States and British ruling classes; thus The Independent proclaims an ‘increasingly compelling’ case against the DNR, citing heavily-edited, unverified and contradictory footage from right-wing bloggers and Kiev’s secret service, as though they were proven fact.
Ukraine is being pushed into chaos by the interim government and its NATO commanders.
Dozens of United States CIA and FBI agents have been installed in Kiev to advise the interim government and direct its forces.
The police and army have proved unreliable when directed to attack opposition forces in eastern Ukraine and so fascist gangs have been recruited to the National Guard and put in government uniforms.
Private security contractors, previously deployed in Iraq and Afghanistan, have been hired.
By incorporating Crimea and Sevastopol into the Russian Federation, Russia’s rulers have demonstrated that they intend to halt United States encroachment into the territories of the former Soviet Union.
A referendum was held in Crimea on 16 March to decide on the region’s future.% of those eligible to vote took part; of these over 96% voted for unification with Russia.
Hague accused Russia of acting without respect for international law and of conducting a ‘land grab’ in Crimea.
The states that accuse Russia of occupying Crimea intend to take over Ukraine.
Lenin said that imperialism ushers in an era of wars and revolution this now has substance – menacingly so.
The deployment of Russian troops in Crimea and battleships off Crimea’s coast signals that the Russian ruling class views the 23 February coup in the Ukraine to be a strategic threat.
United States strategy is to weaken Russia’s central state and fragment Russia.
More immediately, in Ukraine the United States wants to remove Russia’s naval base from Sevastopol in Crimea, break Russian military ties to industries in eastern Ukraine, bring Ukraine into the European Union and eventually into NATO, and station NATO missiles on Ukrainian territory.
When the Russian parliament voted unanimously on 1 March 2014 to deploy Russian troops in Ukraine, Russia’s rulers showed their intention to resist and reverse the United States encroachment into the territories of the former Soviet Union, which they consider their sphere of influence.
US Secretary of State Powell, British Foreign Secretary Straw and European Commission President Barroso swiftly took the side of the demonstrators in Kiev, protesting at the declaration of Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych as winner of Ukraine’s 21 November presidential elections.
Powell said the United States did not accept the results of the election and warned of the consequences if the Ukrainian government did not act quickly.
Russian president Putin congratulated Yanukovych before the results were announced.
Powell visited the Ukraine during the election campaign and Putin visited twice to support Yanukovych.
As we go to press the Supreme Court has suspended the result of the election.
Yuschenko is a former head of the National Bank of Ukraine and his associates include those who benefited from the privatisation of Ukraine’s industry.
Yuschenko wants closer ties with the European Union and an open market economy.
Yanukovych seeks closer relations with Russia and received strong support from Ukraine’s Russian population, located mainly in the east of the country.
Russia stopped supplying gas to Ukraine on 1 January and a week later stopped all supplies to Europe passing through Ukraine.
Russia accused Ukraine of stealing gas intended for other European countries.
Supplies resumed on 20 January when the Ukrainian government agreed to pay a higher price for the energy.
About one fifth of the European Union’s gas supplies are piped from Russia across the Ukraine.
In the midst of freezing temperatures Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Romania, Croatia, Hungary, Macedonia, Serbia and Greece were particularly hit by the shut down.
Slovakia declared a state of ‘energy emergency’ and the French Peugeot-Citroen car factory was closed.
Mighty fine words, but Britain does not import gas from Russia and so bombast was a luxury he could afford.
