The release of the money was confirmed Friday in a statement posted by the Ukrainian Embassy in Washington.
The official said the funding will provide equipment to support ongoing training programs and operational needs, including counter-artillery and counter-mortar radars, high mobility multipurpose wheeled vehicles, night vision devices, electronic warfare detection, secure communications and medical equipment.
The newly released money was part of the United States defense budget but its release was contingent on Ukraine passing a series of defense reforms to help bring the country’s defense practices into line with modern standards and practices.
The Trump administration decided that Ukraine’s passage of a new national security law, signed by Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko on July 5, met the requirements enshrined in the United States legislation, thereby allowing the Pentagon to release the funds.
Full implementation of the Ukrainian law “will further deepen Ukraine’s Western integration,” State Department spokesperson Heather Nauert said in a statement after the law was enacted.
The United States has provided Ukraine with more than $1 billion in security assistance since 2014 as it has sought to bolster the country’s military which is facing an ongoing conflict with separatists in the country’s east, forces the Pentagon believes are backed, armed and even led by Moscow.
On Friday the Trump administration ruled out the possibility of supporting a referendum on the future Eastern Ukraine in areas that are under the control of armed groups backed by Moscow.
Furthermore, to organize a so-called referendum in a part of Ukraine which is not under government control would have no legitimacy,” he added.
The Russian Foreign Ministry slammed the exercise, calling it “another attempt to provoke tension” in the region.
Hundreds of United States National Guardsmen are in western Ukraine as part of an effort aimed at training and mentoring Ukrainian army units.
Russia invaded and annexed Crimea in 2014, a move that was criticized in a communiqué issued by NATO leaders following their summit in Brussels, Belgium, last week.
A spokesman for the Russian Ministry of Defense said Tuesday that his country was ready for the “implementation of the agreements reached between Russian President Vladimir Putin and United States President Donald Trump” following the two leaders’ Monday meeting in Helsinki.
The Russian military “is ready to intensify contacts with the United States colleagues in the General Staff and other available channels to discuss the extension of the START treaty, cooperation in Syria, as well as other issues of ensuring military security,” spokesman Maj.
A United States defense official told CNN that Secretary of Defense James Mattis is open to talks with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Shoigu, but that there are currently no plans for such a conversation.
