Tatiana Zhurzhenko Russia's never−ending war against ""fascism"" Memory politics in the Russian−Ukrainian conflict Seventy years after the end of World War II, writes Tatiana Zhurzhenko, the fight for hegemony in Europe continues −− disguised as a conflict of historical master narratives.
The beginning of the current round of memory wars in the post−Soviet space can be dated back to 2005, when the sixtieth anniversary of the victory over Nazi Germany turned into a loyalty test for the politicians of neighbouring countries.
Shutterstock The war in Donbas, which was provoked and supported by Moscow, has been narrated in Russia as a war against Ukrainian ""fascism"" that threatens Russians in Ukraine.
In the beginning of the war in Donbas, long before Russia had crammed the region full of its weapons, An article from www.eurozine.com 1/6 pro−Russian separatists in a small town told journalists that the tank they used against the Ukrainian army had been taken down from the plinth of a local war memorial, repaired and refuelled.
Geopolitics of memory In post−Cold War Europe, the politics of memory has in fact often been about geopolitics.
This decision provoked unprecedented riots among the local Russian population, which Moscow was happy to fuel.
The conflict had far reaching consequences for Russian−Estonian relations, and gave rise to a number of new phenomena in the post−Soviet space, from cyber wars to mass youth movements used as instruments of political pressure and intimidation.
Local opponents of Yushchenko dubbed his rule an An article from www.eurozine.com 2/6 ""Orange plague"" (an allusion to the term ""brown plague"", a Soviet−era metaphor for fascism) and, with the support of the Kremlin, created ""anti−fascist"" movements and political alliances.
From the Russian perspective, the conflict in and around Ukraine has thus become a An article from www.eurozine.com 3/6 reincarnation of the Great Patriotic War.
The new quality of memory politics Taking into account the ""memory wars"" of the last decade, the developments of 2014−15 are not particularly surprising.
And yet, we can talk about a new sort of memory politics, or perhaps even about a new phenomenon that goes beyond the usual instrumentalization of the past.
Accusing the West of silent support for neo−Nazism (and evoking Russia's historical mission of preventing its return to Europe) is part of a rhetoric that has its roots in the anti−Western propaganda of the Soviet era.
Reflecting on Competition and Conflict in European Memory"", 15−16 December 2014, Vienna.
Anders Fogh Rasmussen, ""A war of values with Russia"", www.project−syndicate.org/commentary/russia−fear−west−democracy−by−anders−fogh−rasmussen−2015−04 An article from www.eurozine.com 5/6 2 Cf.
Beton International 2, no., 2015 8 Maxim Kantor, ""Empire inside out"" , Novaya Gazeta, 8 December 2014, www.novayagazeta.ru/society/66422.html 9 Ilia Kalinin.
