All rights reserved.Early last month, Anton Gerashschenko, MP and adviser to Interior Minister Arsen Avakov, used his Facebook page to announce the publication of a list of email addresses and personal phone numbers belonging to 7,000 media workers.
These journalists were said to have “collaborated with the terrorists” following the outbreak of war in eastern Ukraine in 2014.
Obtaining journalistic accreditation from rebel authorities in the Donbas.
More worryingly, these accusations of treason against journalists reveal a deep mistrust towards the Fourth Estate shared by many Ukrainians — an unfortunate consequence of the propaganda that surrounds the “hybrid war” in Donbas.
As soon as the Myrotvorets scandal erupted, opinion makers and internet commentators were quick to dub the people on the list “traitors”, suggesting that they should be exposed by any means necessary.
Nevertheless, the overwhelming majority of outraged patriots emphasise the public importance of information concerning who is collaborating with the enemy.
According to this logic, every concerned Ukrainian should be able to access this information.
Speaking about the leak at the recent Lviv Media Forum, United States Ambassador Geoffrey Pyatt mentioned Simon Ostrovsky and Clarissa Ward, foreign correspondents kidnapped in Donbas during their assignments.
OSCE and Reporters Without Borders have also issued statements expressing their concerns for journalists’ security.
When asked about the aftermath of the Myrotvorets leak, Iryna Chulivska, an expert at Ukraine’s Institute for Mass Information, says that journalists’ safety is the biggest concern here.
The accreditations in DPR were issued to journalists, fixers, video operators, translators, and photographers not only from Ukraine and Russia, but from other countries as well.
Some rights reserved.As Ukraine is not the hottest topic in the foreign media anymore, journalists often come here in their own initiative and at their own risk.
After having been accused of helping “the terrorists” in the “People’s Republics” of Donetsk and Luhansk and receiving dozens of angry emails from “patriots”, these people might have second thoughts about coming here.
For Ukrainian journalists, the situation will also get worse, reasons Chulivska.
Not to mention the anonymous threats some journalists have started receiving at home.
Pyatt also addressed Arsen Avakov, Gerashchenko’s boss at Ukraine’s Interior Ministry, in the hope that the interior minister would condemn this leak.
For supporters of Myrotvorets, however, sending a journalist to the frontline is not an issue of security — it is an issue of morality.
Vitaly Portnikov, a leading Ukrainian television journalist, argues that he could not imagine an Israeli journalist getting accreditation for Gaza, so a Ukrainian journalist doing so in the “People’s Republic of Donetsk” is a hypocrite.
This kind of accreditation isn’t a safeguard for a journalist, Portnikov told Radio Liberty, it is treason.
Butusov, Portnikov and other “patriotic journalists” are satisfied without any journalists entering contested territory — they claim that official messages from the state’s army and security, as well as rumours from people fleeing the war, are enough for them.
This isn’t the first time a heated discussion has emerged over journalists’ ethics and propaganda in Ukraine.
Stanko, who was the first to raise the issue of the Myrotvorets leak, found herself at the wrong end of popular resentment at the end of 2015.
One such ridiculous stunt was the storming of Ukraine's Information Ministry by members of Right Sector and C14, two far-right groups, after a deputy minister initiated a lawsuit against Myrotvorets.
One publication was an update of the original list, and another was the list of journalists accredited in Russia.
The public significance of the latter publication, which was taken down shortly after, is unclear; however, it certainly played its role in polarising attitudes further.
Apart from the incident at the Information Ministry, Ukraine’s “ultra-patriotic” far-right have shown little interest in the Myrotvorets leak — they seem to be preoccupied with the upcoming LGBT+ pride march in Kyiv, where they would very much like to repeat last year’s attack.
Maidan emerged as a protest against a government that many perceived as a direct descendant of communist rule.
The communists had little chance of finding a place in the Maidan’s ranks; anarchists and other non-communist far-left activists had been driven away along with them.
Both these groups have since found their place in post-Maidan activism , but they are not the major players here.
Caught between these two extremes, Maidan’s public could be divided into two loosely-defined categories.
First, there were “professional patriots”, members of the Ukrainian intelligentsia working at various state cultural institutions, as well as the patriotic element of the artistic world.
These people were the “newly-initiated” activists who provided the “mass” for the mass protest.
It is hard to single out a typical “neophyte”, as they all come from different social backgrounds.
Predominantly urban office workers and small business owners, these people have rediscovered and reshaped political and civil activism in Ukraine.
Powerful movements of “volunteers” have emerged largely thanks to this constituency — people who donate money and buy equipment for army units, bypassing the often cumbersome logistics of the state.
As almost all Maidan’s newcomers are dedicated to European integration and European values, those who have not identified as liberal left naturally drift towards moderate and centrist position.
But as the Ukrainian public is heavily polarised between right-wing populism and liberalism, these people often find themselves in the more dominant far-right camp.
Unable to voice a strong “middle ground” opinion, this constituency’s centrism is right-leaning, with an emphasis on patriotism, “the national idea”, national identities, traditional values and other issues generally associated with the right-wing agenda.
When someone is new to activism, they start by searching for information.
They need to learn how to voice their opinions, how to identify important issues and how to analyse information critically.
The influx of new activists after Maidan required a strong media to educate them.
First of all, at that time, the Ukrainian media were too busy serving the interests of the oligarchs who owned them.
Many questions that required a thoughtful approach remain unanswered, and people were left to their own devices in finding the most appealing explanation for pressing questions.
This approach fails to account for other important factors and even contributes to the creation of that identity during wartime.
Second, propaganda is often exaggerated as a factor in the “hybrid war”, downplaying the significance of other factors — not only political, but economic and military too.
According to this rationale, propaganda, a weapon to frighten and demoralise, becomes more frightening and demoralising than bombs and bullets.
Dmitry Kiselyov, the Russian regime’s talking head, is probably the most hated Russian person in Ukraine after Putin himself.
For a person deeply trapped within the narrative created by the “hybrid war”, a journalist who makes propaganda is perceived as a valuable asset and one who refuses to do it is a traitor that wastes their skills.
In these circumstances, Ukraine’s media have often favoured clarity over reliability.
Every event is explained in relation to a particular worldview, and that worldview serves as a tool to define and create an audience for the media.
That way, articles often fall into one of two extremes, jokingly referred to as “zrada” and “peremoha” — straightforward pieces of journalism, completely devoid of any half-shades, in which a particular notion is either criticised or lauded.
The “zrada” and “peremoha” model thrives on Ukrainian social media, which Ukrainian officials and opinion makers use as an important tool to gauge and influence public opinion.
Each major event becomes a part of this black-and-white narrative, temporarily overshadowing every other topic for discussion.
Emotional arguments are always more effective, more appealing to this audience — and that works on both sides.
Attempting to counter the propaganda and sometimes blatant falsehoods, it is difficult to construct an argument that would be effective as an anti-propaganda measure and critical to details at the same time, as these categories are often mutually exclusive.
The very state in which Ukrainian society has found itself since November 2013 — experiencing revolution, annexation and war — has contributed to the public’s apparent mistrust in journalism.
However, it isn’t only external factors that undermine the credibility of the media.
In the broad range of glaring problems in Ukrainian journalism, such as lack of funding or sub-par fact-checking, Dovzhenko singles out media conflicts — a perfect example being Myrotvorets.
The audience sees people joining either side of the debate seemingly at random, without any reference to their political views or prior opinions — this only further deepens the public mistrust against journalism.
With no one left to believe in Ukraine’s professional media, people turn to other, seemingly “authentic” sources of information, particularly social media accounts run by soldiers, volunteers, local residents.
Even Ukrainian media that can’t afford or don’t want to risk sending their correspondents into the war zone might use such unreliable sources.
In a healthy media climate, alternative accounts in social media can ensure diversity.
But in the present situation, these alternatives only serve to further polarise audiences and perpetuate the black-and-white narrative.
This neurotic state of uncertainty, mistrust and equivocation can easily be exploited by oligarchs and the authorities, as they introduce regulations that could restrict freedom of the press with public approval or at least tacit consent.
For instance, on the same day as the Myrotvorets leak was published, Ukraine’s parliament registered a draft bill on the protection of intellectual property.
Following a sharp backlash, the government relented, and the site has since resumed its operation.
Entering into such a confrontation today, the government might easily commit a “zrada” themselves and fall victims to the vicious cycle.
Meanwhile, “zrada” and “peremoha” are juggled in the realm of abstract, symbolic notions — like those related to memory and history.
The most noticeable provisions of Ukraine’s “decommunisation” laws, which came into effect recently, were related to the renaming of towns, cities, and streets and has become an excellent source of public amusement.
One thing that raises concern, however, is the “ban on propaganda of Communist and National-Socialist symbols,” the contravention of which might incur a prison sentence.
But these laws greatly exaggerate the issue, as they often cite the “communist heritage” as the main reason for the annexation of Crimea or the war in Donbas.
Only two types of opinions are heard — those who fully support the process exactly as it has taken shape now, and those who are absolutely against it.
During the initial outbreak of the Myrotvorets scandal, one of the many internet troll attacks directed against Nastya Stanko castigated her for “supporting” Ruslan Kotsaba, the Ukrainian journalist and blogger who was recently convicted to 3. years in prison for obstruction of Ukrainian Army’s war mobilisation effort.
Kotsaba’s crime was to publish a video on Youtube where he called for resistance to the draft.
The trial was highly controversial, and Stanko merely expressed her disapproval of its “Soviet nature”, quoting a “middle-ground” article by the writer Taras Prokhasko, who argued that Kotsaba was mistaken, but should not be punished for his actions.
Kotsaba, himself active participant of nationalist protests during perestroika, can hardly be accused of sympathising with the “communist” legacy.
Effectively, the discourse on any major issue is polarised to the extremes, and moderate opinions are rare.
The majority of people who have remained in political activism after Maidan are trapped within this one-dimensional paradigm, instilled by the propaganda frameworks of the hybrid war.
In these circumstances, the mass of “moderates” often finds itself powerless against the populist far-right.
It is the “moderates” who silently observe clerics and neo-Nazis teaming up to throw stones at the LGBT+ Equality festival in Lviv; these are the people who cheer at hate speech and indulge in stereotypes about people from Donbas; it is they who are eager to imprison dissenters, however biased the trial may be.
The authorities are playing along while the cycle of “zrada” and “peremoha” keeps the public distracted.
It is a sort of chicken-and-egg situation, in which the government has the power to crack down on opposition as soon as new groups are named as scapegoats — and at the same time, they are expected to act this way.
For instance, president Poroshenko finally commented on the scandal nearly a month after it broke out, expressing his disapproval of the leak.
However, the president also asserted that the government has no control over Myrotvorets, and urged the journalists present to cease all criticism on this matter.
The latest instance of the government's ambivalent attitude is the criminal case against the Lviv Black Sunrise anarchist group, which is accused by Ukraine’s security services of “attempting to overthrow the state” for distributing leaflets ahead of a May Day rally in Lviv.
Apparently, the public has other, more pressing concerns than indulging in a witch-hunt over this case — and they are obvious,” says Grytsenko.
For the past two years, Ganna has observed a rise in patriotism coupled with increased social distance towards Russians; people are also displaying somewhat elevated anxiety levels.
The Myrotvorets scandal shows how the fear of losing an effective wartime instrument can be used to manipulate public opinion,” Grytsenko told us in an interview.
As tensions once again escalate on the frontline, the war in the Donbas is still very far from over.
Whilst many more people have become interested in political activism compared to early 2013, the traditional media remain in their pre-Maidan state, stymied by a lack of financing, dependence upon oligarchs and an inability to establish stable value systems.
The war and the resulting stress are not the only problems that have to be solved if public polarisation is to decrease.
