The aim of this article is to classify the armed conflict between Ukraine and Russia in light of international law.
Firstly, the Russian armed activities are qualified through the lens of use of force and it is shown that Russia committed an aggression.
Secondly, the RussianUk­ra­i­nian conflict is qualified according to the law of armed conflict, not only identifying the applicable norms of law of armed conflict but examining whether atrocities have been com­mitted and whether they are war crimes or mere crimes or acts of terror.
The article posits that there is an international armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine and in ad­dition a non-international one between Ukrainian insurgents and governmental forces.
The methodology used in the article is legal analysis of documents and international law doctrine.
But immediately after this announcement Yanukovych escaped from Kiev and the very * Patrycja Grzebyk, Ph.D., assistant professor at the Institute of International Relations of the Uni­ver­ sity of Warsaw.
At the end of February 2014 armed forces without a state insignia, in cooperation with Crimean self-defence units formed by separatists, began to take control of the main points in the Crimean Peninsula and engage in some raids in neighbouring regions.
On 16 March 2014 the Crimean authorities organized a referendum in which, allegedly, the overwhelming majority voted for accession to the Russian Federation.
Their expressed “will” resulted in a declaration of independence by the Crimean authorities and the signing of an agreement on the accession of Crimea and Sevastopol to the Russian Federation on 18 March 2014.
The issue of the removal of the President of Ukraine from office in compliance with the procedure of impeachment shall be initiated by the majority of the constitutional membership of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.
The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall establish a special ad hoc investigating commission, composed of special prosecutor and special investigators to conduct an investigation.
The conclusions and proposals of the ad hoc investigating commission shall be considered at the meeting of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine.
On the basis of evidence, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine shall, by at least two-thirds of its constitutional membership, adopt a decision to bring charges against the President of Ukraine.
However, the Ukrainian parliament elected Oleksandr Turchynov as the new Chairman of the Ukrainian Parliament and the acting President of Ukraine.
The Ukrainian government began its offensive only after the presidential elections which took place on 25 May 2014.
De­spite a cease-fire agreement of 12 February 2015 hostilities continue to take place in Eastern Ukraine.
Firstly, the Russian armed activities will be examined through the lens of the principles concerning use of force in order to answer the question whether there was an aggression.
Secondly, the Russian-Ukrainian conflict will be examined from the point of view of the law of armed conflict and international criminal law in order to identify norms which should be applied to the conflict and in order to determine whether the atrocities committed constitute war crimes, mere crimes, or acts of terror.
The methodology used in the article is a legal analysis of documents, including Security Council decisions and the international law doctrine.
Crimea Russia denies its direct involvement in the Crimean crisis and emphasizes that the Crimean case is an example of execution by the Crimean people of their right to self-deter­mination, which it argues is the same right Ukraine exercised when se­pa­rat­ ing itself from the USSR, additionally justified by the Kosovo precedent.
Firstly, it must be emphasized that any use of force, or even a threat to use force, against another state is prohibited by the UN Charter ), and in particular the alteration of international borders by force is considered inadmissible in light of international law.
Definitely the deployment of soldiers and using “those who were stationed in Crimea as a part of the Black Sea fleet members in order to take control” over the main positions in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol was an example of the use of force.
The annexation of part of Ukrainian territory by Russia confirms that the military actions in the Crimean Peninsula had as their aim the violation of sovereignty and territorial integrity and reached the sufficient level of gravity.
The fact that Russian operations were advancing without a fight does not 10 GA resolution 2625, 24 September 1970.
Classification of the Conflict... 43 impact this qualification, as it is incontrovertible that in a situation when one state uses force to take a position and waits for the reaction of the state whose territory was invaded, the former must be labelled as an aggressor not the latter.
Russia first used armed force which, by the principle introduced in GA resolution 3314 on USSR’s request, should be considered as prima facie evidence of an act of aggression.
Resolution 3314 defines acts which can be qualified as acts of aggression, some of which can be directly applied to the situation in Ukraine.
It should be stressed that this act requires invasion or attack on a territory, and it says nothing about the necessity of attacking the armed forces of another state.
In consequence, such an aggression can be committed without a single bullet being fired or a drop of blood being shed.
Invasion means a situation in which a state sends its troops into the territory of another state and maintains them there for an extended period of time,15 thus a crossing of frontiers and physical entering of troops into at least a part of a state’s territory is therefore required.
The definition contained in Resolution 3314 considers as aggression any military occupation resulting from an invasion or attack on a territory, and undoubtedly the territory of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and of the city of Sevastopol was occupied.
This separation was done against the will of Kiev, in violation of the Ukrainian Constitution and with the use of armed forces.
Secondly, Resolution 3314 defines “the blockade of the ports or coasts of a State by the armed forces of another State” ) as an act of aggression.
Ukrainians emphasize that the missile boat Ivanovets of the Black Sea Fleet of the Russian Federation blocked the Balaklava Bay.
In addition, the sinking by the Russians of their own antisubmarine vessel Ochakov in the straits that connect the Black Sea with Donuzlav Lake should be considered as a part of the blockade as it prevented Ukrainian navy ships from leaving a nearby base and going to sea.
The undeniable moves of the soldiers of the Black Sea fleet outside the agreed-upon zones was in contravention of the aforementioned provisions and constitutes an act of aggression.
It is in fact a variation of an invasion, but the purpose behind its enumeration among acts of aggression was to emphasize that aggression can be committed without the violation of frontiers, from within the victim state.
In consequence, if it is proven that Russia had effective control over those groups, the operations conducted by them can be attributed to Russia and thus constitute the commission of another act of aggression.
The chapeau of the definition of aggression emphasizes that the use of force in con­ travention of the UN Charter should be considered as an aggression.
The UN Charter allows for the use of force only when there is an authorisation on behalf of the UN Security Council or in case of self-defence in response to an armed attack (Art.
There was no such authorisation in the Crimean case, but Russia attempted to justify its actions towards Crimea and Sevastopol through its right to defend its citizens.
This kind of defence is in fact admissible, but only in specific situations such as a case when there was an attack or imminent threat of attack on its nationals, they were taken as hostages, and when the hosting state was unwilling or unable to protect those nationals.
In case of Crimea, there was 19 See J Kranz, Kilka uwag na tle aneksji Krymu przez Rosję (Some remarks on the annexation of Crimea by Russia), 8 Państwo i Prawo 23 , 33.
In state practice, none of the arguments advanced by states in order to justify military interventions in favour of their nationals has been accepted by the entire community of states.
Classification of the Conflict... 45 no attack on Crimean people, not even the slightest threat of an attack.
The Russian allegation that the Ukrainian authorities were working on the adoption of new law revising the language policy, which would thus be directed against ethnic minorities, definitely does not constitute a reason justifying the use of force in defence of those minorities.
The live and health of members of those minorities were not endangered and the Russian reaction was excessively disproportional.
For the same reasons, the argument about the need for humanitarian intervention is invalid.
In addition, it should be stressed that the concept of responsibility to protect has been limited only to situations of genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and ethnic cleansing.
The argument about cultural genocide, which is raised by some Russian scholars,20 certainly has as its purpose to put the Russian intervention within the framework of a responsibility to protect exception, but it should not be forgotten that the cultural aspect of genocide was purposefully eliminated from the definition of genocide.
In addition, analysis of the judgments of,g. the Polish Supreme National Tribunal concerning the cultural dimension of genocide committed against Jews and Poles clearly demonstrates that only the most severe violations of cultural rights, equal to an annihilation of the culture of a particular group (e.g. burning libraries or a ban on education) could be labelled as some sort of genocide, which was clearly not the case in the Crimean conflict.
With respect to them, it must be stressed that they are allowed according to international law, but only under certain conditions.
In case of consent, there must be a clear request issued by constitutional authorities.
Russia has used the argument that Yanukovych was still president as he was toppled in violation of the Ukrainian Constitution.
However, Russia did not reveal any document which would confirm that such a request was made by Yanukovych.
This is a clear example of a request which raises major doubts about the intentions of the intervening power, so it cannot be considered as a legal justification for the use of force.
The fact that such a request was also issued on behalf of Crimean authorities27 has no legal meaning, as international law does not allow intervention on behalf of insurgents,28 even in a situation of self-determination.
It would seem that the GA resolution could not have more clearly expressed the prohibition of intervention into the internal affairs of another state under the pretext of self-determination.
The people of Crimea have no right to external self-determination, as this right was attributed only to people of a colony or Non-Self-Governing Territory, and the so-called “secession remedy” would be allowed only if there was no other way to secure its self-determination within the Ukrainian state and the rights of Crimean inhabitants were violated in such extent that,g., crimes against civilians were committed.
The right of self-determination does not give rise to a right of secession.
Eastern Ukraine The same mechanism of intervention as in Crimea was used in the case of Eastern Ukraine.
But in this case the victim state decided to respond militarily, and not just through diplomatic channels.
As in the case of Crimea, so too in Eastern Ukraine Russia committed aggression.
There is no legal justification for the use of force by Russia against Ukraine in the Donbas region as there was no authorization on behalf of the UN SC (in fact Russia blocked any action by the SC in order to prevent any involvement of other states), and there was no armed attack against Russia by Ukraine which would have entitled Russia to use force.
No human rights were violated in the Donbas territory, so the issue of humanitarian intervention or the need to protect Russian citizens could not be raised and the support of rebels is prohibited by international law.
The Russian rhetoric about the need to answer the Western transfer of weapons to Kiev or the training of its army is incomprehensible, as according to international law support for the legitimate authorities of a state (and definitely the current Ukrainian powers have legitimacy after the elections) is legal.
From the very beginning of the Crimean crisis Russia has amassed major armed forces near the Ukrainian border.
This could be considered as a threat to use of force, as could the authorization by the Council of Federation of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation to use force against Ukraine,33 and although the mere threat to use force cannot be considered as aggression,34 it is prohibited in light of Art. of the UN Charter.
For the sake of clarity, it must be noted that the qualification of the use of force by Russia or Ukraine as aggression or self-defence does not have any impact on the appli­cation of the LOAC,35 but this issue is crucial for four other reasons.
Fourthly, if Russia committed aggression, then theoretically individuals responsible for the crime of aggression can be prosecuted before Ukrainian and Russian courts, inasmuch as the criminal codes of both states penalize the crime of aggression.
Crimea According to the law of armed conflict in order for an armed conflict to classify as an international armed conflict it is sufficient to find that there is an armed conflict between two or more states.
However, it must be noted that the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia has suggested that requirements of intensity also apply to international armed conflicts.
In case of the Crimean Peninsula, it could be argued that despite the fact that about 25,000 members of armed forces were engaged in armed activities on behalf of the Russian and Crimean authorities, there was no kinetic violence, or that there were just some minor isolated incidents with few victims,48 thus direct hostilities between two states practically did not take place and, because of the lack of armed conflict, the LOAC is not applicable.
See also A Paulus, M Vashakmadze, Asymmetrical war and the notion of armed conflict – a tentative conceptualization, 91 International Review of the Red Cross 95 , p.1.
The underlying rational of the afore-mentioned provision was to eliminate any possible gap which would result in deprivation of protection of people hors de combat and also to encompass such situations as the German annexation of Czechoslovakia prior to World War II.51 The Hague Regulation of 18 October 1907 states that “erritory is considered occupied when it is actually placed under the authority of the hostile army.
Firstly, the occupant must take effective control over the territory against the will of the state to which the territory belongs.
Secondly, this control must have been gained or be maintained due to the use of the army.
Thirdly, the occupant must have established its authorities on the occupied territory and is able to exercise its powers.
It is sufficient to have overall control over a proxy executing the authority in the field.
The Geneva Conventions broaden the concept of occupation in order to also cover those situations in which armed force was not used.
In case of Crimea it is undeniable that from March 2014 Russia has had and still has effective control over the Crimean Peninsula.
It gained its control by sending thousands of soldiers and using those who were based in Crimea.
Ukraine decided not to carry out armed actions, but it has not accepted the loss of Crimean territory.
In consequence Crimea has the status of an occupied territory and Russia must be identified as an occupant.
Classification of the Conflict... 51 since March 2014 Ukraine and Russia are engaged in an international armed conflict and LOAC shall be applied in the whole territory of the belligerent states.
As Crimean annexation seems to be a fait accompli and the perspective of restitutio quo ante in the near future is highly improbable, it should be kept in mind that even if the situation lasts for decades , at least some provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War must be applied at all times.
The “fact” of annexation cannot deprive protected persons of their protections under the LOAC.59 2.2.
The Eastern Ukraine case The situation in Eastern Ukraine has been an evolving one, thus its legal classification according to the LOAC must also be considered as evolving.
There is no conventional definition of an armed conflict, but nonetheless the juris­ prudence has attempted to define this term.
According to the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, a non-international armed conflict exists when there is “protracted armed violence between governmental authorities and organised armed 57 Kolb, Hyde, supra note 46, 94.
AP I See also Art. of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, 2187 UNTS 90.
Firstly, non-international armed conflict exists not only in a situation of hostilities between governmental forces and some organized armed group, but also in situation where there are hostilities only between organized armed groups without any engagement of governmental forces.
This finding matters in assessment of the first phase of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine when there were sporadic clashes between so-called separatists and pro-Ukrainian volunteers (territorial defence battalions which at the beginning of the conflict were not always controlled by the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence), with little or no engagement of the state’s armed forces.
Secondly, in order to classify a situation as an internal armed conflict a minimum level of intensity, including duration (as the ICTY’s definition stresses that the conflict must be protracted) must be achieved in order to distinguish armed conflict from isolated acts of violence.
Such factors like the deployment of armed forces instead of police, number of armed forces and partisans involved in hostilities, collectiveness and frequency of fighting , number of casualties, displacement of civilians, detention of fighters, usage of heavy weaponry, and a relatively wide geographical scope of hosti­ lities are all indicators of an armed conflict.
Similarly as in international armed conflicts, the subjective opinion of parties to the conflict about its intensity and thus the existence of an armed conflict is not decisive.
Prosecutor Ljube Boškoski, Johan Tarčulovski, Judgment, IT-04-82-T, 10 July 2008, paras.
Classification of the Conflict... 53 and the blurred line between violent riots and an armed conflict, the trigger system for the application of the law of non-international armed conflict is not as effective as that of international armed conflict, as it leaves a broad gap of doubt about the classification of the situation.
In such a situation the opinion of the engaged parties to the conflict has some value.
In case of Eastern Ukraine, from March until June 2014 separatists were taking control over consecutive cities and villages with little resistance.
Even the announcement by the Ukrainian President on 13 April 2014 of the commencement of anti-terrorist ope­ rations did not change this situation much.
Analysts emphasize that during the abovementioned period there were only some minor clashes resulting in few casualties, which were exaggerated by both sides due to the upcoming presidential elections.
The major fights commenced in July with the launch of the governmental offensive.
From that moment on thousands of soldiers and partisans began taking part in hostilities in the Donbas region, which is the most densely populated region of Ukraine (apart from the capital city of Kiev).71 One of the biggest battles was over the Donetsk Airport and lasted 66 Vité, supra note 42, 78.
See also ICTY, Prosecutor Fatmir Limaj, Haradin Bala, Isak Musliu, IT03-66-T, 30 November 2005, para.0.
Artillery, tanks, combat helicopters and other heavy weaponry were used during these operations.
The number of civilian casualties increased enormously, especially at the beginning of 2015.73 The Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights assessed that from mid-April 2014 until mid-February 2015 the overall death toll exceeded 5,358 people, with another 12,235 wounded.
Civilians were dying on a daily basis, as was emphasized by the UN Secretary General.
The Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre estimated that there are at least 1,116,618 internally displaced persons in Ukraine as of March 2015.76 The insurgents have had a clear command structure from the very beginning of the establishment of the so-called “South-East Army” and “Donetsk People’s Army” in April 2014.77 The duration of, for example, the battle over the Donetsk Airport also proved that they were able to sustain major military operations over an extended period of time.
Taking into account the size of territory on which fighting has taken place, the size of the engaged forces, their military character, the number of casualties, the weaponry used, and the clearly distinct parties to the conflict, it is incontrovertible that in Eastern Ukraine, at least from July 2014, there was and continues to be an armed conflict.
The above statement clearly confirms that the ICRC considered, at least from July 2014, the situation in Eastern Ukraine as an armed conflict.
Classification of the Conflict... 55 of war crimes,e. crimes which by definition can only be committed within the framework of an armed conflict, confirm the above conclusion.
Firstly, the conflict took place (and continues to take place) between governmental forces and dissidents.
Secondly those dissidents have, from the very beginning of the conflict, controlled a distinct part of Ukrainian territory, including the Russian-Ukrainian state border.
Thirdly, they are able to conduct hostilities in an organized manner, which is confirmed by the simple fact of the relative long duration of the military clashes in Ukraine.
The Russian engagement in the conflict is not without an impact on the classification of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine.
At least from August 2014 (in response to the successes of the Ukrainian army in regaining control over different localities in Donbas), the Russian involvement was direct.
However, this internationalization could even have happened earlier if it were confirmed that the insurgents in Eastern Ukraine were from the very beginning inspired and supported by Russia to the extent that Russia had overall control over the dissident forces.
The “overall control” test established by the ICTY (and adopted also by the International Criminal Court) does not require that specific orders relating to every military action must be issued by the foreign state.
It is sufficient to establish that a foreign state’s organs were involved in the planning, coordinating, organizing and supervising of the entire military operation, as well as in financing, training and equipping, or providing operational support to it.
The ICTY identified some indicators based on which the overall control can be assessed, likeg. sharing personnel, paying wages by the foreign state, coordination of actions, aiming at the same goals, a similar military structure, and some more obvious indicators like the issuance of orders by a foreign state.
From the very beginning of the conflict there was evidence that Russia provides the insurgents with weapons, shields them with its air-defense system, allows the flow of Russian volunteer fighters, that Russian agents are among the commanders of the insurgents’ armed forces, and what is most important, that the insurgents’ operations are consulted with the Russian command.
This allows to at least suspect that Russia has had overall control over the separatist armed groups.
The ICJ’s test puts at a much higher level than the ICTY the degree of control which must be attained in order to trigger a state’s responsibility.
However, even if we agree that the overall control test cannot be applied to the issue of state responsibility, as it broadens it too much and was several times rejected by the ICJ,87 the test of overall control still merits consideration in classification of a conflict as international or non-international in light of LOAC.88 It is not agreed among scholars if a foreign engagement internationalizes the entire conflict,89 or if it means that two types of conflicts – international and non-international – are taking place simultaneously,e. that there exists a mixed conflict.
The second option results in a complication of legal regimes applied in the case of Ukraine as it means,g., a necessity to distinguish between members of Russian armed forces – having combatant and prisoners of war rights – and dissident forces without any combatant privileges; and the application of different rules concerning the detention of civilians or fighters and separate regimes of responsibility for war crimes.
Even if some standards of international and non-international armed conflicts are merging nowadays, still too many important issues are resolved in different ways depending on the classification of the armed conflict,91 thus the Ukrainian case is an excellent example that the call to establish one definition of an armed conflict must be finally answered positively.
ICJ, Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo , Judgment, 19 December 2005, para.0.
Sylvain Vité emphasizes although that the ICRC proposal made in the 1971 Report on the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts, according to which the whole conflict would be internationalized if there was external intervention, was rejected.
Rome Statute declaration, which would give the ICC jurisdiction over the Ukrainian situation.
The Rome Statute does not create a separate definition of international armed conflict, but in case of a non-international armed conflict it differentiates between armed conflicts which are within the common Art. of the GC94 and those which are protracted .95 This distinction is incomprehensible taking into account, for example, the ICTY jurisprudence which added the time element to the general definition of an non-international armed conflict.
However, taking into account the duration of the Ukrainian-Russian conflict it may be said that without doubt all articles concerning war crimes committed in a non-international armed conflict could be applied (under the condition that the ICC would have jurisdiction based ong.
However, it must be emphasized that the fact that some violent incidents resulting in many civilian losses took place during the conflict between Ukraine and Russia , this does not mean that those responsible for them (even if they are captured and evidence of their involvement is collected) could be sentenced for,g., war crimes or even crimes against humanity.
Killing civilians not taking part in hostilities is obviously prohibited by the LOAC but in order to attach individual responsibility the appropriate mens rea must be proven.
In consequence, the attacker will be found guilty only if he was aware of all the circumstances of the attack (including the civilian status of the victims) and intended to commit a crime.
Paradoxically, because in Eastern Ukraine there is an armed conflict, it is much easier to avoid responsibility, inasmuch as if the attack was performed in relation to the conflict it is sufficient to demonstrate that the perpetrator was convinced that he was targeting a military object (e.g. a military transport plane) in order to be found not guilty.
Art. of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, 2187 UNTS 90.
Classification of the Conflict... 59 committed with dolus directus or dolus eventualis.
In the case of insurgents, even if it is impossible to judge them for war crimes because of,g., a lack of mens rea, it is still possible to prosecute them for merely taking part in hostilities (unless it is determined that in Eastern Ukraine there is only an international armed conflict and all fighters, including Ukrainian insurgents, enjoy combatant immunity).97 Concluding remarks The situation in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine can be qualified from the perspective of two separate branches of law, namely the LOAC and the law on the use of force.
In light of the LOAC, there is definitely an international armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine as the territory of the Crimean Autonomous Republic and city of Sevastopol is occupied.
Even if this occupation lasts for decades, Crimean territory cannot become a part of Russian state as debellatio is not legally possible, and thus at least some provisions of the GC IV will continue to be applied.
The case of Eastern Ukraine should not be artificially separated from the Crimean one, thus from the point of view of LOAC it should be treated as a mere expansion of the geographic scope of the battlefield of an international armed conflict between two states, due to the direct and indirect involvement of Russia on that territory.
In addition, it can be assumed that because of the Ukrainian insurgents’ military actions, simultaneously with the international armed conflict there is also non-international one, to which not only is the common Art. of the GC applied, but also the AP II, inasmuch as insurgents control a part of Ukrainian territory and have proven that are able to carry out sustained and concerted military operations.
From the point of view of the law on the use of force, undoubtedly in both cases – Crimea and Eastern Ukraine – Russia committed aggressions in light of the definitions contained in GA resolution 3314.
The members of the UN SC are fully aware of this, as reflected in various statements made during SC meetings.
There is no legal justification for the Russia’s use of force in light of the UN Charter.
Russia’s acts of aggression constitute armed attacks and entitle Ukraine to self-defence.
In addition, Russia is responsible for the commission of an internationally wrongful act and, inasmuch as it violated a peremptory norm other states and international organizations are obliged to not recognize its unlawful annexation and undertake steps to bring to an end the serious breach of this norm.
It is significant that, despite the blatant violation of the prohibition of the use of force, the vote in the GA (concerning only Crimea) gathered a majority of only 52% of states.
This is proof that even in a situation when the law is clear, policy still matters more.
