Official Washington marches in propaganda lockstep about Crimea’s decision to rejoin Russia two years ago, with references to a Russian “invasion” and a “sham” referendum of Crimea’s voters, but the reality is different, says ex-CIA analyst Ray McGovern.
With high symbolism Russian President Vladimir Putin is visiting Crimea “to check on the construction of the Kerch Strait Bridge, which will link the Crimean peninsula and continental Russia,” the Kremlin announced on Thursday.
As the Russians like to say, “It is no accident” that he chose today – marking the second anniversary of Russia’s annexation of Crimea three weeks after the U.S.-sponsored coup in Kiev on Feb., 2014, and just days after a referendum in which Crimean voters approved leaving Ukraine and rejoining Russia by a 96 percent majority.
The 12-mile bridge is a concrete metaphor, so to speak, for the re-joining of Crimea and Russia.
Yet, the Obama administration continues to decry the political reunion between Crimea and Russia, a relationship that dates back to the Eighteenth Century.
Instead, the West has accused Russia of violating its pledge in the 1994 Budapest agreement — signed by Ukraine, Russia, Great Britain and the United States — “to respect the independence and sovereignty and existing borders of Ukraine,” in exchange for Ukraine surrendering its Soviet-era nuclear weapons.
Of course, there were extenuating circumstances, including alarm among Crimeans over what the unconstitutional ouster of Ukraine’s president might mean for them, as well as Moscow’s not unfounded nightmare of NATO taking over Russia’s major, and only warm-water, naval base at Sevastopol in Crimea.
But what is seldom pointed out is that the other parties, including the United States, seem to have been guilty, too, in promoting a coup d’etat removing the democratically elected president and essentially disenfranchising millions of ethnic Russian Ukrainians who had voted for President Viktor Yanukovych.
In such a context, it takes a markedly one-dimensional view to place blame solely on Russia for violating the Budapest agreement.
But if the putsch came as a total surprise, he sorely underestimated what $5 billion in “democracy promotion” by Washington can buy.
But the Feb., 2014 putsch in Kiev was YouTube-ized two-and-a-half weeks in advance.
Arseniy Yatsenyuk was quickly named prime minister of the coup regime, which was immediately given diplomatic recognition by Washington.
Ukraine is an economic basket case, and “Yats” barely survived a parliamentary vote of no confidence and is widely believed to be on his way out.
That Russia would not let Crimea become a NATO base should have been a no-brainer.
If Putin acted decisively, it would be all the easier to demonize him, denounce “Russian aggression,” and put a halt to the kind of rapprochement between President Barack Obama and Putin that thwarted neocon plans for shock and awe against Syria in late summer 2013.
However, if Putin acquiesced to the Ukrainian coup and accepted the dangers it posed to Russia, eventual membership for Ukraine in NATO might become more than a pipedream.
Russia has been repeatedly rebuffed – or diddled – when it has suggested bilateral talks on this key issue.
Four years ago, for example, at the March 2012 summit in Seoul, Russia’s then-President Dmitry Medvedev asked Obama when the United States would be prepared to address Russian concerns over European missile defense.
In remarks picked up by camera crews, Obama asked for some “space” until after the United States election.
The Obama administration and its stenographers in the mainstream United States media would like the relevant Ukrainian history to start on Feb., 2014 with “Yats” and his coup cronies deemed the “legitimate” authorities.
As for Russia’s alleged designs on Crimea, one searches in vain for evidence that, before the coup, the Kremlin had given much thought to the vulnerability of the peninsula and a possible need to annex it.
According to the public record, Putin first focused on Crimea at a strategy meeting on Feb., the day after the coup.
Yet, given the United States mainstream media’s propagandistic reporting on the Ukraine crisis, it is small wonder that the American people forgot about the putsch in Kiev.
The word “coup” was essentially banished from the United States media’s lexicon regarding Ukraine.
In reaching its no-coup conclusion, the Times ignored any evidence that there was a coup, including the Nuland-Pyatt phone call.
In regards to Ukraine, “coup” became just another unutterable four-letter word.
John McCain was wrong to write that Russian President Vladimir Putin annexed Crimea without provocation.
More recently, in Jeffrey Goldberg’s lengthy magnum opus in The Atlantic on Obama’s foreign policy, there were two mentions of how Russia “invaded” Crimea, two allusions to Russia’s “invasion” of Ukraine, but not a word about the coup in Kiev.
In Catholic theology, the theory that some people can be “invincibly ignorant” can lessen or even erase their guilt.
Many Americans are so malnourished on accurate news – and so busy trying to make ends meet – that they would seem to qualify for this dispensation, with pardon for not knowing about things like the coup in Kiev and other key happenings abroad.
A meeting of progressives that I attended last year was keynoted by a professor from a local Washington university.
I told her that there were, in fact, no reports of anyone having been killed.
A few weeks before the professor’s remarks, after a speaking engagement in Moscow, I had a chance to do a little souvenir shopping on the Arbat.
It was decades since I had served as a CIA officer in the Soviet Union; the shopkeepers then were usually taciturn, allergic to discussing politics, and not at all given to bragging about their leaders.
Ray McGovern works for Tell the Word, a publishing arm of the ecumenical Church of the Saviour in inner-city Washington.
During his 27-year career as a CIA analyst he headed the Soviet Foreign Policy Branch.
Bob Parry argues a decent case that Mr Obama’s transgressions may have been tepid compared to what the impliedly crazier and totally amoral neocons or Responsibility to Protect crowd pressured on him.
That Hillary, the Donald, Ted and others may yet outdo Obama’s abysmal performance should not be cause for praising him, even tepidly.
Siberia is sacrificed to the Asia Group because it’s deemed too hard to hold against the Asians…and European Empires always coveted Africa anyway.
Ibero-America will be kept for The Commonwealth as somewhat of a resource bank, but mainly to deny access to PanEuropa/Africa, and the Asian Group.
TransPacifica will be “danced around” by The Commonwealth and The Asian Group.
So that’s The Plan that would-be Emperors are working on, replete with endless Border Wars to keep the serfs pre-occupied.
It is of paramount importance , to defeat The Plan of the Oligarchy and secure a peaceful developing World, for the Russian Federation and the USA to become stalwart allies and continue to pander to the Chinese “Win-Win” policies of Silk Road/World Land Bridge.
Sun Yat Sen; no longer Fascist/Communist of the Chaing Kai Shek/Mao Tse Tung dichotomy.
Soon, we will be Dirigist too, when New Deal policies are re-instituted to bring an end to Great Depression II that we’ve been suffering for eight years now… And FDR’s vision will be realized, via the cooperation of the three Great Republics.
Since the Civil War did not achieve their goals, this was the British Plan B Meanwhile, the Tory press mad sure that the United States and Russia were separated via articles on Siberia, ignoring prison conditions in the western United States ant the time.
Amazing work, but not surprising, from an empire that had survived so long.
It is no wonder that the Russians have no use for opponents on their borders.
Yeah, it leaves me numb, almost willing to turn my back on these web sites…but it’s hard to stop watching an on-going train wreck.
The USA’s historic mission was to supplant Imperial Oligarchy with republican Democracy, and “unfettered” Capitalism with the American System of dirigist political economy.
This Mission is completely defeated…and now comes the Collapse of epic proportions, 5th century Roman Empire-style, of the entire Trans-Atlantic System as built by The City and The Street.
I just wish we’d get more actual Crimean people who have left the country and can speak freely to straighten out this story.
I don’t believe either side. “asked Crimeans if the results in the March 16, 2014 referendum to secede reflected the views of the people.
A total of 82.8% of Crimeans said yes. while 68.4% of Ukrainians felt so.
MG you forgot to mention that it was done shortly after annexation and that source of news suddenly shifted from Ukrainian channels to all russian channels, bc russians start jamming Ukrainian news and overflowing news with anti-Ukrainian propaganda.
Unfortunately for everyone, it is the fallacy of tortured argumentation that won’t go away, and like asserting ” global warming is a hoax”, rests firmly on ignorance, in your case ignorance of history.
Seven months before Ukraine declared independence, a referendum in Crimea reaffirmed its status as an Autonomous Region within the Soviet Union.
It does give one a clear idea of the general will of the population of Crimea.
Post-1991, the history is complex, a 1992 Crimean constitution declaring Crimea an Autonomous Republic, the Ukrainian government unilaterally declaring the Crimean Constitution void, even an attempt at direct rule by decree by the Ukrainian President.
Clearly, the present status of Crimea has been a long time coming and reflects the post-1991 historical trend, constant reassertion of Crimean Autonomy and constant attempts by Ukraine to void previous agreements, finally catalyzed by the Maidan Episode, and is a return to a historical stasis disrupted by Nikita Kruschev circa 1954.
Nuland with Yats with support of a few hundred right sector ultras with wooden shields and a few invisible CIA agents conceived and utilized within a month flawless coup with only evidence of a phone call and hundreds casualties from right sector and overthrown legitimate president and government.
The president and government were totally cooperating with Russian FSB for years, had thousands of police forces and criminal elements under their wing with several hundreds AK’s on hands, controlled communication lines and mass media, had Russian intelligence guiding them and troops on the boarder ready to intervene.
Well, let’s not forget the little matter of Victoria Nuland’s boast of the United States having poured $5 billion into the Ukraine to finance pro-Western opposition groups in the10 years leading up to the coup.
The United States has channeled, and is channeling, United States taxpayers’ money to sow the seeds of unrest in a huge swath of former Soviet republics.
The fact the corporate media doesn’t report this is probably why you haven’t heard about it.
Perhaps you might be a little less complacent about your hard-earned income being squandered in this way if Russia had been doing the same in Canada and Mexico.
Oh, I forgot, no need for Russia to undermine democracy in Mexico, the United States is already making a fine mess of things there too.
Bryan you are mistaken and let me demonstrate you how budget of $500 millions per year buys you almost nothing in Ukraine in terms of politics.
A head of local district transport police in regional center city like Kharkiv, Lviv, Odessa, Donetsk was collecting at least $100,000 per month in bribes to send up the chain in Kyiv.
Look in their news almost every other day new police discovers conversion centers laundering at least $100,000.
Sons of Yanukovich and Pshonka were collecting in bribes millions per day.
You add custom, IRS, medical, banks and you easy swallow Nulands $500 millions in bribes and achieve nothing, money just disappear.
Look who is in parliament, the same faces that were there more then 10 years.
So after 10 years of investment in opposition groups there are no groups, no mass media that is totally biased pro-western.
RT, lifenews, annanews, zillions of network groups in vkontakte, sponsoring left and right wings in Europe, conducting conferences of neo-nazi in St Peterburg on regular basis, Dugin pure fascist is going time to time to EU at those meetings and was consulting Putin sometime ago.
Efremov was holding Lugansk region in his packet or at least he thought so.
A bunch of so called separatists at leading positions in Special Regions of Dontesk and Lugansk Districts sent their kids to Kyiv to live among the junta and right sector.
And this article is once more asking you to chew the same old gum that was aired by RT and lifenews since 2014 over and over and over.
The Crimea was occupied by British troops for almost two decades, following the Crimean War, in which former bitter adversaries Britain and France flexed their military might together for the first time, selecting a weaker neighbor to attack on the flimsiest of provocations.
In so doing they laid down the pattern for the terrible German wars to come in the next century.
The statement, repeated several times, in this article that “Russia annexed Crimea” is absolutely false.
Crimea was severed by the Russian SSR and attached to the Ukrainian SSR in the status of an Autonomous Region.
Under international law an Autonomous Region within a sovereign state may choose to secede and declare itself a sovereign state.
IMO, if it can declare independence, it can also choose to join another sovereign state, but that is a question for an expert in international law, as I am not aware of any precedents.
It should be noted that the Crimean Rada voted in 2008 to secede from the Ukraine.
I am merely a layman, so I am unfamiliar with established procedure for an Autonomous Region to secede, but it must require a referendum, as this is what happened in 2014.
I have looked, and cannot find any objections by experts on international law regarding the Crimean Autonomous Region’s secession.
David, you are may be coherent, but your lack of basic jurisprudence lead you to a maze from which you cannot get out.
When case is in court judge will consider all provided substantial evidence and will be conducting multiple tests to characterize not only events, level of damage and responsibilities of involved parties, but conduct, intentions and capabilities.
AJFA, the subject of my comment was the status of an Autonomous Region under International Law.
Your comments are a mass of Fallacies of Informal Argument, and your incoherent statements fail, absurdly, to rise to the level of Unsound Propositions.
Your statements are irrelevant and have mistakes in defining the status of Crimea.
They are irrelevant because on February 27 2014 Ukraine was recognized internationally within its borders including Crimea.
All these agreements superseded anything what happened in 1954, 1991 or invented by you in 2008.
So, status of Crimea was undisputably territory of Ukraine and covered by Ukrainian Constitution.
It was undisputable, because there was no any on going trial in international courts regarding the status of Crimea.
Why is the date important, because on February 27 2014 Russia has began conducting military operation on the territory of Ukraine resulting in annexation of Crimea on March 18 2014.
It was a military aggression as defined in the resolution 3314 of UN General Assembly, December 14 1974.
Conduct of russian troops included blocking Ukrainian military bases, airports and water line by military ships.
Thank you, Mr McGovern, and God bless you for “telling it like it is” for us.
I am not naive about the sneaky and underhanded ways our government goes about working its will in other nations.
Hence, I’ve read with a very cynical eye all the reportage concerning this affair.
Your report is for me the most transparent and believable narrative of events and description of the situation.
Since it was not an initiative by Russia but a decision of the Crimean population, and not really an annexation, Russia did not violate its pledge in the 1994 Budapest agreement, in my opinion.
The United States push to make trouble on the borders of Russia should motivate Russia to seek military alliances on the doorstep of the US, explicitly attributing this to the United States right wing provocations on their doorstep.
Unlike the savvy Russians, there is no society anywhere in the world more dumbed-down than the American culture.
It’s estimated that about 90% of all Americans don’t have a clue about what their government/corporatists/military institutions are doing to others.
As a result, American military/financial hegemony can do whatever they please.
I’d guess that more people in the United States are fluent in 3+ languages than United States foreign policy.
If the Ukrainian people had, in early elections as had been agreed upon, voted Yanukovych out of power – then all the power to them.
Then if all of Ukraine had a referendum to join the EU, again all the power to them.
I remember doing some quick reading on the coup that the CIA pulled off in Iran in 1953 and I believe again there were actual protesters in the streets against Mossadegh but the CIA, I think Kermit, paid off some protesters and opposition government officials and we ended up with a coup.
I just shake my head when I think of all of this underhandedness, that is not the world that I want to live in.
One other point that I find interesting about the Crimea story is that at the time I just remember almost all of western MSM were reporting that Crimeans were voting at gunpoint and the reported 82% voter turnout with 96% of them voting to rejoin Russia was completely dismissed.
Then a year later or more we have Gallup, GFK and Pew Research polls, all trusted western polling services, basically in their information supporting the initial numbers that were reported.
This also shows, as people keep screaming about Russian propaganda, how much propaganda our own news agencies are spewing.
I agree totally with this response and wish that more Americans were watching our state department and the policies that are being driven by the neo-con think tanks rather than by interest in the true circumstances that are behind conflict in this global community.I for one am tired of being lied to and tired of seeing what military might of the USA is inflicting on the world in our name.
The remark on supposed Russian caused casualties in Crimea by a Washington professor were astonishingly and inexcusably ignorant.
Americans are the most out of touch with reality nation in this world,dumbed down by the zionist msm.
I remember watching the Olympic coverage in Sochi and being stunned by the negative on air commentary about Russia and wondering what it was about.
I found my go to guy on Russia, Stephen Cohen who was saying similar things as you have said here.
At the time I remember thinking, unbelievable that the Obama administration would allow such negative diplomatic talk, but I have since learned that it was simply more of the same.
As Hillary’s term at State becomes more apparent, its clear that she thinks as a neocon, approves of all of this Empire rubbish, and that, heartbreakingly, the good ole United States is still up to its regime changing tricks.
The year when the Treaty of Paris, which ended the American Revolutionary War, was ratified.
It would be another four years before the United States Constitution was ratified.
The Budapest agreement wasn’t a treaty, rather a political understanding, and politics change.
Ukraine remains a total financial basket case with Right Sector and other lovely fascist groups gaining power.
With respect to Ukraine…if the majority of western Ukrainians want a pro-european government then I applaud them for opposing the status-quo.
With respect to Donesk…I understand their proclivity toward Russia and dissatisfaction with the coup.
I don’t think I would appreciate Ukrainian tanks and troops shooting in my direction.
Ukraine should grant Donesk full independence to include land stretching down to Crimea.
In return, Ukraine would receive the western 50% of Crimea back from Russia.
Ukraine and New Ukraine would establish treaties regarding trade, travel, and political recognition.
Then, they would shake hands and become good friends again. how about this.
Some neighbor mobsters get into your house and occupy say kitchen and drive way because they are scared that some other mobsters from other part of town will get your porch next to them.
Then a bigger mobster shows up with a machete and pushes you to a living room.
Then they tell you they want your backyard too, because it was some time ago part of their property, but then was sold and added to your property.
You agree to give them living room instead in return of 50% of your driveway.
Your daughter kind of liked one of mobsters and stays with them to party and your son will be kind of hostage in their house just in case you go to other mobsters to talk.
And the mobsters will be telling everybody around that you planned to get their porch and they did not have a choice, but to intervene.
And if you want heat upstairs you have to pay them 5 times more than the real price.
Given your verbose incoherance, I have to ask, although your succinct incoherance is equally obscure.
The people of Crimea will never under any circumstance agree to allowing the western 50% of Crimea to go back to the Ukraine.
Your suggestion/solution simply doesn’t hold water and betrays a significant understanding of the region and of Crimea.
Ukraine is run by United States funded NAZI thugs without Integrity or Honor.
Turn the screws on Nuland’s little kingdom and starve it into submission. which set up the chain of events, consequences of which we witness now.
Some of these folks are really anxious for a new hot war, which they think can be fought without affecting the United States at all. all about the United States White Elite getting other people’s resources for nothing.
When people start shooting at each other like in Donbass, be sure that issue is real as it only can be.
Soviet missiles on Cuba precipitated Caribbean Crisis with nuclear weapons ready to fly.
And I will open a secret to you, Ukraine will not be part of NATO for a while do not be scared for poor russians.
They have Kalinigrad from which they can cover with Topol a good portion of Europe.
Still does not answer why Russia should behave differently than Kennedy administration.
