What started as a demonstration in support of a pro-European course for Ukraine and developed into powerful civic protests against a criminal authoritarian regime culminated in a serious international conflict after Russia annexed Crimea and continues to threaten the stability and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
On this blog, curated by Tatiana Zhurzhenko, critical commentators connected to the Institute or its partners are sharing their views on the current crisis.
The Ukrainian Revolution and the war in the east seen through the eyes of a Kharkiv intellectual.
Global temperatures are rising, but the former Soviet Union’s frozen conflicts show no sign of a thaw.
Russia’s support for the election held by separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk – key cities in Ukraine’s Donbas region – indicates that the Kremlin has decided to create another semi-permanent “mini-Cold War,” this time in rebel-controlled areas of Russia’s most important neighboring country.
Since the armed conflict in Donbas between the Kyiv government and pro-Russian separatists, the common discourse about ""two Ukraines"" separated by history and values looks like a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Scepticism about the viability of Ukraine as a nation-state, shared by so many observers inside and outside the country, now appears well-founded.
In tribute to Europe’s pivotal politician, who has clearly led Europe’s evolving policy towards Ukraine, we might call it the Merkel plan.
If it succeeds, a characteristically European version of liberal order will have prevailed over the conservative, nationalist recipe for permanent, violent disorder represented by Vladimir Putin.
Due to the recent tragic events in Ukraine and the ongoing military conflict in the East of the country, Orthodox Christianity has become increasingly important to Western observers and journalists in their attempts to explain the Russian support for the Eastern Ukrainian separatists.
What is happening in eastern Ukraine is war – 'ambiguous war' as a British parliamentary committee calls it, rather than outright, declared war between two sovereign states, but still war.
The triumphal narrative of 1989 presents the revolutions in Poland, Hungary, East Germany, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and Romania as a wave of civil resistance and broad popular opposition to the local communist regimes.
This narrative, however, often obscures the fact that the fall of these regimes was only possible because Moscow’s grasp on its satellites had weakened.
It is hard to judge, from today’s perspective, what strategy the Patriarch of Moscow will pursue with regard to Putin’s politics towards Ukraine.
But what can be said for sure is that in Ukraine, the Russian Orthodox Church’s approach to pluralism is at stake.
This Sunday, millions of men and women will go to the urns in Ukraine to exercise their civil right to vote for a new president.
Opinion polls show that the vast majority of Ukrainians throughout the country wish to remain in Ukraine and want to take part in the election.
If Ukraine can hold a democratic election for its president next Sunday, there's a hope it can return to peaceful negotiations.
Though some deride Russia for backward thinking, Putin's strategy in Ukraine betrays a nuanced understanding of 21st century geopolitics.
At an international conference in Kyiv, taking place between 15 and 19 May, European, American and Russian intellectuals will meet their Ukrainian counterparts to discuss the meaning of Ukrainian pluralism for the future of Europe, Russia and the world.
Voltaire, the French teacher of tolerance and a great friend of Catherine the Great, said that he would gladly move to Russia, though only if its capital were Kiev, not icy St.
As the Ukrainian presidential election scheduled on May 25 gets closer, Kremlin's window of opportunity for invading the country and derailing its European course is gradually narrowing.
The rhetoric of Russian President Vladimir Putin justifying the Anschluss of Crimea and unscrupulous meddling in Ukraine's internal affairs has been based on the premises that there is no legitimate government in Kiev, that it is being run by a gang of Nazis and anti-Semites who took power by coup d'etat and terrorised Russians and Russophones all over the country.
There is nothing we or the Ukrainian government can do to restore its control over Crimea.
In opinion polls held in anticipation of the presidential elections scheduled for May 25, the leaders of the Ukrainian far right receive the support of 2 percent to 3 percent of Ukrainian citizens.
After dismantling the Soviet empire at the end of the short 20th century, Europeans went back to finishing off the Austrian-Hungarian and Ottoman ones, including successor states such as Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia.
In the course of the recent dramatic events in Ukraine, great emphasis has been put on the language question.
I will demonstrate that Vladimir Putin’s allegations regarding the suppression of Russian speakers in Ukraine are part of a complex network of continuing propaganda, and I will confirm that Putin’s recent political moves are the result of an ideology that is dangerously close to that of Nazi Germany.
On 20 February, the young Ukrainian activist Aleksandra Kovaleva posted an open letter to European politicians on Facebook.
The letter was a cri de coeur, evoking the anger, hurt, and disappointment of thousands on the Maidan.
Sanctions on Russia are vital for the credibility of democracy, but politicians believe citizens will not tolerate economic sacrifice.
Ukraine now has a government that has undertaken constitutional reforms to create a parliamentary democracy and has scheduled presidential elections.
Like other countries, Ukraine is home to a number of political parties with different views of the future of the country.
We believe that these differences should be resolved in peaceful discussion and free elections among Ukrainians themselves.
Russia’s willingness to violate Ukraine’s territorial sovereignty is the gravest challenge to the European order in over half a century.
The conflict pits a vast nuclear power against a state equal in size to France, an autocratic regime against a revolutionary government.
Russia has likened the protests to pogroms, but Jews have joined the movement because what’s at stake is an independent future.
The tragedy about the crackdown in Ukraine is that the day of violence began with the promise of peace.
Tuesday was the day that the Ukrainian parliament was supposed to begin discussions on the basic constitutional change that is needed as a first step towards resolving the present political crisis and restoring normal governance to the country.
More tragic still is that a broad consensus exists, within and without Ukraine, as to how a political exit from the crisis could be arranged.
And of course, as recent events in Ukraine show, the European idea extends well beyond the formal frontiers of the European Union.
But the face of Ukraine today is the bloodied, scarred face of the opposition activist Dmytro Bulatov.
Comparisons with Bosnia are still far-fetched, but think of this as a political Chernobyl.
VIENNA — As Russian leaders, diplomats and commentators ponder the division of Ukraine, we must begin to ask what this would actually mean.
If the present crisis ends with the fragmentation of the Ukrainian state, the result will be disastrous for all concerned, including Russia.
The risk is that, in conditions of chaos and in the absence of a decisive Western stance, Russia could follow the logic of its current commitments to a very dangerous conclusion.
Diese Fragen stellt sich der Schriftsteller Martin Pollack, wenn er dieser Tage seinen Freund Juri Andruchowytsch auf Videos sieht, wie er auf dem Maidan in Kiew steht.
We call our international colleagues not only to express their support for Ukrainian writers and journalists, and their solidarity with the Ukrainian people.
We call on you to mobilize your democratic societies and increase pressure on your governments to take a tougher stance against a regime that is leading its country to further violence and bloodshed.
In many ways, Ukraine's Euromaidan is rather unlike the wave of mass protests in Russia that followed the rigged election to the State Duma in December 2011.
Hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians in Kiev and throughout the country are spending nights in the cold and risking arrest and pain to show that they care about Ukraine and its distinct future.
In recent years, one may have witnessed a widening gap between the discourse promoted by the Russian leadership regarding the creation of a Eurasian Union incorporating Russia, the states of Central Asia, and, presumably, Ukraine and the growing discontent of the Russian public.
This is the question we Americans might be asking ourselves these last few days, as we watch young Ukrainians being beaten in Kiev for protesting their own government’s decision not to enter an association agreement with the European Union.
