CONTRACT NUMBER Russia’s ’Ambiguous Warfare’ and Implications for the United States Marine 5b.
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER CNA Analysis & Solutions,3003 Washington Boulevard,Arlington,VA,22201 9.
Phases of Russia’s ambiguous warfare ....................................................... 5 iii This page intentionally left blank. iv Introduction It has been just over a year since “little green men”—strongly suspected to be Russian Federation soldiers—surged into Crimea and drove out all elements and symbols of Ukrainian authority.
While it is unlikely that United States Marines will directly confront Russian Federation forces in the near future, other nations and non-state actors who are potential U.S. adversaries are closely observing Russia’s use of ambiguous warfare and will likely modify their own strategy and tactics as a result.
As he explained, the rules of war have changed:1 In the 21st century we have seen a tendency toward blurring the lines between the states of war and peace.
In the second phase, Russia uses economic warfare and diplomatic/political pressure to intimidate, coerce, punish, and undermine governments in target states as a 4 means of further weakening them.
One of Russia’s 7 major forces for political impact is the Spetsnaz, which one expert discussed in more detail.
Eurasia Daily Monitor 11, no. . 9 quickly throughout the peninsula to take control of key infrastructure.
At that point, the Russians were forced to 10 take on clearly visible roles to prevent the defeat of the self-proclaimed republics.
Russian-sponsored operations have been more successful where they have had support from large ethnic Russian populations, and have fallen short where these conditions do not exist.
The national armed forces of Lithuania, for example, currently have no mandate to intervene in internal affairs; that is the responsibility of the police and the Ministry 13 of Interior.
Bulgaria, heavily dependent on Russia for energy supplies and maintenance of its military equipment, was subject to intense pressure to go forward with its long-planned role as the entry point for the South Stream gas 14 pipeline, but Washington and Brussels prevailed.
In particular, participants saw Russia’s use of population shaping measures in the pre-hostilities phase (to include leveraging Russian-speaking populations in target countries); its use of a mélange of ambiguous actors—to include special forces, militias, and criminal elements, along with resupply missions disguised as humanitarian assistance convoys; and its deliberate use of disinformation and misinformation pertaining to events on the ground, as being particularly effective components of Russia’s ambiguous warfare strategy.
