Russia’s government defines the term compatriots broadly to incorporate not only ethnic Russians and Russian speakers but also their families as well as others who may have cultural or other connections to the Russian Federation—including its nonRussian ethnic groups—directly or through relatives.
Compatriots may have descended from former subjects of the tsarist empire or Soviet-era migrants or may have migrated more recently.
Russian foreign policy and decision-making Moscow has identified protection of and support for compatriot populations as a foreign policy priority since shortly after Russia’s independence, and official Russian foreign policy and national security documents routinely cite it as such.
Nevertheless, in practical terms, Russian compatriots have often been more visible as instruments of broader Russian foreign aims than as objects of Russian policy themselves.
Thus Russia’s compatriot policy is best analyzed wit hi n the context of the Russian government’s overall foreign policy goals as well as its objectives within its immediate neighborhood—the former Soviet region.
Though Russia’s foreign policy conduct is increasingly assertive, in our judgment Russian president Vladimir Putin sees Russia as a conservative power acting in defense of its own vital interests in the region and elsewhere.
This is the case even in Syria, where Moscow sees a serious threat in the potential return of Russian 1 CNA Federation citizens and citizens of other former Soviet states (probably including some Russian compatriots) to their home countries to promote violent extremist ideologies and conduct terrorist attacks.
Closer to Russia, President Putin—and most of Russia’s foreign policy elite and public—sees his country as a great power, something that inherently requires stability and a generally secure environment within its neighborhood so that it can exercise its appropriate role on the global stage.
This in turn calls for significant influence in the former Soviet region.
That said, President Putin’s decision-making often appears tactical rather than strategic and few if any within his inner circle seem to challenge his perspectives, goals, or approaches in defining Russia's foreign and national security policy.
Russia’s seizure of Crimea and support for eastern Ukraine’s separatist forces fit this pattern.
While the former move was immediately successful, it has created a variety of predictable challenges and dile mm as for Russian policy—especially in view of the li mi ted financial and military commitment Mr Putin has made so far in the Donbas.
In seeking to influence the former Soviet region, Russian compatriots can be useful to Moscow in many ways.
Their very existence strengthens Russia’s argument that there is a “Russian world” larger than Russia itself that lends legitimacy to both Russia’s great power status and its regional aspirations.
To the extent that they identify with Russia not only culturally but also politically, Russian compatriots can amplify Russia’s political influence in the former USSR and provide political, economic, and military intelligence.
Where they are alienated from governments in their countries of residence—a condition to which Moscow can contribute—their ahenation from their own governments creates latent potential for unrest and another possible lever.
Protecting compatriots is also politically useful both at home, to rally support, and internationally, where it can benefit Russia’s public diplomacy.
Russia’s influence operations Operationally, Russia attempts to influence compatriots and their governments through several channels.
The Russian government works directly with compatriots through Rossotrudnichestvo, a government agency analogous to the United States Agency for International Development that also has specific responsibility for assisting compatriots, and through its semi-governmental Russky Mir Foundation, which promotes Russian language and culture.
Other tools include an extensive information operations campaign that aims to spread dezinformatsiya, or disinformation.
This includes Russian state media, such as Russia Today and Sputnik; private media in Russia and other countries; social media, and cyber-attacks.
In addition, business and economic relationships, corruption, and the Russian Orthodox Church are critical tools for influencing compatriots in the former Soviet region.
The following table briefly lists implications for Russia, and strategic and operational implications for United States policy.
Implications for United States and Russia's policies Implications for Russia Using compatriots requires not only cultural but political identification with Russia.
Using compatriots may produce diminishing returns if they produce backlash in home countries.
Compatriots are a blunt instrument not fully subject to Moscow’s control.
Provoking violent conflict is dangerous for compatriots and for Russia.
Reintegrating compatriots into Russia weakens their role as instruments of influence elsewhere.
United States Strategic Implications Existing Western and Russian definitions of regional security are incompatible and will remain a source of tension.
Russia’s leadership is prepared to take significant—perhaps even seemingly irrational—risks to defend vital interests.
Moscow may be open to mutually satisfactory understandings to promote regional stability.
Effective host government management of compatriot populations’ grievances reduces vulnerability to Russian pressure. iii CNA United States Operational Implications Better understanding Russia’s policy and actions toward compatriots is critical for United States policy.
United States messaging to compatriot populations is no less important than wider messaging in the region.
Corruption creates additional pathways for Russian influence in compatriot co mm unities and beyond.
Russia is likely to continue cyber-attacks, especially in states with significant and dissatisfied compatriot populations.
The Russian government's direct engagement with compatriot communities.
Percentage of ethnic Russians residing outside of Russia in former Soviet Union states.
Implications for United States and Russia's policies iii IX CNA This page intentionally left blank. x CNA Glossary CIS Commonwealth of Independent States CSTO Collective Security Treaty Organization GDP Gross domestic product 10 Information operations IRC Information-related capabilities OSCE Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe RT Russia Today SBU Sluzhba Bezpeky Ukrayiny xi CNA This page intentionally left blank.
CNA Introduction Since the start of Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its hybrid warfare campaign in eastern Ukraine, policy experts and practitioners alike have been closely monitoring Russia’s efforts to influence and potentially reintegrate the Baltic States, Ukraine, Moldova, and Kazakhstan into a Russia-centric political and economic space.
These countries are all states of the former Soviet Union that have sizable ethnic Russian populations and Russian-speaking communities.
As such, they present Vladimir Putin and the Russian government with an opportunity to exert influence over ethnic Russian populations by supporting local pro-Russian organizations, businesses, and Russian cultural events, and the Russian Orthodox Church.
While it is not new for compatriots to feel a continuing attachment to Russia or even to consider reintegration attractive, what has become more eye opening is how and why Vladimir Putin is using Russia’s strategic influence over Russian ethnic populations in the neighboring states.
These actions have profound implications for United States and Western policy toward Russia, Europe, and Central Asia as the United States explores options for engagement and containment in the region in the years to come.
As part of its wider efforts to assess the implications of Russia’s foreign and national security policy, CNA initiated this study to examine Russia’s objectives, policy, and strategic and operational calculus with respect to ethnic Russian, Russian-speaking, and other potentially sympathetic populations residing in other former Soviet states.
This is a quick-response, three-month effort designed to stimulate public discourse around Russia’s efforts to use these communities, which Moscow defines as compatriots, to further its policy goals.
The study highlights several important implications that United States policy-makers may consider in formulating policy toward Russia and the countries in which these compatriot populations reside.
After releasing this report, the study team plans to organize an event to discuss these topics at CNA headquarters in fall 2015.
Constraints In view of the study team’s aim to encourage public discussion, this report is unclassified and cleared for public release.
Our analysis relied on data from primary open sources, in Russian and in English.
Because this is a rapid-response assessment, we did not conduct interviews in the United States or the former Soviet Union.
Russia’s increasing assertiveness as a great power warrants further research in this area, particularly in the wake of Moscow’s seizure of Crimea and its ongoing assistance to separatist forces in eastern Ukraine.
First, we define Russian compatriots and provide an overview of Russian compatriot populations in the former Soviet Union and their host governments’ relations with them.
Second, we discuss Russia’s foreign policy objectives toward its compatriots abroad.
Third, we examine the compatriots’ role in Russia’s strategic calculus and decision-making, and the varied perspectives of Russia’s foreign policy elites.
Fourth, we discuss Russia’s operational calculus toward its compatriots and the channels through which it seeks to influence compatriots and host governments in their countries of residence, including information operations, economic relationships and corruption, and the Russian Orthodox Church.
We conclude by highlighting implications for the United States to consider as it formulates its policies toward Russia and other former Soviet countries.
I meant, first and foremost, the humanitarian consequences of that process... people lived within the borders of one country, where there was no difference between Ukraine, Belarus, Russia, and Kazakhstan.
And that, moreover, was a tremendous advantage of such a community, such an enormous state.
One-day people woke up, and no one had asked them, and the country was gone.
We then provide an overview of various states’ successes and failures integrating their Russian compatriot populations.
Nevertheless, the ability to speak Russian does not inherently produce loyalty to Russia.
It is important to recall that the Soviet political and social system created strong pressures—and strong incentives—for members of non-Russian ethnic groups to speak Russian.
Over two decades after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the pressure to speak Russian no longer exists (outside Russia) and the incentives to do so are much weaker.
With this in mind, the fact that many in older generations learned and used Russian to advance their careers—and may not have learned to speak national languages well—does not necessarily make them more receptive to present-day Moscow’s political objectives.
Since the annexation of Crimea, he has spoken increasingly of ethnic Russians abroad.
This shift appears to reflect an effort to satisfy and promote Russian nationalism and cultural unity beyond the political borders of the Russian Federation.
Percentage of ethnic Russians residing outside of Russia in former Soviet Union states ESTONIA* 24.8%’ LATVIA 26.
The Russian Academy of Sciences estimates these populations to number approximately 30 million.
Since census data in former Soviet states do not use Russian government classifications—and therefore do not count Russian compatriots—it is complex and somewhat contentious to estimate their numbers.
Prior to the breakup of the Soviet Union, over 25 mi llion ethnic Russians lived in Soviet republics outside the Russian federation.
Though many migrated to Russia during the 1990s, sizeable populations remain in several countries.
Estonia , Latvia , Ukraine and Kazakhstan each have ethnic Russian populations exceeding 15%, and thus likely have the largest Russian communities in proportional terms.
Ethnic Russians make up smaller shares of the population in the other post-Soviet states.
In addition, significant numbers of non-Russians consider Russian to be their primary language of communication.
This includes 15% of the population in Kazakhstan, 12% in (preconflict) Ukraine, 10% in Latvia, and 4% in Estonia.
PyccKHe, PoccHSHe, PyccKoroBopamne, CooTeBecTBeHHHKii: PacceaeHne, HHTerpauHa h Bo3BpaTHaa Murpapua b Pocchk>,» PoccHHCKaa AicaaeMHJi Hayfc: ItHCTHTyT CopiiaubHo-noJiHTHqecKHx HccJieaoBaHnii, MocKBa, 2014.
The constitution of Estonia designates Estonian as the official state language, but it provides protections for minority languages, devolving some authority for language use to local government.
The constitution of Latvia designates Latvian as the official language.
Ukraine’s ethnic makeup generally correlates with the country’s geography.
Most ethnic Russians are located in the eastern and southern oblasts of the country, where Russian is the predominant language.
In Crimea, Stalin’s mass deportation of Crimean Tatars and the Russian naval presence led to the near-complete Russification of the local population, which the Ukrainian government was not able to reverse after independence.
Odessa, a Black Sea port and major trade hub, is also predominantly Russian speaking, as are major cities in eastern Ukraine such as Kharkiv and Dnipropetrovsk.
Ethnic Russians account for approximately 6% of Moldova’s population of 3. million, and an additional 10% of the population consider Russian their primary language.
The majority of the Russian population is in Moldova’s east, in the breakaway region of Transnistria, which borders on southern Ukraine.
Russia’s 14 th Army—numbering 1,200 soldiers—remains there as peacekeepers and to prevent Transnistria’s integration into Moldova.
Between 1989 and 2009, the ethnic Russian population of Kazakhstan declined by 2. mi llion people, dropping from 37% to 24% of the total population.
Of the Russians remaining in Kazakhstan, exceedingly few— approximately 3%—speak Kazakh fluently.
Russian serves as the language of interethnic communication in Kazakhstan, another legacy of Soviet-era Russification policies, and many urban Kazakhs still use Russian as their primary language.
Today, pragmatic education policies promote the Russian language in order to encourage economic engagement with Kazakhstan’s northern neighbor.
Integration programs The constitutions of the Baltic States, Ukraine, Moldova, and Kazakhstan each protect and guarantee the rights of ethnic minorities living within their territories.
However, the degree to which these legal provisions are implemented and enforced varies from country to country.
In each of the post-Soviet states, responsibility for integrating minority populations is shared by a number of ministries and departments.
In Estonia, the citizenship law requires applicants to demonstrate proficiency in the notoriously complex national language.
The Estonian government has passed initiatives to increase minority access to Estonian language instruction.
In Latvia, the National Integration Centre, a project of Latvia’s Society Integration Foundation, works to ensure and improve the availability of various aid services to third-country nationals (those who are neither Latvian citizens nor citizens of other European Union countries), while helping them integrate into Latvian society, and promoting understanding about migration and migrants within Latvian society.
Because Russia and Ukraine share many linguistic and cultural commonalities, Ukrainian governments deemed it unnecessary to create a robust framework for integrating ethnic Russians and Russian speakers.
In those regions of Ukraine where they reside in significant numbers, ethnic Russians are able to live and operate effectively using the Russian language.
They employ passive knowledge of Ukrainian when necessary but are generally resistant to using that language.
In Kazakhstan, several government-affiliated organizations support the rights of the ethnic Russian minority, though these organizations have little political leverage.
Ethnic Russians’ clout was significantly diminished by the emigration of almost 40% of the group’s population to Russia.
The remaining Russian diaspora there tends to organize through shared business and economic ventures.
The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe is the most prominent international organization monitoring human rights and minority rights in the region.
The OSCE maintains a program office in Astana and monitoring missions in both Ukraine and Moldova.
It has conducted investigations and analysis in the Baltic States, where language policies have been a particular point of controversy.
Measuring success In order to assess the success of post-Soviet states in integrating their ethnic Russian mi norities and, by extension, Russian compatriots, we use a framework based on two metrics.
Upon gaining its independence, Lithuania passed generous legislation that afforded full citizenship rights to any ethnic Russians previously resident on its territory—approximately 90% of the Russian population in Lithuania.
Lithuanian is the national language, but the country has not pursued a nationalist political agenda to the exclusion of its Russian or other minorities.
In Lithuania, the per capita gross domestic product is slightly higher than Russia’s.
Estonia and Latvia initially adopted policies toward their ethnic Russian minorities that ranged from unaccommodating to provocative.
The situation was partially rectified in the late 1990s and early 2000s as part of the process of accession to the European Union.
While the social situation for ethnic Russians is disadvantageous, however, the economic conditions in both countries are favorable.
In Latvia, the per capita GDP is on par with Russia’s; in Estonia, it exceeds Russia’s by nearly 10 percent.
We do not assume, however, that the economic situation in either country is so attractive as to wholly outweigh the social exclusion that Russians experience there.
Ukraine stands out among the 14 former Soviet states other than Russia in having both ongoing tensions over Russian compatriots’ language and other cultural rights and a very low per capita income relative to Russia’s.
Lithuania, State Department, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor.
It appears that Ukraine’s failure was not in its treatment of the Russian minority upon independence, but in its subsequent failure to generate and support a consolidated Ukrainian national identity throughout the entirety of its territory.
The population was therefore prone to nationalist tendencies associated with geography and demographics.
The extent of Crimea's autonomy from Kiev has been a source of constant tension, including an effort at secession in the early 1990s and continued protests at Ukraine’s language and foreign policies throughout the 2000s.
Ukraine’s per capita income was approximately 35% of Russia's in 2014, though its eastern regions are relatively wealthy compared to the rest of the country.
For these reasons, Ukraine had the highest risk of Russia exploiting its compatriot population, as became abundantly clear in the aftermath of the EuroMaidan protests in the winter of 2014.
Moldova’s government initially instituted citizenship legislation that granted citizenship only to people residing on the territory of the country in 1940 and their descendants.
Since the majority of ethnic Russians had arrived in Moldova after World War II, this made them stateless.
In addition, nationalistic language policies enacted in the late 1980s caused both ethnic Russians and ethnic Ukrainians to feel discriminated against.
Moldova’s per capita income amounts to just one-fifth of per capita income in Russia.
In Kazakhstan, the government has nearly excluded Russians from politics, though not by design.
Interestingly, the Russian government has largely not asserted itself on behalf of the Russian minority living in this region.
Cultural and political identity are not equal Alone, shared language, history, and culture do not guarantee that an ethnic Russian or broader Russian compatriot population will support Kremlin foreign policy— Russian cultural identity does not automatically produce Russian political identity.
Affinity for not only Russia but also its policies requires something more.
Likewise, economic disappointments or even dissatisfaction do not necessarily lead to political support for another government over one’s own—and where they do, they may encourage migration rather than political protest.
To support Russian political and foreign policy objectives over those of the government of the country in which they reside, Russian compatriots likely must be both socially alienated and determined to remain within those societies rather than return to Russia.
In countries such as Estonia and Latvia, economic satisfaction may have combined with a continuing cultural gulf to create a pool of compatriots who support Russian objectives without desiring to leave their country of residence.
A similar pool of Russia supporters has emerged in eastern Ukraine, as a result of cultural affinity with Russia and dissatisfaction with Ukrainian government policies.
In this case, Russian compatriots appear determined to remain in territory with a deep historical connection to Russia.
Finally, it may be the case that individuals simultaneously adopt multiple overlapping identities—state-centric, ethno-centric, linguistic, political, or otherwise.
Or they may adopt particular identities in particular circumstances,g., when at home, traveling, or visiting a government office.
Since Russian compatriots abroad reside predominantly in this region, Russia’s policy toward the former Soviet Union and its place in Russia’s overall foreign policy is essential context for Moscow’s approach to compatriots.
Russia’s foreign policy Chief among Vladimir Putin’s goals for Russia is to establish Russia as an acknowledged global great power, an aim with direct implications for Russia’s attitude toward the Eurasian region.
In a private meeting several years ago, a senior Kremlin official described this status as being “a member of the world’s board of governors”—one of the small number of countries that are sufficiently powerful to pursue what Russians call an “independent” or “sovereign” foreign policy.
In essence, these terms refer to a foreign policy that is not subordinate to a senior ally or partner or, alternatively, dictated by military and economic weakness.
This attitude is in no small part a reaction against Russia’s political weakness and economic dependence on the United States and the West in the 1990s.
Obtaining global great power status requires security, stability, and significant influence along the aspiring power’s periphery; absent this, national leaders can devote neither the time nor the attention necessary to establish and sustain a global role.
Thus, Moscow’s quest for such a role inherently requires a considerable if not preeminent capability to shape Russia’s immediate neighborhood.
Indeed, Russia’s National Security Strategy declares its relationships with the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States as “a priority direction” of the country’s 33 Russia's recent intervention in Syria notably occurred during a period of relative calm in the conflict in eastern Ukraine; whether Moscow could have moved so assertively in Syria while intense fighting was underway in Ukraine is an open question.
More recently, Moscow has intervened in Syria’s civil war not simply to support President Bashar al-Assad’s government, but to prevent a victory by the Islamic State or other extremist forces that could lead experienced fighters from the former Soviet region to return to their home countries and foment violence in Russia or along its southern periphery.
Russian officials see particular danger in their country’s North Caucasus region, including Chechnya.
Security and stability The Russian government defines security along its borders as a top priority.
However, Russian officials generally define security and stability differently from their Western counterparts.
For Moscow, security in the former Soviet region rests heavily on friendly governments that will not challenge its leadership or align themselves with outside powers.
This is why Russian officials have typically had a very skeptical view of Western assurances that NATO enlargement would increase Russia’s security.
At the same time, Russian officials see strong governments as essential in stemming the spread of extremism and terrorism—especially along Russia’s southern periphery.
However, top officials see transitions to democracy—particularly abrupt transitions, such as the “color revolutions” in Russia’s neighborhood—as producing dangerous instability that is often best avoided.
In recent years, we have seen how attempts to push supposedly more progressive development models onto other nations actually resulted in regression, barbarity and extensive bloodshed.
Putin’s reference to “supposedly more progressive development models” is a clear jab at United States democracy promotion efforts throughout the region and makes clear his view that it has produced instability rather than stability.
Russia’s policy toward Russian compatriots Top Russian officials have consistently described protecting Russian compatriots as a foreign policy objective for over two decades—virtually Russia’s entire postindependence history.
Former president Boris Yeltsin issued what appeared to be his first government-wide instructions on the matter in an August 1994 decree, “On the Fundamental Directions of State Policy of the Russian Federation in relation to Compatriots Living Abroad,” which established an inter-agency coordinating com mi ssion and ordered the government to review and approve a list of “priority measures” to support Russian compatriots.
The Russian government’s foundational foreign policy documents have reflected its attention to compatriots.
Russia’s Foreign Policy Concept, a document prepared periodically by the Foreign Ministry for approval by the president and released when new presidents enter office, highlighted the rights of Russian compatriots in its 2000, 2008, and 2013 editions.
Interestingly, neither Russia’s National Security Strategy nor its earlier National Security Concept refer to “compatriots”; they call strictly for protecting the “rights and lawful interests of Russian citizens abroad”—a narrower construction.
The migration of Russian compatriots to Russia has been important to Russia’s demographics, especially during the 1990s, when immigration into Russia from other CIS countries was at its highest levels.
Taking into account that Russia’s total population declined by about 2 million during this period—even with these 5 million immigrants—their return prevented what could have been a 5% decline in Russia’s population, an unprecedented demographic collapse in peacetime.
Moscow has supported the resettlement of Russian compatriots in the Russian Federation, including through a government commission, the Interdepartmental Commission for the Implementation of the National Program to Assist the Voluntary Resettlement in Russia of Compatriots Currently Living Abroad.
This remains important to Russia’s demographics today; according to a recent report, Russia’s population would have declined in the first half of 2015 if not for migration into the country.
Russia’s use of Russian compatriots Russia’s formal policy toward Russian compatriots is oriented toward helping them improve living conditions where they reside or, alternatively, resettle to Russia.
From this perspective, compatriots are objects of Russian policy—i.e., the Russian government pursues policies intended to affect them in various ways.
Yet, Russia's practical policy toward its compatriots abroad also appears to approach them as instruments—in other words, as tools to implement broader policies that may affect compatriots but are not primarily for their benefit.
In fact, the substantial numbers of Russian compatriots who remain in neighboring countries can serve as instruments of Russia’s foreign policy in several ways.
This maintains pride in the country’s imperial and Soviet past while simultaneously demonstrating that Russia is a great power with social and cultural influence beyond its borders.
It is a major assessment of Russians, Russian speakers, non-Russian ethnic groups of the Russian Federation, and compatriots in other countries, their integration there, and their return migration to Russia.
Russian officials can use this alienation immediately or allow it to remain latent, as a resource for the future.
In practice, alienation can take place at multiple levels, including particular individuals, non-governmental organizations representing compatriots, and even regional governments within states.
This has been most obvious in Ukraine, including in Ukraine’s military and security services.
In a speech to students at a Ukrainian university, President Petro Poroshenko personally claimed that about 80% of the personnel in his country’s security services had been suborned by Moscow.
While perhaps an exaggeration, many media reports describe compromised SBU operations.
In Latvia, the ethnic Russian politician Nils Usakovs has served as mayor of Riga since 2009; his party won approximately 22% of the vote during 2014 elections—despite Russia’s actions in Ukraine, which boosted turnout among parties taking a harder line toward Moscow.
A victory would have made Usakovs the leading candidate for prime mi nister.
The name of Usakovs’ party is Harmony or Concord in English; it is VIENOTIBA in Latvian.
A recent statement from Russia’s Foreign Ministry commenting on UN Human Rights Committee recommendations to the Latvian government illustrates this.
As in the case of the so-called “little green men” who surrounded the Crimean parliament building as Russia’s intervention began, the presence of Russian compatriots can also serve to camouflage Moscow’s involvement.
Compatriots and political legitimacy In addition to its foreign policy dimensions, visibly defending ethnic Russian populations is politically advantageous for Russian political leaders.
Perhaps most notable in this respect has been Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin, who launched his political career in the i990s as a leader of the Congress of Russian Communities, a party explicitly dedicated to this cause.
Former Moscow mayor Yury Luzhkov was similarly known for his long public campaign to return Crimea to Russia and his frequent visits there.
The Russian public sees Russia’s neighborhood as an area important to the country’s national interests and national identity.
As a result, Russians expect leaders to manage relationships successfully, meaning primarily on Moscow’s terms, both as a matter of necessity and as a matter of dignity and pride.
Apparent defeats or concessions can be politically damaging, while victories—such as Mr Putin’s seizure of Crimea—provide not merely support but also political legitimacy.
Developments in surrounding nations can also strengthen or weaken the Russian leadership’s political legitimacy.
With some justification, Russians see their country as much more stable and prosperous than many if not most other CIS countries— something that makes Russia’s leaders look successful and deserving of support.
This is especially consequential with respect to Ukraine, which is the largest and most si mi lar country in the region and therefore the most directly comparable to Russia.
A democratic Ukraine with a stable political system and a growing economy would, over time, raise questions about why Russia was not more successful itself.
Given their common language, easy travel, and shared media, this could even transform Ukraine’s large compatriot population from an instrument of Russia’s influence over Ukraine into an instrument of Western/Ukrainian influence in Russia.
Such domestic political impacts are a key consideration for Russia’s leadership.
The critical challenge for United States and Western policy-makers is of course to understand how and when Moscow may seek either to act on behalf of Russian compatriots or to employ them in pursuing its broader objectives.
This requires an assessment of Russia’s strategic calculus, to which we now turn.
Yet, while approval for Putin remains at 83% in August 2015, only 55% of Russians responded that their country “is on the right track” during the same month.
Strategic calculus incorporates drivers, which motivate action, boundaries, which li mi t it,, and the decision-making processes through which leaders assess options.
Thus, strategic calculus incorporates identifying goals and the steps to achieve them, assessing policies that other actors might pursue in response, and determining how to address those potential responses.
This inherently requires political judgments both internally and externally.
Strategic calculus is the foundation of realistic and rational policy-making.
The Russian leadership’s strategic calculus can be challenging to understand because Russia’s decision-making processes are personalized and non-transparent.
Nevertheless, observers have amassed over 15 years' empirical experience with Vladimir Putin’s rhetoric, choices, and actions as well as with broader patterns inside the Russian government under his leadership.
Thus, they can make a meaningful if cautious assessment of Moscow’s basic approach to foreign and national security policy, including its policy toward compatriots.
With this caveat, we are confident in our assessment of the Russian leadership’s strategic calculus in formulating policy toward its compatriots abroad.
Drivers The key drivers in Russia’s strategic calculus relating to Russian compatriots reflect the fact that Moscow’s foreign policy toward Russian compatriots is largely a function of its overall regional objectives.
As argued earlier, Russia’s desire for influence in the former Soviet region is a function of its quest for acknowledged global great power status.
Moscow thus prefers that governments in this region are both relatively friendly and relatively deferential.
Russian compatriots can both influence and pressure governments to pursue friendly policies.
Russia’s seeks to maintain its modest network of regional military bases and generally to exclude other extra-regional states from establishing 22 CNA military bases in the region.
In Crimea, securing the Sevastopol naval base was a key Russian objective and the relatively large military presence permitted at the base was decisive in doing so.
The 14 th Army has been the facilitator and guarantor of Transnistria’s de facto independence from Moldova.
Russia’s peacekeeping forces in South Ossetia were of course central in the 2008 Russia-Georgia war.
Conversely, after initially accepting American military bases in Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Kyrgyzstan to support the United States war in Afghanistan, Moscow later encouraged their governments to discontinue those arrangements and offered financial incentives.
Russia has important interests at stake in its economic ties with other successor states of the former USSR, particularly with Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan, which together amounted to nearly 15% of Russia’s exports in 2012.
Russian compatriots can play central roles in sustaining these economic relationships.
In addition to its broad geopolitical aims, Russia has narrower political goals in regional states.
Russian compatriots can play political roles and help reach those goals.
For example, they can influence the success of specific legislative initiatives that could affect either Russian compatriot communities or the Russian government’s interests, such as constitutional or legal reforms in Ukraine to promote political decentralization.
As described earlier, Russia’s government conducts a variety of programs to assist Russian compatriots, including promoting language and culture, human rights, and resettlement.
If Belarus president Alexander Lukashenko were to seek to re-orient his country toward the West, Moscow would likely perceive a threat to its vital interests.
Of the former Soviet republics, Russia also shares land borders with the three Baltic States , and with Georgia, Azerbaijan, and Kazakhstan.
United States and other Western analysis has generally focused on the proportional size of Russian and compatriot communities relative to a country’s overall population as an indicator of potential instability or of Russian influence.
However, it is also useful to consider the absolute size of these communities, as numerically larger communities give Russia a greater stake in any conflict or instability that could threaten these groups.
For that matter, Ukraine’s total is comparable to that of the 13 other former Soviet states, excluding Russia, combined.
Thus far, neither Kazakhstan nor Azerbaijan has sought to challenge important Russian interests; indeed, both have maintained generally positive relations with Moscow.
At the same time, each has a strong leader prepared to contain domestic threats, including radical Islamists.
Should either condition change, however, Russia could see a very significant threat to its interests and to Russian compatriots, particularly in Kazakhstan.
Notably, while Azerbaijan’s president Ilham Aliyev successfully inherited political power from his father, Kazakhstan’s aging leader Nursultan Nazarbayev remains in office, having just won re-election at age 75.
Since 57 Authors’ calculations from CIA World Factbook population data.
Numbers of Russian compatriots are larger, to varying degrees, as this incorporates Russian-speakers and other Russian Federation nationalities.
W hil e they share borders with Russia, the Baltic States, as NATO members, are in a different category from other post-Soviet states, and Moscow no longer contests their strategic alignment.
Due to their NATO membership, Russian military intervention in the Baltic States could carry substantially higher—and more unpredictable—costs for Moscow than elsewhere.
Nevertheless, Russia has exercised sustained military, economic, and diplomatic pressure on the Baltic States and used unconventional tactics such as cyber-attacks.
Moscow could see large-scale NATO deployments there as a significant threat to bases in its Western Military District; the concern that it might do so has, of course, already constrained NATO responses to Russia’s actions in Ukraine.
In view of the high stakes, Russia seems unlikely to risk a serious conflict in the current environment.
Still, this calculation could change if Moscow were to assess that the existing danger is already so great that its own responses would not materially alter the threats facing Russia or, alternatively, if Russian leaders believed that dramatic action could force the West to back down.
Again, Russian compatriots could serve as an instrument of action or as justification for action.
Armenia is an important strategic partner for Moscow, but is unlikely to generate threats to Russian interests in the near term.
It was a largely willing addition to the tsarist empire as it was seeking protection from its neighbors, and its leaders see similar reasons to align with Russia today.
In Moldova, Russia accepts the status quo in Transnistria, but could react strongly to any effort to change it; the separatist region's Russian compatriots have long been a highly visible political issue in Russia, to a degree matched only by compatriots in Ukraine and the Baltic States.
Russian compatriot populations there are relatively small—as are Russia’s enduring economic interests.
Moreover, while Russian troops played a significant part in the Tajik civil war over 20 years ago, Moscow declined to become involved in Kyrgyzstan’s more recent Tulip Revolution despite some calls to do so.
Afghanistan is important to Russia in large part because of its impact on Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
From a cost-benefit perspective, supporting strong governments that contain extremism in this region helps Moscow avoid pressure to intervene militarily if a weaker government should fall.
Notwithstanding increasing assertiveness during Vlad imi r Putin’s tenure as Russia’s president, Russia’s overall foreign policy has been conservative and strategically defensive.
His 2013 Address to the Federal Assembly, in which he quoted Orthodox-conservative philosopher Nikolai Berdyaev, was one of his most specific efforts to define himself and Russia as leaders of the world’s political and social conservatives.
Russia’s first president, Boris Yeltsin, ordered two wars in Chechnya, the first to prevent its secession (which many in Russia saw as the do mi no that could collapse the country) and the second to contain quasi-independent Chechnya’s dangerous impacts on Russia’s other North Caucasus regions.
Medvedev and Putin intervened in Abkhazia and South Ossetia to prevent Mikheil Saakashvili, then president of Georgia, from forcibly reintegrating the autonomous regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia—and to block Georgia’s possible NATO membership for the foreseeable future.
Similarly, from Putin’s point of view, his seizure of Crimea and intervention in eastern Ukraine were in defense of Russia’s national interests.
The moves blocked Ukraine’s membership in NATO and ended continuous risks to Russia’s control over its naval base at Sevastopol.
They also protected Putin from the domestic consequences of former Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych's ouster, which otherwise could have looked like a major foreign policy defeat.
If Crimea’s reintegration into Russia had been a central goal of Vladimir Putin’s foreign policy without regard to conditions in Ukraine, Russia could have acted at almost any time over the last decade.
The Crimean parliament had voted more than once for greater autonomy and even independence from Ukraine well before March 2014.
Russia’s parliament had also voted, among other things, to declare Sevastopol a Russian city.
Furthermore, leading Russian politicians had been campaigning for years to encourage the Russian government to take back Crimea, and had been attempting to mobilize Russian compatriots there.
Generally speaking, Russia’s strategically defensive foreign policy suggests that Moscow is unlikely to pursue a Crimea-style policy, or a Donbas-style policy, toward other Russian compatriot populations unless Russia’s leaders—especially Vladimir Putin—perceive significant new threats to Russia’s regional role and influence in specific countries.
It is especially unlikely to pursue such policies if the potential costs seem high.
Russia’s financial constraints Financial boundaries are also significant in Russia’s strategic calculus, particularly as its economy and its federal budget groan under the strain of continuing low oil prices that have forced across-the-board cuts in non-defense spending.
Moscow already appears to have blanched at the cost of sustaining and rebuilding rebel-held territories in Ukraine, the so-called Donetsk and Lugansk People’s Republics.
Putin likewise insisted that Crimea’s tourist destinations would not threaten Sochi’s future as a high-priced resort.
The fact that Russia’s president and his advisors chose to address these two questions in a live national television program suggests that they considered it important to do so.
Since that time, Russian federal budget outlays to integrate Crimea and develop its infrastructure have only increased.
According to Deputy Crimean Affairs Mi ni ster Andrey Sokolov, Russia will spend $2. billion in 2015 and a total of $13. billion by 2020 to do so.
In Russia’s current economic environment, neither Vladimir Putin nor other Russian leaders are likely eager to assume financial responsibility for devastated rebel-held territory in eastern Ukraine, which would far exceed the costs of absorbing an undamaged Crimea.
The Afghan syndrome A third significant boundary on Moscow’s strategic calculus is Russia’s so-called “Afghan syndrome”—the public’s reluctance to support military operations after the Soviet Union’s long and troubled efforts to occupy and stabilize Afghanistan.
This reluctance to support military action was especially evident during Russia’s first war in Chechnya, when the country’s freer political and media environments under President Boris Yeltsin permitted open opposition.
This was especially important in that the war in Chechnya was not an optional foreign venture but a effort to preserve Russia’s territorial integrity.
A spring 1996 poll by Russia’s independent Levada polling agency found that some 59% of Russians expected the candidate for whom they planned to vote in forthcoming presidential elections to end the war in Chechnya.
As late as 2013, after the second war in Chechnya and a time when Russia’s North Caucasus region was much more stable, some 24% of Russians expressed support for Chechnya’s independence.
During the second war in Chechnya, new president Vladimir Putin expended significant effort in controlling media access to and reporting about the conflict and in suppressing public criticism of the war.
This was likely a direct consequence of the fact that public pressure forced Yeltsin to accept Chechnya’s de facto independence to end the first war—an outcome Putin was unwilling to accept.
Although the Russian government’s ability to manage information has improved since that time, it remains limited; as a result, the prospect of significant casualties does shape Russia’s strategic choices.
At the same time, however, like in Western democracies, public tolerance of casualties is proportionate to public perceptions of the stakes—hence, the efforts to magnify perceived threats in Ukraine.
On the contrary, Russia’s president operates within the context of Russia’s elite-level policy debates and within a broader political-bureaucratic system that overlays Putin’s personal style and approaches onto Russian and Soviet historical patterns.
Russia’s foreign policy debate Though Russian officials typically do not differ publicly with their president, they do express opinions that suggest the existence of two broad schools of thought regarding Russia’s foreign policy, with implications for Russia’s approach to its neighborhood and to Russian compatriots.
Russia’s Foreign Ministry and some other voices describe a “multi-vector” foreign policy approach that emphasizes relations with China, India, and multilateral organizations such as the BRICS group, which includes Brazil, China, India and South Africa as well as Russia, and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, in addition to Russia’s ties with the United States and the West.
Succeeding at this policyintended to facilitate Russia’s role as a great power and a stable international enviro nm ent for domestic economic growth—inherently requires reorienting toward China while preventing a fundamental break with the West that would entirely redirect Moscow’s foreign policy.
Those with this perspective advocate cooperating with Washington in some areas, such as the United States and NATO war in Afghanistan and the recent Iran nuclear agreement, notwithstanding differences in others, such as Ukraine and Syria.
They argue for continued efforts to find a diplomatic resolution to Russian-Western differences over Ukraine and have relatively limited objectives in Ukraine, with particular emphasis on preventing Ukraine’s NATO membership and encouraging decentralization in order to provide Russian compatriot populations with more political and language rights.
While determined that Russia should play a leading role in the former Soviet region, they generally eschew tactics that could seriously damage Moscow's relations with other major powers.
Harder-line officials, including some in Putin’s inner circle, are deeply skeptical of American intentions and focus on building a closer relationship with China in order to challenge the U.S.-led international order.
They appear to support a confrontational policy toward the United States and to argue that Russian escalation in Ukraine will demonstrate Western weakness and secure a favorable resolution for Moscow, whereas continued cooperation in other areas will encourage Washington and Brussels to believe that Russia is weak.
They are quite comfortable applying significant pressure on other former Soviet states in order to achieve Russian foreign policy objectives.
One example is then first deputy prime minister Sergey Ivanov’s reported support for economic sanctions against Estonia in a 2007 dispute over Soviet-era monuments.
Some, such as Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin, have long records of activism on behalf of Russian compatriots in the former Soviet Union, especially in Moldova’s Transnistria region.
Thus far, Vladi mi r Putin has set Russian policy on the course advocated by the Foreign Ministry, expanding Russia’s ties with China and other non-Western powers while attempting to preserve some cooperation with the United States and major European governments.
This constrains further provocative actions toward Russian compatriots in the former Soviet region, at least in the near term.
Indeed, as Moscow has recently increased its military presence in Syria and pursued military-to-military contacts with the United States, Russia has simultaneously ousted harder-line officials in the Donetsk People’s Republic who call for independence rather than greater autonomy within Ukraine.
Vladimir Putin’s “inner circle”—primarily current and former siloviki, or veterans of Russia’s military and security services—appear generally to support “the road not taken,” that is, to prefer a more confrontational approach to the United States and the West than Mr Putin is currently pursuing.
That said, since government officials in most political systems rarely express open differences with a sitting head-of-state, this is not easy to assess.
This also limits the degree to which the Russian president's close associates publicly express their personal views.
Perhaps more important, however, neither Putin nor key individuals in his inner circle appear to be nationalist ideologues.
The Russian president certainly employs nationalist rhetoric, such as in his March 18, 2014, speech to a joint session of the Russian parliament on Crimea’s annexation, 76 but he does so intermittently, for practical political purposes.
He is a statist and a patriot who asserts that Russia has its own path—neither Western nor Eastern—but he is also extremely pragmatic.
This is a common perspective among other siloviki 77 that Putin’s inner circle seems to share.
Observing Russia’s actions, the Russian president’s close associates indeed appear to be focused more on the pragmatic use of Russian compatriots as operational policy instruments in pursuing wider policy objectives than on addressing the concerns of Russian compatriots themselves.
The policy process Because Russia’s government does not have a structured and formalized policy process—or, more precisely, because Vladimir Putin’s very broad authority in foreign policy limits the impact of formal processes in making specific decisions—Russia’s decision-making can appear opaque.
That said, available accounts suggest that Russia’s president seeks information and receives recommendations from his inner circle, and from other senior subordinates, but does not solicit feedback.
As a result, there is little evidence that these individuals openly question his decisions or challenge his thinking, particularly on foreign policy matters.
President Putin’s status as the sole decider on any particular issue does not give him the ability to be the sole decider on every issue.
He can closely manage his personal priorities, but must delegate broad power to subordinates on a de facto basis if not a formal one.
Since Russia’s government is not immune to internal bureaucratic differences or even disputes, this can lead to simultaneous and contradictory policies that Putin eventually arbitrates.
From this perspective, it is important that Mr Putin appears personally involved in Russia’s Ukraine policy.
On the other hand, to the extent that Ukraine has captured the Russian president’s attention, his inner circle and senior government officials may have greater autonomy on some other issues.
Vladimir Putin’s defensive and reactive approach is partially a consequence of the fact that, like Boris Yeltsin, he is more effective as a tactician than as a strategist.
This is most evident in that many of the Russian president’s tactical moves— including those that appear immediately successful—have uncertain strategic consequences for Russia.
This has a variety of important consequences, including the fact that reactive policies can evolve significantly over the course of a crisis, complicating efforts to understand Moscow's objectives and to formulate responses.
The ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine is a powerful reflection of Russia's nonstrategic approach to foreign policy in many respects.
First, while likely relying on existing contingency plans, Russia's initial seizure of Crimea appears to have been an abrupt response to the collapse of the Viktor Yanukovych presidency and Ukraine’s government rather than a step in a considered strategic plan.
However, the populations in the two eastern provinces were more divided—and less geographically isolated—than Crimea’s and those conflicts quickly became more complex.
In that environment, Moscow’s active and visible support for the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics has encouraged expectations among Russian compatriots in those regions—and in Russia itself—that the Kremlin cannot fully satisfy without making military and financial commitments that it has thus far demonstrated no willingness to make.
At the same time, the more damaging the conflict becomes to the Donbas and its residents, the more Moscow has to deliver in order to maintain its credibility at home and in other Russian compatriot communities.
This may ultimately drive the very changes in Ukraine’s orientation that Putin intended to avoid.
Removing Crimea’s compatriot voters from Ukraine’s previously closely divided electorate will likely contribute to these dynamics.
Today, it is unclear how Russia’s government can accomplish its stated aims without escalating in ways that it has so far been unprepared to pursue—though Moscow is perhaps not unique in confronting this challenge.
Thus far, Vladimir Putin’s response has been to prevent the compatriot-separatists’ defeat through gradual and calibrated escalation.
Yet in the absence of clearly defined objectives, the policy resembles the early stages of former president Lyndon Johnson’s escalation in Vietnam.
Strategic thinking about Ukraine could have foreseen the possible dynamics of this conflict and the dile mm as they could create.
On one hand, Russia’s military presence does not seem sufficient to produce a decisive victory for Syrian government forces on the battlefield.
On the other hand, however, Moscow’s participation in the conflict subjects both its forces in Syria and civilians in Russia to the risk of retaliatory attacks.
Taking into account that only 14% of Russians strongly or somewhat supported a direct military role in Syria in a mid-September 2015 survey—and 69% strongly or somewhat opposed this—a prolonged, costly and inconclusive mission could also pose a political problem.
Moreover, Putin’s centralized and personalized governance style inherently weakens efforts to establish a system that could develop and execute long-term strategies without his continuous intervention.
Manual control allows the Russian president the power to do almost anything, but only as long as he personally supervises the effort.
Mr Putin himself recently used the term, asserting 79 This is not to imply that Russia might escalate to a similar extent without significant changes in conditions on the ground.
In Russia, the broad autonomy that leaders enjoy at every level—federal, regional, and local—arguably has this impact.
Notwithstanding a broadly conservative approach, Vladimir Putin has been willing to take considerable risks when he has perceived Russia’s fundamental national interests to be at stake.
Indeed, according to a recent journalistic account citing a former KGB officer, Putin in his earlier career “was seen in the system as a risk-taker who had little understanding of the consequences of failure” 84 —another indicator suggesting tactical rather than strategic thinking.
Thus, though seizing Crimea was quite bold, Putin reacted to an imminent threat when Viktor Yanukovych fell from power in Ukraine.
Ukraine’s full membership in the West and its institutions, and its potential ejection of Russia from the naval base at Sevastopol, would have prevented Russia from exercising the role it seeks as a global great power.
Russian compatriots served as a justification 85 and as an instrument for Moscow’s action, but do not appear to have been the primary motive.
Mr Putin seems to have accurately assessed that the Western reaction to a fait accompli in Crimea would be limited, though the downing of Malaysian Airlines flight 17 over eastern Ukraine led to considerably tougher Western sanctions a few months later.
Politburo members excluded staff from the meeting, and a Politburo member prepared handwritten minutes.
When Moldova’s president Vladimir Voro ni n rejected the deal due to last-minute Western pressure—causing Putin to cancel a planned November 2003 trip to Chisinau to sign the deal, on the eve of his departure—Moscow did not appear to see immediate risks to its vital interests so long as Transnistria maintained its de facto autonomy and the frozen conflict remained frozen.
These two conditions ensured that Russia would retain its role in Moldova and that Moldova would remain stable.
Russia’s reaction in its relations with Transnistria was mild by comparison with its recent policy toward Ukraine.
Still, according to a former senior career diplomat, the episode had a considerable impact on Putin’s longer-term evaluation of United States and Western objectives in Russia’s neighborhood.
Understanding this and other lessons that Russia’s leaders draw from United States policy choices is also valuable in understanding Russia’s strategic calculus.
Managing Rivalry or Business-as-Usual,” in Enduring Rivalry: American and Russian Perspectives on the PostSoviet Space, Paul J Saunders, editor, Center for the National Interest, 2011, 43.
In the same volume, Russian journalist Alexey Pushkov, now chairman of the State Duma Committee on International Affairs, also highlighted the impact of United States efforts to kill the Kozak plan on Putin’s thinking.
A leading Russian politician told one of the authors of this paper that Voronin called Putin at midnight the night before Putin’s trip to withdraw from the agreement, after receiving calls from United States Secretary of State Colin Powell and NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana.
Specifically, we will examine Russia’s influence operations through formal government institutions, social and religious movements, media, cyber-attacks, and economic and business ties to Russia.
A calculated decision further stipulates that decisionmakers consider the impact that their actions will have on operations and policy.
Thus, one can say that operational calculus is country-level decision-making in selecting among available tools to achieve desired strategic objectives.
For the purpose of this paper, we will examine Russia's operational calculus by evaluating how the Russian government exerts influence on Russian compatriots in neighboring states.
Geography is a significant general consideration in Russia’s operational calculus in influencing Russian compatriots.
As noted earlier, Azerbaijan, the Baltic States, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine share borders with Russia, while Armenia, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan do not.
The Russian government’s direct engagement with compatriot communities Where possible, Russia’s government interacts directly with compatriots through government institutions.
As its resources and capabilities have increased over time, the Russian government has expanded its bureaucratic machinery focused on Russian compatriots.
In addition to the com mi ssion established through Boris Yeltsin’s 1994 decree, now known as the Government Commission on the Affairs of Compatriots Abroad , 89 Russia also has a government-wide commission to help compatriots return to live in Russia.
Perhaps more important is Rossotrudnichestvo, the Federal Agency for Commonwealth of Independent States Affairs, Compatriots Living Abroad, and International Humanitarian Cooperation, which then-president Dmitry Medvedev established by decree in September 2008.
Though structured as an independent agency, Rossotrudnichestvo is bureaucratically subordinate to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and its director is equivalent in rank to a deputy minister—not unlike the relationship of the United States Agency for International Development (which Russian officials consider Rossotrudnichestvo’ s closest American counterpart) to the Department of State.
Rossotrudnichestvo received a separate budget allocation to support Russian compatriots for the first time in 2014, amounting to 111. million rubles.
Of this, the sum of 57. mi llion rubles was directed to programs outside Russia and the sum of 47. mi llion rubles went to programs in the country.
This followed President Putin’s call for “strengthening” the agency’s “human and resource potential” in his Executive Order 89 The commission’s very limited web site is at www.government.ru/department/156/events.
In addition to development assistance, public diplomacy, and educational and scientific cooperation, its mission also includes assisting compatriots, promoting Russian language and culture, and protecting historic monuments and burial sites in other countries, often a source of tension due to contending perspectives on Soviet history.
Its current leader, Lyubov Glebova, previously directed an independent agency supervising education and science and was earlier a deputy mi nister of health and social development.
Rossotrudnichestvo has dozens of representative offices co-located with Russian embassies and consulates; in Ukraine, it has offices in Kiev and in Odessa.
As noted above, the government-supported Russkiy Mir Foundation also supports Russian language and culture globally and among Russian compatriots.
Information operations Russia’s extensive information operations are among its most effective instruments of influence over Russian compatriots and the governments of neighboring countries.
Russia’s 10 dramatically increased in scope in recent years with the founding of Russia Today , Russia’s state-sponsored news channel for foreign audiences, and the consolidation of government-sponsored media entities targeting foreign audiences.
Russia’s 10 aims not only to influence Russian compatriots in neighboring countries, but more generally to project the image of a strong and powerful nation-state capable of interfering in its neighbors’ affairs with ease and at a moment’s notice.
In this section, we discuss some of the operational tactics that Russia has used to influence Russian compatriots in the information domain.
One of the motivations behind the latest wave of 10 efforts is to spread dezinformatsiya, or disinformation, to confuse audiences and present alternative perspectives favorable toward Russian foreign policy.
One tactic to distribute dezinformatsiya is to use on lin e trolls, whether automated or human, to post pro-Moscow comments and information on the internet and social media in order to sway opinion.
These commentators often obscure information, falsify facts, and edit or fabricate images to generate suspicion, confusion, and fear in the audience.
In some instances, “troll armies,” groups of online pro-Kremlin, pro-Putin regime bloggers, spread dezinformatsiya.
Petersburg, employees receive over S500 a month to pose as internet users defending the pro-Putin regime, and to spread conspiracy theories of Western leaders and those of Central and Eastern Europe.
Russian state media also spread dezinformatsiya to influence Russian compatriots in neighboring countries.
For example, RT has significant operations throughout Central Europe and the former Soviet Union, including the Baltic States, the Balkans, Eastern Europe, and Central Asia.
RT provides programming in Russian, English, and the native language of each country—e.g., in Lithuanian, Latvian, and Estonian in the Baltic States.
In eastern and southern Ukraine, and Russian-occupied Crimea, half of the population accesses Russian TV for news.
According to the State Committee of Television and Radio Broadcasting of Ukraine, up to 80% of RT’s broadcast time is non-Ukrainian content, primarily from Russia.
Russia’s domestic media can also be influential among Russian compatriots, particularly in neighboring countries where broadcast media are available over the air.
Even those segments of the population who may prefer to watch Ukrainianlanguage television often end up watching significant programming in Russian since it is higher in quality and cheaper for Ukrainian broadcasters to purchase.
Impact on Media Independence and Pluralism,” Problems of Post-Communism.
Since most Russian-language content online originates within Russia’s borders, Russia’s domestic online censorship affects the Russian media that the compatriots consume in neighboring countries.
In recent years, Putin has consolidated the control of the internet, a virtual space that in the past was not under strict regulation.
In the past year, the Russian parliament passed legislation requiring that any blogger with over 3,000 followers must register his/her personal information with the Russian government, and will be held to the same “journalistic” standards as any major news source.
Additionally, the internet law requires that all internet companies operating webpages within Russia must house their user data so that those data are available to Russian security services.
Many in Western media have expressed concerns that the law’s aim is to silence bloggers and social media outlets that oppose the Putin regime and Putin’s policies.
Perhaps further underscoring the concerns of those who believe in free expression, President Putin stated, “You do know that it all began initially, when the Internet first appeared, as a special CIA project.
Pavel Durov, the CEO of VKontakte, a Russian version of Facebook, was “elbowed” out of the company and fled to the Caribbean.
VKontakte is now under the control of Alisher Usmanov, a strong ally of the Putin regime.
Some of the funding was reportedly to compensate for the decline in the Russian mble.
Cyber-attacks that appear politically motivated can also have important symbolic impact among compatriots and contribute to mobilizing their communities.
Russian cyber-attacks are often planned and orchestrated by independent hackers supported by the Russian government.
In 2007, Estonia was the victim of one of Russia’s largest cyber-attacks, after the Estonian parliament voted to remove the Bronze Soldier statue from Tallinn’s city center.
After extensive media criticism and violent public protests against the Estonian parliament’s action, many in Estonia’s government, business establishment, and media outlets woke up one April morning to find that their computer systems had been attacked.
While nothing has been proven, many in Estonia and the West suspect that Moscow was behind this attack, which was the largest cyber-attack that Estonia had ever seen.
Since then, Russia has expanded cyber-attacks to influence other neighboring countries, particularly those with significant Russian compatriot populations.
Cyberattacks in Ukraine have increased significantly since the annexation of Crimea.
While Western media have focused on military operations in eastern Ukraine, there subsequently have been over fOO low-tech cyber-attacks on Ukraine’s government and non-government organizations.
Many of these attacks have featured “black energy,” malware designed to remotely take over computer networks.
Analysts estimate that $900 mi llion was collectively stolen from these institutions.
Economic influence and corruption Business relationships—whether fully legitimate or not—are another element of Russia’s influence in neighboring countries.
In this context, Russian compatriots provide an economic point-of-entry by virtue of their contacts and local knowledge.
This can be a significant advantage for Russia, given its economic goals in the region.
Russia’s overall objective is to sustain and expand market access and trade flows with other successor states of the former USSR—particularly Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan, which together amounted to nearly 15% of Russia’s exports in 2012.
Russia’s considerable energy exports can provide leverage in dealing with its customers, but only so long as Moscow has sufficient control.
Absent that control, pipelines make Russia vulnerable in relations with transit countries.
Ownership of pipelines has thus been a high priority and a consistent goal for major companies such as Gazprom.
Russian compatriots play important roles in linking Russia’s economy with neighboring states.
One prominent example is Ukrainian oligarch Rinat Akhmetov, whose DTEK energy firm incorporates six Ukrainian and three Russian coal companies.
Akhmetov is also a useful example in that he highlights the fact that Russian compatriots need not be ethnic Russians, as compatriots are defined by Moscow to include individuals from other ethnic groups predominantly residing in Russia.
The influence of the Russian Orthodox Church From the tsarist era, through the Soviet period, into the present day, the Russian Orthodox Church has had an intimate relationship with the Russian state.
Tsar Nicholas I played a key role in binding the church to the state when he formulated his ideology of “Orthodoxy, Autocracy and Nationality” as Russia’s guiding philosophy.
Officially atheist Soviet leaders later suborned the Orthodox Church’s leadership in order to ensure control over its remaining followers.
Though Orthodoxy is weaker today than in the past, Vladimir Putin has often publicly proclaimed his Orthodox faith and appears increasingly to be linking Orthodoxy with Russian identity—though he is also careful to craft a national identity that incorporates Russia’s Muslims and Jews.
Vladimir, the spiritual leader of the Russian Orthodox Church, Patriarch Kirill, reiterated the spiritual unity of all living on the territory of Ancient Rus.
Although there are different independent states on the territory of Ancient Rus’ today, I believe their people desire to be united spiritually.
For our lives are based on one faith, selected by the holy Prince Vladimir, the individual who formed the contours of the great Eurasian state on whose territory these independent countries exist today.
Top Russian officials often praise the Russian Orthodox Church and its affiliates for building close ties with the Russian compatriots in neighboring states.
In a Bishops’ Convention in Moscow, President Putin emphasized that millions of ethnic Russians communicate with Russia through the church in neighboring countries.
This is particularly significant as the Russian Orthodox Church provides an outlet to strategically influence Russian compatriots in neighboring states in all spheres of public life, including social institutions, charity, science, and the military.
For example, Konstantin Malofeyev, founder and director of the Fund of St.
Basil the Great, funds programs abroad that are affiliated with the Russian Orthodox Church and the government, particularly in countries with Russian compatriot populations.
Basil the Great, Malofeyev promotes and supports the Orthodox Church, education and religious activities, national programs, and charity and aid for children.
This not only provides a sense of unity and commonality, but also allows the Russian government and its supporters to use social and religious institutions as a means to indirectly influence the targeted ethnic Russian population.
By doing so, Russia is able to drive a wedge between Russian compatriots and the countries they reside in, and to align Russian compatriots more closely with the Russian state.
In effect, through social and religious influence, Russia has a strategic tool to influence the socio-cultural and political affairs of neighboring countries of the former Soviet Union.
Having examined Russia’s objectives toward the compatriots in neighboring countries, and further assessed Russia’s strategic and operational calculus to achieve its objectives, we divide our implications into implications for Russia and broad strategic and operational implications for the United States and its allies.
Implications for Russia Before assessing strategic and operational implications for the United States and its allies, we believe it is useful to assess the implications of Russia’s approaches for its own longer-term interests and objectives, as these implications create certain dilemmas and constraints for Moscow.
Russia’s use of compatriots in the region requires not only their cultural but also their political identification with Moscow and its aims.
Gaps between Russian compatriots’ cultural identification and their political identification complicate efforts to mobilize these groups for broader political purposes as opposed to narrow issues of language rights, educational options, and other social concerns, including ease of travel to Russia.
Relatively satisfied compatriot populations will be less amenable to mobilization.
Large-scale mobilization requires that Russian compatriots see an existential or near-existential threat to their way of life—something not presently visible outside Ukraine.
Continuous efforts to employ Russian compatriots as an instrument of Russian foreign policy are likely to produce diminishing returns.
If host government and majority populations in neighboring states begin to view Russian compatriots as essentially foreign groups that act in Russia's interests rather than in the interests of their states of citizenship/residence, those compatriots are likely to face growing skepticism and even hostility as they pursue their political or other objectives.
This could generate political—or violent—backlash against them and might even lead to conflict.
Conversely, if Russia’s government appears to use Russian compatriots without producing tangible benefits—or, indeed, at the expense of their interests and lives—Moscow risks alienating not only those with which it is directly engaged, but also Russian compatriots in other countries.
Some Russian compatriots might welcome peaceful Crimea-style a nn exation to Russia, but few likely aspire to the grinding and destructive civil war underway in eastern Ukraine.
The Kremlin’s manifest unwillingness to absorb those territories or to provide significant assistance beyond arms, food, and emergency supplies could thus deter Russian compatriots elsewhere from pursuing their aims through violence.
Setting aside the evolving Donetsk and Lunhansk People’s Republics, Russia generally does not exert operational control over compatriots or the institutions they create.
Even in those cases, however, Russian policy aims depend on local actors with their own objectives, tactics, and timelines.
Outside times of crisis, Russian compatriots can be most useful to Moscow in attempting to enforce boundaries on policy choices by the government of their country of residence—for example, in opposing cooperation with Western institutions or defending the rights of their communities, and in creating or threatening political crises to justify direct political, economic, or military pressure from Moscow.
They have limited capacity to force specific actions by national governments.
Deliberately provoking large-scale violent conflict is a “nuclear option” with unpredictable and possibly very dangerous consequences, including for the compatriot populations that the Russian government has committed to protect and potentially for Russia itself.
If the Russian compatriots of the Donbas remain inside Ukraine—which seems quite likely, since Russia has not offered otherwise— their lives will be far more difficult in the coming years than they have been in the past.
Large-scale fighting, like what is underway in eastern Ukraine, also risks escalation in Russia’s broader confrontation with the West.
That said, if Russia’s leaders expect Washington to back down if faced with direct conflict between nuclear-armed states, as some likely do, they may consider this an acceptable risk.
Reintegrating Russian compatriots into Russia through immigration or through territorial acquisitions inherently weakens their role as instruments of influence.
Kazakhstan’s Russian compatriot community is significantly smaller than it was when the Soviet Union collapsed.
Ukraine has perhaps 2 million fewer Russian compatriots following Moscow’s annexation of Crimea.
Though it is impossible to predict Ukraine’s future presidential elections, it appears much less likely that the country will elect another president from eastern Ukraine, as Viktor Yanukovych was.
This alone will diminish Russia’s political influence in Ukraine in the future—and even dealing with Yanukovych, the Kremlin experienced many disappointments.
Political elites in Washington and Moscow harbor considerable mistrust of one another’s intent that will shape bilateral relations for some time.
At the same time, Russia retains the capability to threaten vital United States national interests or to assist the United States in advancing them.
This context necessitates consideration of key strategic implications of Russia’s policy toward compatriots in the former Soviet region.
Existing Western and Russian definitions of regional security in Eurasia are incompatible and will remain a source of tension.
Russia’s determination to be an acknowledged great power requires a level of influence in its immediate neighborhood that the United States and its allies have been unwilling to accept.
Until the West and Russia find a mutually acceptable European security architecture, policy-makers should expect new conflicts to erupt.
Russia’s leadership is prepared to take significant—perhaps even unexpected or seemingly irrational—risks to defend vital interests.
As a result, it is essential for United States and Western decision-makers to understand how Russia’s leaders define vital national interests as well as their narrower vital personal interests, rather than projecting United States or Western perspectives of what those interests should be.
Only through this approach can United States and Western decision-makers anticipate Moscow’s responses to their own policy choices.
Because Russia’s definition of security for its citizens and compatriots in its immediate neighborhood requires stability, Moscow may be open to mutually satisfactory understandings to maintain stability.
Instability that creates ungoverned or weakly governed zones along Russia's borders facilitates terrorism, drug trafficking, and other security threats.
Moscow accepts stable frozen conflicts, such as those in Nagorno-Karabakh and Transnistria, but prefers strong central governments that respect Russian government perspectives and Russian compatriot populations.
Russian compatriot populations are significant and—notwithstanding migration to Russia—enduring; thus, tensions surrounding their rights, treatment, and grievances are likely to endure too.
High levels of Russian public support for Vladimir Putin’s annexation of Crimea suggest that even many in Russia’s opposition identify with Moscow’s former imperial/Soviet territories and the Russian compatriots who live there.
This raises the possibility that a more Western-oriented 50 CNA Russia could retain existing objectives and policies.
More focused consideration of these populations and Western policy toward them seems appropriate.
Effective management by host governments limits Russia’s opportunities to exploit Russian compatriots.
Moscow is most successful in mobilizing compatriot populations with significant economic and/or social grievances.
Governments that address these grievances and build mutual trust with their Russian compatriot populations will be less vulnerable.
Integration of Russian compatriots in a way that facilitates their political identification with their countries of residence is a powerful tool for governments in the region in blunting Moscow’s influence in their societies.
Steps to constrain Russian compatriots’ political activity or cultural rights are likely both to alienate those populations and to provide Moscow with fodder for its public diplomacy messaging—if not with pretexts for aggressive policy measures.
Operational implications Russia’s policy toward Russian compatriots also has more i mm ediate repercussions for America and for United States allies as they make near-term decisions.
We consider the following to be among the significant operational implications.
A better understanding of Russia’s policy and actions toward Russian compatriots in neighboring countries is critical to United States policy toward Russia and its neighborhood.
Russian compatriots are a valuable policy instrument for Moscow, yet United States and Western governments have not thoroughly exa mi ned the many potential axes along while Russia can exercise influence, ranging from political parties to Russian and local Russian-language media to formal and informal relationships.
United States messaging to compatriot communities is at least as important as messaging to wider populations in Russia’s neighborhood.
Improving Russian compatriots’ understanding of United States and Western objectives in relation to the former Soviet Union could mitigate existing perceived threats.
Further, developing counter-messaging and counter-narratives to balance Russia’s information operations will continue to be vital in the battle of ideas.
Equally important is the continuous effort to strengthen new media outlets and freedom of expression.
Corruption creates additional pathways for Russian influence in compatriot communities and beyond, and can constitute a threat to national security.
Corruption that establishes relationships of dependence—whether political or economic—can enable Russian influence both directly and indirectly.
Corruption in military and security services can be dangerous if it compromises these institutions.
Russia is likely to continue sponsoring cyber-attacks on governments and nongovernmental organizations that work against its interests in the former Soviet 51 CNA region, especially in states with significant and dissatisfied compatriot populations.
Stronger security measures—and improved attribution capabilities—will be important.
Under such circumstances, examining and responding to Russia’s policies will take on even greater importance for United States policy-makers.
As part of this effort, an understanding of the host governments’ capacity to counter Russian influence in political, economic, security, and information domains will be paramount.
Our intent for this study is to have an initial open dialogue about Russia’s use of the compatriots as an influence tactic in neighboring countries.
To pursue this task effectively, further robust analysis must be undertaken in order to assess Russia’s objectives, its strategic calculus, and its operational decision-making and tactics, and to understand Moscow’s perspectives and motives on its terms.
Comment by the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs regarding the reaction of Latvia to the recommendation of the UN Human Rights Committee, April 5, 2014.
Ethnic Composition and the Protection and Promotion of National Minorities’ Cultural Identity.
Opening remarks at the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Summit in Ufa, in July 2015.
National Security Concept of the Russian Federation ; CTPATETHLI HaanoHanbHOH 6e3onacHocTH Pocchhckoh Oeflepaunn ao 2020 roaa.
Remarks by Russian president Vladimir Putin on Russian television, Poccua 24, 19 December 2013.
Russia’s Military Doctrine, BoeHHaa aoKTpHHa Pocchhckoh OeaepaHHii, December 25, 2014.
Managing Rivalry or Business-as-Usual.” in Enduring Rivalry: American and Russian Perspectives on the Post-Soviet Space.
PyccKne, Poccnane, PyccKoroBopamne, CooTenecTBeHHHKn: PacceJieHne, HHTerpanna n Bo3BpaTHaa MnrpanHa b Pocchk>,» PocciriicKaa AxafleMna HayK: IlHCTHTyr ConiiajibHO-rioJiHTHnecKHX HccjieHOBaHHH, MocKBa, 2014.
CTPATErilR HapiioHajibHOH 6e3onacHocrn Pocchhckoh ct>enepaijHH ho 2020 rona, May 12, 2009.
OEAEPAJlbHblH 3AKOH “O EOCYAAPCTBEHHOH nOJIHTHKE POCCHHCKOH <t>EJlEPAH,HH.” d>eHepajibHbiH 3Bkoh “o rocynapcTBeHHofi noJiHTHKe Pocchhckoh Oenepaipni b othohichhh cootchcctbchhiikob 3a py6eacoM,” 23 July 2010.
Bhktop XaMpaeB, “MnHo6pHayKH HyacHbi neHbrH Ha «PyccKHii Miip»”, KoMMepcanm , June 24, 2015.
