Background Since declaring independence in 1991, government corruption and economic turbulence have contributed to political unrest in Ukraine.
With previous protests yielding little structural change, many Ukrainians have grown frustrated with the lack of action on promised reforms and are increasingly looking to EU integration as a way to move forward.
In November 2013, deep political unrest erupted in the Euromaidan protests after former President Viktor Yanukovych abandoned an agreement that would have brought Ukraine economically closer to the EU and instead accepted a $15 billion bailout from Russia.
These protests erupted into the 2014 Ukrainian Revolution, which resulted in the ousting of Yanukovych and progress towards increased EU integration.
These new EU-friendly policies kindled tensions with pro-Russian separatists in Eastern Ukraine, who subsequently rebelled against the central Kyiv government by declaring autonomy through internationally-disputed referendums in March/May 2014.
Tensions quickly escalated into armed conflict in March 2014 following Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the pro-Russian separatist takeover of the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts in the Donbass region.
Stabilizing factor; Destabilizing factor; Mixed factor Very High Risk March 2014: Crimea’s disputed referendum, forced by pro-Russian separatists, declares its intention to join the Russian Federation.
The conflict has settled into a stalemate.vi  Following the Euromaidan protests of 2013-2014, freedom of peaceful assembly was generally respected in government-controlled areas of Ukraine.vii  The Ukrainian government has passed legislation to defend freedom of expression.viii ± President Yanukovych’s resignation in February 2014 placated protesters, but the new government has since struggled to implement aspects of promised security sector and economic reforms.ix Political ± Concerns over minority rights have increased ethnic tensions.
The Ukrainian government has Instability repealed previous anti-Russian language laws, but distrust remains.
In Crimea, Ukrainian and Tatar people report that authorities discourage the use of minority languages.x Government corruption is a serious problem in Ukraine.
The Ukrainian Defense Minister reports that the separatists’ army is 40,000-strong, but such estimates are difficult to confirm.xix The separatists are armed by Russia with Soviet-era, and more recent, military hardware.xx Russian soldiers are also found operating in Ukraine.xxi Russia’s annexation of Crimea and clashes between the Ukrainian Armed Forces and Russian-backed separatists have resulted in many casualties.
Though the conflict has since settled into a stalemate, Risk skirmishes continue as both sides intensify militarization.
Russia has increased its military budget and Assessment continues supporting the separatists in Eastern Ukraine.
Ukraine has also expanded its military budget, but at great economic cost.
Continued conscription and economic woes may escalate political unrest.
Given the unresolved tensions and growing militarization, a resurgence in violence is likely before the 1 conflict is resolved.
Political instability initiated the current conflict and Ukrainians still have little trust in their government.
The current conflict has also exacerbated animosity between ethnic groups.
Domestic political stability is contingent on the Ukrainian government’s ability to fight corruption and enact reforms.
Failure to do so may result in renewed protests and possibly another regime change.
Kyiv must also find a way to resettle the millions displaced by the fighting in Ukraine.
Ethnic minorities in Eastern Ukraine, specifically ethnic Russians, must also be adequately represented within the Kyiv government if reunification with contested areas is to occur.
The hryvnia’s sharp devaluation since 2013, along with the rise in inflation, reflect Ukraine’s unstable economy.
However, the upcoming IMF financial assistance package, as well as the DCFTA Agreement Risk with the EU, may help Ukraine recover their import/export losses.
President Poroshenko faces numerous Assessment challenges in the wake of the 2013-2014 Euromaidan protests to gain public confidence.
Kyiv must tackle widespread corruption, restriction of civil liberties, and an unstable economy.
The Ukrainian government may also face difficulties ensuring that the upcoming local Donbass elections in early 2016 are legitimate, impartial, and transparent.
Implementation of the 2014-2017 Action Plan, outlined in the 2014 Ukraine-EU Association Agreement, establishes conditions of EU International membership alongside ratification by EU members.
The EU does not recognize Russia’s annexation of Crimea.xxxvi ± Ukraine is also actively working towards NATO membership.
In turn, NATO has denounced Russia’s military action in Crimea as a breach of international law and vowed to support Ukraine through the Trust Fund Project, which assists with military and humanitarian logistics, communication, medical rehabilitation, and diplomatic support.
Ukraine’s increased ties with the West may offer Risk sociopolitical and economic stability, but further risk deteriorating relations with Russia.
Meanwhile, Assessment droughts and high temperatures have had a negative short-term effect on Ukraine’s wheat production and exports which threatens its already turbulent economy.
Nonetheless, the length and Assessment intensity of conflicts and mass displacement may result in long-term effects that warrant monitoring.
Internal Stakeholders Despite a lack of international recognition, Crimea has become an autonomous state Republic of Crimea & the led by pro-Russian Prime Minister Sergey Aksyonov.
Russian-armed militants Federal City of Sevastopol continue to repress individuals, especially the Crimean Tartars, and reject Kyiv’s central control.xlix The pro-Russian and anti-Kyiv Donetsk People's Republic led by Alexander Donetsk People’s Republic Zakharchenko and Luhansk People’s Republic led by Igor Plotnitsky are both & fragile and politically unstable.
Various militant ethnic groups, including the Cossacks and Tartars, also Other Internal Actors continue to fight over competing territorial claims.liv Local oligarchs such as Ihor Kolomoisky and Rinat Akhmetov continue to threaten Kyiv by sponsoring corrupt opposition parties and rigging elections.lv External Stakeholders North American Treaty Alliance NATO has condemned Russia’s actions and has publicly supported Ukraine throughout the current crisis in an advisory and financial role.
NATO is evaluating 3 Ukraine’s membership and has signed multiple partnership agreements with Ukraine.lvi NATO is also considering expanding its presence in Europe.lvii The USA has coordinated sanctions against Russia and accused it of destabilizing United States of America Ukraine.
The ceasefire outlined in the Minsk II Protocol holds as continued mediation brings the conflict closer to a peaceful solution.
Ukraine’s economy stabilizes and experiences positive GDP growth with the IMF and EU’s financial assistance while Russia scales back Best Case Scenario gas price hikes.
Political unrest subsides as the Ukrainian government makes progress on its promised reforms to address police and government corruption.
The return and resettlement of Ukrainian refugees and internally displaced persons from the armed conflict begins.
Government protection of minority rights and political participation facilitates a promising reconciliatory process between ethnic Ukrainians and Russians in Eastern Ukraine.
A punctuated ceasefire continues between Ukraine, Russia, and pro-Russian separatist groups in the Donbass region.
Ongoing efforts are made to fulfill the Minsk Protocols’ provisions to withdraw heavy weapons and recognize local selfgovernance in the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts.
Despite this, the legitimacy of the local Donbass elections in early 2016 will be questioned by Ukraine and the Most Likely Scenario international community.
Popular challenges of the elections will result in further suppression of human rights and civil liberties in the Donbass region.
Public trust continues to decrease as Kyiv faces challenges addressing widespread corruption and the restriction of civil liberties.
The status of Crimea remains legally ambiguous, but effectively under Russian control.
Tensions continue to rise in the region as actors engage in provocative tit-for-tat signalling tactics.
The increased porosity between the Eastern Ukrainian and Russian borders increases arms trafficking, escalating the intensity of violent outbreaks.
The IMF’s financial assistance fails to stabilize the war-torn economy, exacerbating Worst Case Scenario Ukraine’s socio-economic problems and political instability.
Separatists capitalize on these weaknesses, allowing them to further challenge Kyiv’s legitimacy and effective control.
The status of Crimea remains legally ambiguous, but effectively under Russian control. 4 i BBC News.14.
Retrieved January 29, 2016 . vii Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.15.
Retrieved January 29, 2016 . xxiii State Statistics Committee of Ukraine.01.
Retrieved January 27, 2016 . xxxv Mission of Ukraine to the European Union.15.
Economic instruments for managing environmentally harmful products in Ukraine.
Retrieved January 26, 2016 . xli Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations.15.
Retrieved January 23, 2016 . xliv Ibid. xlv Central Intelligence Agency.16.
Retrieved January 23, 2016 . xlvii Ibid. xlviii Ibid. xlix Freedom House.15.
Retrieved January 27, 2016 . lv Ibid. lvi North Atlantic Treaty Organization.15.
Retrieved January 29, 2016 . lvii Baczynska, Gabriela, and Wiktor Szary.16.
Retrieved January 23, 2016 . lxiii Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe.16.
