In response to the growing unrest in Ukraine, mid-March 2014 many governments launched sanctions against individuals and companies that are viewed as having direct involvement in destabilizing the situation.
The 2014 Crimean crisis, part of the unrest, and the ensuing Russian military intervention there led some governments in Europe, North America and elsewhere to target Russian and pro-Russian Ukrainian politicians, officers and businessmen.
As the unrest expanded into parts of eastern and southern Ukraine, the scope of the sanctions increased.
The Russian government responded in kind, with sanctions against some Canadian, American, and EU individuals.
As of 13 April, following Canadian, European Union and United States sanctions, alongside dozens of individuals, two companies were also listed.
Albania, Iceland and Montenegro on 11 April announced that they would align themselves to the sanctions adopted by the EU on 17 March.
On 28 April, the United States expanded its sanctions to include 17 Russian companies, mostly affiliated with the aforementioned individuals.
The EU furthermore has instructed the European Investment Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to suspend the signature of new financing operations in Russia.
On 25 July, the EU again expanded its sanctions to an additional 15 individuals and 18 entities, followed by an additional 8 individuals and 3 entities on 30 July.
On 1 September, Australia places Russia, Crimea, and Sebastopol on the Australian autonomous sanctions list in response to the Russian threat to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
On 12 September 2014, the European Union sanctioned three major Russian oil companies, three major Russian defense firms, and dual-use technology from nine other Russian defense firms.
On 29 November, an additional 13 individuals were added to the EU sanctions list.
In November 2014, Shearman & Sterling published a list of individuals and entities under sanctions by the United States, the European Union, and Japan.
In December 2014, Bryan Cave published a list of individuals and entities sanctioned by the United States, the European Union, Canada, Switzerland, Australia, Japan, and Liechtenstein.
December 2015, the United States sanctions six individuals, and numerous individuals and entities associated with Viktor Yanukovych, Gennady Timchenko, Arkady Rotenberg, Boris Rotenberg, Kalashnikov Concern, Izhevsky Mekhanichesky Zavod JSC , Sberbank, VTB, and Rostec.
August 2016, Stewart and Stewart published a list of individuals and entities under sanctions by the United States, European Union, Canada, Australia, and Japan.
April 2017, Maclean's published a list of Russians under sanctions by the United States, the European Union, and Canada.
On 4 August 2017, EU added three individuals and three entities to its list of sanctioned individuals for support of a power supply in Crimea and Sevastopol independent from Ukraine.
On 20 November 2017, EU added an individual to its list of sanctioned individuals.
On 29 January 2018, the United States releases a list of senior foreign political figures and oligarchs in the Russian Federation and Russian parastatal entities from which future sanctions will be applied.
April 2018, Canada updated its consolidated list of sanctioned individuals and entities.
On 6 April 2018, the United States added 17 individuals, 12 companies, an armament firm and its banking subsidiary.
May 2018, the European Union and Switzerland add five individuals to their sanctions lists for these individuals' organising the March 2018 Russia presidential elections in Crimea and Sevastopol.
Former head of the Ministry of State Security of unrecognized Transnistria, wanted by the law enforcement agencies of Latvia and Moldova.
One of the leaders of the ""Army of the South-East"" Deputy Speaker of the Federation Council of Russia.
Deputy Head of the People's Council of the unrecognized Luhansk People's Republic.
Commander of the ""First Cossack Regiment"", an armed separatist group involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine. de facto ""Deputy Prime Minister for Social Affairs of the Donetsk People's Republic"" Former Supreme Council Chair of the Luhansk People's Republic; asked the Russian Federation to recognize the independence of the Luhansk People's Republic.
Former President of the effectively defunct Federal State of Novorossiya; asked Russia to deploy troops to Ukraine.
Responsible for or complicit in, or has engaged in, actions or policies that threaten the peace, security, stability, sovereignty, or territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Head of the administration for governmental affairs of the unrecognized Donetsk People's Republic.
Commander of the 'Rusich' unit, an armed separatist group involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine.
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Crimea to the Russian Federation.
Member of the National Council of the unrecognized Donetsk's People's Republic.
Commander of the 'Sparta Battalion', an armed separatist group involved in the fighting in eastern Ukraine.
Former Defence Minister and currently Head of the Lugansk People's Republic.
Materially assisted, sponsored, or provided financial, material, or technological support for, or goods or services in support of, senior officials of the Russian Federation; extensive business dealings with the Russian Federation Ministry of Defense, and a company with significant ties to him holds a contract to build a military base near the Russian Federation border with Ukraine.
Russia has been building additional military bases near the Ukrainian border and has used these bases as staging points for deploying soldiers into Ukraine.
Active leader of the ""Lugansk Guard"" Head of the ""Donetsk Republic"" Commanded Russian airborne troops during annexation of Crimea.
Member of the Parliament of the unrecognized Donetsk People's Republic and works in the Union of veterans of the Donbass Berkut.
Bank that provided ""material support"" to Russian officials and whose biggest shareholder is the also-sanctioned Yury Kovalchuk.
State-owned agricultural bank that provided ""material support"" to Russian officials.
