This paper examines the downing of a Malaysia Airlines passenger jet over eastern Ukraine in July 2014 and the divergent blame storylines produced on Russian and Ukrainian television about the event.
It then examines results of a question asking why MH17 crashed in a simultaneous survey conducted in December 2014 in six oblasts in Southeastern Ukraine, Crimea, and the de facto states of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria.
An analysis of the surveys shows that blame attribution was driven more by television viewing habits than by any other factor.
On 17 July 2014, Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was en route from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur when it was shot from the skies over eastern Ukraine.
Two hundred and eighty three passengers and a crew of fifteen were killed.
Travelers from ten countries died, including one hundred and ninetythree from the Netherlands.
Below the plane’s flight path, a war between Russian-backed separatist rebels and Ukrainian government forces was in its fourth month.
Rebel forces challenging Kiev’s control over its territory, including its skies, were losing ground.
In a comprehensive final report on the cause of the downing of MH17 in October 2015, the Dutch Safety Board, the group leading a technical investigation of the crash, found that the plane had been downed by a 9N314M warhead on a 9M38 missile launched by a Buk surface-to-air system.
Colour versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/fgeo.
In late September 2016, they released a preliminary report based on extensive forensic analysis, audio interceptions and over a hundred interviews with eyewitnesses and other informants.
This concluded that flight MH17 was shot down by a 9M38 missile, launched by a Buk from farmland in the vicinity of Pervomaiskiy.
At that time, the area was controlled by pro-Russian separatist fighters.
The JIC investigation demonstrated that the Buk had been transported from the Russian Federation and subsequently, having destroyed MH17, was taken back to the Russian Federation.
The Russian government maintains that no Buk ever crossed into Ukraine from Russia.
As soon as it became evident that a commercial passenger aircraft was destroyed, MH17 became the object of an intense struggle over blame attribution – the projection of blame causality onto certain actors and not others – between the warring parties in Ukraine, their regional allies and the international community.
The violent death of so many civilians from different countries over a war zone rendered what was supposed to be a violent act in a local military struggle into a worldwide media spectacle.
Pictures and stories of the tragedy filled news programmes and newspapers for the following week, and periodically thereafter as victim remains were recovered and the Dutch investigations got under way.
Western-based free-lance social media investigators like Bellingcat drove parts of the initial forensic investigation of the event.
Central to this effort was the organisation and framing of MH17 within ready-made blame attribution and victimisation narratives, narratives that defined and gave meaning to the broader struggles over Ukraine.
Narrative is the social practice of producing relatively coherent accounts of events, actors and motivations.
Framing is the culturally shaped cognitive practice of classifying and particularising that is vital to the creation of narratives.
The emergence of clearly divergent blame attribution storylines, and their persistence, allows us to examine the degree to which television viewing habits, interacting with other socio-demographic, locational and political factors, account for variations in people’s beliefs about MH17.
Shocking and horrific events occur regularly in the course of violent conflicts.
Like the genocidal killings around Srebrenica in July 1995, the MH17 tragedy is an instance of how conflicting parties and their state sponsors, with the television media under their control, produce self-protective bubbles of belief about shock events that reproduces geopolitical antagonism, regardless of forensic facts.
In the era of digital media ascendancy, where geo-locational data are more abundant than ever, truth is still a casualty of war but its death in controlled info-spheres is now more closely observed.
Analyzing news coverage of MH17 by the most watched television stations in Russia and Ukraine, the paper documents how the downing of MH17 was initially presented to the public in both countries and to allied territories abroad.
Drawing upon results from simultaneous surveys in SE6, Crimea, Abkhazia, Transnistria and South Ossetia in December 2014 organised by the authors, the paper examines the relative support that different blame options received from respondents.
Making Sense of Shock Events World politics has always been marked by shock events that have distinctive geographies and materialities.
The meaning of these events is never manifestly clear and often fiercely contested.
Nevertheless, shocking events have historically created windows of opportunity for transformational political action and change.
With the advent of television as the predominant source of international news for most publics, this contest is a multimedia struggle of conjoined sounds, images and narratives.
Terrorist attacks are a distinctive genre of shock events, distinct from catastrophic natural events and accidents, in that they are planned and purposeful.
They also create well-known opportunities for the consolidation of power by those in positions of authority.
Affective Images Shock events are, by definition, affective spectacles where images play a key role in triggering and inducing affective contagion.
Affective contagion has the capacity to widen existing political cleavages, deepen political polarisation and accelerate the eclipse of politics by war.
Television news programmes face choices about what to show and what not to show of the event.
Protocols and editorial decisions, for example, about whether to show the bodies of human victims vary.
Shocking images can so radicalise viewers that evidencebased discussion of events is next to impossible.
As visual storytelling, television production can link different events across time and space through multimedia montage.
It can also produce animated and virtual reality visual reconstructions of events, thus powerfully shaping interpretation and blame attribution.
Availability, Analogy and Assimilation Shock events are dislocations in the routine reproduction of discourse in geopolitical cultures.
But they can also stimulate a renewed commitment to dominant discourses and strengthen epistemic closure to inconvenient facts.
Key mechanism here are what psychologists term ‘availability bias,’ the presence and supply of similar instances from the past and the operation of familiar modes of representation and narration, and ‘confirmation bias,’ the selective collection of evidence to bolster pre-existing beliefs.
In authoritarian societies and many democracies also, the leader of a country is the preeminent storyline setter and the first explainer.
Statefunded media tend to follow the lead of the country’s power center.
If power centres are plural and the media less beholden to the state or private actors, there is likely to be greater scope for divergence between the official government narrative on shock events and media representations.
Experts have a different type of authority, one grounded in technical knowledge, subject-matter mastery, cultural capital and a presumption of objectivity.
Comportment, dress, titles and background imagery convey this to television viewers.
Becoming successful in Russian television production, for example, requires adekvatnost (‘correct instincts’), what critics see as self-censorship.
Who are deemed expert and who are enabled to speak authoritatively in that role in public, especially on television, is a process that is conditioned not only by cultural and social factors but also by editorial decision making.
Who is entrusted to decide and direct what the public sees is shaped by power structure and cultural habitus.
Blame Attribution and Agnotology Blame attribution can take many forms.
It can be a direct and concentrated attribution of an event to a singular actor.
But it can also be a much more indirect process where attribution is not concentrated on a singular target but diffused among a series of alternatives.
The first form generates a clear story, or counter-story , about the event.
In the second process, however, the effect is to generate a counter-story that muddies attribution.
The picture is unclear, and we may never know who is responsible for what.
This form of attribution drifts towards agnotology, namely the social and political production of ignorance.
Used to describe corporate campaigns to deny causality and create confusion (e.g., on tobacco and global warming), this concept has similarities to what is known as disinformation in intelligence work.
Conspiracy Theories A conspiracy theory is a style of interpretative heuristics that explain events and practices by reference to the machinations of powerful actors who conceal their role to dupe regular people.
This style of reasoning is ostensibly populist but is easily appropriated by powerful actors.
In societies characterised by high levels of distrust of or contempt for official institutions, conspiracy theories can be vehicles for that distrust and discontent.
The disruptive impact of the internet on traditional media and the rise of personalised expressive social media have created an unregulated and open communications ecosystem for conspiracy theories to spread and flourish.
Indeed, considerable research in psychology suggests that human cognition processes are ‘biased’ towards cognitively miserly thinking; conspiracy theories are thus attractive and appealing, especially in times of turmoil and crisis.
Conspiracy theories flourish when professional standards of journalism are compromised and trust in traditional authority is low.
Politicians as well as stateand oligarch-controlled media can be conspiracy theory propagators if it serves identified interests.
As a widely recognised mode and style of reasoning, conspiracy theory needs to be treated as a category of practice rather than a scholarly concept.
The frame itself is part of the discursive struggle of blame attribution and avoidance.
Materialities of Shock Events Shock events, as noted, have their own materialities and contingencies as events.
Catastrophic events have structural, proximate and physical causes as well as multidimensional material impacts and ruins.
Weapon systems have physical characteristics, material capabilities and visual signatures.
These pose distinctive technoscientific challenges to investigators and those seeking to control the meaning of these events.
In the course of investigations, certain material objects and traces may take on iconic status and may act in ways that defy the meanings being imposed upon them by the contesting parties.
Television News Frames and Blame Attribution MH17 was a global media event that was front page news worldwide in the week that followed.
We provide an illustration of the narrative framing that developed in the first week of the event by contrasting the MH17 coverage by the two most popular channels in Russia and Ukraine.
According to television ratings for 2014, Perviy Kanal in Russia and Inter in Ukraine were the most watched channels in each country.
The Russian government controls the board of directors of Perviy Kanal, and the station is widely seen as a vehicle for the communications agenda of the Kremlin.
In September 2016, the offices of the station were firebombed and subsequent blockaded by Ukrainian militia activists.
A week after the crash, two rival storylines on MH17 were well established within Russian and Ukrainian geopolitical cultures.
MH17 is a centrally contested event within the Ukraine crisis, an object of intensive information war on multiple media platforms.
This paper is no more than an introduction to the opening rounds of that war and its effects in various locations.
News of the crash was first reported in two brief segments on Perviy Kanal’s 19:00 hour programme Vechernie Novosti .33 The 21:00 television news programme Vremya on Perviy Kanal was the first with sustained coverage of MH17.
The broadcast began with distant local amateur video and photographs of the wreckage.
Correspondent Alexandr Evstigneev, reporting by phone, presented an on-the-ground account of what happened according to local separatists.
They claimed that a Ukrainian Su-25 fighter jet shot down the passenger aircraft and that they subsequently shot the SU-25 down.
A news analysis segment immediately after by Maxim Semin presented a series of ‘facts’ for interpreting the event.
He claimed they do not have weapon systems capable of destroying a passenger jet at higher altitudes.
Further, Russia’s Ministry of Defense indicated that no Russian warplanes were flying near the border of Ukraine.
Semin’s report reminded viewers that the Ukrainian military shot down a Russian Tu-154 airliner in October 2001, with the loss of all 78 lives on board.
Footage of former President Kuchma from 2001 reacting to the accident as well as video of the wreckage and subsequent investigation accompanied Semin’s commentary.
Despite initial denials, Semin explained, the Ukrainian authorities in 2001 were later forced to admit that their missile had indeed destroyed the plane, and that they were at fault.
The first close-up video footage of a wreckage site, featuring still smoldering fires, wreckage, human body parts and scattered personal effects, was shown thereafter.
The information indirectly inferring that Ukraine was responsible for the downing of MH17 was repeated by other correspondents and experts over the subsequent hours and days.
Further claims about the poor training and expertise of the Ukrainian military were made.
To this indictment using selective and misleading facts was added a speculative conspiracy theory.
A section of Churkin’s speech featured him rhetorically asking why Ukrainian air traffic controllers directed the aircraft into a war zone.
He declared that ‘ensuring the security of civilian aviation in a state’s airspace is that state’s responsibility.
The segment features excerpts from an interview with Mikhail Delyagin, director of the Institute for the Problems of Globalization.
It’s clear that this is a great way to blame everything on the rebel militia.
It means you have this technology , and now we’ll blame all on you, and at the same time, on Russia.
Therefore, I think, it is a pure provocation by the Ukrainian Nazi junta.
But the real masterminds are Americans, because, I’m sorry, but Poroshenko, or Kolomoisky aren’t clever enough for this.
The United States, however, sought to break apart Europe from Russian energy supplies.
It is certain that, what happened in Ukraine is an attempt to separate Russia from Europe.
In fact, the United States plan is to prevent a union between Europe and Russia, and instead, make Europe depend exclusively on the United States.
The energy sector is the most important part of our relations with Europe.
If this link is cut, then of course, we will have difficulties in other directions as well.
This rupture had not happened, however, while rebel forces were proving difficult for Kiev to eliminate.
The downing of MH17, however according to Simonov, allowed the Americans to say to the Europeans that Russia was a terrible country and that the Donetsk Republic was like a branch of the evil empire.
This claim was then consolidated by a video montage of Cuban missile crisis images and document quotation which suggested that the United States sought to create a very similar catastrophe as a pretext to invade Cuba.
That Putin was returning from a BRICS summit that very day was seen as significant.
According to Pchelkin, their refusal to use the dollar as a reserve currency was a catastrophe for that currency.
Washington, Pchelkin concluded, cannot accept Russia’s growing role in the world, its energy deals with Iraqi Kurdistan and Argentina.
This conspiratorial mode of reasoning was a feature of similar reports on Perviy Kanal in the days following the disaster.
The Ukrainian government was condemned for its desire to immediately pronounce separatist rebels guilty of the downing.
Deputy Defense Minister Anatoly Antonov stressed that ‘political attempts to play on the tragedy, to immediately identify the perpetrators’ were incorrect.
He listed ten questions that the Ukrainian military had to answer, questions that insinuated that the government in Kiev was hiding information to serve its interests.
It was ‘no coincidence’ that Poroshenko subsequently called on the world to consider the Donetsk and Luhansk republics as terrorist organisations.
This report featured a cut-out style animation of a jet being tracked and then attacked by two Ukrainian Buk weapon systems.
The West remembers the shooting down of the South Korean Boeing in 1983 but not the Ukrainians shooting down the Siberia Air jet in 2001.
The shock of MH17 is quickly assimilated into pre-existing blame narratives through a series of strategies.
A series of ‘experts’ present ‘facts’ that steer blame away from Russia and the Donbas separatists.
An anti-American bias, longstanding from Soviet times, is mobilised as available heuristic to locate MH17 within a rich history of United States foreign policy provocation and perfidy.
Inter’s Podrobnosti Inter has an hour-long evening news programme called Podrobnosti at 20:00.
The initial visual signature of the downing was an amateur eyewitness video of a plume of black smoke in the distance.
An aviation expert interviewed declared that a Buk system could have brought down the aircraft as could have an air-to-air missile.
At the end of the broadcast, the programme displayed a social media photograph of a Buk moving through what it identified as the town of Snezhnoe.
The anchor declared that, according to the United States television station CNN, Washington had irrefutable evidence that the missile that shot down the Boeing was fired from the territory of Russian Federation.
The following night’s broadcast featured considerable visual footage of the wreckage of the airplane and of grieving relatives in the Netherlands and elsewhere.
Human body parts were blurred in the footage, but this blurring and the scattered personal effects of the victims were visual signatures of the loss of life involved.
The broadcast focused on audio recording released by the Ukrainian Secret Service of rebel leaders, described as ‘terrorists’ in all broadcasts, discussing the transfer of the Buk.
It featured a short segment on ‘absurd Russian propaganda,’ the attempt to fake a social media entry by one of the passengers confirming that Ukrainian fighters are next to the Boeing.
Reports from various world capitals highlighted the international reaction amongst politicians to the tragedy.
In a report on German Chancellor Angela Merkel, the correspondent was openly critical of her conciliatory policy towards Russia.
A report from Washington highlighted the condemnation of the rebel groups by UN Security Council ambassadors from France and the United States.
Among them was Putin-critic and historian Andrei Zubov who expressed great embarrassment at what was happening in Ukraine.
Another figure interviewed was the Russian writer Viktor Shenderovich who commented on how the MH17 tragedy had ‘spawned monstrous and senseless lies.
A report highlighted the Russian propaganda effort to divert blame for the tragedy onto Ukraine even to the extent of changing the responsible party from self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic ‘terrorist’ to the ‘Ukrainian military’ on the event’s Wikipedia web page.
Accusations that rebels were restricting access to the crash site and manipulating evidence were also broadcast.
Russia’s Public Relations Offensive on MH17 On 21 July, the Russian Ministry of Defense held a press conference on MH17 for the international media in its new operations theatre.
The first was by the head of the Main Operations Directorate of the Russian Armed Forces General Staff Andrei Kartapolov.
His presentation was an elaboration on the alreadyexisting information strategy of the Russian military on MH17, namely to present so-called objective data and to pose interrogating questions of the Ukrainian military, inferring its guilt in the process.
Ukraine, he asserted, had three or four air defense battalions, equipped with Buk surface-to-air missile systems, in the area on the day of the crash.
Kartapolov presented a series of images that inferred that Ukraine was responsible for downing MH17.
One was an image of MH17 within the range of the nearby Ukrainian Buk systems.
Another was a collection of black and white satellite photos showing Ukrainian air defense systems and a battery of Buk missiles in the vicinity.
The final two images show the same location with the Buk missiles deployed on the day of the crash, and then an empty field some days later.
A chart of Ukrainian radar activity designed to show its intensity on 17 July was also presented.
All of this ‘circumstantial evidence’ was designed to bolster the claim, which Kartapolov does not state directly, that a Ukrainian Buk surface-to-air missile shot down MH17.
To corroborate this inference of Ukrainian guilt, Kartapolov turned the presentation over to the head of the Main Staff of the Russian Air Force Lt.
Igor Makushev who presented a fourminute flight monitoring video taken by the Russian air traffic control centre in Rostov.
Ukraine claimed none of its military aircraft were in that area at the time of the crash.
Kartapolov ended the press conference by challenging the United States to release the data it claimed proves that the rebels shot down MH17.
The press conference was covered extensively on Vremya that night and subsequent nights.
An initial video segment weaved together the technospeak of the Ministry of Defense officials with a ground-level witness who asserted she saw two planes that day.
In a follow-up segment the next evening, the press conference was described as providing ‘clear’ and ‘irrefutable evidence’ linking Ukraine to the MH17 tragedy.
Various experts explained that Ukraine’s non-closure of the air space indicated they knew the separatists did not have any Buk systems, that it is possible to disguise a launch site (Ukraine could then blame the rebels for the missile they launched), and that either of the two Russian theories of the downing were strong possibilities.
Yet, strangely, many salient images from the press conference appeared for 42 seconds as background to a standup report by the Moscow correspondent on Putin’s midnight address the night before.
The broadcast was dominated by international reaction to the MH17 tragedy.
The Berlin correspondent’s report was on German newspaper reporting on the possibility of sanctions.
The evidence was an interview clip taken from RBC TV in which an aviation expert (Vadim Lukashevich) pronounced the claim that a Su-25 could shoot down a plane at an altitude of 11,000 meters.
The anchor then reported that Russian pilot-hero Sergey Nefedov (pictured with a medal) termed the Defense Ministry’s version complete nonsense designed for internal Russian consumption only.
In this way, Russian ‘experts’ were used to refute Russia’s MH17 storyline.
Subsequent Podrobnosti reports on the following evenings chronicled the material effort to remove human remains from the crash site as well as international diplomacy at the United Nations and elsewhere.
An audio recording in which Vostok battalion leader Alexander Khodakovsky admitted that separatists received and returned a Buk missile system was the subject of a brief video segment a week after the crash.
No feature segment, however, directly deconstructed the two Russian theories on MH17.
Instead, the statements of Western leaders, and the Western press, were used to affirm and amplify the Ukrainian government’s position.
Girkin’s social media posting, Ukraine moved BUK to area. subsequently deleted Russian jets not flying in area.
Initial Privileged Source Rebel sources indicating Ukrainian Su-25 shot CNN reporting photograph of on the Event it down.
Controlling Force United States Putin; the Kremlin Geopolitical Meaning United States wants to block Russia’s growth and power Russia wants to ruin Ukraine in international affairs. common sense.
Political authority figures and chosen television ‘experts’ suggest that the United States was behind the events, using provocations to further its geopolitical interests.
Conspiracy and agnotology go together in the Ministry of Defense press conference.
To Inter, the MH17 downing was another example of its victimisation at the hands of Russia and its terrorist proxies in the Donbas.
Both Western and Russian authority figures and ‘experts’ attest to their culpability.
It remains an ongoing subject of contestation between Russia, Ukraine and the international community.
Public Opinion Attitudes on What Happened to MH17 Given the fact that Ukrainian and Russian television consistently broadcast powerfully divergent storylines on what caused the downing of MH17 throughout 2014, it is worth examining what impact this ‘information war’ had on the attitudes of ordinary residents in parts of Ukraine, Crimea and de facto state territories directly supported by the Russian state.
In the last weeks of July 2014, the independent Russian polling agency Levada Center asked respondents in the six largest Russian cities about MH17.
Instead, it posed a question about causality that may or may not involve the allocation of blame to particular actors.
That most responses translate into blaming particular actors is itself an important finding.
Other diverse explanations were provided by 6% of the sample, while 16% indicated that they could not give a reason for the loss of the plane.
Five months after the Levada poll, we asked the same question on MH17 in five other regions – in six oblasts of Southeastern Ukraine , in Crimea and in the three Russian-backed ‘de facto’ states of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria.
A suite of socio-demographic and ideological questions enables cross-tabulation of the answers.
The MH17 explanation question allows us to probe the relative impact of television habits on causal attribution while at the same time considering the effects of socio-demographic and ideological predictive factors.
Most importantly, the simultaneous administration of the same survey questionnaires in the five sites in late December 2014 allows us to estimate the differential effects of television station access, post-Soviet experiences and local contextual politics.
The MH17 catastrophe was a catalysing event in widening the divergences between the post-Maidan Ukrainian government and its Western supporters, on one side, and the Putin government and its attendant regimes in Crimea and the de facto republics, on the other.
The Eurasian de facto states are the products of separatist wars of the early 1990s entangled with the collapse of Soviet power.
In the post-Soviet independent states of Georgia and Moldova, anti-government forces in the small autonomous regions of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria eventually prevailed with the backing of Russia.
Survey Design and Predictors We survey contested regions that include Russian-supported de facto states, the annexed Crimean republic and the Ukrainian territory adjacent to the active war zone oblasts in the Donbas.
The timing of the survey was crucial as events on the ground were shifting quickly and diplomatic negotiations were underway regarding a ceasefire for the war in the Donbas.
This timing requirement meant that the survey be conducted at the same time in all sites as potentially new shock events could lead to different responses if the survey was delayed in one or more regions.
The site of sporadic violent clashes and struggles over the removal of Soviet-era memorials earlier in 2014, the region of SE6 Ukraine was nominally contested but peaceful.
While the benefits to respondents are obviously small, the overall project provided a diversity of local perspectives on the causes and dynamics of possible conflicts, the intersection between local and international geopolitical aspirations and the prospects of reconciliation between opposing views on the future of the different regions.
The simultaneous survey was managed by Kiev International Institute of Sociology for SE6 Ukraine and by the Levada Center for Crimea, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria.
Coordination between the two polling companies and sharing of the questionnaire while following the well-designed sampling procedures allowed the completion of the surveys in the last two weeks of December 2014.
Respondents in SE6 Ukraine were offered a choice of either Ukrainian or Russian and elsewhere were in Russian.
Our general approach as indicated by the emphasis on the respective TV broadcasts is to understand how television habits influence blame attribution by respondents.
To highlight this factor, we need to control for other possible explanations, which are included as predictors in the model though we do not give them substantive attention.
First, we considered socio-demographic backgrounds and included 8 predictors in the model from this category.
Selfdefined nationality as Russian and Ukrainian were both included since these two groups are most directly involved in the private and public discussion about the fate of MH17.
We expect educational status to be related to interest in and information about the event so we included both low educational status and high educational status (university degree or higher) in the model.
We also considered age to be a key element – age 35 and under is the post-Soviet generation, while age 65 and over are typically pensioners who spent most of their lives in Soviet times and for many of whom the post-Soviet period has been a time of economic difficulty.
We included gender as a control variable since other work has shown men take stronger stands on positions regarding conflict and perceived external aggression.
We include an income effect using the category ‘we can only afford food’ and worse as the measure of low income.
Typically, individuals in this latter category are generally less interested in geopolitical and public affairs and more concerned about daily material needs.
A second set of predictors measures political and ideological orientations.
We consider attitudes about the ongoing conflict over borders and sovereignty in Ukraine and earlier conflicts in the de facto states as important elements informing a view about the fate of MH17.
In an April 2014 survey in 8 oblasts in Southeastern Ukraine, including the war zones of Luhansk and Donetsk oblasts, Kiev International Institute of Sociology had asked respondents if they were willing to resist invaders.
In their sample, 21% were ‘willing to put armed resistance’ to any Russian troops entering Ukraine.
While the survey settings are in multiple countries, all of them are potentially future war zones due to unsettled borders, and territorial preferences and claims.
We add an interactive term of Ukrainians and ‘willingness to fight’ to account for the particular war circumstances in Ukraine at the time of the survey.
A third set of predictors revolved around post-Soviet material circumstances.
We expect those who believe that the end of the Soviet Union was correct to be more favourably disposed to current territorial arrangements, and we also add a variable specifically asking about future economic prospects to measure economic optimism.
A third measure in this category of explanations asks respondents to evaluate material interests against territorial arrangements.
Our variable ‘good salary’ indicates those who agree or strongly agree with this sentiment.
Our fourth category of predictors is most closely connected to the main argument of the paper about the divergent conspiratorial nature of the explanations for the crash of MH17.
We identify respondents who watch more than 20 hours of television per week, those who trust television news and those for whom television is their main information source.
Finally, we added an interactive term of Ukrainians and ‘trust television news’ to identify those Ukrainians who would be most likely to accept the explanation coming from the Poroshenko government.
Lastly, we add a dummy variable – residence in SE6 Ukraine –to characterise respondents who do not live in the Russian information space, that is, Russian controlled or Russian dominated sites.
The main comparison is blame attributed to Ukrainian forces versus those to the Donbas militants and its Russian supporters, and the multiple categories are collapsed into 7 major options for display.
On the graphs, the SE6 Ukraine sample , Georgians in Abkhazia and Tatars in Crimea are the exceptions since elsewhere a plurality or majorities of the respective nationalities place the blame on Ukrainian forces for the aircraft downing.
Values most similar to the overwhelming blame attributed to Ukrainian forces by urban Russians in Levada’s July 2014 survey are seen in Transnistria , Russians in Abkhazia, Ossetians and among Russians in Crimea.
Exceptionally, Georgians in Abkhazia and Ukrainians in the SE6 part of the country attribute significant blame to Russian forces.
Only in SE6 Ukraine and ‘others’ in Transnistria show more than 10% to the Donbas militias.
It could be argued that asking ‘why was MH17 destroyed’ is a potentially sensitive political question, one with a manifest ‘politically correct’ answer.
What we can say is that, in keeping with our findings on other potentially sensitive questions in these Black Sea-Caucasus locations, groups who feel marginalised or alienated in their regional settings show high ratios of ‘don’t know’ answers out of an abundance of caution.
The extreme ratios – over one-fifth of Georgian respondents in Abkhazia, Russians in SE6 Ukraine , Ukrainians in SE6 Ukraine , and one-third of Tatars in Crimea – are higher than the one-fifth ratio in Russia.
It is also possible that many of the respondents of Russian nationality that generally support the Kremlin position believed that it was Russian forces or Donbas militants who shot down the plane but decided against revealing their opinion to interviewers because it did not affirm their usual geopolitical preferences.
By pooling the 5 samples, we can gain insights into the factors that led people to come to their decision about who was to blame for the downing of MH17.
By including a predictor in the model that defined the residence of respondents as either in SE6 Ukraine or not, we can see the importance of the contextual factor that has been argued by geographers as an element that can influence respondents’ attitudes.
We drop respondents who refused to answer the question about MH17; we also drop respondents whose personal characteristics are not available since they either refused to answer a specific question or provided a ‘don’t know’ response.
These ‘missing cases’ result in 3339 respondents in the statistical models.
The Role of Television We have summarised the dramatically contrasting blame attributions put out by Russian and Ukrainian broadcasters in the aftermath of the shooting down of MH17.
We chose multinomial logit as our preferred modelling approach since it allows examination of circumstances with more than two discrete outcomes.
In these cases, the choice of a comparator is important for interpretation of the coefficients.
Respondents who chose these options are not specifically opting for Russian, Ukrainian or Donbas militant forces but neither do they avoid the ascription of blame by choosing the ‘don’t know’ option.
In the multinomial logit modelling, we present the four comparisons – Ukrainian forces (air force, army or volunteer groups), Russian forces, Donbas militants and the ‘don’t knows’ to the accident/terrorist act comparator.
We convert the values from the multinominal logistic regression into average marginal effects for clarity of display and identification of the significant factors in predicting the choice of blame attribution.
Marginal effects are calculated from predictions of the model that was fit for each of the 26 predictors by averaging their values and integrating over the remaining variables.
Average marginal effects can be interpreted as the probability for a unit change in the variable of interest holding the other variables constant.
Standard errors are represented by the vertical lines, and when the 95% error estimates cross the zero line, the predictor in that model is not significant.
All of the modelling was completed by the ‘mlogit’ command in STATA 14.
It is highly significant and indicates that those who trust Putin are 19.6% more likely to blame Ukrainian forces for shooting down MH17 compared to those who do not trust Putin, holding other variables constant.
We consider the demographic variables as controls in this analysis and do not devote much attention to their coefficients.
Few of these variables show any significant relationship with any of the four blame attributions.
It should be noted that there are significant numbers of Russians and Ukrainians in Transnistria and Crimea as well as in SE6 Ukraine.
Russians might be expected to have different interpretations about the cause of the MH17 crash because of differential exposure to local television stations, as well as broadcasts emanating from Moscow.
But there is insignificant variation among these sub-populations by study site.
On the four graphs of the average marginal effects, the relative positions of the estimates for both Russians and Ukrainians are very similar.
Given the debate about the causes of the MH17 plane crash and the key role that Putin played in its immediate aftermath, these values are expected.
The effect of this locational factor is visible in all of the blame attributions (Ukrainian, Donbas or Russian forces), after controlling for the individual personal characteristics of the respondents.
At the time of the surveys in December 2014, neither the Dutch Safety Board nor the Joint Investigative Committee had released reports on their findings.
In contrast, those who trust TV news (minus 3.1%), those who watch Russian television stations and those who are ‘very proud’ of their nationality at minus 3.5% also show significant effects.
The relative lack of significant effects for this model is not surprising since the public debate over the plight of MH17 had focused on either Russian or Ukrainian guilt and divisive lines did not develop as readily among the populations of our survey sites about the Donbas militants.
Blame on Russian forces achieved a high rate at 31% among those who self-identify their nationality as Ukrainian in SE6 Ukraine.
Elsewhere, the ratio was only sizable at 22% among Georgians in Abkhazia.
On this blame option, the divide among the survey sample is as clear as it was for the Ukrainian forces, though now the values are reversed.
The final model was not expected to yield much clarity on political, nationality, TV watching and ideological divides since a ‘don’t know’ answer could have many different provenances.
Those who watch Russian television stations are more likely to give a ‘don’t know’ answer at 6%, perhaps as a response to the accumulating information about the causes of the crash at the time of the survey which was increasingly pointing the finger of blame on Russian-backed forces.
This cumulating evidence contradicts their generally pro-Kremlin positions, and a ‘don’t know’ answer is one way to resolve this asymmetry.
Our analysis of the surveys shows that blame attribution was driven more by television habits than by any other factor.
Of course, habits are ingrained and now dictated increasingly by access to broadcasts from across the border as Ukraine and Russia try to constrain information to certain reliable sources that stick to the government line.
Residents in the region (the Black Sea area more broadly) are increasingly living in ‘different worlds’ despite the shared provenances of their territories in the former Soviet Union and their traditional inter-nationality, language and economic ties.
Conclusion The downing of MH17 was a pivotal event in the Ukraine crisis of 2014, a moment where its violence became worldwide news.
A wave of revulsion in the West provided popular impetus for the imposition of new sanctions on Russian individuals and entities by the European Union and the United States in July 2014.
MH17 is an event that continues to haunt Russia’s foreign policy and the separatists it supports in Ukraine.
Preliminary hearings on the case began in March 2017, and it is not likely to be decided for years.
In July 2017, just before the third anniversary of the MH17 downing, the Dutch Foreign Ministry declared that suspects in that downing will be tried in a Dutch court.
The evidence gathered by the JIC on the downing of MH17 can be used to prosecute those responsible, but it must stand up in court.
MH17 is one among a series of shock events – Euromaidan, the annexation of Crimea, the Odesa tragedy – that are at the fulcrum of a multimedia ‘information war’ between Russia and its allies, on one side, and Ukraine, the European Union and the United States, on the other.
That discursive struggle is characterised by many of the mechanisms we have examined here – affective imagery, the promotion of ‘partisan truths,’ the politicisation of authority and expertise, agnotology and disinformation, othering through conspiracy theory mongering – and it has produced a self-affirming bubble of understanding that is insulated from inconvenient material facts.
In this paper, we have shown how ordinary residents in a set of study sites across the Black Sea region appear to be guided in their understanding of major geopolitical events, like the destruction of MH17, by the televisual infosphere within which they live.
Data analysis also suggests that people tend to follow the narratives of the political leaderships they trust.
The high ‘don’t know’ ratios seen in some locations are likely a combination of genuine confusion about the reasons for the plane’s destruction (itself a created condition), tactical avoidance of a politicised topic, and decisions by some to not affirm blame narratives contrary to the respondents’ general political orientation.
Given their significance in international affairs, scholars need to pay more attention to shock events in conflicts, the storylines disseminated by politically controlled television networks to manage the meaning of these events and the reception these storylines receive by different audiences.
This is particularly important given the manifest fragmentation of traditional media and politics in many Western states, which some commentators have linked to the influence of ‘filter bubbles’ – information flows shaped by algorithms using past preferences – and a ‘post-truth’ politics driving the BREXIT and Trump campaigns of 2016.
Thanks also to Gela Merabishvili for research and translation work on the television news reports.
Finally, the comments of two anonymous reviewers for Geopolitics helped refine and sharpen our argument.
Bellingcat later allied with the Washington DC based advocacy organization, the Atlantic Council.
We have used a paraphrase of the interview question for this article’s title.
In July and August 2014, Levada asked a more direct blame allocation question (which we chose not to use) in national surveys with an option that included the United States.
