THE PRICE TAG INTRODUCTION T he purpose of this report is to assess the matepercent of $179. billion multiplied by four, or $98.4 rial losses Ukraine has suffered as a result of the billion.
This roughly represents the value lost to Ukraine Russian occupation and annexation of Crimea in if it loses these territories forever.
February-March 2014 and Russia’s military aggression in parts of the Ukrainian eastern regions of Luhansk and Donetsk since April 2014.
These two cases of milHOW IT HAPPENED itary aggression were quite different, and their differThe Russian occupation of Crimea started on February ences have persisted in relation to both the damage 27, 2014, as “little green men”— Russian special forces caused and how the territories have been governed. without insignia—seized the regional parliament in While conditions are bad in both territories, they are Simferopol.
It was unprovoked military aggression far worse in the Donbas. and came as a complete surprise.
The unprepared Ukrainian armed forces made no resistance, and the The costs are of several kinds.
On March 18, the seized by the government of the Russian Federation Russian Federation annexed the whole of Crimea. or by Russian-backed forces.
Second, enterprises, buildings, and infrastructure have been destroyed In April 2014, “little green men” tried to initiate by warfare; some of these assets belonged to the warfare in eight other regions in the south and east Ukrainian state, others to private firms or individuals, of Ukraine, the pretense being that this was a local but all are Ukrainian legal entities.
Another group of uprising of Russian-speaking Ukrainians against the losses is flows.
Since the summer of 2013, Russia has new, “illegitimate” government in Kyiv.
With surprising imposed ever more severe trade sanctions on Ukraine, speed, Ukrainian forces, many of them voluntary, got which eventually responded with sanctions of its own. organized and resisted.
In August, their offensive Furthermore, the warfare minimized the flow of real compelled the Kremlin to send in a large contingent of foreign direct investment into Ukraine. regular Russian troops, whom Moscow initially claimed were using their holidays to voluntarily join the conflict This report deals with purely economic losses, not in Ukraine. with military or humanitarian costs.
Thus, it deals only glancingly with public expenditures on citizens in the Two cease-fire agreements were concluded in Minsk occupied territories and does not discuss the costs of after major Russian offensives.
September 5, 2014 (with a follow-up memorandum signed two weeks later), the second on February 12, In his famous book Capital in the Twenty-First Century, 2015.
Russia is not mentioned multiply the share of GDP that Ukraine lost by four.
The in the text, although there is a reference to “foreign Donbas was the source of 10 percent of Ukraine’s GDP troops” that Ukraine and the West understand to mean and Crimea 3. percent.
Neither cease-fire took hold, and daily Fund assessed Ukraine’s GDP in the pre-crisis shootings and killings have continued. year of 2013 at $179. billion.
Thus, the total asset value of Crimea and Donbas would amount to 13.7 After September 2014, the big question was wheth1 Thomas Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century , 165.
Forecasts Revised to Factor in Protracted Military Conflict, Dragon Capital, October 2, 2014.
Of that number, The United States and the European Union RBC estimated, 2 million to 2. million are in rebel-held responded with severe sanctions against Russian territory, and about 1 million of those are pensioners.
A officials, individuals, and enterprises held responsible December 2015 Bild report also pegged the pensioner for the annexation and anybody pursuing business population in the occupied are at 1,079,000.6 dealings with the region.
Crimea’s foreign trade has fallen by nineThe Ukrainian Ministry of Social Policy reported in tenths.
Housing prices slumped, while the prices of August 2016 that 1,714,388 individuals were registered goods and services rose because of supply problems. as IDPs in Ukraine;7 according to the RBC account, Annual tourism has dropped from 6 million visitors, 500,000 to 1 million people have gone to Russia and two-thirds of them from Ukraine, to 4 million to 5 another 100,000 have fled to other countries.
Thus, million, almost entirely from Russia. occupied Donbas is a hellhole, where few but the poor, the old, and the criminal remain.
The Crimean It has seen many assassinations of rebel battalion economy has become completely commanders.
The skill with which these killings have been carried out suggests they were inside jobs by Russian special forces.
Nothing seems to function or be produced in Luhansk, while Donetsk has restored dependent on the some order as well as elementary local food supplies and public services.
Russian state and is There is no comparison with the peaceful and relatively likely to remain so... well-organized Crimea, which is ruled from Moscow Russian special forces without insignia patrol Simferopol Airport on February 28, 2014 in Crimea, Ukraine.
The complaints in economy of Crimea in 2014, and it is continuing to Crimea concerns discrimination against Crimean subsidize the region to the tune of $2 billion a year.
The Tartars and Ukrainians, human-rights violations, and Russian government is building a major bridge over the er Russian troops would try to seize the big industrial guess is that a similar number of people have been property crimes, not outright warfare or lawless gangs Kerch Strait from mainland Russia to Crimea’s eastern city of Mariupol.
Russia’s economic treatment tip to be completed at the end of 2018, at a cost of $3.5 the Ukrainian economy, as Mariupol is the country’s people have disappeared in Crimea, and six are thought of the two occupied territories has also been very billion.
The project is overseen by Arkady Rotenberg, second biggest port, accounting for about one-third to have been killed.
While Crimea is subject to a hard different. a construction magnate and longtime friend of Putin of Ukraine’s exports.
So far that has not happened. dictatorship, occupied Donbas is a lawless war zone. who is under sanctions,8 as are many of his companies One reason may be that the economic destruction Population movements dramatize the contrast involved in building the bridge. would be too great.
Crimea has a population RUSSIAN POLICY ON CRIMEA the narrow Strait of Kerch that leads out to the Black The Crimean economy has become completely Sea, and Russia has imposed many restrictions on of 2 million, as it did in 2013.
Twenty thousand people, When Russia annexed Crimea on March 18, 2014, it incorporated the region fully, imposing Russian state dependent on the Russian state and is likely to remain shipping from Mariupol, so that much of its freight mainly Crimean Tatars and youth, have left for Ukraine institutions and laws but also offering federal Russian so; the annual cost of $2 billion, merely 0.14 percent of has been diverted to ports on the other side of proper, and about as many Russians have moved in, financing.
The ruble was introduced, as were Russian Russia’s current GDP of $1. trillion, is significant yet Crimea.
The share of Ukraine’s cargo export going most of them presumably military pensioners. pensions and state salaries.
This does not include military through the country’s two Azov Sea ports, Mariupol expenditures for Crimea.
THE PRICE TAG KREMLIN AGGRESSION IN UKRAINE: THE PRICE TAG MATERIAL LOSSES IN CRIMEA 2014, Ukrainian Energy Minister Yuriy Prodan declared average price of agricultural land in Ukraine is $1,300 , moved in.
RNCB has been established as the that losing access to the Black Sea fields would cost per hectare, which would mean a value of $1. billion.
The two biggest companies in Crimea, immediately lost all state property, which included The most important of these offshore projects involved be worth $5. billion.
Crimea Soda and Crimea Titan, belonging to Ukrainian Naftogaz holdings, infrastructure, buildings, land, and a consortium led by ExxonMobil and including Royal oligarch Dmytro Firtash, have apparently been remilitary assets.
Dutch Shell and Romania’s OMV Petrom, which was registered as Russian companies.
Of Ukraine’s moving forward on product-sharing agreements for offshore blocks outside of Crimea.
These As Russia persistently An alternative and more comprehensive method of natural-gas production of 20 billion cubic meters per year, 1. bcm came from state-owned plans were shelved because of the annexation and the denies its very assessment would be to base the loss amount on post-conflict GDP and use a standard international presence in the ensuing Western sanctions against Russia and Crimea.
As noted above, Piketty sets eighteen gas fields on the Black Sea shelf and onshore. that ratio as a multiplier of slightly more than four, The company was “nationalized” by Crimean regional alone at $30 billion, when the gas prices remained high.
Ukraine adopted a law on PSAs in 1999, but Donbas, it has not based on European economic averages over the last authorities in March 2014 and is now effectively under Russian control.
According to Ukraine’s statistics, Crimea accounted for 3. percent of its GDP in 2013, when the and security analyst, noted shortly after the annexation that Chornomornaftogaz had intended to double Since the annexation, Russia has carried out extensive confiscation of public and private property, which it responsibility for IMF set its national GDP at $179. billion.
The resulting equation—0.037 x $179. billion x 4— yields a loss of production in 2015, on which basis he estimated the company’s value at $1 billion,11 a figure that seems low. has referred to as “nationalization” under Russian Federation legislation.
As of May 12, 2017, 4,575 public governance or the $26. billion. and private real-estate assets had been nationalized.
RUSSIAN POLICY ON DONBAS Since the annexation, demolition of buildings constructed without necessary While Moscow followed a clear-cut path of annexation Private enterprises in Crimea faced the choice of reRussia has carried out permits.
If and nationalization in Crimea, its policy in the Donbas has been neither clear nor stable.
Many Ukrainian owners have tried to sell their property in Crimea but are stymied by the depressed economy there.
Actual Russian policy has evolved in steps, with increasing Kremlin involvement, but it property, which it steps to compensate owners of confiscated property, but it excludes individuals accused of “extremism.” market and low prices. has not prevented the territory from devolving into a lawless mess. has referred to as Moreover, compensation payments can be postponed Crimea had a large banking sector.
In February 2014, more than twenty Ukrainian banks with 1,022 branch for ten years.
The National Bank of Ukraine assessed the value of the regional banking through terrible destruction.
Russian engineering under Russian acquired in Sevastopol with a risk of no compensation.
Several property owners saw courts cancel purchase sector at $1. billion to $1. billion.
By the end of April 2014, all Ukrainian-registered banks had closed troops blew up bridges and factories were subject to extensive artillery fire.
All banks and ATM machines Federation legislation. contracts that had been concluded before the Russian occupation, judgments that amount to confiscation of their branches and left Crimea.
Rebels plundered state banks, Sberbank and VTB, have stayed away to property without reparation. or seized small, medium-sized and state enterprises, avoid the United States and EU sanctions.
Instead, the alreadyUkraine has large but unexplored resources of gas on while big private enterprises, largely owned by Rinat The Ukrainian government also owned 1. million sanctioned Bank Rossiya, owned by friends of Putin its shelf in the Black Sea and Azov Sea shelves.
With Akhmetov’s DTEK and Metinvest,” were allowed to hectares of agricultural land in Crimea.
Petersburg, and a few minor Russian state Russia’s annexation, it seized these assets.
THE PRICE TAG KREMLIN AGGRESSION IN UKRAINE: THE PRICE TAG cost to Russia of these payments at $1 billion a year.
Militarily, Russia has integrated the Donbas rebel forces The Ukrainian government credibly estimated that under regular Russian command.
Moscow spent $2 billion in non-military expenditures on the rebel-held territories in 2016.28 MATERIAL LOSSES IN DONBAS In October 2015, the Kremlin changed its management The economic and humanitarian situation in Donbas of the occupied Donbas.
Dmitri Kozak, the deputy is awful and stands in sharp contrast to the situation prime minister in charge of regional affairs, including in Crimea.
First, the war in the Donbas wrought frozen conflicts, took over from Vladislav Surkov of substantial destruction from May to August 2014.
The appointment Economic output declined by roughly two-thirds. of Kozak, a lawyer from St.
In the wake of both Minsk agreements, the Russian-led forces took hundreds of square kilometers of additional Sergey Nazarov, Russia’s deputy minister of economic Ukrainian territory.
The line dividing Ukraineand development for regional development, took over rebel-held territory has somewhat stabilized since, the management of the occupied zone’s economy. but shooting has continued along this line.
The daily He commanded a plethora of Russian state agencies, shelling has caused significant material destruction and while private Russian enterprises hardly entered. disrupted supply chains.
Some production recovered, Until March 2017, many large Ukrainian enterprises but not much.
By March 2017, the rebel governments in still operated in the occupied territories and they did Donetsk and Luhansk had confiscated almost all stillso in accordance with Ukrainian law.
Previously, neither Russia What these reports nor Ukraine had recognized high-school or university exams from these regions.
Students had to leave for reflect, more than either Russia or Ukraine before completing their exams. three years after the A destroyed office of PrivatBank, Ukraine’s largest commercial bank, which was set on fire in May 2014 in Mariupol, Ukraine.
Carl Ridderstråle The Russian government has tried to restore the banking system.
According to a December 2015 occupation started, automated teller machines in free Ukraine to collect not afford large public outlays to territory it did not entry in “The Donbass Paradox,” a Journalismfund.eu investigative project on the economic and business is that unruly armed their wages. control and from which it could not collect taxes. situation in the rebel-held areas, “Nearly all foreign gangs seize whatever companies have fled from the occupied zone.
Most The first signs of any stabilization came in August 2014, when Aleksandr Zakharchenko became prime minister During the Minsk negotiations in February 2015, Russia insisted that the Ukrainian government continued to of their assets have since been destroyed, looted or assets they desire. of the DNR and Igor Plotnitsky became head of the provide public financing to the occupied Donbas, but occupied.
Zakharchenko remains the nominal head of the the Ukrainian government only paid pensions in nonItalian and Ukrainian—closed in mid-2014.
The rebels The quarterly reports of the United Nations High DNR; in November 2017, Plotnitsky was ousted in a occupied Ukraine to people registered as living there. have raided many of the outlets and blown up ATMs, Commissioner for Human Rights routinely coup and replaced by Leonid Pasechnik.
These leaders In April 2015, Russia hesitantly started paying pensions looking for cash.
The only bank open is the rebel-run detail looting and harassment of small enterprises are considered mediocre and they lack political appeal, sporadically in the Donbas and covering some other Republican Central Bank, which has opened mainly and property owners, such as this from the summer but they are obedient to Moscow. basic public expenses, in rubles.
By November conflict territories, RCNB, has entered this territory, as groups continued to create unnecessary hardship for the Donbas until November 2014, when President Petro 2015, the misery seems to have become so great that in Crimea. the population … all real estate transactions executed Poroshenko signed a decree that cut off all Ukrainian Moscow feared starvation and started regular but state funding of the occupied territories.
THE PRICE TAG KREMLIN AGGRESSION IN UKRAINE: THE PRICE TAG on material losses in the Donbas.
He stated that Yatsenyuk assessed the war damages to physical 11,325 infrastructure facilities with a collective value infrastructure at $9 billion,44 and much destruction has of UAH 11. billion had ensued. been destroyed in the Luhansk and Donetsk regions.
The border between the December 2014, UNHCR reported that about 12,000 DNR and Ukraine proper is relatively open, with four public and private facilities had been destroyed in crossings, but traffic from the LNR is squeezed through occupied Donbas.
The traffic is substantial, with for this extensive material destruction.,000 border crossings every day, mainly by elderly people aspiring to collect their Ukrainian pensions.
Key Ukrainian enterprises are concentrated in the Some residents of the occupied zones also cross to Donbas, producing general machinery, mining buy food—prices are much lower and selection much equipment, machinery, equipment for metallurgy better in free Ukraine. and the chemical industry, transport equipment, locomotives and rail cars.
Donetskhormash PJSC and Donetsk Akhmetov that employed some 57,000 people.
At that PJSC, Horlivka Machine Builder PJSC, Novohorlivsk time, the Kremlin decided to take them over, under an Machine Works PJSC, Yasynuvata Machine Works as-yet-unclear legal form.
They are the confiscated LLC, Azovmash PJSC, Stakhanov Wagon Works PJSC, enterprises listed in Appendix 1. and the Kirov Forging Plant “Tsentrokuz” PJSC.40 Stirol fertilizer plant stopped working.
Wikimedia Among Ukraine’s many steelworks, only Alchevsk Iron to former President and Steel Works was fully modernized.
Russian forces bombed bridges and power stations in areas under their control.
There continue to operate groups further restricted the right to unimpeded use of privately owned commercial premises or other the territory.
In October 2014, the occupied territories accounted for 2. percent of Ukraine’s area, 10 percent have been reports of many other factories more being enterprises under the looted and transferred to Russia, but it is hard to get business-related property.
Economic Studies reported that war-related damages reflect, more than three years after the occupation seemingly a very low estimate given the extent of in the Donbas amounted to some 8 percent of started, is that unruly armed gangs seize whatever the destruction.
Of that, $352 million pertained to Some local businessmen close to former President Ukraine’s GDP, or $10 billion.
At a conference in Kyiv assets they desire. transportation and $53 million to the energy sector.
Viktor Yanukovych continue to operate enterprises on September 13, 2015, then-Prime Minister Arseniy The damages to transportation were specified as 1,100 The Donbas economy has collapsed.
What Went Wrong and How to Fix It, Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2015, 21.
Statement at the Yalta European Strategy Conference in Kyiv, September 2014.
Illegally extracted coal in Donbas has summer of 2014 and the poor Ukrainian conditions Yanukovych in Kharkiv in April 2010.53 Kyiv responded Billions of United States Dollars been exported to Russia, Turkey, and Poland.
Previously, Shell had by not paying, and on June 16, 2014, Gazprom stopped 2018, the United States Treasury sanctioned some of these coal talked about investing $5 billion to 10 billion in this supplying gas to Ukraine.
In November 2015, Naftogaz ceased importing From Russia 27.4 5.1 -81% the country, contending that trade financially sustained The commission said there has been “no progress in gas from Gazprom.
IMF, Direction of Trade Statistics, 2017. halted the transport of coal from mines in the NGCA, destroyed property.”52 appealed, leading to a December 2017 decision both which were critical for steel factories, other metalworks, sides claimed as a victory, but in fact Naftogaz’s victory The table above shows a truly shocking collapse in and power plants in Ukraine.
The rebels took control of Returning to Piketty’s standard European multiple was confirmed.
The occupied territory of Donbas before Russian trade sanctions and military aggression. medium-sized and large companies.
In response, Kyiv accounted for 10 percent of its GDP in 2013, when the With the Russian annexation of Crimea in March 2014, Russia’s share of Ukraine’s trade fell from 29 percent banned all commercial transport of goods between IMF set its GDP at $179. billion; 0. x $179. billion x 4 Ukraine lost much of its export capacity, and by that in 2012 to 11. percent in 2016.
The have caused great damage to Ukraine’s economy.16 of Ukraine estimated that the result would be a 1.3 considerable production of steel, coal, iron ore, and marked the nadir; Ukraine’s trade expanded sharply in percent loss in national GDP in 2017—0. percent of related products in the Donbas was stopped almost 2017, although the Russian sanctions did not ease.
GDP because the seized companies are no longer part TRADE SANCTIONS AND THEIR completely, as were as the exports of steel and other of Ukraine’s economy, and 0. percent of GDP because COSTS products from the region.
The war also disrupted Within the former Soviet Union, Russia has frequently transportation.
In September 2014, Ukraine responded imposed severe trade sanctions with little or no of trade suspension.
The economic indicator that most clearly reflects with extensive sanctions.
In the early 1990s, it hit the Central and Eastern the damage to Ukraine’s economy from Russia’s European countries, notably the Baltic states.
To begin with, in July and August 2013, Russia started In January 2016, the EU and Ukraine provisionally them reacted by shifting their trade from Russia to the EU.58 In 2006, Russia imposed harsh trade sanctions on indicator that most multiple trade sanctions against Ukraine, especially against imports of agricultural goods and steel.
The share of Moldovan exports going to Russia plunged from 40 percent in 2005 to clearly reflects the these sanctions were directed against pro-European Ukrainian businessmen but gradually they spread to the existing, multilateral free-trade agreement among 16 percent in 2007, but its total exports increased and the members of the Commonwealth of Independent damage to Ukraine’s its exports to Europe expanded fast.
States with regard to Ukraine, thus imposing import similar if less precipitous decline in Russian trade, from economy from Gazprom is Russia’s favorite geopolitical tool, toying with both prices and supplies for political aims.
To add insult to injury, Russia also imposed transit restrictions on Ukrainian exports to 18 percent of exports to 4 percent, but its total exports actually surged by 42 percent.
Russia’s aggression is first quarter of 2014, Gazprom charged Ukraine $268.50 Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, which eliminated 0.4 percent of Ukraine’s total exports.
The two countries per 1,000 cubic meters in accordance with an foreign trade. agreement between Presidents Putin and Yanukovych have gradually escalated their many trade sanctions. on December 17, 2013.
On April 1, however, Gazprom hiked the price to $385 per mcm, announcing that it Before it was ousted, the Yanukovych government would no longer give any special Yanukovych discount. concluded PSAs with Chevron in Western Ukraine Two days later, Gazprom raised the price again, by and Royal Dutch Shell in the Donbas on shale-gas another $100 per mcm to $485 per mcm, arguing that exploration and production.
Shell declared force since Russia had annexed Crimea, it was no longer majeure for its fields located in the war zone.
What Went Wrong and How to Fix It, Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2015, should be added that other factors contributed to this 205.
What Went Wrong and How to Fix It, Washington, DC: Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2015, and Kyrgyzstan,” German Advisory Group, Policy Briefing Series, February 2018.
Consequences for the CIS Countries,” in Beyond Transition: Development 51 Conversations with the Ukraine manager for Shell in September 2014.
THE PRICE TAG KREMLIN AGGRESSION IN UKRAINE: THE PRICE TAG but Naftogaz said it escaped Russian claims of $75 months’ deposits in United States Dollars prevailing at the billion.
London interbank market plus 1% and shall be efficiently realizable and freely transferable.
The London court ruled for Russia in its bid to collect on a defaulted $3 billion bond dating from December Article 9 of the BIT offers alternative venues of 2013, near the end of the Yanukovych era.
Kyiv claimed Russia’s decision Arbitration Institute of the Chamber of Commerce was political, but the court threw those arguments in Stockholm,” or “an ‘ad hoc’ arbitration tribunal, in out in a March 2017 ruling.
As of this writing Ukraine’s conformity with the Arbitration Regulations of the appeal is pending.
Subsequent court rulings raised the fine to $6 billion, which Kyiv is seeking to collect The number of Ukrainian cases is large and is likely from Gazprom assets in Ukraine. to grow if the plaintiffs prove successful.
The biggest case has been raised by Naftogaz and six of its A number of Crimea-related cases have been initiated subsidiaries (Chernomornaftogaz, Ukrtransgaz, Likvo, by Ukrainian companies, often acting in groups.
The Ukrgazdobuvanya, Ukrtransnafta, and Gaz of Ukraine). legal basis for these cases is the bilateral investment The companies seek $5 billion for damages caused treaty between Ukraine and Russia of November by the seizure of its assets in Crimea plus $2 billion in 27, 1998.
The Russian Federation did not recognize the jurisdiction of the International Court of Arbitration, 1.
The Presidential Administration of Russia equated by its consequences to expropriation At least seven other lawsuits have been filed against , with the Russian Federation over confiscation of assets in the exception of cases, when such measures are occupied Crimea, by companies including Ukrnafta, not of a discriminatory nature and entail prompt, Within the former of agricultural goods are set to continue rising, and the hope is that Ukraine will become integrated into adequate and effective compensation.
Privatbank is likely to Soviet Union, Russia the European supply chain of manufacturing and services.
The compensation shall correspond to the market seek compensation of a similar amount, as is Ukrnafta.
Ukraine’s largest private power and coal producer, has frequently value of the expropriated investments, prevailing DTEK, has declared that it will seek compensation of immediately before the date of expropriation $500 million from Russia for the loss of its assets in imposed severe trade UKRAINIAN CLAIMS or when the fact of expropriation has become officially known.
The pending claims by Ukrainain enterprises, listed in Appendix 2, could fetch damages exceeding sanctions with little or Ukraine and Russia are also battling in the legal arena, with cases before the Stockholm Arbitration Institute, without delay with due regard for the interest, to be charged as of the date of expropriation till $10 billion. no notice. the International Court of Arbitration in The Hague, the High Court of London, the ECHR in Strasbourg, the date of payment, at the interest rate for three the International Court of Justice , and the 61 Polityuk.
The share of steel is likely to continue a ten-year bilateral gas agreement signed in 2009.
THE PRICE TAG KREMLIN AGGRESSION IN UKRAINE: THE PRICE TAG The Ukrainian corporate claims in Crimea appear to be case is the ICJ in The Hague.
It is the most authoritative indication of provisional measures submitted by non-government controlled territories “temporarily on firm legal ground.
Russia officially annexed Crimea, judicial body for sovereign interests of states.
This changes the international legal and the BIT was clearly valid at the time.
The companies filed claims against Russia there in January 2017, framework and offers new options for Ukrainian have found a desirable venue; Moscow refuses to alleging Russian violations of UN conventions.
An alternative international tribunal is the ECHR, which claimants. accept the Hague arbitration court’s jurisdiction, but is attached to the Council of Europe.
With regard to the Donbas, Kyiv accuses Russia of Ministry of Justice has repeatedly stated that it would If a Ukrainian entity wins in an international arbitration violating the Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, including in its charges Russia’s go to the ECHR to seek compensation from Russia for its economic losses in Crimea.
In December 2015, The ECHR is flooded court, it can raise claims against the Russian Federation in other jurisdictions than Russia where Russian assets alleged role in the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight however, the Russian State Duma promulgated a law with Ukrainian cases.
The shooting down of the Malaysia Airlines flight is a prove successful.
Kramatorsk; the bombing of civilians in Kharkiv; and “all other acts of terrorism the Russian Federation has special case.
The Netherlands has claimed jurisdiction caused, facilitated, or supported through its financing because the plane departed from Amsterdam and POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS of terrorism, and failure to prevent and investigate the most of its passengers were Dutch citizens.
However, The situation in the Donbas is legally much more The Ukrainian state, Ukrainian enterprises, and financing of terrorism.”74 the Dutch investigation has been very slow, and tenuous.
Although it is obvious that the Russian Ukrainian individuals have lost vast assets in Crimea Ukrainians authorities have considered raising the case government controls the territory, it does not and the Donbas because of Russian aggression.
Many The Ukrainian government’s two main accusations with in the ICC.80 As a preventive step, in November 2016 admit doing so.
As Moscow refuses to take official court cases are already under way, and their number regard to Crimea have been based on the Convention Russia pulled out of the ICC.81 responsibility for the occupied territories, it is unclear will surely rise substantially over several years.
This will on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination whether the Ukraine-Russia BIT is applicable.
Nor is it The amorphous situation in the Donbas has impeded be an important part of Ukraine’s foreign and economic (primarily pertaining to Crimean Tartars but also clear in what jurisdiction claims would be presented. legal cases.
Therefore, these matters need to be given wide ethnic Ukrainians in Crimea) and the United Nations Any Russia-Ukrainian settlement over the Donbas through its annexation; it has not done so in Donetsk policy consideration.
Convention on the Law of the Sea, “concerning Russian would have to contain some clarification over legal and Luhansk.
It changes the legal position of the Donbas Governments have other jurisdictional options for suing requests the Court to reject the request for the substantially.
Previously, Ukrainian authorities called • pursue all legal opportunities that have been one another.
The most prominent institution in this the military activities in Donbas “terrorism” and established. thus accused Russia of providing terrorist financing.
Aaron Matta, “MH17 Downing Suspects to be Prosecuted Before Dutch Domestic Courts—An Obstacle or an Advantage for 75 Baggiani.
THE PRICE TAG KREMLIN AGGRESSION IN UKRAINE: THE PRICE TAG • seek the best legal advice available, as Naftogaz did in taking Gazprom to arbitration.
Athletic facilities: take responsibility for material compensation for • Donetsk Metallurgical Plant • Donbas Arena Ukrainian losses in the Donbas.
The PCA acts as registry investments in Crimea as well as its subsidiary in this arbitration, which is being conducted under Russian Federation and the Cabinet of Ministers Moskomprivatbankin following the 2014 Russian of Ukraine on the Encouragement and Mutual the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules 1976 pursuant to annexation of that territory including alleged the Agreement between the Government of the Protection of Investments, dated 27 November confiscation of various cash holdings and real 1998.
Russian Federation and the Cabinet of Ministers estate assets owned by the claimants, totaling of Ukraine on the Encouragement and Mutual nearly $200 million.
Claims arising out the Agreement between the Government of the Crimea-Petrol LLC of alleged expropriation of a large number of Russian Federation and the Cabinet of Ministers Pirsan LLC properties in Crimea, including offices, apartment of Ukraine on the Encouragement and Mutual Trade-Trust LLC buildings, and villas, following the 2014 Russian Protection of Investments dated 27 November Elefteria LLC annexation of Crimea.98.
The PCA acts as registry bk-Invest CJSC Niva-Tour LLC Claimant: in this arbitration, which is being conducted under the UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules 1976 pursuant to IMME LLC JSC Oschadbank the Agreement between the Government of the Planeta PE Russian Federation and the Cabinet of Ministers Krim Development LLC Source: Sergejs Dilevka and Mena Chambers, of Ukraine on the Encouragement and Mutual Aerobud PJSC “Arbitration Claims by Ukrainian Investors under Protection of Investments dated 27 November Privatoffice LLC the Russian-Ukraine BIT,” CIS Arbitration Forum, 1998.
THE PRICE TAG Atlantic Council Board of Directors ABOUT THE AUTHOR *INTERIM CHAIRMAN R Nicholas Burns *Maria Pica Karp Harry Sachinis *James L Jones, Jr.
Steele INTERNATIONAL Michael Chertoff Laura Lane Paula Stern Anders Åslund is a senior fellow in the Eurasia Center at the Atlantic Council.
He is a leading specialist on economic David McCormick Wesley K Clark *Jan M Lodal Robert L Stout, Jr. policy in Russia, Ukraine, and Eastern Europe.
He is chairman of the Advisory Council of the *Frederick Kempe *Ralph D Crosby, Jr.
William J Lynn Nathan D Tibbits Center for Social and Economic Research, Warsaw, and of the Scientific Council Nelson W Cunningham Wendy W Makins Frances M Townsend EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS of the Bank of Finland Institute for Economies in Transition.
Previously, *Robert J Abernethy Conrado Dornier T Allan McArtor Maciej Witucki Dr.
Boyden Gray *Stuart E Eizenstat John M McHugh Guang Yang International Center for Scholars.
Melby Mary C Yates Economics and the founding director of the Stockholm Institute of East European *Virginia A Mulberger Julie Finley Franklin C Miller Dov S Zakheim Economics.
DeVier Pierson *Alan H Fleischmann Judith A Miller HONORARY DIRECTORS Moscow.
