Ukraine’s March and October 2019 presidential and parliamentary elections will represent a watershed in the country’s history.
They will be the second set of elections following those held in 2014 after the Euromaidan Revolution of Dignity, during Russia’s military aggression in Ukraine and when the EU and Ukraine had signed an Association Agreement, or enlargement-light providing integration without membership.
If reformers win the 2019 elections, as they did in 2014, Ukraine will have passed Samuel Huntington’s two-turnover test of elections changing governments without a collapse of the democratic order.
Opinion polls show the battle line in Ukraine’s 2019 presidential elections will not be between “pro-Western” and “pro-Russian” candidates, as was the case in four out of the six previous elections, but rather between reformers and populists.
In next year elections, President Petro Poroshenko will face leading candidates who are all populists – Yulia Tymoshenko, Anatoliy Grytsenko, Oleh Lyashko, Vadym Rabinovych, and Yuriy Boyko.
With populists leading in Ukrainian polls, it is important for scholars and policy makers to compare populism in Ukraine and Europe and analyse their critical discourse.
Populists have long been present in Ukrainian politics and existed on both sides of the “pro-Western” and “pro-Russian” divide up to 2014.
Diverse scholarly literature on populism has attempted to grapple with a vague concept that encompasses both the left and right of the political spectrum.
Most of the scholarly work on populism has focused on Latin America but with the rise of populist nationalism more recently this has expanded to Europe, including post-communist central-eastern Europe.
Populism in Ukraine, and the former USSR, displays characteristics that are commonly found in Europe as well as those that make it different.
These characteristics include hostility to immigration, electorally popular populist-nationalists, anti-Islamic xenophobia, and the EU viewed as a threat to national sovereignty.
Immigration is not an issue in Ukrainian elections because the country is a transit route for migrants seeking to travel to western Europe.
This is one, but not the only reason why populist-nationalists are unpopular.
In seven parliamentary elections held since 1994, nationalists have only been elected on a single occasion in 2012 when the Svoboda party won ten percent, far lower than for populist-nationalists in many EU member states.
Nationalists did not win seats in the October 2014 elections during the year that Russia launched its military aggression against Ukraine.
Patriotism rather than ethnic nationalism is more prevalent in Ukraine with popular opinion showing high levels of negativity to Russian leaders but not to Russian citizens.
Hostility to Islam and migrants from Islamic countries is not an issue in Ukraine as migrants do not seek asylum in Ukraine and there is no large Islamic community.
Ukrainian dissidents in the Soviet era and contemporary democrats and nationalists have long been allies of Crimean Tatars in what they perceive as their common anti-Russian struggle.
Crimean Tatar leaders have been elected to parliament in Rukh , Our Ukraine and the Poroshenko bloc.
Anti-EU sentiment in Ukraine was low and has dramatically fallen since 2014.
Antipathy to the EU was found among supporters of Ukraine joining the CIS Customs Union but support has collapsed to under ten percent as a consequence of Russia’s military aggression.
Nevertheless, they do not attack the EU or Ukraine’s path of European integration.
Ukrainian nationalists differ from their European counterparts in being pro-NATO and not anti-American.
The collapse of Russian soft power is particularly noticeable among Ukrainian youth, representing the future of the country, two thirds of who believe Ukraine and Russia are in a state of war.
Similar views of Ukraine and Russia at war can be found among all age groups in Ukraine with the highest among young people and lowest among the over 60s.
Six other issues commonly found in European populists are also found among Ukrainian populists.
First, anti-globalisation has not yet been an election issue for post-Soviet countries such as Ukraine.
Nevertheless, as Pierre Ostiguy writes, in dividing the population into “corrupt” elites and the “people,” populists often accuse the former of being controlled by foreign powers.
This external management is taking place through Ukraine’s puppet leadership” Tymoshenko said.
Tymoshenko, who is often described as Ukraine’s leading and long-term populist, has always used radical rhetoric against “corrupt” authorities and oligarchs.
Tymoshenko said during the XII National Prayer Breakfast in Washington DC earlier this year that “we should love God and love people.
It’s a simple answer” with presumably her understood as being God fearing and all other Ukrainian politicians as Godless.
Anti-corruption rhetoric is central to European and Ukrainian populist discourse.
While Ukraine’s politicians routinely attack corruption and oligarchs the weakness of Ukrainian political parties has ensured their only source of funding is big business.
This has produced low levels of public trust in the anti-corruption claims found in programmes of presidential candidates and political parties.
Tymoshenko, for example, has only participated in 55 per cent of votes on corruption and as low as 34 per cent on banking reforms and 13 per cent on energy, two sectors in Ukraine traditionally rife with corruption.
Third, scholars have emphasised the anti-democratic nature of populists.
Stefan Rummens writes the most dangerous feature of populism is a firm belief only they are right coupled with a disrespect for alternative opinions.
The Committee of Voters of Ukraine, an election monitoring NGO, calculated that in May 2018, Tymoshenko and Opposition Bloc MP and presidential candidate Boyko attended only 1 and 6 per cent respectively of parliamentary proceedings.
Tymoshenko’s authoritarian leadership was revealed to United States Ambassador to Ukraine William Taylor by Viktor Pynzenyk who resigned as Finance Minister from her 2007-2010 government.
Pynzenyk added, “Tymoshenko simply wanted to consolidate power in her own hands;” that is, populism was a means for her to achieve maximum power.
This view of Tymoshenko as an authoritarian politician is commonly held in Ukraine and worked against her in the 2010 elections when she received three million fewer votes than Viktor Yushchenko in December 2004 because some voters saw her as a bigger threat to Ukraine’s democracy than even the authoritarian Yanukovych.
Vox Ukraine ranked the Popular Front loyal to former Prime Minister Yatsenyuk and Poroshenko Bloc with providing the highest number of votes for reforms.
Vox Ukraine ranked Tymoshenko a low 38 per cent on their Index of Support for Reform.
Vox Ukraine calculates that over the four years of the current parliament, Tymoshenko has participated in less than a third of votes and her average support for reformist policies is only slightly higher at 36 per cent.
Batkivshchyna led the way calling for the resignation of Minister of Health Ulana Suprun who has been successful in reducing corruption in the purchasing of medical supplies and reforming this sector.
Ukraine is the only country in central-eastern Europe with a land sale moratorium that has produced a corrupt grey economy in land sales.
In May and August 2018 the European Court of Human Rights ruled the moratorium violates the property rights of farmers.
The World Bank believes the lifting of the moratorium would boost agricultural output by $15 billion.
Tymoshenko leads a campaign to collect signatures for Ukraine to hold a referendum on land reform.
Fifth, populists are chameleons and draw on different ideologies to mobilise electoral support, as clearly seen during Britain’s Brexit referendum and the 2016 United States presidential elections.
This is especially prevalent in Ukraine and other post-Soviet countries where political parties are weak, or oligarch election projects and ideology is fluid.
Ukraine’s populists are labelled “pro-Western” or “pro-Russian” while sometimes supporting similar populist policies.
Outright lies, deception and exaggeration are commonly found in populist rhetoric with the most extreme case of this phenomenon the twitter rantings of United States President Donald Trump.
Vox Ukraine ranked Ukrainian politicians by their willingness to be truthful in its “liars” and “manipulators” survey.
Vox Ukraine ranked the top five as Tymoshenko in first place, followed by Opposition Bloc MP’s Rabinovych, Boyko and Oleksandr Vilkul and, surprisingly, leader of the Samopomych parliamentary faction Oleh Berezyuk.
Sixth, Paul Taggart has discussed how crises lead to an increase in the popularity of populists.
Populists are adept at what Benjamin Moffit points to as the instrumentalisation of perceived crises.
Ukraine has experienced multiple economic, political and military crises since becoming independent in 1991 and each of these crises has been exploited by populists to mobilise votes.
In 2010, voters elected Yanukovych after five years of crisis and political instability when Yushchenko’s presidency was dominated by his bitter and public quarrels with Tymoshenko.
Since 2014, Ukraine has been at war with Russia while at the same time seeking to overcome a deep economic crisis and implement unpopular reforms.
The extent of the unpopularity of these reforms introduced since 2014 can be gauged by the collapse of support for Yatsenyuk’s Popular front which led to the decision to not participate in local elections held in 2015.
Populists, both “pro-Western” and “pro-Russian,” have sought to capitalise on public disgruntlement over unpopular reforms and frustration at the lack of end in sight for the on-going war with Russia.
Tymoshenko and Grytsenko have criticised the low number of high-ranking elites who have been criminally prosecuted – which the Anti-Corruption Curt is meant to rectify and Tymoshenko criticised.
They have also claimed, without producing evidence, that President Poroshenko’s team are financially benefitting from the prolongation of the war through corruption in military orders.
Neither Tymoshenko or Grytsenko have put forward realistic alternatives to the president’s policies towards Russia’s military aggression.
In both Russia’s 2008 invasion of Georgia and Ukraine’s on-going war with Russia, Tymoshenko has been reluctant to criticise Putin.
Meanwhile it is feared that Grytsenko, because of his military background, would pursue a more aggressive attempt to forcibly re-take the occupied territories in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine leading to an all-out Russian-Ukrainian war.
Migrants do not seek sanctuary in Ukraine, nationalist political forces are unpopular, Crimean Tatars are viewed as allies by democrats and nationalists alike while Russia, not the EU is viewed as a threat to Ukrainian sovereignty.
In six other areas, Ukrainian and European populists have close similarities.
These include hostility to globalisation, use of radical rhetoric against corruption, they exhibit authoritarian and anti-democratic tendencies, provide weak support for reforms, their utterances are routinely untruths and those of chameleons, and they will always capitalise on crises.
In 2019, Ukrainian voters will be given the choice between voting for a continuation of the current political forces in power or supporting the populist alternative who are claiming to be better at reducing the pain of reforms, fighting corruption and curtailing the power of oligarchs, and ending the war.
These are tall orders for any political force to implement, particularly in a parliamentary system such as Ukraine’s where parliamentary coalitions create governments.
Tymoshenko and Grytsenko do not lead political parties that could hope to elect a large no of MP’s.
Batkivshchyna and its predecessor BYuT obtained their highest support of 30 per cent over a decade ago in 2007 but today only command twenty MP’s.
Grytsenko’s Civic Initiative party has never been elected into parliament.
Both candidates are running their third attempts at the Ukrainian presidency.
Ukraine’s 2019 elections will therefore lead to a democratic breakthrough, as per Huntington’s two-turnover test, or the country will again take two steps forward and one step backwards.
One thing is for sure is that Moscow, Washington and Brussels will be closely watching the election outcome.
Extensive polling data on Ukrainian identity can be found in the Razumkov Ukrainian Centre for Economic and Political Studies National Security and Defence magazine, nos.-4, 7-8, 2016 and nos.-2, 2017.
It is wrong to describe the conflict in eastern Ukraine as a “frozen conflict” as they are outcomes where one side is defeated – as in Moldova, Georgia and Azerbaijan.
This is not the case in eastern Ukraine where military engagements and casualties of combatants and civilian is a daily occurrence.
The Crimea is different and is a frozen conflict because Russia occupied and annexed the region without any war and there is no on-going conflict.
A comparison of populism in the Republic of Moldova, Ukraine and Georgia.
A Model for Understanding the Key Role of Crises in Contemporary Populism.
A Socio-Cultural Approach in Rovira C Kaltweisser, Paul Taggart, Paulina Ochoa Espejo and P Ostiguy eds., The Oxford Handbook of Populism.
He is the author and editor of 21 books and think tank monographs, including Putin’s War Against Ukraine.
Democratization, Corruption and the New Russian Imperialism , The Crimea.
