Kyiv, October 17, 2014 – “Terrorists outshot positions of Ukrainian Armed forces in Donetsk airport three times using artillery, mortar guns and tanks.
According to intelligence data received, over 70% of participants of the terrorist subdivision consisting of former police officers established to assault Donetsk airport, have deserted”, – reported Colonel Lysenko, the National Security and Defense Council Information Center spokesman at his briefing at the Ukraine Crisis Media Center.
The bombardments were recorded nearby Pisky, Maloorlivka, Debaltseve, Troyitske, Nikishyne, Novoorlivka, Kamyanka, Trudivske, Krasnohorivka, Hostra Mohyla kurgan in Donetsk region as well as Donetskyi, Frunze, Nyzhnye, Zolote, Stanytsya Luhanska in Luhansk region.
Among these, Tryokhizbenka in Luhansk region and Komuna, Tonenke, Novokalynove were outshot using “Grad” rocket launchers.
The NSDC spokesman reported death of 3 Ukrainian servicemen and 10 wounded soldiers over the past 24 hours.
According to Lysenko, militants’ activity northwards and in Donetsk direction slightly reduced as compared to the day before.
Terrorist are redeploying their forces nearby Shyrokino populated locality.
Colonel informed that yesterday at 5:20 pm a reconnaissance team of the Armed Forces of Ukraine consisting of 8 people found a terrorist group consisting of up to 20 people near a ruined bridge in the vicinity of Verkhnyotoretske settlement in Yasynuvata district.
Skillfully using the ground relief and the element of surprise, our soldiers managed to destroy 4 militants at once and wound several of them, following which the retreat started.
Colonel informed that one of our servicemen was wounded during the battle.
The reconnoiters followed by the enemies succeeded in bringing them under fire of the main covering party.
Unfortunately, an enemy sniper’s bullet ended life of a reconnoiter who was helping to take a wounded comrade out.
The situation stabilized and the enemy defeated in a checkpoint nearby Smile settlement in Luhansk region, where intense battles had been taking place for several days.
Our positions were strengthened and the defenders received reinforcement.
According to Lysenko, use of Russian pilotless aircrafts for air reconnaissance was recorded in this area nearby Sartany and Velyki Novosilky populated localities.
There were no military clashes on the border segments controlled by Ukrainian troops.
All the returned Russians are military servicemen of the Armed Forces of the Russia Federation.
As we informed previously, ten days ago the Security Service of Ukraine opened a hotline for Russian citizens aimed at helping them to find Russians missing in military actions in Donbas as well as identify bodies of the Russian servicemen who had died.
Terrorists continue outshooting residential quarters of towns in the territories temporarily controlled by them.
For instance, yesterday they delivered artillery fire upon central part of Hranitne village in Telmanivskyi district of Donetsk region from the direction of Nova Maryinka village.
Since the beginning of works on 06 July 2014, 24115 units of ammunition were rendered safe. administrative buildings and other premises were checked for presence of explosives.
Colonel Lysenko also informed on the situation in temporarily occupied Crimea.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine made reprehensions related to illegal adoption of children, the citizens of Ukraine, on the territory of Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
At present a program “Train of Hope – Crimea” is being implemented in Autonomous Republic of Crimea under the guidance of Russian civil organizations, aimed at Russian citizens’ adoption of orphans and neglected children who are the citizens of Ukraine and reside on the territory of the autonomous republic.
Article 21 of UN Convention on the Rights of the Child envisages that arties that recognize and/or permit the system of adoption shall ensure that the adoption of a child is authorized only by competent authorities.
The document states that the Ukrainian party files a strong and rigorous protest in connection with the described actions referring to the abovemetioned categories of children – citizens of Ukraine which take place in violation of international provisions of law and effective legislation of Ukraine, neglecting the envisaged procedures in this sphere.
It also states that such adoption shall be illegal and, consequently, carry no legal weight.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine called upon the Russian party to take all the necessary measures in compliance with international legal commitments in order to prevent illegal adoption of Ukrainian citizens by foreigners and their following illicit transfer from the territory of Ukraine.
The NSDC spokesman also debriefed on the 10th Summit of “Asia-Europe” Meeting in Milan.
Working breakfast with the participation of the President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko and the President of Russia Vladimir Putin ended in Milan.
It took place within the framework of the 10th Summit of “Asia-Europe” Meeting and lasted almost an hour and a half.
The Prime-minister of Italy Matteo Renzi, the Prime Minister of Great Britain David Cameron, the Chancellor of Germany Angela Merkel, the President of France Francois Hollande, as well as head officials of the European Council Jose Manuel Barroso and Herman Van Rompuy also took part in the negotiations.
The Prime-minister of Italy Matteo Renzi stated that an important step on Ukrainian discussions had been made as a result of leaders’ extended session within the ASEM meeting.
The first step in this discussion has been made, though numerous discrepancies remain.
It is understandable, but there is a desire to find a solution which gives hope for search of the settlement”, – he stated.
The day before the President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko held meetings with the President of the European Council Herman Van Rompuy, Head of the European Committee Jose Manuel Barroso, Federal Chancellor of Germany Angela Merkel, the Prime-minister of Italy Matteo Renzi and the President of Italian Republic Giorgio Napolitano.
Importance of thorough and timely implementation of Minsk agreements of 5th and 19th of September, necessity to extend OSCE mission for the situation in Ukrainian-Russian border monitoring as well as the need to improve its technical supply were discussed during the meeting.
The parties mentioned the importance of establishing the control over Ukrainian-Russian segment of the border, absolute ceasefire and all the hostages release.
