WASHINGTON, DC -Ukraine's economy may no longer be in free fall, but it remains in dire straits.
The country's GDP contracted by 6. per cent last year, and is forecast to shrink by another 9 per cent this year – a total loss of roughly 16 per cent over two years.
Ukraine's economic problems are being caused by Russia and Putin, who hope the fledgling democracy might collapse.
While things seem, to some extent, to be stabilising – depreciation of the hryvnia has eliminated the country's current-account deficit, and a massive fiscal adjustment brought Ukraine's budget into cash balance in the second quarter of this year – the situation remains precarious.
Ukraine's primary economic challenges are not homegrown; they are the result of Russian aggression.
The country's belligerent eastern neighbour has annexed Crimea, sponsored rebels in eastern Ukraine, pursued a trade war, intermittently cut off its supply of natural gas, and is threatening financial attack.
So far, Ukraine has miraculously managed to withstand these assaults with little international support – but it is in desperate need of assistance.
Since then, Russian-supported armed forces have occupied territories in eastern Ukraine that accounted for 10% of the country's GDP in 2013.
Since 2013, Russian trade sanctions have slashed Ukraine's exports to the country by 70 per cent – accounting for a drop of 18 per cent in Ukraine's total exports.
Last year alone, Ukraine's exports to Russia – which included machinery, steel, agricultural goods, and chemicals – fell by half.
Logistical issues, the lack of commercial links, and the specialisation of some products meant that the goods could not be redirected in the short term.
Businessmen everywhere are aware of Russia's assault on Ukraine, and, unsurprisingly, few want to invest in a war zone.
As a consequence, Ukraine's net foreign-direct investment, which was slightly over 3 per cent of GDP before the start of hostilities, has evaporated.
Leaving Crimea aside, we can attempt conservatively to sum up Ukraine's economic losses from Russia's aggression.
Roughly 7 per cent from lost production in occupied eastern Ukraine, 6 per cent losses from trade sanctions, plus 3 per cent from lost foreign direct investment amounts to 16 per cent of GDP – that is, the total amount Ukraine is estimated to have lost from the beginning of 2014 to the end of this year.
Russia's apparent but undeclared aim is to make sure that democratic Ukraine fails, without looking entirely guilty of having caused that failure.
Ukraine is not the culprit but the victim, and it should be treated accordingly.
One does not counter military aggression only with stabilisation credits, but also with military support.
European countries should note that, given the Kremlin's saber-rattling in the Baltic and the Balkans, there is little reason to believe that the Russian threat is limited to Ukraine.
Delivering arms to Ukraine before Russia attacks, openly or covertly, should be a priority.
On July 1, Russia opened a new front in the economic war on Ukraine when the energy giant Gazprom, which is majority-owned by the Russian state and slavishly pursues Russian foreign-policy objectives, decided unilaterally to cut off the country's gas supply.
Given the global gas surplus, Europe is in a position to tell Russia in no uncertain terms that its corrupt practices are no longer acceptable.
In particular, the European Commission should insist that Ukraine be able to continue to import gas from Gazprom in order to augment European supplies.
The international community, again with the EU in the lead, must provide substantial humanitarian assistance.
Ukraine's stabilisation program with the International Monetary Fund is sound but underfunded.
An additional credit of roughly $10 billion is needed to raise Ukraine's international reserves and stabilise its currency so that controls can be lifted.
Meanwhile, the EU should make Russia's trade war with Ukraine the focal point of any trade negotiations with the Kremlin.
And it should abolish its remaining strict import quotas for Ukrainian goods.
Finally, every legal avenue to holding Russia to account must be pursued.
Sanctions against Russian President Vladimir Putin's cronies should not only be continued, but also deepened.
And the United States should follow on its success in tackling FIFA by exposing criminals in former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych's regime and Putin's entourage.
Given that many of them have international bank accounts in United States dollars, they are liable to American prosecution.
