PRESS Council of the European Union EN BACKGROUND NOTE Brussels, 29 July 2014 EU restrictive measures in view of the situation in Eastern Ukraine and the illegal annexation of Crimea Economic sanctions The Council's Committee of Permanent Representatives today reached agreement on EU restrictive measures in view of Russia's actions destabilising the situation in eastern Ukraine.
In order to restrict Russia's access to EU capital markets, EU nationals and companies may no more buy or sell new bonds, equity or similar financial instruments with a maturity exceeding 90 days, issued by major state-owned Russian banks, development banks, their subsidiaries outside the EU and those acting on their behalf.
Services related to the issuing of such financial instruments,g. brokering, are also prohibited.
In addition, an embargo on the import and export of arms and related material from/to Russia was agreed.
Coreper also reached agreement on a prohibition on exports of dual use goods and technology for military use in Russia or to Russian military end-users.
Finally, exports of certain energy-related equipment and technology to Russia will be subject to prior authorisation by competent authorities of Member States.
Export licenses will be denied if products are destined for deep water oil exploration and production, arctic oil exploration or production and shale oil projects in Russia.
These restrictions will now be formally adopted by the Council through a written procedure.
They will apply from the day following their publication in the EU Official Journal, which is scheduled for late on 31 July.
Additional restrictions for Crimea and Sevastopol In addition, the Coreper meeting of 28 July agreed on trade and investment restrictions for Crimea and Sevastopol, as requested by the European Council of 16 July.
Key equipment for the same six sectors may not be exported to Crimea and Sevastopol; finance and insurance services related to such transactions must not be provided.
This brings the number of persons and entities under EU restrictions to 95 persons and 23 entities.
These measures will come into force after their formal adoption by the Council through written procedures and their publication in the EU Official Journal, scheduled for late on 30 July.
This includes 87 persons and 9 entities responsible for action against Ukraine's territorial integrity and 11 entities in Crimea and Sevastopol that were confiscated or that have benefitted from a transfer of ownership contrary to Ukrainian law.
Goods originating in Crimea or Sevastopol may not be imported into the EU unless they have Ukrainian certificates.
The European Council also requested the European Investment Bank to suspend the signature of new financing operations in Russia while EU member states coordinate their positions within the Board of Directors of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development with a view to suspending financing of new operations in Russia.
Diplomatic steps Instead of the G8 summit in Sochi, a G7 meeting was held in Brussels on 4/5 June.
EU countries also supported the suspension of negotiations over Russia's joining the OECD and the International Energy Agency.
The EU-Russia summit was cancelled and EU member states decided not to hold regular bilateral summits.
Bilateral talks with Russia on visa matters as well as on the New Agreement between the EU and Russia were suspended.
In addition, a re-assessment of EU-Russia cooperation programmes is currently ongoing with a view to suspending the implementation of EU bilateral and regional cooperation programmes.
Sergey Valeryevich o.b..11.1972 Aksyonov was elected “Prime Minister of Crimea” in the Crimean Verkhovna Rada on 27 February 17.3.2014 Aksyonov 2014 in the presence of pro-Russian gunmen.
Vladimir Andreevich o.b..03.1967 As speaker of the Supreme Council of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, Konstantinov played 17.3.2014 Konstantinov a relevant role in the decisions taken by the Verkhovna Rada concerning the “referendum” against territorial integrity of Ukraine and called on voters to cast votes in favour of Crimean Independence.
Rustam Ilmirovich o.b..08.1976 As Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Crimea, Temirgaliev played a relevant role in 17.3.2014 Temirgaliev the decisions taken by the Verkhovna Rada concerning the “referendum” against territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Deniz Valentinovich o.b..07.1974 Berezovskiy was appointed commander of the Ukrainian Navy on 1 March 2014 and swore an 17.3.2014 Berezovskiy oath to the Crimean armed force, thereby breaking his oath.
The Prosecutor-General’s Office of Ukraine launched an investigation against him for high treason.
Pyotr Anatoliyovych Zima was appointed as the new head of the Crimean Security Service on 3 March 2014 by 17.3.2014 Zima “Prime Minister” Aksyonov and accepted this appointment.
On 11 March 2014 the formation of an independent Security Service of Crimea has been proclaimed by former SVR officers of Crimea.
Yuriy Zherebtsov Counsellor of the Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea, one of the leading organizers of the 17.3.2014 16 March 2014“referendum” against Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
He drew into this endeavour Vladimir Konstantinov, threatening him with his dismissal.
He publicly recognized that the MPs from Crimea were the initiators of inviting Russian soldiers to take over Verkhovna Rada of Crimea.
He was one of the first Crimean Leaders to ask in public for annexation of Crimea to Russia.
Ozerov, Viktor o.b..1.1958 in Chairman of the Security and Defense Committee of the Federation Council of the Russian 17.3.2014 Alekseevich Abakan, Khakassia Federation.
On 1 March 2014 Ozerov, on behalf of the Security and Defense Committee of the Federation Council, publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Dzhabarov, Vladimiro.b..9.1952 First Deputy-Chairman of the International Affairs Committee of the Federation Council of the 17.3.2014 Michailovich Russian Federation.
Klishas, Andrei o.b..11.1972 in Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Law of the Federation Council of the Russian 17.3.2014 Aleksandrovich Sverdlovsk Federation.
Ryzhkov, Nikolai o.b..9.1929 in Member of the Committee for federal issues, regional politics and the North of the Federation 17.3.2014 Ivanovich Duleevka, Donetsk Council of the Russian Federation. region, Ukrainian On 1 March 2014 Ryzhkov publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of SSR Russian forces in Ukraine.
Bushmin, Evgeni o.b..10.1958 in Deputy Speaker of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation..3.2014 Viktorovich Lopatino, On 1 March 2014 Bushmin publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Sergachiisky Russian forces in Ukraine. region, RSFSR Annex 1 4/24 N Name Identifying Reasons Date of information listing 14.
Totoonov, Aleksandro.b..3.1957 in Member of the Committee on culture, science, and information of the Federation Council of the 17.3.2014 Borisovich Ordzhonikidze, Russian Federation.
North Ossetia On 1 March 2014 Totoonov publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Mironov, Sergei o.b..2.1953 in Member of the Council of the State Duma; Leader of Fair Russia faction in the Duma of the 17.3.2014 Mikhailovich Pushkin, Leningrad Russian Federation. region Initiator of the bill allowing Russian Federation to admit in its composition, under the pretext of protection of Russian citizens, territories of a foreign country without a consent of that country or of an international treaty.
Zheleznyak, Sergei o.b..7.1970 in Deputy Speaker of the State Duma of the Russian Federation..3.2014 Vladimirovich St Petersburg Actively supporting use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea.
Vitko, Aleksandr o.b..9.1961 in Commander of the Black Sea Fleet, Vice-Admiral..3.2014 Viktorovich Vitebsk (Belarusian Responsible for commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory.
Sidorov, Anatoliy Commander, Russia's Western Military District, units of which are deployed in Crimea..3.2014 Alekseevich Commander of Russia's Western Military District, units of which are deployed in Crimea.
Annex 1 5/24 N Name Identifying Reasons Date of information listing 21.
Galkin, Aleksandr Russia's Southern Military District, forces of which are in Crimea; the Black Sea Fleet comes 17.3.2014 under Galkin's command; much of the force movement into Crimea has come through the Southern Military District.
Rogozin, Dmitry o.b..12.1963; Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation..3.2014 Olegovich in Moscow Publicly called for the annexation of Crimea.
Glazyev, Sergey o.b..1.1961, Adviser to the President of the Russian Federation..3.2014 Zaporozhye, Publicly called for the annexation of Crimea.
On 1 March 2014, publicly supported in the Federation Council 21.3.2014 Valentina Ivanova Shepetovka, the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Publicly supported the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine..3.2014 Evgenevich St Petersburg Publicly supported the Russia-Crimea reunification treaty and the related federal constitutional law.
Nosatov, Alexandero.b..3.1963 Deputy-Commander of the Black Sea Fleet, Rear-Admiral 21.3.2014 Mihailovich Sevastopol, Responsible for commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory.
Kulikov, Valery o.b..9.1956, Deputy-Commander of the Black Sea Fleet, Rear Admiral 21.3.2014 Vladimirovich Zaporozhye, Responsible for commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory.
Surkov, Vladislav o.b..9.1964, Aide to the President of the Russian Federation.
He was an organiser of the process in Crimea by 21.3.2014 Yurievich Solntsevo, Lipetsk which local Crimean communities were mobilised to stage actions undermining the Ukrainian authorities in Crimea.
Mikhail Malyshev Chair of the Crimea Responsible for administering the Crimean referendum.
Responsible under the Russian system 21.3.2014 Electoral for signing referendum results.
Valery Medvedev Chair of Sevastopol Responsible for administering the Crimean referendum.
Elena Borisovna Deputy in the State Originator and co-sponsor of recent legislative proposals in Russia that would have allowed 21.3.2014 Mizulina Duma regions of other countries to join Russia without their central authorities' prior agreement.
Responsible for overseeing the integration of the annexed Autonomous 29.4.2014 Kozak Kirovohrad, Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Oleg Yevgenyvich Born 15.9.1949 in Plenipotentiary Representative of the President of the Russian Federation into the so called 29.4.2014 Belaventsev Moscow ‘Crimean Federal District’, Non-permanent member of the Russian Security Council.
Responsible for the integration of the annexed Autonomous Republic 29.4.2014 Savelyev Leningrad of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Sergei Ivanovich Born 22.8.1960 in Acting governor of the Ukrainian annexed city of Sevastopol..4.2014 Menyailo Alagir, NorthOssetian Autonomous SSR, RSFSR 38.
Olga Fedorovna Born 7.5.1962 in Member of the Russian Federation Council from the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea..4.2014 Kovatidi Simferopol, Ukrainian SSR 39.
Ludmila Ivanovna Born 24.9.1949 in Deputy Chairman of State Duma, United Russia — Responsible for initiating legislation to 29.4.2014 Shvetsova Alma-Ata, USSR integrate the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Sergei Ivanovich Born 21.12.1961 in Deputy Chairman of State Duma, United Russia.
Responsible for initiating legislation to integrate 29.4.2014 Neverov Tashtagol, USSR the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Igor Dmitrievich Born 28.3.1957 Director of GRU , Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the Armed 29.4.2014 Sergun Forces of the Russian Federation, Lieutenant-General.
Valery Vasilevich Born 8.9.1955 in Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, First Deputy Minister of 29.4.2014 Gerasimov Kazan Defence of the Russian Federation, General of the Army.
Took part in the seizure of the building of the Lugansk 29.4.2014 regional office of the Security Service, recorded a video address to President Putin and Russia from the occupied building.
Valeriy Bolotov One of the leaders of the separatist group ‘Army of the South-East’ which occupied the building of 29.4.2014 the Security Service in the Lugansk region.
Before seizing the building he and other accomplices possessed arms apparently supplied illegally from Russia and from local criminal groups.
Andriy Purgin Head of the ‘Donetsk Republic’, active participant and organiser of separatist actions, co-ordinator 29.4.2014 of actions of the ‘Russian tourists’ in Donetsk.
Denys Pushylin Born in Makiivka One of the leaders of the Donetsk People's Republic.
Tsyplakov Sergey One of the leaders of ideologically radical organization People's Militia of Donbas.
He took active 29.4.2014 Gennadevich part in the seizure of a number of state buildings in Donetsk region.
Vyacheslav Born 4 February First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Administration of Russia.
Responsible for overseeing 12.5.2014 Viktorovich Volodin 1964 in the political integration of the annexed Ukrainian region of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Vladimir Shamanov Born 15.02.1954 in Commander of the Russian Airborne Troops, Colonel-General.
In his senior position holds 12.5.2014 Barnaul. responsibility for the deployment of Russian airborne forces in Crimea.
Vladimir Nikolaevich Born 19.05.1960 in Chair of the Duma Constitutional Law Committee.
Responsible for facilitating the adoption of 12.5.2014 Pligin Ignatovo, legislation on the annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol into the Russian Federation.
Petr Grigorievich Acting Head of the Federal Migration Service office for Crimea.
Responsible for the systematic 12.5.2014 Jarosh and expedited issuance of Russian passports for the residents of Crimea.
Oleg Grigorievich Born 19.12.1962 in Acting Head of the Federal Migration Service office for Sevastopol.
Responsible for the systematic 12.5.2014 Kozyura Zaporozhye and expedited issuance of Russian passports for the residents of Crimea.
Ponomarev called on Vladimir Putin to send in Russian troops 12.5.2014 Ponomariov to protect the city and later asked him to supply weapons.
Igor Mykolaiovych Born in 1965 One of the leaders of self-proclaimed militia of Horlivka.
He took control of the Security Service of 12.5.2014 Bezler Ukraine's Office in Donetsk region building and afterwards seized the Ministry of Internal Affairs' district station in the town of Horlivka.
Publicly called for the creation of the Federal Republic of Novorossia, 12.5.2014 composed of South Eastern Ukrainian regions.
Roman Lyagin Head of the ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ Central Electoral Commission.
Aleksandr Malykhin Head of the ‘Lugansk People's Republic’ Central Electoral Commission.
Actively implementing Russia's annexation of Crimea..5.2014 Poklonskaya Eupatoria.
Actively implementing Russia's annexation of Sevastopol..5.2014 Shevchenko 62.
Responsible for the separatist ‘governmental’ activities of the so called ‘government of the People' s Republic of Luhansk’ Annex 1 11/24 N Name Identifying Reasons Date of information listing 67.
Responsible for the separatist ‘governmental’ activities of the so called ‘government of the People' s Republic of Luhansk’ Responsible for the statement of the Army of the Southeast that the Ukrainian presidential elections in the ‘People's Republic of Luhansk’ cannot take place due to the ‘new’ status of the region.
Nikolay KOZITSYN June 20, 1956 in Commander of Cossack forces..7.2014 Donetsk region Responsible for commanding separatists in Eastern Ukraine fighting against the Ukrainian government forces 72.
Oleksiy MOZGOVY One of the leaders of armed groups in Eastern Ukraine..7.2014 Responsible for training separatists to fight against the Ukrainian government forces Annex 1 12/24 N Name Identifying Reasons Date of information listing 73.
Mikhail Efimovich Born on 1.9.1950 in Permanent member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation; Director of the Foreign 25.7.2014 FRADKOV Kurumoch, Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation.
As a member of the Security Council, which Михаил Ефимович Kuibyshev region provides advice on and coordinates national security affairs, he was involved in shaping the policy Фрадков of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Nikolai Platonovich Born on 11.7.1951 Permanent member and Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian Federation.
As a 25.7.2014 PATRUSHEV in Leningrad (St member of the Security Council, which provides advice on and coordinates national security Николай Petersburg) affairs, he was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial Платонович integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
As a member of the Security Council, which provides advice on and BORTNIKOV coordinates national security affairs, he was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Александр Government threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Rashid Gumarovich Born on 8.10.1956 Permanent member and Deputy Secretary of the Security Council of the Russian Federation.
As a 25.7.2014 NURGALIEV in Zhetikara, member of the Security Council, which provides advice on and coordinates national security Рашид Гумарович Kazakh Soviet affairs, he was involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial Нургалиев Socialist Republic integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Boris Born on 15.12.1950 Permanent member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation.
As a member of the 25.7.2014 Vyacheslavovich in Vladivostok Security Council, which provides advice on and coordinates national security affairs, he was GRYZLOV involved in shaping the policy of the Russian Government threatening the territorial integrity, Борис sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Sergei Orestovoch 1954 Commander of the Fifth Service of the FSB, Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation..7.2014 BESEDA As a senior FSB officer, he heads a service responsible which oversees intelligence operations Сергей Орестович and international activity.
Mikhail Born on 10.7.1981 Member of the State Duma..7.2014 Vladimirovich in Kuibyshev On 23.5.2014 he announced the inauguration of the ‘de facto embassy’ of the unrecognized, soDEGTYAREV called, ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ in Moscow, he contributes to undermine or threaten the Михаил territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Kadyrov made statements in support of the illegal 25.7.2014 Akhmadovitch in Tsentaroy. annexation of Crimea and in support of the armed insurgency in Ukraine.
Alexander Born on 23.12.1960 Governor of the Krasnodar Krai..7.2014 Nikolayevich in Vyselki.
He was awarded the medal ‘for the liberation of Crimea’ by the Acting head of the Autonomous TKACHYOV Republic of Crimea for the support he provided to the unlawful annexation of Crimea.
At that АЛЕКСАНДР occasion, the Acting Head of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea said that Tkachyov was one of НИКОЛАЕВИЧ the first to express his support to the new ‘leadership’ of Crimea.
He requested 25.7.2014 Павел Юрьевич in Sievierodonetsk Russian intervention in eastern Ukraine, including through the deployment of Russian Губарев peacekeeping forces.
Ekaterina Born on 5.7.1983 in In her capacity of so called ‘Minister of Foreign Affairs’ she is responsible of defending the so 25.7.2014 GUBAREVA Kakhovka called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’, thus undermining the territorial integrity, sovereignty and Екатерина independence of Ukraine.
He is 25.7.2014 Фёдор Дмитриевич Donetsk associated with Igor Strelkov/Girkin, the so-called ‘defence minister’ of the so-called ‘Donetsk Березин People's Republic’, who is responsible for actions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Valery Vladimirovich Born on 2.4.1956 in The self-described ‘president’ of the so-called ‘Republic of Novorossiya’ who has called on Russia 25.7.2014 KAUROV Odessa to deploy troops to Ukraine.
Serhii Anatoliyovych Born on 23.6.1972 Senior aid to Igor Strelkov/Girkin who is responsible for actions which undermine or threaten the 25.7.2014 ZDRILIUK in Vinnytsia region territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Former ‘Ministry of State Security’ in the separatist region of Transnistria.
In his capacity, he is responsible for the separatist ‘governmental’ activities of Антюфеев the so called ‘government of the Donetsk People's Republic’. (aka Vladimir SHEVTSOV, Vladimir Iurievici ANTIUFEEV, Vladimir Gheorghievici ALEXANDROV, Vadim Gheorghievici SHEVTSOV) 88.
Alexey Alexeyevich Born on 31.5.1960; As first Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Administration, he is responsible for instructing 30.7.2014 GROMOV in Zagorsk (Sergiev Russian media outlets to take a line favourable with the separatists in Ukraine and the annexation Posad) of Crimea, therefore supporting the destabilisation of Eastern Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea.
Oksana TCHIGRINA Spokesperson of the so called ‘government’ of the so called ‘Lugansk People's Republic’ who 30.7.2014 Оксана Чигрина made declarations justifying inter alia the shooting down of a Ukrainian military airplane, the taking of hostages, fighting activities by the illegal armed groups, which have as a consequence undermined the territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of Ukraine.
Boris LITVINOV As of 22 July, chairman of the so-called ‘Supreme Council’ of the so called ‘Donetsk People's 30.7.2014 Борис Литвинов Republic’ who was at the source of policies and the organisation of the illegal referendum leading to the proclamation of the so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’, which constituted a breach of the territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of Ukraine.
Sergey ABISOV Born on 27.11.1967 By accepting his appointment as so-called ‘Minister of Interior of the Republic of Crimea’ by the 30.7.2014 President of Russia on 5 May 2014 and by his actions as so-called ‘Minister of Interior’ he has undermined the territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of Ukraine 92.
Arkady Romanovich Born on 15.12.1951 Mr Rotenberg is a long-time acquaintance of President Putin and his former judo sparring partner..7.2014 ROTENBERG in Leningrad (St He has developed his fortune during President Putin's tenure.
He has been favoured by Russian Petersburg) decision-makers in the award of important contracts by the Russian State or by State-owned enterprises.
His companies were notably awarded several highly lucrative contracts for the preparations of the Sochi Olympic Games.
He is a major shareholder of Giprotransmost, a company which has received a public procurement contract by a Russian State-owned Company to conduct the feasibility study of the construction of a bridge from Russia to the illegally annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea, therefore consolidating its integration into the Russian Federation which in turn further undermines the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Konstantin Born on 3.7.1974 in Mr Malofeev is closely linked to Ukrainian separatists in Eastern Ulkraine and Crimea.
He is a 30.7.2014 Valerevich Puschino former employer of Mr Borodai, so-called Prime Minister of the so-called ‘Donetsk People's MALOFEEV Republic’ and met with Mr Aksyonov, so-called Prime Minister of the so-called ‘Republic of Константин Crimea’, during the period of the Crimean annexation process.
Yuriy Valentinovich Born on 25.7.1951 Mr Kovalchuk is a long-time acquaintance of President Putin.
He is a co-founder of the so-called 30.7.2014 KOVALCHUK in Leningrad (St Ozero Dacha, a co-operative society bringing together an influential group of individuals around Юрий Petersburg) President Putin.
He is the chairman and largest Ковальчук shareholder of Bank Rossiya, of which he owned around 38 % in 2013, and which is considered the personal bank of Senior Officials of the Russian Federation.
Since the illegal annexation of Crimea, Bank Rossiya has opened branches across Crimea and Sevastopol, thereby consolidating their integration into the Russian Federation.
Nikolay Terentievich Born on 24.1.1950 Mr Shamalov is a long-time acquaintance of President Putin.
He is a co-founder of the so-called 30.7.2014 SHAMALOV Ozero Dacha, a co-operative society bringing together an influential group of individuals around Николай President Putin.
He is the second largest shareholder of Шамалов Bank Rossiya, of which he owned around 10 % in 2013, and which is considered the personal bank of Senior Officials of the Russian Federation.
Annex 1 18/24 Annex 2 List of entities under sanctions N Name Reasons Date of listing 1.
So called ‘Lugansk People's Republic’ The so called ‘Lugansk People's Republic’ was established on 27 April 2014.
Declaration of independence ‘Luganskaya narodnaya respublika’ on May 12 2014.
This is in breach of Ukrainian constitutional law, and, as a consequence, of international law, thus undermining the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
It is also involved in the recruitment to the separatist ‘Army of Southeast’ and other illegal armed separatist groups, thus undermining the stability or security of Ukraine.
So called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ The so called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ was declared on 7 April 2014.
Declaration of independence ‘Donétskaya naródnaya respúblika’ on May 12 2014.
It is also involved in the recruitment to illegal armed separatist groups, thus threatening the stability or security of Ukraine.
International Union of Public Associations The ‘Great Don army’ established the ‘Cossack National Guard’, responsible for fighting against 25.7.2014 ‘Great Don Army’ the Ukrainian government forces in Eastern Ukraine, thus undermining the territorial integrity, Международный Союз Общественных sovereignty and independence of Ukraine as well as threatening the stability or security of Объединений Ukraine.
So called ‘Lugansk Guard’ Self-defence militia of Lugansk, responsible for training separatists to fight against the Ukrainian 25.7.2014 ‘Луганская гвардия’ government forces in Eastern Ukraine, thus threatening the stability or security of Ukraine.
Associated with Mr, German PROPOKIV, active leader who is responsible for taking part in the seizure of the building of the Lugansk regional office of the Ukrainian Security Service and recorded a video address to President Putin and Russia from the occupied building.
So called ‘Army of the Southeast’ Illegal armed separatist group which is considered to be one of the most important in Eastern 25.7.2014 ‘Армии Юго-Востока’ Ukraine.
Responsible for occupying the building of the Security Service in the Lugansk region.
Associated with Mr Valeriy BOLOTOV, listed as one of the leaders of the group.
Associated with Mr Vasyl NIKITIN, responsible for the separatist ‘governmental’ activities of the so called ‘government of the People' s Republic of Luhansk’ Annex 2 20/24 N Name Reasons Date of listing 10.
So called ‘Donbass People's Militia’ Illegal armed separatist group responsible for fighting against the Ukrainian government forces in 25.7.2014 ‘Нарóдное ополчéние Донбáсса’ the Eastern Ukraine, thus threatening the stability or security of Ukraine.
Inter alia, the militant group seized control of several government buildings in Eastern Ukraine in early April 2014, thus undermining the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Responsible fighting against the Ukrainian government forces in Eastern Ukraine, thus threatening the stability or security of Ukraine.
State ferry enterprise ‘Kerch ferry’ The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law.
State enterprise ‘Sevastopol commercial The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law.
In Gosudarstvenoye predpriyatiye terms of volume of trade, it is the biggest commercial seaport in Crimea.
Sevastopolski morskoy torgovy port Annex 2 21/24 N Name Reasons Date of listing 14.
State enterprise ‘Kerch commercial sea The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law.
In terms of volume of trade, it is the second biggest commercial seaport in Crimea.
State enterprise Universal -Avia The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law.
Resort ‘Nizhnyaya Oreanda’ The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law.
Crimean enterprise ‘Azov distillery plant’ The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law.
State concern ‘National Association of The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law.
State enterprise ‘Factory of sparkling wine The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law.
JOINT-STOCK COMPANY CONCERN Almaz-Antei is a Russian state-owned company.
It manufactures anti-aircraft weaponry including 30.7.2014 ALMAZ-ANTEY (a.k.a.
ALMAZ-ANTEY surface-to-air missiles which it supplies to the Russian army.
ALMAZ-ANTEY DEFENSE providing heavy weaponry to separatists in Eastern Ukraine, contributing to the destabilization of CORPORATION;k.a.
These weapons are used by the separatists, including for shooting down airplanes.
As a JSC;), state-owned company, Almaz-Antei therefore contributes to the destabilization of Ukraine.
DOBROLET aka DOBROLYOT Dobrolet is a subsidiary of a Russian state-owned airline.
Since the illegal annexation of Crimea 30.7.2014 Добролет/Добролёт Dobrolet has so far exclusively operated flights between Moscow and Simferopol.
It therefore facilitates the integration of the illegally annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation and undermines Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity.
