The document defines the features of the use of land plots located in an array of agricultural lands, as well as field-protective forest belts, which limit such an array.
So, the document assumes the right of owners, land users of land plots for agricultural purposes, intended for personal farming, farming located in an array of agricultural land, to use them also for conducting commercial agricultural production without changing the purpose of such sites.
In addition, owners of land plots of all forms of ownership were legally allowed to exchange such land plots.
The document specifies the features of the disposal of lands that remained in collective ownership after the distribution of land plots between the owners of land shares.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko has discussed the release of the Ukrainian filmmaker Oleg Sentsov as the press service of the Ukrainian leader reported.
According to the message, Poroshenko and Merkel coordinated the positions before the meeting of the German Chancellor and Russian President Putin on August 18.
Also, the leaders discussed the situation in Donbas and further efforts for the provision of the progress in the peaceful settlement of the conflict.
During the talk, Poroshenko put special attention to the release of the Ukrainian prisoners and political prisoners illegally detained at the temporarily occupied territories in Russia, particularly Oleg Sentsov.
Poroshenko and Merkel have discussed the security issues connected with the construction of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline and agreed on the schedule of the next contacts within the development of the bilateral dialogue.
As is known, the native of Crimea, film director and political activist, Sentsov has been serving time in the Russian penal colony in Labytnangi since May 2014.
This spring, he announced a hunger strike, demanding to release all Ukrainian political prisoners, illegally held by the Kremlin.
Oleg Sentsov was illegally detained in Crimea in 2014, then taken to Russia.
They judged him and sentenced him to 20 years of imprisonment at a high-security penal colony.
The prosecutors charged Sentsov with preparing terrorist acts in the occupied Crimea.
Ukraine's government, common citizens and the international society politicians, artists, public figures urge the Kremlin to release him.
