UC Berkeley Social Sciences Portal Reimagining Democracy Town Hall Series About Contact Frequently Asked Questions Jobs Team Affiliated Centers Matrix Space Usage Policy HomeResearch StreamsIdentitiesResearch Streams Identities After the Maidan Associated Channels Identities Cities Governance Complexity Mortality May 12, 2015 by Bathsheba Demuth Share UC Berkeley scholars present diverse viewpoints on the conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
Another is Edward Walker, a political scientist and director of UC Berkeley’s Program in Soviet and Post-Soviet Studies , who agrees that the conflict is as much about symbolism as geography.
In this context, Russia's invasion of Crimea marked an assertion of its sphere of influence, a response to the post-Soviet EU and NATO policy of expanding into countries on Russia’s borders.
While some analysts ascribe blame for this aggressive stance to Russia's President, Vladimir Putin, others say the root causes run deeper.
Roland points out that while the EU and Russia have been major players, the ultimate cause of the recent events stems from the desire for democracy from the people of Ukraine.
Walker concurs that the internal logic of Russian politics is a large part of the picture.
In large part, this has to do with Putin’s highly controlled media and “increasing constraints on free public discourse,” Walker says.
Crawford is especially troubled by the way the conflict has stirred up ethnic tensions in the region.
The West, she says, “needs to recognize Russia as a great power and reiterate that they won’t attack.
Walker, meanwhile, is keeping an eye of on the military dimensions of the standoff.
Russia not only feels threatened by the actions of the West, but it has “2000 operational nuclear tactical weapons and thousands more in storage and a huge military,” Walker notes.
Pérez, Professor of Ethnic Studies and and Chair of the Latinx Research Center, was joined by Natalia Brizuela, Associate Professor of Modern and Contemporary Latin American Literature & Culture, UC Berkeley; and Julia Bryan-Wilson, Professor, Modern and Contemporary Art, Department of Art History, UC Berkeley.
December 7, 2017 by Adora Lily Svitak Changing the Face of Economics UC Berkeley economics professor Dr.
Martha Olney explains the importance of diversity in the field, and why she supports initiatives designed to welcome underrepresented groups to the major.
