Ukraine is a virtual United States colony – the way it’s been since the Obama regime’s February 2014 coup, replacing democratic governance with fascist tyranny in Europe’s heartland.
Ukraine shares a near-1,500 mile land and sea border with the Russian Federation, the longest Western frontier with the country.
The regime running things is a hotbed of militarized extremism, waging war on its own people, committing appalling human rights abuses – with full support and encouragement from Washington and key NATO countries.
Stop NATO’s Rick Rozoff earlier explained that Ukraine is “the decisive linchpin in plans by the United States and its NATO allies to effect a military cordon sanitaire, severing Russia from Europe” – part of a sinister plot, risking East/West confrontation.
United States orchestrated and directed Kiev war on Donbass in the country’s southwest since March 2014 intensified.
Ukrainian forces began heavily shelling residential areas of the People’s Republic of Donetsk in Donbass, the heaviest aggression in over a year.
It came after Kiev installed S-300 air defense systems along the Donbass border, at the same time as a likely United States orchestrated CW false flag occurred in Aleppo, Syria, and a provocation by Ukrainian naval vessels in Russian Black Sea waters.
Kiev understands proper navigation procedures for passing through Russian territorial waters, including the Kerch-Yenikale Canal.
The United States installed Poroshenko regime followed innocent passage procedure before, not on Sunday, committing an unacceptable provocation.
Two more Ukrainian warships headed toward the same area, turning back before improperly and illegally entering Russian waters.
Russia has what it calls “irrefutable evidence” of the staged provocation – to be revealed soon.
Its aim was likely all about imposing martial law for 60 days ahead of March 2019 presidential elections, along with a pretext for imposing more illegal United States sanctions on Russia.
Moscow called for an emergency Security Council meeting on Monday to discuss what it called “maintenance of international peace and security” – despite US/UK/French veto power preventing condemnation of what happened.
Russia no doubt will be blamed for the provocation committed against the country, a familiar pattern repeated many times before.
Kiev’s action violated Articles 19 and 21 of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea by entering Russian territorial waters without permission, along with failure to respond as required to legal Russian demands and conducting dangerous maneuvers.
Under a 2003 treaty, Russia and Ukraine have freedom of navigation rights in the Kerch Strait – providing defined rules are followed through the narrow waterway.
Requesting and receiving permission to sail through the Strait is required.
The Kerch Strait separates the Crimean Republic from the Russian mainland.
Russian Federal Security Service forces are responsible for maintaining order along the country’s land and maritime borders.
Its officers repeatedly asked the Ukrainian vessels to leave Russian territorial waters, ignored by their commanders.
The maritime area in question was temporarily closed to navigation for security reasons.
Video released by Moscow showed Ukrainian vessels maneuvering provocatively close to Russian ones.
An FSB statement said Russian warships opened fire after Ukrainian vessels repeatedly ignored “legal demands to stop” and leave the area.
Kiev “first stages a provocation, then plays power games, and accuses” Russia for its own unacceptable provocation.
US forces are in Ukraine, training and directing its military, including its war of aggression on Donbass.
The self-styled newspaper of record repeated the Big Lie about Russia annexing “the Crimean Peninsula in 2014,” its waterways where the Sunday incident occurred.
Putin and Trump are expected to meet on the sidelines of this week’s Nov.-Dec.
G20 summit in Buenos Aires, Argentina – the incident surely to be discussed.
Posted in Geopolitics, Russia, Ukraine and Tagged America, Azov, CIA, Crimea, Europe, fleet, imperialism, Kiev, Lvov, NATO, Obama, Odessa, Pentagon, Poroshenka, Putin, Russia, Terrorism, Trump, USA, war, war crimes, Washington, White House, World, Zionism.
