The demise of the regime was brought about by bitter protests that had erupted in Kyiv’s Maidan Square in late 2013 over the government’s decision to reject closer relations with the European Union and by civil society’s reaction to a brutal government response to the Maidan protestors.
In the wake of the turmoil of the Maidan, the country saw the emergence of a pro-Western government promising reform and an energized civil society generally anxious to lessen Moscow’s influence, committed to pressing for the implementation of serious reform measures, and determined to draw closer to Europe and the United States.
Despite a commitment to reform and the initiation of a pro-Western political and economic orientation, throughout 2015 many felt the government—led by President Petro Poroshenko and Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk—moved too slowly and cautiously in implementing anticorruption reform and achieving economic progress.
The government’s cautious approach, although moving in a positive direction, failed to impress a frustrated public and a still-skeptical international community, both of which demanded a faster implementation of change.
By the beginning of 2016, Ukraine remained far from achieving the political and economic progress and internal security sought by supporters of the Maidan.
As frustrations continued to mount, the government was confronted with the resignations of a popular, reform-minded economy minister and a deputy prosecutor and by warnings from the head of the International Monetary Fund and several European nations that Ukraine risked losing continued international political and financial support if progress was not made.
When two political parties quit the coalition government in early 2016, a new crisis was created forcing President Poroshe nk o to ask for the resignations of Yatsenyuk and Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin, who many accused of running a corrupt office.
Transparency International continues to ra nk Ukraine worse than Russia on its corruption perception index, although that appears to be changing.
The continued presence of a small group of old-time oligarchs who refuse to relinquish power or influence and other shortcomings in the rule of law continue to plague the country.
Since the Groysman government took control, the pace of the reform process has accelerated with a number of reforms in the energy and banking sector, among others, put in place.
The international community appears to be more encouraged by the new government, but many concede that more work needs to be done.
Ukraine’s problems, however, have not been solely political and economic.
A 12-point agreement to end the conflict, known as Minsk-2, was signed in late 2014 by the leaders of Russia, Ukraine, France, and Germany.
Since then, however, the separatists and their patrons in the Kremlin have shown little interest in fulfilling their responsibilities to implement Minsk-2, while Europe and the United States have continued to press Kyiv to move forward on implementation of the agreement.
According to USAID, since the crisis that began in late 2013, the United States government has committed more than $1. billion in foreign assistance to Ukraine to advance reforms, strengthen democratic institutions and civil society, stimulate economic growth, and help Ukraine more safely monitor and secure its borders and preserve its territorial integrity.
This amount includes some $135 million in humanitarian assistance provided through the U.N., and three $1 billion loan guarantees.
The United States Congress has been a strong advocate for assisting Ukraine.
In 2014 the Ukraine Freedom Support Act was adopted, which, among other provisions, authorized increased military and economic assistance for Ukraine; authorized funding for United States Russianlanguage broadcasting in the region; and offered support for Russian civil society and democracy organizations.
The legislation also urged the Administration to provide weapons to the Ukrainian military.
In September 2016, the House adopted the STAND for Ukraine Act , which, among other provisions, clarified the position of the United States on Russia’s illegal occupation of Crimea, tightened sanctions on Russia, and sought new options to provide support for Ukraine.
Background Ukraine was the center of the first eastern Slavic state, Kyivan Rus, which during the 10 th and 11 th centuries was one of the largest and most powerful states in Europe.
Eventually, Kyivan Rus was incorporated into the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and into the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth.
Following the collapse of czarist Russia in 1917, Ukraine achieved a short-lived period of independence but was reconquered and incorporated into the former Soviet Union.
Today, Ukraine—comparable in size and population to France—is a large, important, European state.
Occupying the sensitive position between Russia and North Atlantic Treaty Organization member states Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania, Ukraine has played a prominent role in the geopolitical competition between the West and Russia.
Ethnic Russians make up approximately 17% of Ukraine’s population and are concentrated in the southern and eastern parts of the country.
They form a majority in the Crimea, where they make up close to 60% of the population.
In the Crimean city of Sevastopol, the home base of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet, approximately 72% of the population is Russian.
Many Russian politicians, as well as ordinary citizens, have never been fully reconciled to Ukraine’s independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 and feel that the country belongs in Russia’s political and economic orbit.
This historical sense of “ownership” was witnessed in the strong Russian support for the 2014 annexation of Crimea.
Since achieving its independence in 1991, Ukraine’s political scene has been largely dominated by a powerful political elite and politically well-connected businessmen, or “oligarchs,” who regularly manipulate the government for their own security and profit.
Ukraine’s recent political unrest began largely at the hands of Viktor Yanukovych.
Yanukovych drew his main political support from oligarchs from the Donets region of eastern Ukraine, which was also fairly pro-Russian.
Yanukovych’s government was criticized for high levels of corruption, in part among Yanukovych’s own family and close associates.
United States and European Union officials expressed strong concern over the government’s human rights record, especially the targeting of opposition leaders for selective prosecution and Yanukovych’s flirtations with Moscow.
However, in November 2013, the Yanukovych government, under pressure from Moscow, made a last-minute decision to reject an Association Agreement , including a free trade pact, with the EU that would have aligned Ukraine more toward Europe, at least in the areas of economics and trade.
Yanukovych appeared to bend to pressure from the Kremlin, which opposed the AA, and instead opted for closer economic links to Moscow.
The decision sparked antigovemment demonstrations in Kyiv’s central Maidan Nezalezhnosti, or Independence Square.
The death toll likely caused the support for the crackdown in the governmentcontrolled Ukrainian Rada to evaporate and, ultimately, the regime to collapse.
The Rada restored many democratic provisions of the 2004 Ukrainian constitution, eliminating changes made by Yanukovych to strengthen the presidency, and ordered new presidential elections to be held on May 25, 2014.
The Kremlin reacted with great hostility toward the emergence of the new, pro-Western leadership in Ukraine by seizing Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula.
Starting in February 2014, heavily armed Russian-speaking forces, aided by Russian troops, began seizing airports and other key installations throughout the peninsula.
At the time, Russian President Vladimir Putin claimed that many of the troops that poured into Crimea were not Russian Federation military forces but only local Crimean selfdefense forces or volunteers from Russia.
On March 16, Crimean authorities held a referendum in support of annexation by Russia.
Ukraine, the United States, the EU, and other countries denounced the referendum as illegal and claimed it was not held in a free or fair manner.
Ukraine's Political Situation 3 On May 25, 2014, Ukraine elected as president Petro Poroshenko, a wealthy businessman who pledged to move Ukraine closer to the West, to clean up rampant corruption, and to deal with the conflict that had emerged in the eastern part of the country.
President: Petro Poroshenko ; Prime Minister: Volodymyr Groysman ; Foreign Minister: Pavlo Klimkin; Defense Minister: Sepan Poltoral Source: CIA, The World Factbook, 3 Some of the information in this report appeared in previous versions written by Steven Woehrel.
The Opposition Bloc, composed of supporters of the former Yanukovych regime, won 29 seats.
Far-right groups, often held up by Russian propaganda as neo-Nazi gangs dominant in Ukraine, won only a few seats.
One group, Svoboda, won only six seats; another group, Right Sector, won only one seat.
The overall election result was seen as a victory for forces in favor of closer ties with the EU and the United States.
On December 2, 2014, the incoming parliament approved the new coalition government, again led by Yatsenyuk as prime minister.
Prime Minister Yatsenyuk maintained that his government’s main goal was to adopt European standards, with the ultimate objective of EU membership for Ukraine.
He consistently reiterated that a key focus of his government would be to fight corruption, including by reducing government regulation and the size of the bureaucracy and by with minimizing the influence of certain elements of Ukraine’s society.
He stated that the government would cut the number of taxes it collected and devolve more budgetary power to local authorities.
These moves were likely intended to signal that the new government was dedicated to initiating reforms and moving the country toward the West and that these key figures were not from what many Ukrainians believe was the country’s morally compromised political elite.
Through the remainder of 2014 and well into 2015, the record of passage of reform measures was mixed.
In testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in October 2015, Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland noted that the government was setting up an Anti-Corruption Bureau that would investigate corruption among government officials and that new anticorruption laws passed in 2014, including stricter provisions against bribery and conflicts of interest, would require annual disclosures of income by public officials.
After President Poroshenko complained that Shokin was taking too long to clean up corruption even within the PGO itself, he asked for Shokin’s resignation.
Others also observed that it was very difficult initially to keep reform progress moving forward.
United States Ambassador Geoffrey Pyatt, along with several other European ambassadors, praised Abromavicius for his efforts and expressed disappointment with the resignation.
The International Monetary Fund , which had already postponed the 2015 delivery of the third and fourth installments of funds for Ukraine because of the slow pace of reform, including the lack of tax reform, further delayed the payment after the Abromavicius resignation.
The same day, Rada chairman Volodymyr Groysman announced that the legislature would conduct a review of the Yatsenyuk cabinet’s work, which would precede a vote of no confidence on the Yatsenyuk government.
The outcome of the vote further complicated the political environment because although Poroshenko argued that change was necessary to reassure the public, a majority in the Rada, including many in Poroshe nk o’s own political bloc, refused to support the ouster of Yatsenyuk.
Despite these promises, the number of votes against Prime Minister Yatsenyuk and the fact that Poroshe nk o called for his resignation created doubts within the government and among the population regarding Yatsenyuk’s future effectiveness.
However, Ukrainian law prohibits the Rada from considering additional no-confidence votes against a government for six months, so Yatsenyuk was given time to form a new government, make changes, and move the reform process forward, if possible.
Observers believed that although the government had been weakened, all three former coalition partners likely would have continued to support the government’s reform agenda and provide the votes needed to pass such legislation.
Speculation became centered on Volodymyr Groysman, the Speaker of the Rada and Poroshe nk o supporter, as a replacement for Yatsenyuk.
Nevertheless, Yatsenyuk refused to resign until a new governing coalition was agreed to.
The United States and the EU, despite their concerns over the pace of reform, did not want the government to collapse, as failure to form a new government would have required new national elections.
The idea of new elections, which could have generated nationwide political and 10 Op. cit.
In addition, new elections could have called into question the ability of a new government to be any more dedicated to reform or successful in achieving such reforms.
For some Ukraine observers, the shift among the various political leaders triggered fear among reformers that Ukraine might have repeated the failure of the earlier Orange Revolution—the leaders of which, Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko and President Victor Yushchenko, quarreled bitterly after attaining power.
Although conditions this time around were not exactly like those of the Orange Revolution, observers recalled how the mutual hostility between the leaders paralyzed the government, alienated voters, and delivered the presidency to Victor Yanukovich in 2010.
Privatization of state owned enterprises; Improvements in corporate governance of state owned enterprises; Asset seizure and recovery; The appointment process for anticorruption prosecutors; and, mandatory asset disclosure for public officials.
Despite the recognized progress made in passing some reform legislation, opinion polls indicated that public skepticism remained high regarding the Poroshenko/Yatsenyuk government’s ability to implement those reforms, its commitment to make a serious impact in fighting the country’s deeply ingrained, crippling problem with corruption or to adopt additional legislation seen as necessary to move Ukraine forward.
Although Yatsenyuk initially survived the political uprising, a new level of disenchantment on the part of an already skeptical public as well as among some within the Rada who felt Yatsenyuk no 12 Elizabeth Pond, “Gunfight at the Ukraine Corral,” Institute for International Strategic Studies, February 4, 2016.
When Yatsenyuk failed to form a new government by early April 2016, he indicated that he would resign, but only if a new prime minister was agreed to.
On April 14, 2016, the Rada, by a very slim margin , approved Volodymyr Groysman as the new prime minister.
Groysman’s coalition started out in a weakened state, with serious doubts about his ability to move the agenda forward in the very Rada he recently led.
In addition, Groysman’s close association with Poroshenko raised some doubts about his determination or ability to effectively carry out major reforms on which Poroshe nk o himself may have been lukewarm.
They said they were committed to continuing an International Monetary Fund program that is keeping Ukraine financially afloat, to fighting conniption and to rejecting the economic populism proposed by many in parliament.
The period since the formation of the Groysman government has been marked by slow but increasingly successful progress both in addressing reform and in the economy.
Some believe the move to oust former prime minster Yatsenyuk was driven by his reluctance to challenge certain oligarchs and politicians or his failing to address corruption, particularly in the office of the Prosecutor General.
Yury Lutsenko, the head of the Poroshenko parliamentary group, was subsequently appointed the new prosecutor general.
Seen initially as a political move (Lutsenko was not an attorney or from the legal world) to consolidate Poroshenko’s influence and to satisfy critics, including in the United States, observers, despite some internal problems including a dispute between staff members from the prosecutor-general’s office and members of the new Anti-Corruption Bureau, continue to express optimism that Lutsenko appears committed to move forward on needed reforms and prosecutions of corrupt officials of both the former and current governments.
Danyliuk, seen by some as a progressive technocrat, raised some initial concern as to whether he would be willing or able to undertake meaningful reforms over the long term, particularly if it meant an occasional disagreement with Poroshenko.
Since then, Danyliuk appears to have won increasing support for his efforts.
The Groysman government has achieved some notable successes, particularly on the issues of energy subsidies and corruption.
For instance, the government was able to move forward with the further reduction of household energy subsidies demanded by the IMF, even though the prospect of increased electricity prices spurred several street protests.
Similarly, corruption was viewed as rampant throughout the Ukrainian banking system.
Recently, some believe the Chairwoman of the National Ra nk of Ukraine , Valeriya Flontareva, has made significant progress in cleaning up the industry.
This example, however, raises concerns about who in Kyiv loses from the success of the reform efforts.
For instance, Anders Aslund recently warned that an attempt is under way in the Ukrainian parliament to deprive the NBU of its independence and oust Flontareva.
This, according to Aslund, would be a major reversal of Ukraine’s economic reforms.
Thus far, the effort has been resisted by President Poroshenko, Prime Minister Groysman, and others.
Despite continued concerns, these examples, along with others, led United States Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland to say that she was encouraged by signs of commitment to reform from Ukraine’s government.
And despite early concerns over the government’s appetite for reform, the EU and the IMF seem satisfied that the Groysman government has been setting the right tone for moving the country forward.
Recently, the IMF approved another $ 1 billion for Ukraine as part of the IMF’s $17 billion assistance program for the country.
The IMF, however, has warned Kyiv that more difficult reforms are needed in the banking sector, the submission of the electronic declarations by high officials must begin to take place, land reform needs to get under way, and the important issue of privatizations, lie ahead if the country wishes to receive the next $1. billion increment of funding.
In one of his last public appearances before he departed Ukraine, United States Ambassador Geoffrey Pyatt, speaking to a Ukrainian youth club, reviewed some of the progress he had seen Ukraine achieve during his time as ambassador.
According to Pyatt, this progress included a Ukrainian civil society that is perhaps one of the strongest and most active anywhere in Europe today; the establishment of new anticorruption institutions; a new prosecutor general; the transformation of the energy sector; increased media freedom; accountability of democratically elected politicians, and some important first steps toward reform, including constitutional reforms on the judiciary that would make it easier to prosecute corruption.
At the same time, Pyatt indicated that if he had to identify the single area that still required the greatest sustained focus and the greatest sustained pressure and engagement from civil society, it would be rule of law—building a judiciary, a 19 prosecutorial service, and a court system in which the Ukrainian people have confidence.
Still, the Poroshenko/Groysman government has not entirely succeeded in winning over a solid majority in the Rada, former Maidan reformists or among the general public at large.
In a recent assessment of this matter published by Carnegie Europe, oligarchs have managed to retain their status as important players in Ukraine’s politics and economy due to a number of factors.
One is the oligarchs’ continued dominance of certain strategic sectors of the economy through their financial capabilities and their organizational strength.
Another factor is that oligarchic groups still possess powerful instruments to defend their positions, in particular control over dozens of members of parliament and ownership of nearly all major television stations.
A third factor is simply that any attempt to genuinely strip the strongest oligarchs of influence, including by prosecuting them, could lead to open political conflict and possible retaliatory action by those oligarchs who control many sectors of the economy, which could seriously destabilized Ukraine’s internal situation.
The study concluded that the process to get control over the influence of the oligarchs will take time, but that the success of any efforts to weaken their influence will depend primarily on whether Ukraine’s present-day institutions can be reformed with institutions that are robust and independent.
What appeared to be shaping up as a summer calm for the Ukrainian government as it settled in and moved the reform effort forward was marked by several incidents that called into question the stability and public acceptance of the government.
In June 2016, criticism of the government came from Ukrainian war hero Naydia Savchenko, who had recently been released from prison in Russia.
While in prison, Savchenko was elected to the Rada as a member of the opposition Fatherland party led by Yulia Tymoshenko.
In an interview with the Associated Press, Savchenko apparently said that the Ukrainian government had failed public expectations and that the Ukrainian people deserved a better government than they had.
Savchenko then called for early parliamentary elections to “infuse fresh blood” into Ukraine’s politics and spoke of her own presidential ambitions.
Coming from a national icon, these comments sent shock waves across the frustrated nation and throughout the international community, which continues to oppose new national elections as potentially destabilizing.
In August 2016, Savchenko announced a hunger strike to speed up the release of 25 other Ukrainian prisoners of war, accusing Ukraine’s president of ignoring their plight.
In early July 2016a new push to form a European liberal political party was reportedly launched by many young, former Maidan activists who are now in the government, Rada, or civil society.
The new movement backs free-market approaches and specifically supports the smalland medium-sized business community.
The new party is steadfastly libertarian on matters of personal choice and a staunch proponent of tough anticorruption measures that emphasize a strong rule of law and a professional, impartial judiciary.
The group intends to rely on social media, Internetbased news, civic networks, and crowd funding to spread its message and build support.
Some believe that if this movement can evolve into a full-fledged political party with public support, it could present challenges to the current dominance of the Poroshenko Bloc and the People’s Front party.
In July 2016, increased fighting broke out in eastern Ukraine, reminding the public that security had not yet been achieved.
According to the Ukraine Defense Ministry, the deaths of some 27 20 “Ukraine’s Omnipresent Oligarchs,” Wojciech Kononczuk, Carnegie Europe, October 13, 2016.
Also in July, a car bomb explosion in Kyiv killed a well-known Belarussian investigative reporter, Pavel Sheremet.
Sheremet was known for his criticism of Russia’s leadership and his friendship with the slain Russian opposition leader Boris Nemtsov.
It is still unclear whether his killing was internally motivated by individuals who may have been the target of an ongoing investigation by Sheremet or carried out by external forces.
Responding to the incident, President Poroshenko said the killing was an attempt to destabilize Ukraine.
In the same month, the government was dealt another headache when Amnesty International released a report documenting widespread prisoner abuse by Russian-backed separatists.
The report also said that Ukrainian authorities and pro-Kyiv paramilitary groups illegally imprisoned and in some instances tortured prisoners.
These allegations forced the government to defend what had been seen by the public as a well-respected armed forces institution.
Finally, on July 17, Ukraine held special elections in seven districts to fill seats vacated by members of the Rada who had been appointed to the Cabinet of Prime Minister Groysman and one Rada member who had died.
One of the districts was Stansiya Lughansk, part of which borders an area occupied by the separatists.
These special elections were seen as symbolic tests of the public’s mood toward the government.
Two winners were supported by Yulia Tymoshenko , and two were supported by the Renaissance faction.
As Ukraine transitioned into the fall of 2016, the Poroshenko/Groysman government seemed to feel it had achieved much.
At a discussion sponsored by the Atlantic Council in October, Natalie Jaresko, as noted above, Ukraine’s Finance Minister from 2014 to early 2016, suggested that Ukraine has gone through the “longest and most successful reform process,” which has not only spurred GDP growth but has seen inflation drop, lending reduced and credit expanded.
This has occurred in spite of Russia’s occupation of Crimea, the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine, hybrid war carried out by the Kremlin, and an estimated 1. million internally displaced persons.
On the other hand, Jaresko noted that the reforms were not yet irreversible and required continued international support.
Still others have warned that if the new Ukrainian government becomes complacent the country’s gains could be lost.
According to these observers, Ukrainians know that corruption remains endemic, and little progress has been made in breaking the old elite’s power structure.
As people continue to tire of poverty and war, the appeal of populism will grow.
With fresh IMF and United States financing coming through, the new government has a window of opportunity to push through additional reforms and continue the economic recovery.
Otherwise, it risks an early parliamentary election—which it might not survive—next spring.
Jaresko issued the same kind of warning, but she blamed a large share of the country’s slow progress on populist politicians.
Parliamentary elections are not slated until 2019, but populist 24 “Ukraine Sees Ulterior Motives After Car Bomb Kills Journalist,"" Reuters, July 20, 2016.
This concern was heightened recently when Ukraine’s populist, anti-Russia Azov Battalion apparently decided to form its own political party.
Although small in number, the far-right leaning ideology of the group could align itself with others and present a challenge to the Poroshenko/Groysman government.
Despite the apparent failure to improve its image among the population, Poroshenko and Groysman vowed to continue their efforts to meet the demands for reform and economic progress while carefully watching the mood of the country and the potential demand for new national elections.
For Poroshe nk o and Groysman, another major concern continues to be the strength of support Ukraine will continue to receive from the United States and the European Union.
Observers believe any wavering of that support could signal to Moscow that Ukraine “fatigue” was growing and that Moscow could take additional steps to destabilize the government.
Many in Ukraine became concerned over the EU’s ability to sustain its support in the wake of the Brexit vote in the UK as the EU prepared for the negotiation period with London.
Recently, however, Russia’s actions in Syria as well as Moscow’s failure to ease the conflict in the Donbas seem to be hardening the EU position on Russia, which may benefit Kyiv for a while longer.
Although its economy was in decline in 2013, some believe Ukraine’s primary economic challenges were not all self-inflicted.
Russian trade sanctions imposed in 2013, even before the Maidan, slashed Ukraine’s exports to Russia by 70%—accounting for a drop of 18% in Ukraine’s total exports.
In 2014, Ukraine’s exports to Russia—which included machinery, steel, agricultural goods, and chemicals—fell by half.
In addition, with Russia’s aggression in Ukraine still unsettled, few had wanted to invest in what some felt could 29 Op. cit.
As a consequence, Ukraine’s net foreign direct investment, which was slightly over 3% of GDP before the start of hostilities, evaporated.
An example of this lingering concern was seen when, according to the State Property Fund, the tender for a 99.6% stake in the Odessa Port Plant, a large chemicals-production complex, that was supposed to lay the groundwork for the wider relaunch of the government’s privatization plan failed to attract any bidders, particularly any international companies.
According to some, signs of financial and economic stabilization began to appear as a result of a series of measures, including the first payments of the $17.5-billion program loan approved by the IMF in March 2015.
In December 2015, the IMF tweaked its rules regarding lending to countries in arrears to other states, allowing Ukraine to continue to receive IMF funding even though the government has thus far refused to repay a $3 billion bond, issued by the previous government and held by Russia.
According to the EIU, this target is in line with the government’s commitments made as part of its April 2014 request for an IMF loan of $17 billion.
The IMF also wanted a commitment to make rapid progress on reforms, including energy price increases, bank restructuring, governance reforms of state-owned enterprises, and legal changes to implement anticorruption and judicial reforms.
In February 2016, with little progress on the IMF’s demands, IMF Director Fagarde warned thenPrime Minister Yatsenyuk that reforms were taking too long and that continued IMF support for Ukraine was in jeopardy unless the pace of reforms was increased.
After Yatsenyuk was replaced by Groysman as prime minister—ushering in a new emphasis on reform, the hiring of a new prosecutor general, and the passage of legislative fixes to the energy subsidy program—the IMF sent a new assessment team to Ukraine.
The IMF agreed that progress was being made and that the next tranche of IMF funding, around $1. billion, would be forthcoming.
In September, the IMF voted to release $1 billion of Ukraine’s $17. billion bailout package, not as much as Ukraine had hoped for, but nevertheless a welcome infusion of assistance.
The new funding brought total funding from the IMF so far to $7. billion.
Reductions in the energy subsidies have resulted in a rise in electricity prices, which, has spurred some public outrage and protests.
As noted above, when the free-trade agreement with the EU went into effect in January 2016, Russia suspended its own free-trade deal with Ukraine and banned all imports of Ukrainian 33 Anders Aslund, ""Russia’s War on Ukraine’s Economy,” July 9, 2015.
At the same time, this could be inhibited by a deterioration in the economic outlook for the EU, which accounts for around one-third of Ukraine’s exports, following a rise in uncertainty after the UK’s Brexit vote.
Natalie Jaresko, in her recent comments at the Atlantic Council, suggested Ukraine could see 1.5% GDP growth this year.
Inflation has slowed recently to around 9.8%—the lowest rate since early 2014—in part tied to a modest appreciation of the hryvnya to the United States dollar, and a rise also linked to the improvement in ferrous metal prices.
Elowever, an increase of almost 50% in domestic gas tariffs, a reform measure recently enacted by the Rada— also needed to pave the way for the release of a delayed IMF loan tranche—could spur a new round of inflation.
Ukraine possesses some of the richest agricultural soil in all of Europe.
Ukraine sold $7. billion of bulk farm commodities worldwide in 2015, quintupling its revenue from a decade earlier and topping Russia, its closest rival on world markets.
With respect to its need for direct foreign investment, at the end of 2015 the value of Ukraine’s foreign investments was $62bn.
Ukraine fell six spots to 85 th place in the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index.
According to an investors’ survey, obstacles include corruption; lack of trust in the judiciary; the conflict with Russia; an unstable financial system; restrictive capital and foreign exchange controls; complicated tax administration; and cumbersome legislation.
On the other hand, in a recent article for the Atlantic Council, James Brooke, a foreign correspondent, made several observations regarding the business climate in Ukraine in 2016.
The old guard, with their misconceptions of a free economy, is slowly being sidelined.
Similarly, in Lviv, Japan’s Fujikura has recently opened a car parts factory.
Ukraine’s vulnerability to Russian political pressure through energy policy has been mitigated by the fact that the main oil and natural gas pipelines to Central and Western Europe transit Ukraine’s territory.
In 2014, about 40% of Russian natural gas destined for Europe transited Ukraine.
Russia had long sought control of Ukraine’s natural gas pipelines and storage facilities.
Moscow had also proposed a pipeline under the Black Sea to Bulgaria and through the Balkans to Western Europe.
However, after the EU raised objections that the project violated EU rules, Russia canceled the South Stream project in December 2014.
The Ukrainian Rada also passed legislation reducing the energy subsidy provided to consumers, resulting in higher prices for gas or electricity but some reductions in energy consumption.
According to some, the modest gas price increases implemented in 2015 resulted in a 20% reduction in gas consumption in 2015, and such consumption reductions have continued in 2016.
However, according to the E1U, Ukraine is currently only able to do without Russian gas because a deep economic contraction has reduced demand.
Foreign Policy Given the significant domestic problems facing the Poroshenko government, the scope of Ukraine’s foreign policy is focused on a few main foreign policy priorities.
These include securing continued international support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, including nonrecognition of Russia’s annexation of Crimea; reorienting its economy as quickly as possible toward Europe; and seeking continued international assistance to ameliorate the country’s economic situation.
Relations with Russia Ukraine achieved independence in 1991, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine and Security Concerns in Central arid Eastern Europe, coordinated by Paul Belkin.
Russians often point out that their ancestors spilled a great deal of blood to incorporate Crimea and most of the rest of Ukraine into the Russian Empire, and a great deal more to keep it within the empire (and its successor, the Soviet Union) through several wars.
Finally, Russia has consistently reminded everyone of the strong religious connections between Russia and Ukraine through the Eastern Orthodox Church.
Ukrainian government computer servers have been hit by numerous and sophisticated cyberattacks, which some experts suggest may have come from Russia.
As noted earlier, ethnic Russians are concentrated in the southern and eastern parts of the country where ties to Russia remain strong.
Sentiments toward Russia among a majority of Ukrainians have clearly declined since the events of 2014.
In June 2014, President Poroshenko announced that Ukraine would ban military cooperation with Russia despite the economic impact such a move would have on close to 80 Ukrainian defense firms that had been closely li nk ed to Russian firms as a result of their former Soviet heritage.
It was estimated at the time that a ban, with a few exceptions such as for dual technologies, including helicopter engines that were under contract, could cut close to 70% of Ukrainian-made military goods exported to Russia and force the closing or downsizing of the Ukraine military industrial base.
With respect to Crimea, since the 2014 annexation of Crimea, with the exception of the Russian treatment of the Crimean Tatars, the region had been relatively stable as the likelihood of its return to Ukraine continues to fade.
Tensions in Crimea and southern Ukraine flared briefly in August 2016 when Moscow, after Russian forces allegedly captured several Ukrainians trying to enter Crimea, accused Ukraine of “resorting to terrorism” and threatened to take swift action against Kyiv.
With some 30,000 Russian servicemen already in Crimea , Russia recently announced plans to deploy its latest S-400 anti-aircraft missile system to Crimea in August.
This missile system poses a significant threat to the Ukrainian air force, which would be needed for the Ukraine government’s defense of the city of Mariupol.
In another sign regarding the future of Crimea, for the first time since Russia annexed Crimea, Russian elections were held in Crimea on September 18 for four seats in the Russian Duma.
The local population has dealt with increased inflation in food prices and a collapse of tourism, a vital sector of the local economy.
In the meantime, Ukraine has shut off all trade to the peninsula, making Crimea economically closer to and more dependent on Russia.
Unrest in eastern Ukraine took an even more ominous turn in April 2014, when armed men stormed and occupied key government buildings and broadcast facilities in Donetsk and Luhansk, as well as in Slovyansk and more than a dozen other towns in the Donbas region.
After a brief unilateral cease-fire by Ukraine in late June 2014 failed to lead to progress on a peace plan put forward by newly elected Ukrainian President Poroshenko, Ukraine restarted an “anti-terrorist operation” against the separatist forces.
Accusations flew on 47 The Donbas region refers to area comprised of the Donetsk and Luhansk Provinces.
Fighting a heavily supplied separatist force, joined by Russian regular troops, Ukrainian forces lost ground and suffered heavy casualties.
The Minsk-1 agreement also called for Ukraine to adopt a law on amnesty for those involved in the conflict in the Donbas, and other provisions.
While actively engaged with United States allies in Europe in seeking a resolution of the crisis, the Obama Administration had, for the most part, left the leading role in negotiating such a settlement to France, Germany, and Ukraine, whose representatives have met with those of Russia in the socalled Normandy format, named after the place where the meetings first occurred in 2014.
In fact, Minsk-2 contains no obligations whatsoever for Russia, which is not even mentioned in the agreement.
The agreement calls for the removal of all “foreign” troops but does not mention Russian troops.
Furthermore, Minsk-2 was signed not by Putin but by Mikhail Zurabov, Russia’s ambassador to Ukraine.
By September 2016, what little had been accomplished in fully implementing the Minsk-2 provisions, despite commitments by both sides to do so, has come from the Kyiv side.
In Kyiv, the Rada has passed an amnesty law, had the first reading of a constitutional amendment related to eastern autonomy, and passed a special status law for the citizens of the Donbas.
The separatists, on the other hand, have not implemented any of the provisions.
However, while an OSCE Special Monitoring Mission was established and is monitoring the cease-fire along the line controlled by Ukraine, Russia-backed separatists continue to restrict the operational area of the SMM, denying the SMM any opportunity to go inside the rebel-controlled areas, resulting in the OSCE being unable to ascertain the full extent to which the separatists or Russia are participating in or Minsk-2 1.
The OSCE’s SMM has consistently reported daily violations, mostly on the part of the separatists, resulting in numerous casualties.
Although various cease-fire arrangements have been put in place, fighting has periodically flared up.
An estimated 4,000 people have died in the region since Minsk-2 went into effect.
The Ukraine Defense Ministry noted that heavy fighting had taken place along the line of contact, resulting in the death of 27 Ukrainian soldiers and wounding an additional 123.
This action made July the deadliest month for the Ukrainian military in nearly a year.
Speaking at a meeting of the OSCE Permanent Council in Vienna in late July, United States Ambassador Daniel Baer stated that , armed separatists refused to allow an Monitoring Team to cross the line of contact.
Separatist forces also block monitors’ access at transit hubs, in front of compounds suspected of holding weapons or fighters, near the pedestrian bridge at Stanytsia-Luhanska, and even at sites proposed for disengagement.
Combined Russianseparatist forces continue to disable SMM cameras and unmanned aerial vehicles in order to blind monitors.
Most recently, a third SMM long-range UAV was brought down—in an area near the Line of Contact and near where Russian separatist heavy weapons had recently been reported by the SMM—on July 26.
The OSCE has also reported that much of the separatists’ heavy weapons and the military personnel supplied by Russia have been repeatedly repositioned along the front lines but not removed from Ukraine, as required by Minsk-2.
The SMM continues to find weapon systems in separatist-held territory that are only available in the Russian arsenal.
Although the OSCE reported sporadic fighting throughout August, heavy fighting seemed to have subsided.
In September 2016 both sides agreed to a “back to school” ceasefire along with an agreement that Ukrainian and separatists’ heavy weapons and the Russian military personnel supporting the separatists were to be withdrawn from three areas along the contact line.
According to Ukraine sources, 19 Ukrainian soldiers had been injured in fighting along the line of conflict since the new cease-fire took effect.
As a result, Ukraine’s military postponed a planned parallel withdrawal with pro-Russian separatists from one town on the eastern frontline, saying the rebels had disregarded the agreement and fired artillery at Ukrainian positions.
These 54 Remarks of United States Ambassador Daniel Baer to the OSCE Permanent Council in Vienna, July 2016.
Although other prominent separatists have recently met with suspicious deaths, the separatists immediately blamed the government in Kyiv and vowed to retaliate, which could result in an increase in the fighting.
On October 20, 2016, the Normandy Group, including Putin, met in Berlin for several hours of apparently heated debate on what to do about Minsk-2.
The Ukrainians initially stated that no elections law would be passed in the Rada until a real cease-fire went into effect, Russian heavy weapons and troops were withdrawn, and the OSCE was given unfettered access to the UkraineRussia border.
Control of the border is critical for Kyiv in halting the continuous flow of Russian forces and equipment for the separatists.
For some, however, there is a question whether the OSCE can handle such mission.
Some Ukrainian politicians the border should be controlled by the Ukrainian Armed Forces as a precondition to elections.
Russia seems little inclined to push for a resolution of the conflict despite Moscow’s continued participation in the Normandy group.
According to reports, Putin continued to insist on the elections, a special status for the Donbas and amnesty—without any guarantees from Moscow on a ceasefire, withdrawal of troops, and the transfer of border control to the OSCE or Ukraine.
In the end, Poroshenko apparently agreed to draw up a more precise roadmap for implementing the Minsk-2 peace accords.
The plan, according to some, would be ready in November and could include a provision deploying an armed OSCE mission to the east to better protect the monitoring mission.
It is unlikely that the separatists would agree to such a provision, and since Russia continues to insist that it has no military forces in eastern Ukraine, it is unclear at the moment what exactly the roadmap would envision.
And, as noted above, although President Poroshe nk o won a hard-fought victory in initially moving legislation through the Rada to grant the increased autonomy for the Donbas called for in the Minsk-2 agreement, he does not have the necessary votes to pass this legislation as an amendment to the constitution.
He is unlikely to secure those votes unless major progress is made by the other side, where the separatists appear to have no intention to stop the fighting or ensure free and fair elections are held in the disputed regions.
However, Moscow has insisted on the decentralization of Ukraine, under which the various regions would have wide autonomy in the areas of the economy, finance, culture, language, education, and external economic and cultural ties with neighboring countries or regions.
And, according to some, Moscow’s policy in Ukraine’s east continues to look more likely to strengthen the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics.
For instance, according to the International Crisis Group , after showing little interest in building political institutions in the DNR and LNR or enthusiasm for funding social policies, Moscow has been bankrolling pensions, social benefits, and salaries of local officials and the separatist military.
Others have suggested that most of the daily activities in the two areas, including financing, taxation, and electric power, are actually planned and administered by Russian ministries in Moscow, making the two regions somewhat like Russian statelets.
The ICG suggested that these measures are increasingly clear signs that Moscow has decided to transform the crisis into a frozen conflict.
The one unanswered question at the moment is how long would the leadership of the DPR and LPR continue to adhere to Moscow’s strict line if little or no progress is made with Kyiv.
Some believe the DPR, for instance, would like to become more independent of Moscow, at least exercising more control over the economic and business assets of the region.
On the other hand, some observers believe that Putin will eventually create the conditions for an election and reintegration of the Donbas region into the country, not because he is prepared to give up the region but because he could feel such a move would further weaken European resolve to continue the sanctions regime on Russia.
Some Europeans have already suggested that sanctions could be incrementally lifted as parts of Minsk-2 are implemented.
Moscow also appears to believe that by reintegrating the Donbas and having pro-Russians elected to the Rada, Moscow could gain even more leverage in Kyiv.
Russia’s proxies could control a certain bloc of votes on key issues in the Rada, effectively blocking some reform progress and perpetuating political instability.
Such a move by Putin, although not likely, would also force Kyiv and the Rada to either honor democratically elected MPs from the Donbas and offer them protection if they came to Kyiv or to ignore the will of the people of Donbas and refuse to seat them in the Rada, potentially inviting criticism from the West.
On the other hand, what has largely disappeared from official Russian rhetoric for now is the concept of “Novorossiya”—that is, expanding the Russian-controlled area to include most of eastern and southern Ukraine, perhaps linking Russian-controlled areas in southern Ukraine with Crimea.
Since then, however, Ukrainian military forces have become somewhat more capable, and it may appear to Putin that such an objective would now likely require a massive, and perhaps politically unacceptable, infusion of Russian military forces, with casualties to realize.
For these observers, the EU and United States pressure on Ukraine to comply with Minsk-2, something not favored by many Ukrainians, is misplaced, as few believe that neither the pro-Russia separatists nor the Kremlin have any intention of complying with their parts of the Minsk-2 agreement.
In a recent statement on this issue, Ukrainian war hero Naydia Savchenko said that although she welcomed a Minsk cease-fire agreement, she disagreed with key aspects of the deal, including giving eastern Ukraine more autonomy and holding local elections in the Donbas.
This pressure seemed to be on full display earlier in 2016 when the foreign ministers of France and Germany met with President Poroshenko in February.
This pressure also seemed evident in the October meeting of the Normandy group, as noted above.
For some, the pressure on Kyiv to meet the Minsk-2 requirements, including amending the Ukrainian constitution, will permanently reward the separatists, seen by many as mere street thugs with guns, for taking sovereign territory from their own country at the point of a gun.
August 1, 2016, marked the 41 st anniversary of the signing of the Helsinki Final Act.
For many, by its illegal occupation and annexation of Crimea and its aggression in eastern Ukraine, Russia continues to flagrantly flout all of the OSCE principles enshrined in the agreement, to which Russia is a signatory, including territorial integrity, inviolability of borders, and sovereignty.
For members of the Rada, amending the county’s constitution to “reward” the separatists could label those members who vote for these measures as national traitors.
This approach, in the eyes of 63 “Among Political Sharks Ukrainian pilot Savchenko to be a “small piranha.”, Reuters, June 10, 2016.
The EU policy is intended to forge a close relationship that encompasses political association and economic integration, which could prepare Ukraine for eventual membership in the union.
The desire among a least some segments of the Ukrainian public for stronger relations with the EU and the West fueled the initial protests in late 2013 that culminated in the collapse of the Yanukovych regime.
Although the DCFTA further opens potentially lucrative EU markets to Ukraine, it also requires Ukraine to adopt EU legislation and standards and to gradually expose Ukrainian firms to tough competition from EU imports.
The EU and Ukraine signed the parts of Ukraine’s AA dealing with political issues in March 2014 and the parts dealing with economic issues on June 27.
Ratification of the pact was delayed due to Russian threats to block Ukrainian imports from Russian markets unless the pact was modified to protect Russia’s interests.
In addition to the aid package and the AA, the EU established a High Level Investment Forum/Task Force and created a dedicated Ukraine Support Group, composed of experts from EU institutions and member states in different sectors, to provide advice and support to the Ukrainian authorities in the mentioned reform sectors.
Up to this point, the EU was hesitant to impose additional sanctions on Ukraine despite Russia’s support for the destabilization of eastern Ukraine and its assault on Ukraine’s territorial sovereignty.
Elowever, after the Malaysian Airlines tragedy on July 17, 2014, the EU largely matched and even in some cases went beyond United States sanctions.
On July 29, 2014, the EU agreed to impose sanctions on Russia’s financial, defense, and certain energy sectors.
Observers have noted that the sanctions had been crafted to minimize the economic harm to EU countries, for example by not targeting the sensitive natural gas sector or the sale of dual-use technologies to civilian firms.
Nevertheless, some business sectors in Europe that were geared toward the Russian market as well as the agriculture sectors have continued to complain.
On the other hand, Russia has implemented counter-sanctions against Europe, such as in the agriculture sector, among others, which continue to have a negative impact on some countries, despite the ability of some of those sectors to find new markets.
A study by the European Parliament’s Research Service analyzes the impact of the various sanctions and Russian counter-sanctions on European economies.
Since January 2015, the United States and the EU have extended the sanctions on Russian individuals and entities three times.
Key sectoral sanctions were set to expire in July 2016 but were renewed again until January 2017.
Extending the sanctions requires a unanimous vote among all 28 EU member states, and EU leaders are seeing weakening support for continued sanctions.
Although the EU sanctions were extended again, an agreement was reached between the member states that the EU would conduct a thorough review of the sanctions and hold a debate over their continued implementation.
Individual EU member states have different views on how to deal with Russia in the future.
Several countries have argued that the sanctions have not forced a change in Russia’s policies toward Ukraine.
Others have complained about the economic impact of the EU sanctions and Russian counter-sanctions on their economies and have expressed a desire to see the sanctions eased or lifted altogether.
Italy, Greece, Cyprus, and Elungary have been among the more skeptical.
Both the French General Assembly and the French Senate passed nonbinding resolutions asking the French government to support lifting the sanctions.
In the meantime, European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker met President Putin during a June 16, 2016, economic forum in St.
By contrast, Poland and the Baltic states, which have lost economic markets in Russia, have repeatedly pressed for maintaining pressure on Moscow.
The Merkel government in Germany, which has been thrust into the role of seeking EU consensus on Russia while seeking a solution to the Ukraine crisis, has been under serious pressure from Germany’s business community to lift the sanctions.
German Foreign Minister Frank Walter Steinmeier floated the possibility of a “step by step” reduction of sanctions even if the Minsk agreements for resolving the Ukraine conflict are not entirely fulfilled.
Merkel, however, has remained fairly strong in her desire not to lift the sanctions until Russia shows some positive actions in resolving the conflict in the Donbas.
Arguing in favor of retaining the sanctions, Guy Verhofstadt, a former Belgian prime minister and president of the Alliance of Fiberals and Democrats for Europe Group in the European Parliament, stated, this is no time for Europe to “go soft” on Russia.
EU leaders must remain firm and united in ensuring that existing economic sanctions are lifted only if the Minsk agreement is implemented fully.
This includes the full withdrawal of Russian forces and military equipment from Ukrainian territory, and restoration to Ukraine’s government of complete control over its border with Russia.
A weakening of sanctions on Russia might please European business leaders, but it would come at a steep long-term cost.
Even with sanctions in place, the frozen conflict in Ukraine looks increasingly permanent.
Easing sanctions now, with so little progress having been made under the latest Minsk agreement, would amount to a catastrophic collapse in Europe’s impact and credibility— and a major loss for Ukraine.
On September 1, 2016, the United States Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control updated the Specially Designated Nationals List and the Sectoral Sanctions Identifications List to target sanctions evasion and other activities related to the conflict in Ukraine.
Included in the new sanctions were an additional 37 individuals, 11 Crimean officials, multiple subsidiaries of Russian gas giant Gazprom, and some 18 companies operating in Crimea, including a number of defense and shipbuilding firms and companies directly involved in the construction of the 11 -mile road-and-rail connection across the Kerch Strait separating Russia and Crimea.
Relations with NATO Although the 2008 NATO summit in Bucharest declared that Ukraine would eventually become a NATO member, no date was ever set for that goal to be accomplished.
Due to the current military instability in Ukraine’s east, the annexation of Crimea by Russia, and concerns among several NATO allies over Russia’s actions to keep Ukraine from becoming too close to Europe and the United States, it is unlikely that Ukraine would receive a Membership Action Plan from NATO in the near future.
Key assistance includes capacity and institution building, professional development of civilian employees, and strategic communications.
Allied experts are cooperating with eight defense education institutions, three training centers, and the Diplomatic Academy in Ukraine to improve staff skills and develop curricula that meet Western standards.
NATO is conducting humanitarian demining operations and will implement a project to increase Ukraine’s capabilities to counter lEDs.
Allies are supporting Ukraine in disposing of obsolete small arms/light weapons, ammunition, and anti-personnel mines.
In addition, the Alliance restated its commitment, made at the 2014 Wales Summit, to established five trust funds to support Ukraine.
These trust funds include Command, Control, Communications and Computers ; Logistics and Standardization; Cyber Defense; Military Career Transition; and Medical Rehabilitation.
Relations with the United States The United States established diplomatic relations with Ukraine in 1991, following Ukraine’s independence from the Soviet Union.
The United States has committed significant financial and technical assistance to Ukraine to achieve those goals.
Visits by Vice President Biden, Secretary of State Kerry, USAID Assistant Administrator Tom Melia, and, on several occasions, Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland have reaffirmed this support, most recently during Assistant Secretary Nuland’s June 22, 2016, visit and Secretary Kerry’s July 6, 2016, travels to Kyiv.
On May 13, Vice President Biden spoke with President Poroshenko and Prime Minister Groysman and informed President Poroshenko that the United States had approved a third $ 1 billion loan guarantee agreement, which will support continued progress on Ukrainian reforms.
Ukraine is currently the United States’ 80 th -largest goods trading partner, 79 Ibid.
United States imports from Ukraine include iron and steel, inorganic chemicals, oil, iron and steel products, aircraft, and agricultural products.
United States advisers and technical assistance support almost a dozen Ukrainian ministries and localities and have been aimed at helping Ukraine stabilize its financial sector; carry out reforms in the agricultural sector; improve the business climate; support constitutional reforms; bolster civil society to participate and monitor the reform process; and support independent media.
The Administration also requested $15 million in International Narcotics Control and Law Enforcement funding to support justice and law enforcement reform.
The Elouse version of the FY2016 Department of State, Foreign Operations, and Related Agencies Appropriations bill would make $337 million available for Ukraine.
United States aid has been used by Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and Voice of America to produce Russian-language news broadcasts that are aired in Ukraine.
The U.S.-Ukraine defense relationship is transitioning from “crisis-response” to an enduring partnership aimed at developing more capable, NATO-interoperable Ukrainian Armed Forces.
This partnership is intended to help Ukraine’s 100,000-strong security forces effectively preserve and enforce its territorial integrity, deepen defense institutional reforms, and improve processes for developing defense requirements and managing resources.
In 2015, the United States announced a comprehensive $335 million bilateral security assistance package for Ukraine for FY2016, bringing total committed United States security assistance to more than $600 million since 2014.
In February 2015, Lieutenant General Ben Hodges announced that a United States Army battalion had been training Ukrainian forces in Poland, including on how to operate against Russian electronic warfare and how to protect themselves from Russian and rebel artillery.
On July 28, 2016, 24 RQ-11B Raven Unmanned Aircraft Systems (comprised of 72 aircraft and associated equipment) arrived in Ukraine.
The Raven UAV System is a hand-launched reconnaissance and surveillance tool.
The system transmits live airborne video images and location information to a ground control station.
This capability can provide day or night aerial intelligence and enables operators to navigate, recognize terrain, and record information for analysis.
The Raven system is part of the European Reassurance Initiative package and ongoing security assistance efforts in Ukraine.
Several dozen Ukrainian soldiers already have completed training on Raven UAVs in Huntsville, Alabama.
The Multinational Joint Commission on Defense Reform and Security Cooperation with Ukraine , led by the United States in partnership with Canada, Lithuania, and the United Kingdom, also assesses Ukrainian requirements and prioritizes training, equipment, and advisory initiatives.
The United States and Ukraine also host two military exercises each year in Ukraine—a ground forces peacekeeping exercise and a naval exercise in the Black Sea.
These exercises seek to enhance interoperability and strengthen regional security through realistic training, while also sending an important signal of reassurance to Ukraine and 84 Op. cit.
Ukraine also participates in other U.S.-hosted exercises elsewhere in Europe.
In early September 2016, Secretary of Defense Ash Carter met with Ukrainian Minister of Defense Stepan Poltorak and signed a bilateral partner concept that provides a framework for the United States and Ukraine to enhance the defense capacity of Ukraine’s military forces, advance critical Ukrainian defense reforms, improve resource management processes, and boost defense technology cooperation.
Secretary Carter also named General John Abizaid , former CENTCOM commander, as a senior defense adviser to Ukraine for military affairs and modernization.
In April 2014, President Obama signed into law H.R. 4152, which authorized aid to help Ukraine carry out reforms; provided security assistance to Ukraine and other Central and Eastern European countries; and required the President to impose visa bans and asset seizures against persons in Ukraine and Russia who were responsible for violence or for undermining the peace, security, stability, sovereignty, or territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Some Members of Congress have expressed support for going beyond the nonlethal support given by the United States so far to provide “defensive weapons” such as man-portable anti-tank weapons.
The legislation addresses the ongoing crisis in Ukraine by clarifying the position of the United States on Russia’s illegal occupation of Crimea, tightening sanctions on Russia, and addressing new options to provide support for Ukraine.
H.R. 5094 would link any sanctions relief to Russia fulfilling its obligations under the Minsk Agreement, and it would make Crimea-related sanctions permanent so long as the Russian occupation there continues.
The legislation would also tighten sanctions enforcement with a new anti-evasion framework and require regular reports on ha nk s illegally controlling Ukrainian assets—particularly Russian ha nk s in Crimea.
Outlook The fighting between Russian-supported separatists and the Ukrainian military along the demarcation line continues to flare up at times, resulting in continued fatalities and casualties.
As noted, July 2016 was the most lethal month in almost a year for the Ukrainian military.
Another truce initiated in September essentially lasted one week before the shelling from the separatists started up again.
These flare-ups in fighting, despite the attempts to carryout long-term cease fires and troop withdrawals, have been seen as another indication that the Kremlin-supported separatists have no intention of honoring the cease-fire provisions of the Minsk-2 agreement.
In addition, according to the OSCE Monitoring Mission in eastern Ukraine, very few, if any, of the rebel-held Russian medium and heavy military weapons have been completely withdrawn, and there have been periodic reports that weapons and ammunition continue to cross into eastern Ukraine from Russia.
Some are concerned however, that heavy fighting could resume in late November if the so-called “roadmap” Kyiv agreed to present is not favorable to the separatists or Moscow.
Others suggest fighting could increase in January, if as expected the EU extends its sanctions on Russia for another six or 12 months.
First, the prolonged discord at the beginning of 2016 over how to replace Yatsenyuk, create a new government, and avoid national elections served to stymie the political process and fueled doubts among the public regarding the reform agenda.
Prime Minister Groysman, who came into office with little public confidence in the government’s willingness to seriously tackle the root causes of much of the country’s corruption, has shown a relatively strong commitment to enact serious reforms and has proven not to be intimidated by those who oppose those reforms.
The potential for a significant period of instability and the possible necessity of a new national election in 2016 seemed to have been avoided by early summer.
Nevertheless, the government in Kyiv was hit by mid-summer with several new developments, which required Groysman to deal with these additional challenges to his government.
Recent attempts by some to stall the reforms have presented additional challenges to the reform agenda, which must be overcome.
The second internal challenge appears to be a growing gap between those individuals, particularly inside Ukraine, who do not want to implement parts of the Minsk-2 agreement—particularly by amending the Ukrainian constitution—or to accommodate the separatists at all until the separatists fulfill their responsibilities to Minsk-2 and those, under pressure from the outside, who want to keep the process moving forward as long as the other side appears willing to do so.
This dilemma for Poroshenko and Groysman could serve to weaken European resolve to continue to impose sanctions on Russia, even though the sanctions were initially imposed in reaction to Russia’s annexation of Crimea and its activities in eastern Ukraine, and not because of the Minsk2 agreement.
The separatist rebels in the Donbas do not seem to be moving forward in implementing their parts of the Minsk-2 agreement.
Although elections are supposed to take place in the disputed territory, 90 See statement of Representative Eliot Engel before the House Foreign Affairs Committee, July 14, 2016.
This, of course, could change as Putin and his supporters try to stir up political chaos in Kyiv or conclude that the mood of European countries and United States to support Kyiv is diminishing and that Europe may not at some point continue to impose sanctions on Russia.
He could conclude that for the West, progress—however imperfect—would nevertheless be progress, and that would be good enough for Putin’s overall plans for Ukraine.
Some of this thinking inside the Kremlin seems to be paying off, as some European leaders have suggested that sanctions could be incrementally reduced as individual elements of the Minsk-2 agreement, rather than its entirety, are achieved.
Throughout the summer of 2016, observers were concerned that the internal political dynamics in Kyiv and the continued conflict in the east would make it more difficult for the Groysman government to address meaningful political reform, attack corruption, and promote economic growth.
Those concerns have been partially addressed as the government, however slowly, has moved forward with a reform agenda that appears to be gaining momentum.
However, if the current government shows weakness or loses its base of power and thus its ability to get things done, a new political crisis could arise among the frustrated general public, including calls for new national elections.
The public has long been skeptical of the ability of the government to significantly address the problems facing the country.
Recent public opinion polls show the government continues to suffer from low support, with the opposition parties gaining strength.
Any new political crisis could also result in a slowing of the talks over the implementation of Minsk-2 and further movement toward a “frozen conflict” in the east, which could further hinder Ukraine’s economic and political consolidation, as well as its integration with the West.
On the other hand, a period of political stability and progress in the economic and reform efforts of the Groysman government, despite the continued conflict in the east, could also cause problems for Kyiv.
There was renewed fear in Kyiv and elsewhere that the summer of 2016 could have presented new challenges for Kyiv and the West.
Some felt that with Putin’s objectives in Syria well on their way to being realized, Putin could turn his attention back to Ukraine.
With successful progress on reform, the EU’s decision to renew sanctions on Russia until 2017, and the NATO Summit in Warsaw endorsing new military deployments in Eastern Europe, Putin could have reacted by stirring trouble in eastern Ukraine.
The recent death of one of the more prominent separatist officials could still trigger an increase in the conflict.
Moscow has not reacted well to Europe’s continued sanctions or to recent NATO statements in support of Eastern Europe.
Putin and his allies, faced with actual reform successes in Kyiv, could be forced to react in some way to protect his position at home.
For instance, the Kremlin’s disinformation efforts could be increased, along with support channeled to opposition political groups intended to stir the skeptical public, thus placing pressure on the Groysman government.
Putin also could, for instance, support an increase in fighting in eastern Ukraine.
Both options would pose substantial risks for the interests of the United States and the EU to promote stability, security, and economic development in Ukraine.
United States Sanctions After an initial round of sanctions imposed on Russia for its annexation of Crimea and military activity in eastern Ukraine, the United States and the EU continued to add additional travel freezes, visa restrictions, and economic sanctions on Russia for its failure to cease its support for the pro-separatists’ actions in the Donbas regions of eastern Ukraine.
The companies appear to have been chosen due to their links to sanctioned persons in Putin’s inner circle, such as energy trader Genneddy Timche nk o and bankers Arkady and Boris Rotenberg, or to Bank Rossiya.
On September 1, 2016, the Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control updated the Specially Designated Nationals List and the Sectoral Sanctions Identifications List to target sanctions evasion and other activities related to the conflict in Ukraine.
Included in the new sanctions were some 37 individuals, as well as multiple subsidiaries of Russian gas giant Gazprom, some 18 companies operating in Crimea, including a number of defense and shipbuilding firms, 11 Crimean officials, and 7 companies directly involved in the construction of the 11-mile road-and-rail connection across the Kerch Strait in Crimea.
