I am officially confused by the outcome of Ukrainian election polling about Poroshenko vs.
A friend said to me, “Polling suggests Zelenskiy will win which is bizarre.
A lot of people are waiting for presidential debates to finally see what Z has to offer.
People appreciate what P has done in terms of foreign policy & army, but he has failed on internal reforms a lot and now before 2nd round is working on his mistakes.
Based on negative media coverage, Tetyana Stadnyuk shared the following figures.
We have seen the same intensely negative media coverage of Trump since mid-2015, continuing through today.
In light of those numbers, the negativism shown towards Poroshenko makes more sense.
Piontkovsky again warns about Russia’s first use nuclear warfighting doctrine and its false assumptions about de-escalation, and has some choice words for Western commentators showing even the slightest weakness to Russia – he is right, as this regime will exploit any opportunity it sees without any hesitation.
Russia’s conscription debate – this may become moot as the demographic collapses and money runs out.
Blogger comments on the collapse of Russia’s aerospace industry, mostly as a result of losing access to Ukrainian industry.
Some interesting samples of Russian propaganda and its support in the West.
Pres Poroshenko arrives at the stadium to debate Zelenskiy, who refuses to attend.
The debate becomes a one-sided 90-minute election pitch by Poroshenko, well worth watching, possibly one of his best performances to date, and multi-lingual as well.
He invites Zelenskiy to attend a talk show event and explain his policies.
Many analytical articles on the election, especially by Euromaidan authors.
More on the hacked data suggesting possible Russian funding for Zelenskiy.
Four Kyiv MPs pressure MoD for Zelenskiy’s military records, a summary of which was released by the MoD on Saturday, reluctantly, as it appears that Zelenskiy ignored four military reserves call up notices sent in 2014 and 2015, yet inexplicably was not prosecuted for evading his reservist call up.
Butusov lambasts the Military Prosecutor’s office for dereliction of duty in not charging Zelenskiy with avoiding his compulsory military call up – which a great many others were jailed for.
Zelenskiy complains about Poroshenko supporters labeling him a junkie, and attributes this to Poroshenko, Poroshenko at today’s non-debate pointed out he had no evidence of this and never claimed that Zelenskiy was a junkie, for the fourth time.
Most notable analysis item on the election is by editor in chief of LB.ua, Koshkina, who cites inside sources in Poroshenko’s team who are convinced, based on polling data, that Zelenskiy will win the second election round in a landslide, as Poroshenko had not attuned his advertising and campaign focus to Russian speaking Ukrainians in Southern, Central and Eastern Ukraine, and did not appeal to younger audiences.
Her analysis includes a long list of things Poroshenko should do before the final vote.
While the polls were dead accurate on the first round of the election, we have seen much less polling data on the second round, so it is unclear whether Zelenskiy’s position is as unassailable as claimed, and whether he can afford to thumb his nose at debates and other political activities that are usually expected by voters before they make up their minds.
Moscow in a couple of months will be able to break the unity of the North Atlantic alliance.
Jon Huntsman, the United States ambassador to Russia, spoke to Irina Lagunina of RFE/RL’s Russian Service in Prague on April 12.
Huntsman raised concerns about the recent arrests of members of religious minorities in Russia, and shared hopes for the democratic outcome of the presidential election in Ukraine.
Maintaining sanctions against Russia is one of the matters on which both major United States political parties agree. — Ukrinform.
Moscow’s Basmanny Court has approved a petition for Michael Calvey, the founder of the investment firm Baring Vostok, to be placed under house arrest after spending almost two months in a pretrial detention center.
Interfax reported that Calvey was released from the control of his guards on the spot in the courtroom.
Igor Korotchenko, editor of Moscow’s National Defense journal, says that the draft won’t completely disappear, but it will “simply be minimized” as an element of the formation of the army.
Russia needs “the mobilized reserve” that draftees can serve in the event of a military conflict.
And therefore, he argues, Russia must have a military based on both the draft and the recruitment of professionals.
Over the next several decades, Korotchenko says, this principle will not be changed fundamentally.
Instead, “the number of draftees will simply be reduced to a certain figure which will be defined by the General Staff of the Russian Federation.
But geography and tradition are not the only reasons the draft will continue.
A draftee who is paid 2,000 rubles a month is a lot less expensive than a professional soldier who must be paid 25,000 to 35,000 rubles a month, the military commentator says; and that doesn’t include the additional supports and benefits the latter must receive in order to make such service attractive.
According to Baranets, Putin likely has in mind retaining a “symbolic” draft of about 50,000 a year, a number that would be about a sixth of the current call up.
The General Staff could tolerate that if it received enough money to fund the professionals who would be needed as replacements.
The Russian military has already made progress in that direction, the commentator says.
Before 2016, the number of soldiers and officers who were draftees was about the same as the number of contract professional.
Now the balance has shifted to 260,000 draftees as against 370,000 professionals.
But at some point in the future, probably not very soon, Viktor Litovkin, a retired colonel, tells the URA news agency, the draft in Russia will disappear.
But that will happen only once the Russian economy turns around and there is enough money to pay for the far more expensive professional force.
The Russian aircraft industry has lost its competitiveness and is spending “insane money” on the import substitution technology of half a century ago, not paying due attention to maintaining current production and maintaining existing technology.
With such a statement at a working meeting of the State Duma on the legal support of the development of organizations of the military-industrial complex , Anatoly Serdyukov, who oversees the integration of UAC in Rostec, was made, RBC reports.
I’m not even talking about quality, because it’s practically impossible to work out qualitatively on small volumes.
I can say that Airbus launched a new project, the A-350, produces 16 jets a month.
The former Russian defense minister noted that there are practically no bearings in the Russian aviation industry.
In January, the head of Roscosmos, Dmitry Rogozin, explained the failures of the Khrunichev Center, which is the most problematic enterprise of the state corporation, a consequence of the reforms of the military-industrial complex, initiated by Serdyukov.
In July 2018, Roskosmos responded to the statement by the director of the Rostec aviation cluster, Anatoly Serdyukov, who was Russia’s defense minister in 2007-2012, about competition for the production of Soyuz-2 engines.
The Prosecutor General’s Office did not allow the Ministry of Industry and Trade to replace the Ukrainian Be-200 amphibious aircraft with Ukrainian-made engines for engines with components from NATO countries, according to the report of the Prosecutor General Yury Chaika on the state of law and order in the Russian Federation in 2018.
The Prosecutor General’s Office informed the Ministry the risk of disrupting the defense order due to the imposed sanctions, “the report says.
The position of the supervisory authority was taken into account, the decision to actually replace one foreign engine with another has been canceled, the prosecutor general said.
On the whole, the measures taken by the department, the Chaika report notes, made it possible to reduce the dependence of defense companies on foreign components when implementing the state armament program until 2027 and to create an effective system for monitoring the implementation of a set of import-replacement plans by these enterprises.
Comments Engine replacement has always existed only in the inflamed embryo of the Katsapsky brain.
New engine is a new aircraft, new work, new certification, new spending, new time, new deadlines.
If it weren’t for the French SaM-146, then the Katsapa state services would not fly on choosing An-148, or rather flew and fly.
Further – CaM is not suitable, since 436TP is special technologies with protection against sea water.
Further – for the sake of the Russian Federation, it is not rational to make a new plane.
We are already silent about the fact that the Be-200 is generally a failed project, created by another scoop.
Like everything else, Katsapov has a rejection of Ukrainian engines, turbines, rockets, x-35. s300 / 400, aircraft, rvsn, sea launch.
And for that you need to give medals to the organizer of the scheme in Ukraine.
But the Russian Federation was not able to organize the delivery of critical components from Ukraine with gray schemes. – Set off to the Ministry of Industry and Trade, the Security Service of Ukraine and something else. – Glory to Ukraine.
The network has a video on which Russian soldiers are trying to place a tank on the pontoon, and it drops.
On August 1 of that year after meeting with Mikhail Gorbachev in Moscow, the American leader told Ukrainians that “the pursuit of independence is a form of suicidal nationalism,” a reflection of the West’s approach to the Moscow-centered state then and to the Moscow-centered state now, Ukrainian commentator Pavel Podobed says.
In the weeks that followed Bush’s remarks, the national movements in the USSR proved to be far stronger than the democratic opposition.
The Soviet Union crumbled and despite the hopes of the West, neither Russia nor most of the successor states became democratic in more than name only.
Unfortunately, Podobed continues, this tradition continues and not just in the West.
First, Ukraine like the West in 1991 and now overrates the possibilities of the democratic opposition in Russia.
It is not nearly as strong as many want to believe; and despite Putin’s campaign against the non-Russians, the latter have greater potential than most think.
Second, when Ukraine or the West think about the nationality issue in Russia, they focus on the North Caucasus, which puts them off.
On the one hand, the region is violent; and on the other, it is Islamic.
And for both of these reasons, neither Kyiv nor Western capitals shy away from giving it support.
And third, Moscow has successfully presented itself as a defender of national rights by a clever strategy of appearing to support the micro-nations under its control, peoples like the Saami or Izhors, while it does everything in its power to assimilate and weaken larger nations like the Tatars that might threaten its control.
Ukraine needs to focus on the Middle Volga and especially on Tatarstan which despite the weakening of its national movement still represents a serious “headache” for Moscow given its central location and the continued influence of Tatar nationalists both at home and in emigration.
Most people assume that Idel-Ural cannot go anywhere because it does not border on a foreign state, but that is a mistake because the fact that none of its component parts does is the product of Moscow’s imperial strategy rather than some natural phenomenon, Podobed suggests.
Thus arose the Orenburg corridor which divided the two republics” from each other, the Ukrainian commentator continues.
What Podobed doesn’t mention but that may matter a lot is that northern Kazakhstan is becoming ever more Kazakh and Orenburg is becoming ever less Russian.
According to a poll by the Russian Center for the Study of Public Opinion , which was published in late January, the trust rating for Vladimir Putin has reached its lowest level in the last 13 years.
Currently, only 33% of respondents express trust in the Russian president.
The number of Russians supporting Putin’s foreign policy also fell in 2018, but a number of Russian opposition politicians warned that the polls do not show sharp changes in the Russians’ opinion of the president’s foreign policy.
Indeed, many commentators point out that the majority of Russians are tired of aggressive militaristic propaganda.
However, at least several groups of people who support Russia’s aggressive foreign policy can still be identified.
They can be divided into several categories, each of which expresses direct or veiled support for the current foreign policy course.
I will try to analyze these categories, identifying possible pros and cons in working with these groups of people.
Dedicated to Vladimir Lenin Lenin’s Mausoleum ) , also known as Lenin’s Tomb, situated in Red Square in the centre of Moscow, is a mausoleum that currently serves as the resting place of Soviet leader Vladimir Lenin.
His preserved body has been on public display there since shortly after his death in 1924, with rare exceptions in wartime.
Alexey Shchusev’s diminutive but monumental granite structure incorporates some elements from ancient mausoleums, such as the Step Pyramid, the Tomb of Cyrus the Great and, to some degree, Temple of the Inscriptions.
The findings of the UK Forensic Explosives Laboratory confirmed those of the Polish Sub-Commission on the Investigation of the Smolensk Plane Crash, where on April 10, 2010, President of Poland Lech Kaczynski and about a hundred high-ranking Polish officials died.
Head of the Sub-Commission, Antoni Macierewicz, citing the study’s findings, says the cause of the crash was a series of explosions as traces of TNT were discovered.
The cause of ex-Polish President Lech Kaczyński’s plane crash near Smolensk was an explosion, said the chairman of the subcommittee on the re-investigation of the Smolensk disaster Antoni Macierewicz.
He confirmed once again that the crash of the Tu-154M in April 2010 was not caused by a pilot error or the actions of other people on board.
According to Macierewicz, in Britain, it was established that TNT was used in the explosion, traces of which were found in the rubble.
We have not defined the nature of the explosion,” he was quoted as saying on Polish Radio.
The announcement was made on the basis of previous research and the conclusions of the sub-commission, Macierewicz added.
Polish President Lech Kaczyński, the crew, and members of the official delegation traveling to an event commemorating the 70th anniversary of the Katyn massacre.
In January 2011, the Interstate Aviation Committee ,, published a report on the crash investigation, according to which the pilots were responsible for the catastrophe, since they rejected the advice to go to an alternate airport, despite the unfavorable weather conditions.
The inadequate qualification of the crew is stated to be the indirect cause of the crash.
A commission led by former Polish defense minister Antoni Macierewicz refuted the theory that the pilots were to blame.
Just before the landing strip, there were several emergencies, and then, while the plane was still in the air, an explosion in the aircraft’s fuselage.
Furthermore, the commission determined that the operators in Smolensk gave the Polish Tu-154 crew incorrect information for landing.
The commission also ruled out the possibility that Polish Air Force General Andrzej Błasik was in the cockpit during the landing approach.
Macierewicz said that the technical report, which, according to him, does not yet reflect the official stance of the Polish government, has been given to the Prosecutor General’s Office, which is conducting its own investigation into the aviation catastrophe.
Russia has been unwilling to send the aircraft fragments and other physical evidence to Poland, claiming that the Russian investigation is not yet complete.
Colonel Nikolay Poroskov explains it all in the February issue of the Russian Armed Forces monthly journal for research and discussion, the Armeyskiy Sbornik.
Anyone mastering the means of metacontact can, for instance, perform a non-verbal interrogation.
Colonel Poroskov describes how the method was fine-tuned on dolphins, which eventually yielded to the willpower of the Russian soldiers.
But the technology proved applicable also on humans, and even on machines.
With the willpower it is possible to, for instance, hack computer programmes, burn crystals in generators, eavesdrop or jam radio signals or telecommunications.
Experiments demonstrated successfully the possibility to read documents in locked safes, even in foreign languages we don’t know.
It was possible to identify members of terror groups and discover whoever was considering joining a terrorist organisation.
The West’s way of doing things is “losing its attractiveness and is no more viewed as a perfect model for all,” Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said.
No War, No NATO will centre on the key relationship between US-NATO military operations directed against targeted countries and the imposition of far-reaching neoliberal economic reforms both before and in the wake of US-NATO military interventions.
This article will also address the dangers and consequences of a Third World War as well the nature of advanced weapons systems deployed by the broader US-NATO coalition.
Europeans should not rely on Americans to spend, fight, and die for them.
For years presidents, secretaries of defense, secretaries of state, and other officials have demanded, begged, insisted, requested, whined, and urged NATO’s European members to do more.
Nevertheless, as a percentage of GDP, the continent’s military expenditures remain below those of seven years ago.
That number fell to 1. percent in 2014; it was only slightly higher 1.47 percent last year.
Primary responsibility for that increase is Russia’s aggressive behavior toward Ukraine, which sparked a slight bump in allied expenditures.
Additionally, that increase started well before President Trump took office.
The only policy change which would make a difference is for the United States to end Europe’s military dependency and turn responsibility for Europe’s defense over to Europe.
With ten times the economic strength and four times the population of Russia, the continent is well able to defend itself.
European governments then could spend as much or as little as desired on the military, free of hectoring by Washington.
America and Europe still could cooperate militarily on shared interests.
Should an unexpected hegemonic threat arise, the United States could reengage.
But after seventy years of NATO, the American people should declare their work in Europe done.
It is time for the Europeans to take over responsibility for their security.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko stated that at a meeting with French President Emmanuel Macron he had discussed the issue of Ukrainian political prisoners held in Russia and in certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk regions, and also announced a new initiative to free Ukrainian journalist Roman Sushchenko convicted in Russia.
During the meetings with German Chancellor Angela Merkel and President of France Emmanuel Macron on April 12, President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko raised the issue of release of Ukrainian sailors – prisoners of war, political prisoners and violation of rights of Crimean Tatars. — Ukrinform.
They must be returned home immediately and unconditionally along with the military property.
The freedom of navigation in the Kerch Strait must be restored,” Poroshenko said in an interview with Ukrainian TV channels.
The Head of State also raised the issue of the release of political prisoners, who are currently held in prisons in Russia and in the occupied territories.
The issue of Paris-based Ukrinform correspondent Roman Sushchenko was also discussed during the meetings with the European leaders, Poroshenko noted.
And Emmanuel clearly stated that in the near future we would come up with the initiative again for Putin to keep his word, release Ukrainian Sushchenko so that he can return home as soon as possible,” Petro Poroshenko said.
We resolutely start to prepare for the summit in the Normandy format, and these issues will definitively be on the agenda,” Petro Poroshenko emphasized.
More than 70 Ukrainian political prisoners are being held in Russia and in the occupied Crimea, including Ukrinform journalist Roman Sushchenko, who was sentenced to 12 years in a maximum security penal colony for alleged spying.
Ukraine continues its struggle to halt the construction of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline said President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko, at a briefing with Angela Merkel, reports Interfax-Ukraine.
The President of Ukraine noted that the Nord Stream 2 is not a new topic in discussions between the European Union, Germany and Ukraine.
On April 1, Moody’s rating agency confirmed the Chief Executive Officer of Ukrainian state energy company Naftogaz, Andriy Kobolyev’s statement about the delay in the Nord Stream gas pipeline construction due to Denmark’s position.
In addition, the Danish Energy Agency asked Nord Stream 2 AG to prepare an environmental assessment of an alternative gas pipeline in the Danish exclusive economic zone.
Previously, Denmark refused to agree on the Nord Stream 2 route, which was supposed to pass through its territory.
The construction of this gas pipeline has been at the center of international attention since Russia annexed Crimea in 2014.
Germany is trying to convince other countries to support Nord Stream 2, since it will pass through the Baltic Sea, connecting Russian suppliers with consumers in Europe.
He made a corresponding statement during a working visit to the French Republic, the press service of the Head of State reports.
When Ukraine itself does not demonstrate the resolve of its move forward,” Petro Poroshenko said during a live broadcast on Inter TV channel, answering the question whether things could change in the relations between Ukraine and the EU after the elections.
According to him, the number of foreign observers in the elections, including from France and from Germany, exceeded 2,300 people.
At the same time, Petro Poroshenko noted that during the campaign there were tough discussions and expressed hope that we would manage to avoid provocations.
No one will turn us back and return to the previous conditions when we were a colony of the Russian Federation.
A free Ukraine will certainly not allow doing that,” Petro Poroshenko summed up.
Possible attempts to stop Ukraine’s entry into NATO and the EU would violate the Ukrainian constitution, considering that such membership is formalized by the fundamental law and is mandatory for all power branches, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko told the press during his working visit to France.
During their meeting in Berlin on Friday, President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko and Chancellor of Germany Angela Merkel coordinated actions on the possibility of the prompt return of 24 Ukrainian sailors who had been captured by Russia in the Black Sea neutral waters near the Kerch Strait in November 2018.
Also, the German Chancellor stressed the need to ensure free navigation through the Kerch Strait.
The European Union has removed nine persons close to fugitive ex-President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych from its anti-Russian sanctions list.
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the European Union Mykola Tochytskyi has denied information about the lifting of sanctions by the European Union against persons close to fugitive ex-President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych and involved in the violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty.
Tochytskyi says that, on the contrary, the EU has significantly expanded the sanctions list for five years.
Ukrainian ships will continue navigation through the Kerch Strait, stated Ukrainian Defence Minister Stepan Poltorak during the 12th Kyiv Security Forum.
The Defense Minister stated that abandoning the navigation through the Kerch strait would mean that Ukraine surrenders the Sea of Azov and its territory.
According to him, Ukrainian vessels will pass through the Kerch Strait when the Navy and the international partners of Ukraine are ready for this.
I hope that the safe passage will be ensured exactly this way,” said Poltorak, as quoted by UNIAN news agency.
On April 10, the Russian Federation Council urged Ukraine to follow the Russian procedures for passage of ships through the Kerch Strait.
Sea Shield 2019, an annual Romanian-led naval exercise, continued in the Black Sea on April 12.
The exercise, which began on April 5, involved more than 20 ships and crews from Romania, Bulgaria, Canada, Greece, the Netherlands, and Turkey.
Five ships from a standing NATO maritime group participated in the exercise.
The exercises took place amid increased tensions in the Black Sea region after Russia’s capture of three Ukrainian naval vessels in November.
The peninsula had disappeared from the first pages of international media outlets long ago.
The only ones who stir up the information wave come from inside the occupied peninsula – a group of civic journalists who put themselves on the line to prevent their homeland from becoming an isolated island of lawlessness.
Just after Crimea was annexed by Russia, the peninsula became more and more isolated and information became nearly inaccessible.
The Crimean Tatar TV channel ATR worked under the blows of security officials for several days and then its newsroom was forced to move to Kyiv at the end of spring 2014.
The stifling of media pluralism, the closure of Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar media, and criminal cases launched against Ukrainian journalists make information from Crimea completely inaccessible.
But, with rare exceptions, their information follows the narrative “happy return of Crimea to the homeland.
Every Thursday, law enforcement raids the homes of Crimean Tatars, the indigenous population of Crimea which overwhelmingly opposed Russian occupation.
Over fifty people have been arrested because of disagreeing with the regime.
Thanks to some voices, especially those broadcast through social networks, it’s possible to seek out a more complex picture of the situation in the peninsula and at least partially break the silence.
We collected the voices of our colleagues – civil journalists in Crimea.
On 27 March at 6 AM, hundreds of armed police operatives parked their cars near some 50 houses in a Crimean Tatar village.
Masked men with dogs barged inside kitchens and bedrooms, searching for banned literature in houses of the ethnic Muslims.
As a result, during the first day, 20 people were arrested, and the next day, three more Crimean Tatars were arrested and beaten during an FSB operation in the Russian city of Rostov-on-Don.
Over the past day, April 13, Russian proxy forces in eastern Ukraine fourteen times violated the ceasefire.
Russia-led forces on April 13 mounted six attacks on the Ukrainian army’s positions in Donbas, including once with the use of weapons proscribed by the Minsk agreements.
No Ukrainian army casualties have been reported from the start of the day.
Occupation forces fired on the Armed Forces’ positions in Donbas 14 times over the past 24 hours, one soldier had been killed, two more wounded, the press center of the Joint Forces Operation has reported.
Russia’s hybrid military forces in the past 24 hours mounted 14 attacks on Ukrainian army positions in Donbas, with one Ukrainian soldier reported as killed in action, and another two as wounded in action.
Two invaders were killed and another three were wounded on Friday, intelligence reports say.
On April 12, Russian occupation forces launched 14 attacks, using weapons banned under the Minsk agreements seven times, on Ukrainian troops in the Joint Forces Operation area in Donbas.
One Ukrainian soldier was killed and two more were wounded. — Ukrinform.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko, who is now running for re-election, signed a decree dismissing first deputy head of SZRU, the Ukrainian Foreign Intelligence Service, Serhiy Semochko.
The official has long been in public focus over journalists’ allegations of illegal enrichment and possible connections with Russia.
Poroshenko made the announcement as he spoke in front of journalists and supporters at the Olimpiyskiy Stadium.
The aggressor country has increased its military potential in the occupied Crimea and has launched its troops into Belarus.
Thus, Moscow has the potential to attack Ukraine from the south-east and from the north.
According to former deputy head of the General Staff of the Armed Forces, Lieutenant-General of the stock Igor Romanenko, says Tsensor.
According to him, Russia substantially increased its military potential in Crimea, bringing it to a strategic level.
As a result, if you look at the map, you can see that Ukraine is actually surrounded by Russia on three sides,” Romanenko added.
According to the former chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces, Russian troops were brought to Belarus last year on the pretext of establishing a common air defense system in Russia and Belarus.
This corridor will be necessary for Russia to allow Russian troops to enter Ukraine from In addition, for Russia this is a strategic direction, because it is the shortest distance to the capital of Ukraine – Kiev “, – warned Romanenko.
He also reminded that although the Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu in 2014 promised that Russia would return Ukraine all military equipment from the occupied Crimea, neither the ships nor the airplanes returned.
As a result, the fact that we were returned was suitable except for dismantling for spare parts”, – summed up the expert.
Some 35 Hummer combat vehicles have arrived in Odesa from the United States, they will be sent to combat units on the collision line, Ukrainian Defense Minister Stepan Poltorak has said.
According to the military official, this year inspires optimism regarding the fulfillment of the state defense order.
Vizar in Ukraine were manufacturing subassemblies for the 48N6 SAM until June 2014, and also overhauling and repairing up to dozens of R-27 AA-10 ALAMO AAMs for Russian defense contractors.
A man has been arrested on suspicion of attempting to murder police officers after a car was allegedly driven straight at them outside the Ukrainian embassy.
Armed officers were responding to reports the Mercedes had repeatedly rammed into the Ukraine ambassador’s official vehicle in Holland Park.
London police have fired gunshots at a man who rammed into a diplomatic car parked outside Ukraine’s Embassy, and then tried to drive into officers.
President of Canada-Ukraine International Assistance Fund Antonina Kumka says the Ukrainian Cultural Center, located in the city of Hamilton, near Toronto, has been destroyed as a result of the fire.
The Ukrainian presidential administration is accrediting the press to cover presidential candidate Petro Poroshenko’s attendance of the debate at the Olympiysky Stadium in Kyiv on April 14.
The Presidential Administration of Ukraine has announced presidential candidate Petro Poroshenko’s attendance of the debate at Kyiv’s Olimpiyskiy Stadium on April 14, ahead of the second round of the elections.
Today, April 14, the fifth Ukrainian President and presidential candidate for the second term in office Petro Poroshenko will arrive at NSC Olympiysky.
The visit of the President is connected with the pre-election debates with presidential candidate Volodymyr Zelensky.
However, most likely, the debates will be the monologue of the President, as the candidates have not reached an agreement concerning the date of the debates.
The headquarters of candidates for presidency Volodymyr Zelensky and Petro Poroshenko did not come up with a compromise on the holding of the debates at Olympic Stadium.
On April 3, Zelensky replied to Poroshenko’s invitation to participate in debates and put forward his conditions.
A few hours later Poroshenko changed his mind and agreed to participate in the debates.
On April 7, Poroshenko stated that he waits for Volodymyr Zelensky on April 14 at Olympic Stadium.
In his turn, Zelensky reported that he wants to hold the debates with Poroshenko on April 19 at Olympic Stadium.
On April 10, Olympic Stadium reported that it got two applications for holding debates from two presidential candidates Volodymyr Zelensky and Petro Poroshenko.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has arrived at Olimpiyskiy Stadium in Kyiv for a presidential election debate even though his challenger, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has said he will only agree to spar with Poroshenko at the stadium five days later.
Poroshenko is to face Zelenskiy in Ukraine’s presidential runoff on April 21.
Zelenskiy won the first round earlier this month by a large margin, and most, if not all, opinion polls put him well out in front of the incumbent ahead of the final vote.
President Petro Poroshenko, who came to the presidential debates at the NSC “Olympic” , agreed to wait for his competitor Volodymyr Zelensky, who did not appear before them, until 15:00.
We wait for Mr Zelensky, Volodymyr Alexandrovich, till 15 o’clock, I firmly believe that you are watching us now.
You, I hope, have already returned from Paris, have rested and, with new forces, are ready to embark on a key element of democracy – debate, until 15:00, “Poroshenko said.
Instead, Poroshenko held a press conference responding to journalists’ questions.
I’m sorry that people in this area also did not answer these questions,” – said Poroshenko.
Poroshenko expressed hope that the debate that Zelensky’s headquarters intends to organize on the NSC “Olimpiyskiy” on April 19 will be canceled and instead he will come to the TV debates on the Public TV channel.
After communicating with journalists, Poroshenko went to his supporters and invited them to be photographed at the stadium.
Presidential candidate and incumbent head of state Petro Poroshenko said that if, “God forbid”, showman Volodymyr Zelensky, will be elected president of Ukraine, he will respect the people’s choice.
As UNIAN reported, Poroshenko arrived at the debate on the Olympiyskiy Stadium.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko made a corresponding statement, speaking from the stage on the square in front of the National Sports Complex “Olimpiysky” in Kyiv, where he arrived to participate in the pre-election debate, an Ukrinform correspondent reports.
We are doing everything possible for the country to find out the truth.
Ukraine should elect a real president, a real Supreme Commander-in-Chief, who will continue to lead our country on the path towards the EU and NATO,” the Head of State stressed.
At the same time, another candidate for the post of the President of Ukraine, showman Volodymyr Zelensky did not come to the NSC “Olimpiysky” to participate in the debate.
The President proposed to wait for presidential candidate Zelensky until 15:00.
Let’s wait for Mr Zelensky for 40 minutes, even 45 minutes, until 15:00.
I hope you’ve already returned from Paris and had a rest,” Poroshenko said.
As reported, President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko announced his intention to come to the NSC “Olimpiysky” to participate in the debate at 14:14 on April 14.
At the same time, Volodymyr Zelensky refused to come to the stadium on April 14 and said that he would come there to participate in the debate at 19:00 on April 19.
The incumbent head of state and the presidential candidate Petro Poroshenko said that he would respect any choice of the Ukrainian people, whoever they would vote for in the second round of elections on April 21.
Because we are a democratic state, and there is already no doubt about this, “he noted.
At the same time Poroshenko added that he was concerned about the likely presidency of Zelensky.
How he sees European integration, Euro-Atlantic integration, how he sees the first directions of reforms … For example, I’m concerned that we should now stop European, Euro-Atlantic integration in order to go for a referendum again.
The people now have more than half of NATO’s support and almost 2/3 of EU support.
I think this is a deliberate delay of our way to return our people to the family of European nations, “he said.
Earlier presidential candidate Petro Poroshenko promised to learn the Hungarian language if necessary.
Poroshenko made a statement in response to a question from a Hungarian journalist about the next steps of Ukraine on the path to European integration.
The President noted that he was confident in Hungary’s support and support of Ukraine’s aspirations to join the European Union.
And I named a specific year – 2023nd, when we must sign a membership action plan and when we must fulfill the criteria to apply for EU membership.
And I’m absolutely convinced that Hungary together with other EU member states will support Ukraine just as it was promised many times a few years ago.
We are open to compromises on the rights of the Hungarian minority, their right to education.
As a guarantor of the Constitution and the rights of Ukrainian citizens, I also support the rights of Ukrainian citizens of Hungarian origin to study in Ukrainian schools, Ukrainian universities, work in Ukrainian companies.
And you know that this is impossible if you do not know the Ukrainian language in Ukraine”, the president stressed.
President of Ukraine and presidential candidate Petro Poroshenko promised to learn the Hungarian language if necessary.
He clarified that Ukraine is ready to invest for children of national minorities learning two languages, Ukrainian and native – in particular, Hungarian.
Poroshenko expressed confidence that citizens of the European Union should know several languages.
I understand Romanian, I lived in the place where the Romanian minority lives, for more than two years.
When I was at university, I learned Polish, I speak English, Russian and other languages fluently.
This is the future of a European nation – a European country, when EU citizens should know a lot of languages.
And if it was absolutely necessary, I promise, I would have learned the Hungarian language – at a low level, of course”, the president promised.
The election campaign headquarters of Ukraine’s incumbent President Petro Poroshenko no longer believes its candidate can win and is ceasing its efforts, an inside source told Ukrainian news outlet LB.ua.
In an article by the newspaper’s editor-in-chief Sonia Koshkina, the situation ahead of the second round of voting is described as candidate Volodymyr Zelensky’s blatant mockery of topics that should be treated seriously, constructively and in depth, whereas Poroshenko has launched himself into an aggressive attack.
Objectively, such a significant gap cannot be eliminated in three weeks.
At most, it can be reduced , but even then, only insignificantly,” the article states.
The article’s sources claim that, although they did not expect such results in the first round, after the initial shock, they accepted the failure with relative equanimity.
Furthermore, if we were to beat Zelensky, it would have to be done with a significant lead. to 45, for example.
But definitely not 51 to 49 – many would struggle to believe, and thus to accept that,” one of the insiders explained.
Volunteer activity is already being wrapped up, and the team members are preparing to leave their offices and even planning a holiday.
Several people in Poroshenko’s entourage believe that he should focus on diplomacy, even if he does not obtain any official position in the new government.
Even for the country, there will definitely be a benefit,” a source commented.
Recent opinion polls have shown that the actor Volodymyr Zelensky is likely to beat incumbent Poroshenko by a significant margin in the second round of presidential elections.
By the start of the race – came in complete confidence in being able to win.
Almost a two-fold lag from a comedian actor, Vladimir Zelensky, will not be called otherwise.
Lessons, from which he is determined to draw the substantive conclusions.
Two of the past two, instead of competition, pursued the goals, programs, and development strategies of the country into a base-guilty party with analyzes , video contests , and a tug of debate.
One candidate, having already heard the smell of triumph, frankly favors over all who call him seriously, in depth, and constructive; he will be supported and so – he knows that.
The second, aware of the prospect of losing, rushed into an aggressive attack – appealing to common sense, intimidating Putin , without deflection of black technology.
Zelensky – in 2012, when the parliamentary triumph of white-blue persuaded Victor Fedorovich in his exceptional righteousness, eternity and infallibility.
He allowed himself to focus on “time for pleasure,” and to transfer things to his son.
In 2019, between the two rounds, and in the case of Poroshenko, and Zelensky form won a victory over meaning.
What should not be so much the “sharply green” elector, but – in many respects – the current power.
Including the frustration and fatigue of people from “progressive expats”, the crowds of “young democrats”, “progressive public” and so on.
The gap between the favorites – in absolute numbers – 2. million votes.
Objectively, eliminating such a significant gap in three weeks is impossible.
Sociology is not definitely the truth in the last instance, but the latest figures do not leave hope for Petr Alekseyevich.
And the fall of the meteorite to the ground, and the victory of Petro Poroshenko.
But it’s equally important to figure out which path the fifth President of the country has been in for five years and what mistakes were made already at the final stage – during the electoral race.
When the shock went, it turned out that the core of the team Poroshenko took the failure quite calmly.
Moreover, if we assume that we are defeating Zelensky, this must be done with a serious overvaluation.
But certainly not 51 against 49 – in such a lot it will be hard to believe and, therefore, to accept, “adds.
Perhaps this is precisely why there was no special mobilization on the Bank on April 1.
Thief, where ideas were collectively formulated and discussed, “tasks” “cut”, were not created.
The failure of the first round in the list of “exceptional cases” is obviously not included.
And it’s not just the inclination of the President to make all decisions on his own.
Gryniv literally a few days after March 31 gave his suggestions “how to live next” – only five points.
If, in a word, everyone would be as if in fact, but in and of itself, in his sandbox “describes the insider LB.ua.
And not using them – at least just to strengthen their own positions – is even more dumb.
Now he has to show this” heard “in concrete cases, like the President, he has an instrument.
These days in Europe traditional holidays and many Ukrainian “zabotchane” return home.
Guarantine supporters are for some reason certain that people who have left the country because they can not make decent money here will still vote for the current government.
However, even if so, more than three percent to Petr Alexeiyevich this will not add.
TV – only a channel of delivery of meanings, and if there is nothing to deliver, then even the media empire will not help.
To say, the image of Vasily Goloborodko is simple and understandable to a simple person – there is nothing to counter here.
Yes, in the capital Poroshenko’s result is more or less decent, but Odessa gave a modest nine percent , Kharkiv and a gifted guarantor of the Dnieper – eight.
But we see that the ratings of mayors do not always affect the rating of the President,” – specifies.
Well, that’s fine, let’s say, for Lviv, it’s totally unacceptable for Kherson or Nikolayev.
Also – the metamorphoses that have occurred with the conventionally white-and-white electorate over the past five years.
The fact that Zelensky really defeats is not very believable in the president’s team.
Someone, as was said, packs books, others – plan long-awaited vacations.
The first one we discussed quite thoroughly above, that to the second, here the degree of attention is shifted to the area of ​​party-building.
As you know, the President is an honorary leader of the BPP Solidarity.
He has written an application for the addition of appropriate powers more than two years ago.
Only the Solidarity Congress has not been held since then, so the statement has not been considered.
Given that Klitschko himself intends to re-elect in Kyiv in 2020, in 2019, he will simply formally head the “Dyorovsky” list, bringing to parliament the maximum of supporters.
One more associate of the guarantor, whose cooperation with which in October 2019 in the AP was counted another six months ago – Vladimir Groisman.
Moreover, “sharing” in the public plane, achievements, which they considered their own.
Moreover , he, Vladimir Borisovich, expects to head the Cabinet until December.
Even from a public point of view, the situation is good – the continuity of power, everything.
Even the “rebranding” of the party, eliminating the “binding” of his surname will not help.
According to some of his current colleagues, in the future he should concentrate on diplomatic work.
He’s effective in this, and there will certainly be benefits for the country,” they explain.
In the first round of Ukraine’s 2019 presidential elections, over 30% voted for comic-turned-presidential candidate Volodymyr Zelenskyi, while under 16% supported the incumbent President Petro Poroshenko, who was elected after the Euromaidan revolution sent Viktor Yanukovych fleeing to Russia.
This happened despite the fact that Volodymyr Zelenskyi has zero political experience, is struggling to put together a team and program, avoids live interviews and debates on political issues, and gathered his impressive popularity rating thanks to ample airtime of his comic group Kvartal 95 and the TV series “Servant of the People,” where he plays the president of Ukraine, on the wavelengths of one of Ukraine’s largest TV channels belonging to oligarch Ihor Kolomoyskyi.
This is at least surprising given the fact that Ukrainian society was thought of having matured after Euromaidan.
We met with Iryna Bekeshkina, a Ukrainian sociologist who directs the Ilko Kucheriv “Democratic Initiatives” fund, on the sidelines of the Kyiv Security Forum to understand the Zelenskyi phenomenon amid changes among regular Ukrainians after the revolution of 2013-2014.
I would say that what happened now with Zelenskyi is also a result of Euromaidan.
Because after Euromaidan there was a lot of optimism and hopes that didn’t materialize.
Maybe they were inflated, maybe because the authorities didn’t do all they should.
Ukrainian civic society activated because of the war, because they needed to save Ukraine.
The volunteers, the crowdfunding for the army, this all was there, and it activated civil society significantly.
Apart from that, we asked how many people donated money for different civic activities.
They are hoping that civil society will make everything well, which will achieve everything, they idealize it to a great extent.
In Ukraine, the debate heating up as the country prepares for the second round of presidential elections on 21 April.
The two finalists to the second round, political novice, comic actor Volodymyr Zelenskyi who had taken the lead with over 30%, and incumbent President Petro Poroshenko who is trailing behind with under 16%, have camps of supporters who clash so severely that some fear Ukrainian society is getting irreversibly polarized.
Although both candidates declare their pro-western course, the supporters of Poroshenko accuse Zelenskyi to be tolerant to Russian aggression and unable to withstand Putin, serving oligarch Kolomoyskyi’s interests.
Though the existing evidence of corruption incriminates Poroshenko’s close colleagues who, admittedly, still walk free, and not him directly, this cloud of corruption overshadows any other Poroshenko’s achievements of the last 5 years.
To understand where the real division between two groups of voters lies, let’s look on the most important strengths and faults of candidates, to which their supporters and opponents appeal.
Professionalism The pre-recorded interview of Zelenskyi with journalists of the ICTV channel started with the question “You are in politics already for three months.
Zelenskyi’s opponents point to the irony in this question, arguing that a person with three months of political experience can’t be a president.
He was an MP in the Verkhovna Rada several times, the secretary of the National Security and Defense Council , and the minister of Foreign Affairs during Yushchenko’s presidency.
He also was Minister of Economic Development and Trade at the time of Viktor Yanukovych’s presidency.
Being one of the Ukrainian oligarchs himself, Poroshenko is blamed to be from the old system, unable to break up old personal ties and implement reforms with required passion.
Indeed, if the goal is to change tge staff, not policies, three months of political experience may be enough for Zelenskyi.
However, a candidate should have at least a basic understanding of presidential responsibilities and constitutional powers.
For a long time, Zelenskyi’s opponents found it hard to accuse Zelenskyi of being ignorant about politics in a fact-based manner.
According to the famous philosophical rule, there is no possibility to prove the absence of something and to speak in any way about nothingness.
The same went for Zelenskyi — he hasn’t told much about his future policies and hasn’t shown many team members yet.
However, after his political demands to Poroshenko on 3 April, a piece of strong evidence finally appeared.
The candidate confused the key responsibilities of Parliament and President.
HOWEVER, the president can’t ensure the adoption of any law, even by the influence of his party which doesn’t hold the majority alone. restart the NAZK by new staff appointments.
HOWEVER, NAZK is an institution appointed by the Cabinet, NOT by the president. publish a list of Poroshenko’s offshore companies, banks in which these companies have accounts, as well as financial statements of these companies over the past five years.
BUT all data about property, assets, and deposits of Poroshenko is already publicized.
Poroshenko, obviously, is an expert in the field of international relations diplomacy, military, and security issues due to his experience, but his key problem seems to be with his team members.
The candidates’ teams Loud scandals involving the top members of Poroshenko’s political team inflicted a devastating blow to the reputation of the incumbent president, especially against the backdrop of Poroshenko’s billions of hryvnias of wealth.
These scandals created the image of Poroshenko as the chief of corruption in Ukraine, stealing even from the defense industry.
Although there is still no evidence of Poroshenko trying to make illegal profits himself, his disregard of the violations of his colleagues as well as the reluctance of the NABU , which is subjected to the President, to investigate loud cases made a bad reputation for him.
In 2016, Ihor Kononenko, former deputy head of the Poroshenko Bloc, was accused of lobbying the appointment of desired people to managing positions of the main state enterprises.
According to Aivaras Abromavicius, Minister of economic development and trade of that time who now professes his support for Zelenskyi, Ihor Kononenko and other members of Poroshenko’s political party were blocking the work of the ministry and there were from the President’s Administration to appoint desired people.
Law enforcement agencies claim this to be a failure of the Prosecutor’s office, which is subordinated to the president.
In 2016, Poroshenko made a scandalous decision to appoint Yuriy Lutsenko as Prosecutor General.
Lutsenko is unskilled for this particular position, as he doesn’t have a law degree.
However, he was a close ally of Poroshenko, never opposing the President’s will.
Generally, 2016 became the year when Poroshenko tried to consolidate power around himself by changes in the government and a number of new appointments which were criticized by civil society.
The latest corruption-related scandal in the Ukrainian state defense monopolist Ukroboronprom had hit Poroshenko especially hard.
Oleh Hladkovskyi, the First Deputy Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council appointed by the President, and his son Ihor Hladkovskyi were the main officials who managed purchases of the details for the military vehicles from fictitious companies by an overcharge.
A Bihus journalist investigation claimed that President’s friends laundered at least US$9.2mn in state defense procurements.
After the first round of elections, Poroshenko recognized that he made mistakes with staff appointments.
He talked about this at the meeting with civil activists on 6 April and signed the resignation letter of Andryi Hordieiev, the Head of Kherson Oblast Administration who was possibly implicated to the murder of the journalist Kateryna Handziuk, a whistleblower exposing local corruption schemes.
Oleh Hladkovskyi, accused of money laundering in the defense industry, was also dismissed by Poroshenko.
Volodymyr Zelensky’s team is still not completely known, but the personalities who have already been named are also not absolutely clean.
Yet, among the already known members of Zelenskyi’s headquarters, there are several persons linked to Russia or to oligarch Kolomoyskyi.
Dmytro Razumkov, the main political advisor of Zelenskyi, gives rise to suspicions.
Therefore, it’s no surprise that he is quite pro-Russian or, at least, indifferent to Ukrainian national identity.
The ties between Zelenskyi and oligarch Ihor Kolomoyskyi are quite obvious, despite Zelenskyi denying them.
Kolomoyskyi supports the candidate by the media-coverage at his 1+1 channel, giving all the prime-hours to him, and even provides his guards for Zelenskyi.
Finally, during the last three months, he had flown 20 times from Kyiv to Geneva – from Zelenskyi’s headquarters to Ihor Kolomoyskyi’s.
Yet, on 9 April, his team published an expanded list of experts who currently advise the candidate.
The list contains some well-known and experienced politicians such as former Finance Minister Oleksandr Danyliuk and former Minister of Economic Development and Trade Aivaras Abromovicius, as well as former Deputy Minister of Justice Ruslan Riaboshapka.
These skilled persons were among the reformers and members of anti-corruption initiatives in the governments of 2014-2018 but all left the government due to disagreement with particular policies of the prime minister.
However, their role in the team of Zelenskyi is still not clear since they didn’t state anything publicly on this behalf.
Moreover, Marta Bersh doesn’t know anything about her possible appointment as Prosecutor General, journalists uncovered.
She is an American but used to work as a prosecutor in the Ukrainian National Anti-Corruption Bureau for some time.
Zelensky’s team included her to the list of their team members as a future Prosecutor General without notifying her.
Moreover, they even mistakenly wrote her foreign surname in a Ukrainian manner – Borshch instead of Bersh, claiming she is a Ukrainian.
Regarding the other members of the team, they’re rather unknown and come mainly from business.
Oleg Bondarenko, head of the Green Fund, joined the team of Zelensky as an expert on ecology and law.
Oleksandr Kharebin, Zelensky’s adviser on language and information policy, has been working for pro-Russian oligarch Kurchenko and Taruta.
Poroshenko appeals to the things which were already done, such as the visa-free regime with EU, international support for Ukraine, military improvement, new missiles, stabilization of economy, decentralization.
Poroshenko emphasizes the need to continue and finish reforms as well as to overcome poverty.
Peace is Moscow’s undeniable recognition of our right to go our own way” Zelenskyi makes populist promises regarding the rise of economy and income.
The other key point is the power of people through local and national referendums which should become a widespread practice in Ukraine.
Zelenskyi promises a decline in taxes and the rise in social payments and salaries for teachers simultaneously.
Zelenskyi also promises a free land market as well as the liberalization of the economy.
However, whether this liberalization will facilitate large oligarchs’ or small enterprises, as well as how it should be implemented – this would be interesting to hear from Zelenskyi during debates.
Once Zelenskyi’s team promised to raise salaries for teachers to $4000.
They calculated that this would cost an overall $200 mn annually, but made elementary arithmetic mistakes – in reality, this could cost $2 bn per month to the state budget.
The first ten steps to be done were announced by Zelenskyi’s team, not himself.
They include mainly the continuation of current reforms which already started.
Among the novel proposals are economic laws on a tax amnesty in order to legalize the shadow economy.
Another proposal outlines the possibility for citizens to solve their disputes not only in the courts but through mediation as well.
Important points proposed by Zelenskyi are to clearly define the difference between General Staff and Ministry of Defense and to Invite the USA and Great Britain to the Normandy Group, a diplomatic group of senior representatives from Ukraine, Russia, Germany, and France to resolve the war in eastern Ukraine.
However, security questions, and, particularly, the war in eastern Ukraine – the main responsibilities of the president – are not properly addressed.
At the same time, his main goal is “that shooting stops” in eastern Ukraine.
Zelenskyi told this in an interview with Ukrayinska Pravda and continued that “I think it’s possible to come to an agreement.
Poroshenko didn’t announce any clear plan for the reintegration of Crimea and Donbas as well.
His main point seems to keep the growth of Ukrainian military capabilities and keep international pressure on Russia.
Pro-Russian and anti-Russian This division is not what candidates tell about themselves but how their opponents try to portray them.
Some western media have praised these elections due to the absence of pro-Russian candidates among the leaders and quite low Russian influence.
However, Russian media and politicians openly tell that Zelenskyi is their preferred candidate.
But if Zelenskyi remains, then … Well, I like his name – also Vladimir, and Lenin was Vladimir.
And the map is great … then yes, I will recognize the elections… And he already drew a map.
It comes from Zelensky’s film “Servant of the People,” where the candidate shows Ukraine as a number of separate territories, where each region has its own army and government.
Zhirinovsky’s words gain greater importance in the light of documents of his LDPR party which were hacked in 2014.
It describes a Russian political technology plan to bring a comedian into Ukrainian parliament, artificially support the discontent with the Ukrainian elites and in that way establish a pro-Russian and negotiable President.
Indeed, since Zelenskyi tells little about his policies, the most promising way to understand his views is to analyze his film.
He concluded that Ukraine is depicted almost completely Russian-speaking in the film, and most Ukrainians speaking Ukrainian look like radicals.
In reality, Ukrainian is spoken at least as often as Russian in Ukraine and is used overwhelmingly within the government and state institutions.
Ukrainian corruption is also significantly exaggerated and shown as the main problem in Ukraine, together with the complete absence of Russia, Russian aggression, or Putin in the film.
In this alternative world, Crimea and the Donbas seem to be not occupied, and Ukrainian soldiers are not dying on a daily basis.
Zelenskyi used to joke about Ukrainians and humiliate them in his shows.
And now Ukrainian volunteers, priests, veterans and activists started to remind him about that and urge to apologize.
The flashmob “I give you 24 hours” started in Ukrainian social networks, joking about Zelenskyi’s video where he gives Poroshenko 24 hours to accept his conditions for debates.
Kseniya Klym, a warrior from Donbas, asked Zelenskyi to apologize for his cynicism at jokes about the Tomos, the bill of independence for the Ukrainian church which was obtained in January 2019.
You are the descendant of the sons of Abraham and the representative of the Jewish people and know well what are the holy and untouchable topics.
Iryna Herashchenko, First Deputy Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada, asked Zelenskyi to apologize for his humiliation of disabled children and children with Down’s syndrome.
Ivan Lepich, a veteran from Rivne, appealed to Volodymyr Zelenskyi and asked him how a person calling Ukraine “an actress for German films for adults” and naming the war in Donbas as “moving borders aside” can aim for the position of President.
Poroshenko, on the other hand, is portrayed by his opponents as a Putin hater and even the President who suppresses Russian-speakers.
There was no single fact of Poroshenko deciding to discriminate against Russian-speakers, but this is a message spread by Russian propaganda and, also, by people indifferent to questions of national identity which Poroshenko stresses in his speeches.
This portrait of being a enemy of Putin is something which Poroshenko’s oppoarenents dislike.
Poroshenko is blamed for speculating on the issue of war, especially against the background of economic problems and poverty.
But Poroshenko’s pre-election strategy exploited this image – he was portrayed as the only president who can withstand Putin.
Poroshenko’s team says the boards suggest that the President should be powerful enough in order to withstand Putin’s aggression, including at the time of hard negotiations.
However, Zelenskyi’s supporters, and, particularly, the former candidate for the Presidency Anatoliy Hrytsenko say that such boards imply Zelenskyi is pro-Russian and voters should choose between Putin and Poroshenko, which is a manipulation.
However, the day before the boards were installed, Poroshenko told on TV that he doesn’t have any facts to accuse Zelenskyi of being pro-Russian.
But he thinks that Zelenskyi has not enough knowledge, experience, and strength to withstand Putin.
After the results of the first round of Ukrainian elections were announced on 31 March, it seemed incumbent President Poroshenko with his 16% result has little chances of outrunning showman Zelenskyi, who has 30%, at the second round which will take place on 21 April.
Zelenskyi on that day hinted he might agree to it, but later backtracked with a frivolous declaration that he’ll come to the debates only if his comic troop’s schedule allows.
According to Ukrainian law, debates must take place on the last Friday before the second round – that is, 19 April – in the studio of the public broadcaster.
The broadcaster had sent invitations to attend debates to the three leading candidates prior to the first round, but both Zelenskyi and Poroshenko had ignored them.
Only second runner-up Yuliya Tymoshenko had come, and was swiftly gone.
During the campaign, Zelenskyi had avoided live broadcasts and had not showed up for at least two interviews he had promised to come to.
One of the email messages sent by an FSB operative informs that they “have approved the budget for the actions of the comedian” and orders to withdraw 200,000 and “hand them over as we had agreed,” another confirms the plan to fulfill it on the next day, one more email informs a local office of Zelenskyi campaign on the amount.
It turns out that the hack is most probably authentic, but it is impossible to completely verify the most compromising messages.
Hack and finds On 7 April, NGO Myrotvorets Center published the fourth part of their “Operation Regata” alleging they have discovered and confirmed the fact that the campaign of the leader of the Ukrainian presidential race, Volodymyr Zelenskyi, was partially funded by Russia via a cryptocurrency trading site owned by a former pro-Russian mercenary in the Donbas.
The NGO shared the dump of the email account so that anyone can check and validate the e-mail messages.
Moreover, Myrotvorets provided videos showing the process of the validation of the messages which contain a DKIM e-signature and explaining how to validate messages when the email body was reformatted during forwarding.
Ukraine’s presidential election, in which a popular comedian with no political experience is projected to beat a seasoned incumbent with considerable baggage, reflects global trends that continue to shake the global order.
Across the world, economic stagnation, immigration, and other challenges are fueling disgust with traditional politics, leaving voters increasingly attracted to candidates who offer a fresh face and a new approach — even if the candidates are novices and their agendas are vague.
The question is whether, over time, novice leaders adapt to the post-war arrangements that have served the world well for three-quarters of a century, or those arrangements fall victim to unorthodox approaches that new leaders promise and voters seem increasingly willing to try.
ADVERTISEMENT That’s a timely question as freedom and democracy are declining around the world, Washington is cooling toward its Western allies and eschewing multilateral trade opportunities, Beijing is promoting an authoritarian alternative to U.S.-led freedom, China and Russia are working more closely in an antiUnited States axis, and nuclear weaponry threatens to proliferate and further destabilize the world.
On April 21, Ukraine’s Volodymyr Zelensky, a comedian who pretends to be President in a Ukrainian TV show, squares off against the actual incumbent President, Petro Poroshenko, who has served since 2014.
In their battle, Zelensky and Poroshenko symbolize the unsettling global politics of our time.
Zelensky is what the ancient philosophers called a “Tabula Rasa” , for he has offered few ideas about what he would propose or whether he can work the mechanics of a parliamentary government.
The same forces that may catapult him to victory, however, offer him a huge opportunity.
Only 9 percent of Ukrainians express confidence in their government, which is the world’s lowest level for a second straight year, so the bar that he must clear to satisfy public thirst may be a modest one.
To succeed, Zelensky would need an effective reform agenda that increases public confidence by reducing corruption, nourishing transparency, and addressing the country’s serious economic problems.
An oligarch known as the “Chocolate King” for his great financial success in confectionaries, he was first elected to Parliament more than 20 years ago.
He served in the governments of Presidents Leonid Kuchma, Viktor Yushchenko, and Viktor Yanukovych and helped establish different political parties between stints as a Parliamentarian.
He won the Presidency in 2014 and, since then, has fought Russian-backed forces on the battlefield, sought a diplomatic solution to the conflict, and reoriented Ukraine away from Russia and towards the West.
The same public disgust with economic stagnation, population migration, and unresponsive government that’s boosting novice candidates all over the world could well catapult another one to the top spot in Kiev — especially one running against an incumbent who has profited so much from the status quo.
ADVERTISEMENT Even when fed-up populations aren’t changing leaders, they’re forcing radical change through other means in even the most traditional of countries, perhaps without fully appreciating the consequences.
That, apparently, is what’s happened in Britain, where voters opted for a “Brexit” from the European Union in a 2016 public referendum but where Prime Minister Theresa May still can’t gather the votes in Parliament around a plan to leave the EU without sending Britain’s economy into a tailspin.
Whether, in Ukraine, a projected new President will find less disruptive means to address economic concerns is anyone’s guess.
That, in unsettled times, fear is an effective campaign tool is hardly breaking news.
Donald Trump rode fears of lost jobs and falling wages due to immigration to victory, and Benjamin Netanyahu has long retained office by stoking Israeli security fears were his opponents ever to win.
Well behind in the polls, Poroshenko is stoking fears about what Zelensky could mean for his besieged country.
With Ukraine at war with Russia-controlled proxies, he’s calling for “a total mobilization of all Ukrainian patriots,” denouncing such adversaries as “pseudo-patriots” and “open agents of the Kremlin,” and warning that Zelensky will push Ukraine toward Russia and away from the West.
The post-war global order was, in fact, a dramatic change itself when the U.S.-led West began laying the groundwork for it while the Allies were still fighting the Axis powers.
For Ukraine, the question is whether a projected new leader can reassure a potentially skeptical West by taking reasoned and effective steps to address corruption, raise living standards, and keep Russia at bay.
We inform that a citizen Zelensky VO is in military registration of military personnel in the Metallurgical-Dovgyntsevsky united regional territorial center of manning and social support of the city of Kryvyi Rih from December 22, 2008 and to date, the military rank is a soldier, a military-account specialty is a clerk of clerical work.
Citizen Zelensky VO to the military commissariat did not arrive on this request.
To impose a fine of 17 hryvnias for failure to appear in the military office – four times.
To break the case under Art. of the Criminal Code and condemn Zelensky for a term of two to five years imprisonment.
Leader of the Batkivschyna party Yulia Tymoshenko has called on candidates for the presidency of Ukraine, incumbent head of state Petro Poroshenko and showman Volodymyr Zelensky, not to demean the status of presidency.
I think, just like me, millions of Ukrainians, did not want to see this,” she said in a video posted on her Facebook page.
Turning to Poroshenko, the politician advised the current head of state to keep the presidential bar and not to become part of someone else’s show.
If you want to hold this post, take care of the dignity and honor of this position.
You do not need to organize battles around it and you don’t need to, leading the struggle for the right to become president, destroy the honor and pride of presidential status,” Tymoshenko said.
While I’m not a president yet, I can afford to be myself all the same, and I think that for the past five minutes, Mr Poroshenko has done everything … This is another matter, as it relates to this society.For someone, he did everything to ensure that our country did not develop.Someone – he has his own supporters – believes that he has done everything he could for Ukraine.I do not undertake to evaluate his actions, I like to talk at all on an equal basis.
Therefore, when I become president, if the people of Ukraine support me, and you would talk to me like and I was wrong, I would never have looked at the top because I am the president.
Or, you know, I have been a very well-known person for many years, but I always photographed with people, I always communicate, I always hear, I speak about my shortcomings , do not crush anyone, “Zelensky said.
The politician stressed that it is quite difficult to withdraw from himself.
I have respect for the presidential institution because it is a popularly elected president, but on a moral level, purely human, I believe that he is just insulting.
Inside our company, Kvartal 95 studios, everyone knows that I have a fair amount of endurance.
I have no more cheeks, I have substituted the left, I have substituted the right.
With me so much I responded as I could, as I thought fit, “explained the presidential candidate.
Volodymyr Zelensky did not want to go to the NSC “Olimpiyskiy” for delivery of analyzes, because on the eve he received a notification of the provocation that is being prepared there.
Well, the girl was upset, I saw so many journalists, I can understand,” he said.
Zelensky said he did not want to go to the NSC because he received a notification of a provocation that was being prepared.
At stake, my fate, my children, my parents, my wife, so I did not play.
Sometime after all these elections, information will be spilled on, as on the NSC” Olimpiysky “somebody was preparing I’m not going to go there, I’ll get this secret information, but now I’m not ready to talk about it.
When you find out the information, you will understand me, “said the presidential candidate.
See, maybe the information I received the day before is lying, so I do not blame anyone and did not turn to the police, “he said.
See, I’m not him, and so it was all scary, painful, painful to me, but I’m a strong guy and not ready, you know, change in principle, the conditions and your positions.
You decide, honestly, for me – or do not interfere, because at all I do not care only about my interests, therefore, I perceive so painfully, it offends me so, it is repeated analyzes or something else.
I am a strong person, but sometimes it hurts me, so you have to understand me, I’m ready for anything.
As journalists say, I hide, I do not hide when I’m humanly wanting to talk directly, as a husband and wife, I do not escape from anyone.
Ready to ride a bike, but in order to do this, we have to make our safe streets safe in our country.
The candidate for the post of President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelensky has revealed the details of the meeting with President of France Emmanuel Macron. — Ukrinform.
Ukrainian presidential election hopeful Volodymyr Zelensky shared his impressions following his Friday meeting with French President Emmanuel Macron.
French media write that Paris sought to learn more about Zelensky’s views, therefore the meeting offer was accepted.
The Ministry of Internal Affairs asks the headquarters of presidential candidates Volodymyr Zelensky and Petro Poroshenko to refrain from radical appeals against each other in order to avoid artificial provocations.
This was stated by the First Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs Serhiy Yarovyi, the press service of the department reports.
According to him, the Interior Ministry will hold consultations with representatives of both headquarters on the eve of the debate between presidential candidates and before the second round of voting, and those wishing to watch the face-to-face meeting of Zelensky and Poroshenko at the NSC Olimpiysky should be ready for strengthened security measures at the site.
In the information space, the mood of open hostility between candidates is fueled, so our task is to prevent such situations.
He also urged the heads of law enforcement units to work closely with members of the public and explain to them the inadmissibility of violations of public order and the safety of citizens.
Today, everyone’s sayings that Poroshenko’s task is to convince Zelenskyi’s electorate.
Even if there are fewer of them… because they are part of the minority group that took part in the Revolution of Dignity.
Actually, it’s not all these political figures that are so frightening, but Russia’s attempt to turn back the clock and push Ukraine back into a pro-Russian prison colony, where the Holodomor famine and the Great Terror have been duly justified and excused, where corruption has increased, where there is absolutely no future for the protection of Ukrainian culture and language, where Ukrainian media, radio and TV are humiliated and ridiculed on a daily basis.
You can’t buy a pig in a poke at the expense of your own life, the lives of your children and the country.
People may object and say that some of these issues should not be addressed to the President, that they’re not within his competence.
Of course, he won’t be able to implement everything unless he has a powerful faction in Parliament, but apparently both candidates plan to have such a faction.
