In an exclusive interview, the long-serving Russian ambassador to the EU, Vladimir Chizhov, provided insights into his country’s position on the Azov Sea situation, which led to the cancelling of a meeting between Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin at the G20 in Argentina.
Before being appointed Ambassador to the EU in 2005, he was Russia’s Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Ambassador, we have had such interview meetings for the last ten years, but the atmosphere of Russia-Western relations has constantly deteriorated.
I wouldn’t describe these past ten years as continued deterioration of our relations.
During these ten years we launched negotiations for a new basic agreement, which were later stalled for a number of reasons.
We were working on promoting our strategic partnership, which the EU doesn’t want to call “strategic” or even “partnership” any longer, unfortunately.
We – I mean Russia – we never considered the EU to be an enemy or even an adversary.
It has always been a partner, albeit quite a difficult one, but it hasn’t been an easy one to anyone – ask the Americans, ask the Chinese or anybody else.
You mentioned the Azov Sea, which has nothing to do with the EU of course.
From 1 April up to 31 October 1,492 ships were inspected, either on the way in or the way back.
This has been the usual procedure throughout the existence of the Kerch-Yenikale canal.
And the narrow canal is maintained artificially by digging it at least twice a year.
This was done during the 60 years when Crimea was part of Ukraine, this continued after Crimea was reunited with Russia.
So any reference to newly created obstacles because there is only one gate in the new bridge, which allows ships to proceed, is either ignorance, or blatant lie.
Since 2014 Ukraine has ceased to be a littoral state of the Kerch Strait, so now only Russia.
But Ukraine, as well as the EU and the West in general don’t recognise the annexation of Crimea by Russia.
People of Crimea voted overwhelmingly to join Russia, and ever since Crimea has accepted to become part of Russia it is part of Russia.
And most of those checks are conducted while the ships are standing on anchor, waiting in line for a caravan to be formed, so they are not delayed at all.
Only on a couple of occasions waiting time was extended to five hours, not more.
There is a treaty between Russia and Ukraine of 2003 for having the Azov Sea under joint sovereignty, so it’s not part of the world ocean and is not covered by the International Law of the Sea.
What Russia has been accused of, long before this latest incident happened, what we have been hearing for several months already were expressions of concern over alleged militarisation of the Azov Sea by Russia.
No, because there is no significant presence of the Russian navy in the Azov Sea.
If you want to find out who is involved in militarisation of the Azov Sea, it is Ukraine.
In September, as far as I remember, there was a small flotilla of Ukrainian warships that proceeded through the Kerch Strait to the port of Berdyansk in the Azov Sea.
They followed existing procedures, they filed a request for passage, they were escorted by Russian Coast guard through the Kerch Strait, they were waived off and nothing happened.
This time, the crews of these small vessels had instructions, and those were produced on TV when the crews were detained.
They were instructed to proceed through the Kerch Strait without giving any information, without contacting the Russian side, clandestinely.
I don’t know what they were hoping for, because they were detected early and tracked all the way from Odessa where they started.
And they were heavily armed and instructed to open fire, which they fortunately didn’t, in case they were stopped.
There were officers of the Ukrainian security service on board, who admitted they were in charge of this operation.
A well-prepared provocation that had started weeks before the incident itself, by raising attention to the situation in the Azov Sea.
But the Parliament, the Rada, took a decision after a heated debate, resulting in a compromise, the timeline cut to 30 days and the application of the new law was limited to slightly over half of the Ukrainian territory, regions bordering Russia and Moldova.
And immediately the speaker of the Rada, the infamous Mr Parubiy, issued a decree confirming the presidential election for 31 March.
But this time the IMF, for reasons that need to be clarified, released the tranche, and said they are not going to hinder the flow of money whatever happens.
Ukrainian lawmakers passed the 2019 budget early on Friday , taking a crucial step to unlock $3. billion of loans from the International Monetary Fund to tide over a choppy election period next year.
And he knows that playing the strong man in Crimea will boost his ratings again.
Come on, Georgi, he already has an image and reputation of a strong man, with Ukraine or without Ukraine.
No, because they have to be escorted through this narrow canal, as they were escorted before.
Since the construction of the Kerch bridge the security checks have been increased, for obvious reasons, because there are people, including politicians in Ukraine, who promise to blow it up, and these promises keep coming on a regular basis.
But the procedure is established and agreed, as previous Ukrainian convoys have shown that they know the rules, but not this time.
Well, theoretically they can go, on a friendly visit, with the consent of both Russia and Ukraine.
Well, he can invite the air force of Mars and Venus together, but that would hardly have any significance.
That would depend on their behaviour, of course, but I’m sure NATO is not foolish enough to undertake such a dangerous, risky endeavour.
And I believe that some of those political leaders who have been quite vocal, expressing their condemnation, or their apprehension or concern, they could have first tried to find out what was really happening and contact the Russian side, as did two EU countries, Germany and France.
Yes, because Ukraine is procrastinating fulfilling its own obligations.
It was I think two or three years ago, when Frank-Walter Steinmeier was still foreign minister.
The Normandy format met in Berlin and Steinmeier proposed certain provisions of the Minsk agreement to be implemented according to a certain stage-by-stage procedure.
Like the law on the special status would enter into force provisionally on the date elections would be proclaimed, and then would enter in full after the elections are held and the results are pronounced.
The United States on Monday dismissed leadership elections in separatist-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine as a “sham” one day after voters cast their ballots.
The situation is quite understandable I think, after the assassination of the leader of the Donetsk People’s Republic, they had to provide some sort of system of government of the territory, whatever the status.
You know, we don’t intend to sit and wait for pro-Russian leaders in Kiev.
We would be satisfied with pro-Ukrainian leaders, not pro-American or pro-Western.
The problem with today’s leadership is that it’s pointless to reach agreements with them, because they don’t deliver on their own promises.
As far as Russia’s interest is concerned, not only we don’t want to procrastinate things, we are sick and tired of the Ukrainian conflict, we want to see it ended as soon as possible, peace and stability returning to that much-suffered land.
It appears that a visit by a NATO vessel would be a confidence-building, stabilizing action that could reduce tensions in the region and contribute to President Putin’s stature as a global leader.
Russia and NATO have cooperated in combatting terrorism and during periods in the conflict in Afghanistan when Russian transport corridors were opened to resupply NATO operations in that country.
The multiple climate related and other crises on the horizon could open new opportunities for cooperation.
NATO has ceased being defensive when the URSS disbanded the Warsaw Pact in 1991.
Since then, NATO has been involved in wars that run against its statutes and mission.
My guess is Putin will be deposed by his own people long before he sees his dream realized.
If he tells the truth that Putin is a power-hungry maniac trying to put the Russian empire back together, he’ll get poisoned with Novichok.
If the leader is replaced, then maybe they don’t have to lie so much, but then RT/Sputnik, the official Russian state liars, will be out of a job. thatguy, when people like you have no intelligent reply to a comment, they resort to the usual, ahh, boooring accusation that the author of that comment is a troll on Russia’s payroll.
Well, whatever, I would rather be accused of being a Russian troll than of brainlessly regurgitating Western propaganda.
It is the United States that is not interested i solving the Ukrainian conflicts.
It wants to keep Russia and the EU apart and will do anything to achieve that.
