Andrei Illarionov, a Russian expert, economic adviser to Vladimir Putin in 2000-2005, with the start of the Kremlin aggression gained reputation in Ukraine, bringing bad news and alarming forecasts.
He had announced the imminent offensive by Russian troops until the tank strikes on Kiev Chernigov directions warned of Western leaders with the master of the Kremlin supports the Ukrainian leadership in facing and inability to effectively confront the aggressor.
ILLARIONOV's critics accused him of spreading panic and even provocative recommendations leading to full-scale war with Russia.
Russia has enough forces on multiple fronts? -Syria already affects the Donbass, and aggravating way.
One of the objectives of participation in the Syrian conflict for Putin is the Russian regime of international poluizol창cii, in which he found himself as a result aggression against Ukraine.
The second objective is the restoration of relations with Western countries, and even the translation of these relations in the State of the Alliance.
As we see, that in the course of just a few last weeks and days this operation brilliantly successful against France and its New President.
The French President has not only made the statements, but he came to Moscow, met with Putin and agreed on a de facto Allied relations in the Middle East.
Moreover, does anybody, namely Hollande in Moscow said that they discussed the question of Ukraine without Ukraine.
They match a position about the Ukraine-and it means that in this case the French view coincided with the opinion of the aggressor.
Thus, one of the tasks of the Putin regime is not the only, but very important, was in breaking the international isolation, forming new alliances and use these relationships to further isolate Ukraine.
That is, in other words, this convergence of views regarding the isolation of Ukraine and not restore sovereignty over part of the territory of the country. -Visit Hollande took place after a series of terrorist attacks in Paris.
Terror-one of the most effective instruments of internal and external policies.
Various terrorist acts, regardless of who carried them out, always been used effectively to achieve specific political results.
By the way, Hollande, if you remember, participated actively in the preparation of the Minsk accords.
And advised that the terrorists should sit at the negotiating table, it is necessary to take into account their views, it is necessary to give them the opportunity to actively participate in all processes should be at their request to change the Constitution of Ukraine and so on. -What is the role of the Turkish crisis of relations with Russia in this puzzle? -Turkish crisis in this case fulfils the role of improving the overall tension in the world at large and in the Middle East in particular.
There is nothing more effective for impact on the level of oil prices than increase tensions in the Middle East.
This reaction directly to those aircraft and the relevant statements of Moscow and Ankara.
On the one hand, the desire of Putin to establish relations with the countries of the West, on the other hand, immediately the threat of military conflict with Turkey, one of the most powerful military alliance members? -No, this in no way contradicts.
As we can see, in this situation, Ankara is not supported, and the allies quickly distanced themselves from the position of Erdogan.
What does it mean? -This tells us more about the current leadership of Western countries, the most gentle determination for him-""plasticine"". -There is an opinion that Erdogan and Putin policy style is similar-both have a penchant for authoritarianism, both managed by ethnically disparate States, and second, unlike Westerners, easily send your soldiers to death.
Attempts to present the same Erdogan just benefit those who justify the Kremlin's policy against Turkey.
Even if we compare the political regimes in Russia and Turkey, we see that Turkey, though not completely, but still a democratic country.
Russia annexed the same piece of land-Crimea, Turkey nothing annexed when Erdogan.
Or Ukrainian diplomacy managed to correct the situation to your advantage? -I didn't say ""conspiracy"", and said that it is ""m청nhinit""-a disease of Western leaders that resembles the aggressor's policy of appeasement, which was at the end of the 30-ies in relation to Hitler.
In this regard, nothing has changed. -At the same time, Russian companies and individuals were not lifted, there is reason to talk about their tightening.
The current leaders of Western countries, and, above all, the United States, is not in a position to make a truly drastic actions against Russia.
Live the Russians got worse, but would become weaker the Putin regime? -Give your assessment of the Minsk agreements and their marketability. -This agreement to prevent the restoration of the sovereignty of Ukraine on the part of its territory, namely in the Crimea and Eastern Donbass.
Moreover, the Elimination of the sovereignty of the Kiev authorities, because the Minsk agreements require change Constitution in accordance with the wishes of the eastern neighbour. -But you know that the President of the Minsk agreement calls Poroshenko is hardly the biggest success of the Ukrainian diplomacy.
It consists of the UN Charter, the 1975 Helsinki accords year Budapest memorandum 1993 onwards, a series of bilateral agreements between Ukraine and Russia, the CIS agreement on forming Large Treaty of friendship.
In all of these documents clearly established internationally recognized the inviolability of the State border between Russia and Ukraine.
Minsk agreement is preventing the restoration of the sovereignty of Ukraine on the part of its territory.
Moreover, the Elimination of the sovereignty of the Kiev authorities, because the Minsk agreements require change Constitution in accordance with the wishes of the eastern neighbour.
Minsk agreement in this sense contrary to everything, including the UN Charter, in contravention of all norms of contemporary international law.
Moreover, the Minsk agreement you do not have such status in international law, as all of the above Treaty.
In this case, the Ukrainian leadership deliberately chose a document that neither the status nor the more content is not relevant to the norms of international law and had not focused on it.
Naturally, that Putin fully supported these agreements and, if you look its performances, he regularly expounded on the need for their implementation. -Soon turns two years the new Ukrainian authorities.
You can share your impressions about its effectiveness? -I, as a citizen of another country will not give estimates, but I will say the most important thing.
How do you measure such a step by Ukraine? -It's all Slightly affected.
You have heard-it was only a couple of statements, does not change the situation.
Crimeans suffer, but Putin did not think about it at all-would somehow come electricity there and okay.
I am surprised why the Ukrainians did so just now, not a year and a half ago. -If no effect, then why do it even now at least a year and a half ago? -I said that Putin is not affected, but crimeans influences very strongly.
Many have come to believe that they live with Ukraine was more comfortable. -Whether the risk of a full-scale invasion by forces of the Russian Federation to Ukraine? -Full-unlikely, and the continuation of aggression-certainly yes.
A full-scale invasion is impossible, because the physical strength to do so, Russia does not have.
And it's not that the Kremlin would have torn on two fronts-Ukrainian and Syriac.
In particular, in addition to the green men have greenbacks. -What is a green paper? -No, as with their help Putin may try to reach their goal in Ukraine. -There are a lot of decision-makers in Ukraine, working with whom the Kremlin does not cease-collaborating with someone, someone is still trying to seduce, but, nevertheless, the work is done.
Understand that the purpose of the ""Kiev and whole Ukraine"" is not installing the Russian flags in Kyiv and the announcement of your country the territory of the RUSSIAN FEDERATION, but only control of the Ukrainian State and political elite through its people in Kiev offices.
Objective-preventing the integration of Ukraine into European and Euro-Atlantic structures.
Putin's operation to establish control over Ukraine, in his hands all the trumps.
Moreover, with the Ukrainian side to him agreeing to actively help implement the Minsk agreement.
But in the midst of war have an idea about who the enemy is, and who is an ally.
In war you cannot do pardon the terrorists, but in ""Minsk world""-please.
Erdogan is not afraid to shoot down Russian aircraft is an example. -For Erdogan, NATO and Ukraine.
Return to Erdogan, his deed with downed RUSSIAN AIR FORCE aircraft shows that in Turkey there are elite, there are the interests of the State and the willingness to defend them.
By the way, after the incident with the RUSSIAN AIR FORCE aircraft downed ex-. the President of Ukraine, now your chapter made approval of the State Security actions of Turkey and said, well, here's how you should behave civilized countries in terms of violations of their airspace.
All right, but only he, apparently, gave his own assessment guide-when his power military units in Crimea opposed seizures by Russia.
If necessary, the events occur, you can reconcile comparatively beyond the short term.
Let's say, for one generation. -At least restore the internationally recognized border between Ukraine and Russia.
Be sure to return all territory of Donbass and Crimea Ukraine and Russia's recognition of the facts of aggression followed by the refusal of the RUSSIAN FEDERATION from conducting an aggressive policy towards Ukraine and other neighbors. -In practice, it is almost impossible to achieve. -Very hard, Yes.
Navalny, Khodorkovsky, Kasyanov, Yashin? -I would not called Bulk counter-example.
And, by the way, Khodorkovsky also there? -Khodorkovsky a bit differently, but when he speaks on matters of principle, it turns out that his views coincide with those of Putin.
Bulk and Khodorkovsky did not consider Crimea Ukrainian territory and that is all you need to know about their opposition. -For you to Crimea whose? -It's undeniable the territory of Ukraine. -If not Khodorkovsky and the opposition, who are they? -I don't know, I never concerned their identification.
Lenin said that there are idiots, and there are useful idiots. -And who then opposition in Russia? -There is no single structure, it cannot be under the totalitarian regime, which now ruled by Russia.
If by name, Arkady Babchenko it, Eider Mu탑dabaev, Boris Vishnevsky, Andrei Piontkovsky, Lilia Shevtsova, Garry Kasparov.
Because Himmler and Bormann's, too, as the different clans of Putin's Entourage, not all issues positions coincide.
And played an important role, by the way, the sanctions? -The existing sanctions are kindergarten, I have already referred.
The fact is that the number of crimes committed by the regime, is that for each of his cellmate or supporters logoff or elimination of the system will lead to their own destruction.
And mental illness the most scary, because they disable the consciousness and people cease to adequately analyze the surrounding reality. -The root cause of your tv? -No, tv is just one of the tools.
The population of the USSR was poisoned 70 years, including a long period of time when there was no tv.
For example, the same Germany in the first third of the 20th century, was among some of the richest, developed and educated countries in Western Europe.
Nevertheless, infect their totalitarian ideology turned out very easily and in a very short period of time.
Russia still 25 years ago had nothing to do with today's Putin's State.
Yes, there are problems, there is a strange personality, there is a sick, sick state elite, which is worse than in Russia, and a weak economy.
Yes, in Russia a very specific, aggressive, hamska창 Imperial elites with atrofirovannym view on the right, but it's there.
In Ukraine, in my opinion there is no elite, which associated itself with the existence of Ukraine as a nation State.
In March the year 2014 at an emergency economic summit in Ukraine I told everyone about it, and Kakha Bendukidze then said the same thing-for a year nothing has improved.
No problem, that were in Ukraine a year and a half ago, not simply has not been solved, and even, in fact, had not been affected by the power.
Then there are the Ukrainian economy over two years is 20 percent weaker.
External debt of Ukraine in 2014-m was approximately 40% of GDP, 94% this year.
Give advice? -Last spring was meeting with your Prime Minister Yatsenyuk.
He as much as 20 minutes talking with me and us, Bendukidze Kahoj listened to how many managed to say.
What impress you fired the Prime Minister, what can you say about his professional qualifications? -It does not matter what impression on alien fired Prime Minister of your country.
Better yet, that he did not make an impression and did something for Ukrainians.
There is no country in the post-Soviet area, which from that time not just remained at 89 and still and went.
