While Mattis stressed that Donald Trump has not yet made a decision on arming Ukraine, there are certainly legitimate arguments for doing so.
Moscow illegally annexed Ukraine’s Crimea region in March 2014, and the Kremlin supplies both arms and Russian troops to its separatist proxies – the so-called “Donetsk Peoples’ Republic” and “Luhansk Peoples Republic” – fighting Ukrainian troops.
Arming Kyiv would help it better confront this Russian threat while also permitting Washington to send a strong message to Russian President Vladimir Putin that changing borders by force is unacceptable.
But however justified the outrage over Moscow’s behaviour, retaliation is risky.
If the United States arms Ukraine, the Kremlin will almost certainly respond in ways that could damage American national security interests.
For a start, Russia could escalate the violence by sending additional troops or arms to support its separatist proxies there – something Putin already implied would happen.
Trump could then face pressure to send more weapons – thereby escalating Russian-American tensions.
Russia could also retaliate against United States interests in other parts of the world.
In North Korea, it could undermine the American-driven sanctions measures intended to force Pyongyang to end its nuclear weapons program.
Although a number of Russian-North Korean economic projects remain frozen because of the embargoes, Russia could restart these projects – thereby providing Pyongyang with additional hard currency for its testing program.
In Syria, Putin could end US-Russian cooperation on enforcing a ceasefire in southern Syria.
Moscow could also move additional weaponry – perhaps even including nuclear weapons – into Russia’s Kaliningrad region, an enclave that borders Poland and Lithuania, or send Russian weapons to Afghanistan’s extremist Taliban rebels to undermine Trump’s “mini-surge” of troops to that country.
Given the risks to American interests from arming Ukraine, Trump needs to carefully consider both the pros and cons of this step.
In the meantime, the United States can help Ukraine in other ways that include increased support for Ukraine’s anti-corruption reformers; nudging international donors to help Kyiv rebuild war-damaged regions and push European countries to prevent their firms from selling to Russia’s defence contractors.
What Ukraine needs most of all is breathing space to complete the economic and political reforms to consolidate its young democracy.
That remains elusive in spite of the February 2015 Minsk II accord – a package of measures signed by Russia and Ukraine to bring an end to the war.
Keeping Ukraine out of NATO wouldn’t be a big sacrifice for its members.
Russia’s overwhelming military strength in the Black Sea region makes it unlikely NATO could effectively defend Ukraine and many NATO countries don’t support Kyiv’s admission anyway.
Since all 29 members need to approve new members the alliance’s expansion to Ukraine is extremely unlikely, meaning Kyiv gives up little by foregoing NATO membership while potentially setting itself up to demand concessions from Moscow in other areas.
In exchange for concessions on NATO, Moscow must accept it cannot block Ukraine’s right to pursue membership in the European Union – a priority for Kyiv.
This will be a difficult pill for Moscow to swallow since it wants Ukraine to join a Russian-dominated free trade bloc aimed at consolidating Russian influence in the former Soviet Union.
However, it’s time for the Kremlin to accept that Kyiv wants a decisive break from Russia’s political and economic orbit – and Washington should make clear to Moscow it has no right to prevent Ukraine from pursuing what it sees as its Western destiny.
Once these two geopolitical issues are resolved it will be easier for Washington to help Russia and Ukraine to reach agreement in other areas.
Any final deal must require that the Kremlin end military support for its separatist proxies in eastern Ukraine and allow Kyiv to regain full control over its border with Russia.
This would include full control over their own tax and spending, as well as control over social issues such as education, culture and the status of the Russian language.
Moscow says that it considers Crimea part of Russia while Ukrainian officials insist it is part of Ukraine.
For this reason, any final agreement may have to defer negotiations over Crimea – perhaps by suggesting some kind of formula for shared sovereignty or Russian payment to Ukraine for the territory taken.
The United States can make this more palatable to Ukraine by not recognising Crimea is part of Russia until a deal on the peninsula’s status acceptable to Kyiv is reached.
The United States employed a similar policy regarding the Soviet Union’s annexation of the Baltic states during the Cold War.
Putin may not settle for anything other than pulling Ukraine back into the Russian orbit, while Kyiv may consider any deal preventing NATO membership or fudging on Crimea to be unacceptable.
However, the United States could provide a sweetener such as offering to ease sanctions against Russia while Ukraine could be offered assistance in rebuilding its war-torn Donbass region.
Because behavor of USA and Great Britain after Russian ocupation of Ukraine territory just confirms that only stupid politicans would get rid of its nuclear weapons for exchange of piece of paper.
Had the greed and old useless rivalries blinded the West Anyone can now see what disaster forced regime change does.
What happened before the Maidan was that Russia advised Yanukovich that the proposed treaty was not in UKraine’s interests – something that has become very obvious by now as it gives the EU free access to the Ukraine market while restricting Ukraine’s access to EU markets with strict quota.
Yanukovich went with that information to Merkel but he just got a cold shoulder.
It was only then that he withdrew from the treaty. – Ukraine is not a free country.
Anyone talking too “pro-Russian” faces serious problems – from fake accusations to right-extremist violence and murder.
As long as this doesn’t improve integration of LPR-DPR into Ukraine is almost unthinkable as it would lead to a ferocious witch hunt.
I would suggest that Mr Cohen reads a little history of Ukraine and especially Crimea then re-write this nonsense.
Also, Crimea has been a part of Russia since long before California and Texas were grabbed from Mexico.
Actually most Crimeans are Russian and voted overwhelmingly to remain part of Russia.
Hey, Cohen, human beings, even ethnic Russians, have a human right to self-determination.
That includes people in Crimea and Donbass, and other parts of Ukraine, too.
