Permission to make digital or hard copies of any information contained in these web publications is granted for personal use, without fee and without formal request.
Copies may not be made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage.
Taras Kuzio “The Crimean Peninsula is the heartland of Russian nationhood.
This the location of ancient Khersones, where Prince Vladimir was baptised.
Although a Russian nationstate emerged in 1992 and has been independent for over a quarter of a century there ae no histories of the Russian Federation.
Since the late 1980s, Western historians of Ukraine, such as Orest Subtelny, Paul R Magocsi, Serhiy Plokhy, Serhiy Yekelchyk, and George Liber, have adopted this approach.
Western histories of “Russia” thereby continue to ignore its territorial limitations by conflating empire with nation-state.
Western historians of “Russia” have not adapted to the emergence of an independent Russia by using standard Western frameworks whereby the histories of countries are the territories of nation-states.
The history of France and Great Britain, for example, includes all events that took place within the internationally recognised boundaries of these nation-states.
Magosci’s A History of Ukraine surveys 2,500 year of history of Ukrainians and other peoples (Greeks, Crimean Tatars, Poles, Russians, Jews, Germans, Hungarians and Romanians) living within the borders of the Ukrainian nation-state.
Western histories of “Russia” and Ukraine, and histories of Ukraine published since 1991 in Ukraine, are incompatible with one another.
Histories of Ukraine are no different to standard European histories of states that cover all of the events that took place within the territory of the Ukrainian nation-state.
These histories of “Russia” expropriate history that took place on Ukrainian territory for “Russian” history.
Instead of histories of the Ukrainian and Russian Federation there continues to be “Russian” history with Ukrainians as an accident of history who appear from time to time but are always eager to re-embrace Moscow.
This was surely fake news long before the appearance of social media and Russia Today.
In continuing to use Russian imperialist historiography, Western historians and political experts on Russia have become apologists for Russian imperialism in the Crimea.
In supporting Russian President Vladimir Putin’s imperialism, they had to air brush out the Tatar claim to be the indigenous people of the Crimea.
By taking this road they are treading on dangerous territory because an argument claiming white settlers were the indigenous peoples in North and South America, Australia or New Zealand would be condemned as racist.
Claiming Russians are the indigenous people of the Crimea is no different.
Western histories of “Russia” therefore treat Ukrainians as a branch of the “Russian” people and Tatars as not the indigenous First Nations of the Crimea.
De-colonisation of Western history writing of “Russia” is long overdue.
WESTERN HISTORIES OF “RUSSIA” ARE IMPERIALIST Western historians working in conditions of academic freedom were free to pursue the study of “Russian history” in as objective a manner as is possible.
Nevertheless, Western histories of imperial Russia and the former USSR usually portrayed it as a homogenous nation-state rather than as a multinational empire.
This, in turn, could only be undertaken by assuming that Ukrainians and Belarusians were also 5 “Russians” – as Russian President Vladimir Putin repeatedly asserts.
Tsarist policies and Russian historiography were patently misplaced and could only be premised upon a denial of any history for Ukrainians and Belarusians separate to Russian.
As Theodore R Weeks argues, “And yet the Russian Empire was not, and could not be, a nation-state.
Firstly, that Ukrainians and Belarusians were “ethnographic raw material” and simply regional ethnoses of the larger Russkii people.That is, they were simply “Little” or “White Russians”— not separate nations.
The only choice, therefore, given to Ukrainians and Belarusians by the Tsarist authorities was to become Russians or less favourably Poles.
Secondly, the non-Slavic peoples of the Tsarist empire would agree to assimilation into this planned “Russian nation-state” or enter into “voluntary union” with it.
This policy, supported by Tsarist officials and all non-left-wing political parties, rejected any group rights for the empire.
In the Russian civil war, all Russian political groups opposed Ukrainian autonomy or independence.
Thirdly, writing “Russian” history as that which equates empire with nation-state, “Russian” with the eastern Slavs, would be the equivalent of German nationalists and Nazis claiming prior to World War II that the “German World” includes Prussia, Germany, Bavaria, Austria, Switzerland and parts of France, Italy, Czechoslovakia and Poland.
A “German World” encompassing an area that belonged to “German civilisation” would be the equivalent of the Russkii Mir covering Orthodox and Slavic civilisation in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus.
France, Spain and Great Britain both have links to Rome and the Roman empire, but their histories are confined to the borders of the nation-states created during the past two centuries.
This should be the model for the Russian Federation with its origins in the Novgrorod Republic, Vladimir-Suzdal, and Muscovy, rather than Kyivan Rus.
The pre-1945 German World 6 and contemporary Russkii Mir are never equated because the former is seen as belonging to the evils of Nazism while the latter is not viewed as extremist but merely as bringing together three “fraternal” branches of the “Russian” people.
Riasanovsky’s terminological confusion is evident when he discusses the division of the eastern Slavs into three nations after the disintegration of Kyiv Rus.
Riasanovsky, in the tradition of Soviet, post-Soviet and Western historiographies, describes Kyivan Rus as a united state of eastern Slavs whose unity was only broken because of the Mongol invasion.
Viewed in such a framework, Ukrainians and Belarusians are accidents of history and their “natural” state is to be in union with Russians.
The transfer of “Russian” history from Kyiv Rus has its origins in the imperialist Russian school of history expounded by nineteenth century historians Sergey M.Solovyov and Vasily O Kliuchevskyi.
Martin only devotes four lines to the alternative view propounded by the Ukrainian historian Hrushevskyy.
Implicit in Hosking’s writing is that Rus constituted one united entity that would have evolved into a Russian nation-state if only its unity had not been destroyed by the Mongol invasion.
Hosking and other Western historians of “Russia” cannot explain how “Russians,” who allegedly happened to live in today’s Ukraine in the medieval era, were then replaced by “Ukrainians” at an undisclosed later stage.
Hosking, typically for many Western historians of “Russia,” belittles the Belarusians who do not seem to know who they are.
This poor analysis of Ukrainian national identity lay behind Putin’s assumption that Ukraine’s Russian speakers would support Russian intervention in “Novorossiya” (easternsouthern Ukraine) in spring 2014.
Western historians of “Russia,” as much as Russian politicians, cannot comprehend why Russian speakers are Ukrainian patriots, who do not want 9 to be part of Putin’s Russkii Mir.% of Ukrainian soldiers fighting Putin’s proxies in the Donbas are Russian speakers and the neighbouring Dnipropetrovsk region has the highest Ukrainian number of military casualties.
The Concise Columbia Encyclopaedia admits that Kyiv Rus included all of present-day Ukraine and Belarus and only north-western Russia, but this does not influence its conflation of Kyiv Rus into “Russian” history.
The history of Rus is therefore assumed to be part of “The Origins of Russia” which allegedly Christianised itself in 988.
This is also what Putin believed and, in both cases, it is historically inaccurate.
The Soviet state commemorated the millennium of “Russian” 10 Christianity in Moscow in 1988 in a city which did not exist until nearly two centuries after Christianity arrived in Kyiv and six centuries after the founding of the city of Kyiv itself.
Putin subscribes to this mythological history of “Russia” and in November 2016, a 17-metre monument to Kyiv Rus Grand Prince Volodymyr the Great was unveiled in Moscow.
In continuing to use an imperialist history of “Russia,” Western historians are in agreement with Russian nationalists such as Putin about “Kiev Russia” as being the first stage of “Russian” history.
They are equally as confused about why Ukrainians stubbornly refuse to follow Belarusians as a branch of the Russkii people.
This confusion is even more the case since the 2014 crisis which has widened the gulf between Ukrainian and Russian national identities.
Their confusion will only grow as the Ukraine-Russia divorce that began in 1992 and speeded up after 2014 is irreversible.
WESTERN HISTORIES OF THE CRIMEA ARE RACIST Current debates about whether monuments to racists, imperialists and those who committed crimes against humanity against native peoples have had no impact upon Western historians of “Russia” and Russian politics experts.
If scholars and journalists wrote that European settlers who landed in 1607–1608 in Virginia and Quebec were “native peoples” they would be rightly accused of racism.
Yet, Russian and 11 Western historians and Russian politicians continue to describe “Russians” as the “native people” of the Crimea.
Adding to Western and Russian racism towards Crimean Tatars is a continued unwillingness to accept that Russian rule over the Crimea has been disastrous for the indigenous Crimean Tatars, in the same manner as European settlers were for First Native and indigenous peoples in North and South America, Australia and New Zealand.
In these continents and countries, First Native and indigenous peoples experienced forced assimilation, the taking away of their children from parents, destruction of cultures and genocide.
Museums and school history textbooks no longer portray European settlers arriving in an empty Canadian land.
Prime Ministers have publicly apologised for past mistreatment of First Nations and describe them as Canada’s indigenous people.
Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said “The impact of European settlement on Aboriginals was tragic, of course it was.
Continents and countries that have experienced European settlers are coming to terms with their past racism, exploitation, assimilation, and genocide of First Nation indigenous 12 peoples.
Centre-left, liberal and green governments are seeking to redress past crimes.
All political forces, including on the centre-right, describe the indigenous native peoples as First Nations.
Russian rule over the Crimea included all of the elements found in white settler rule of the America’s, Australia and New Zealand.0,000 of the 300,000 Crimean Tatars emigrated to Ottoman Turkey in the nineteenth century.
In the Crimea they were subjected to racism, ethnic and religious discrimination, assimilationist policies and in 1944, ethnic cleansing to Soviet Central Asia.
The ethnic cleansing of Crimean Tatars, in May 1944, is commemorated as a genocide by Tatars each year, because half of them perished during the deportation.
Since 2014, Russian occupation authorities in the Crimea have revived Soviet era repressive policies of imprisonment, closing down of Tatar institutions , destruction of Tatar culture, deportations, and expulsion of Tatar leaders and abduction and possible murder of up to seventeen Crimean Tatar activists.
Crimean Tatar leader Akhtem Chiygoz was sentenced to eight years imprisonment by Russian occupation authorities.
In presenting the Crimea as “always Russian,” Western historians and experts on Russian politics have depicted Crimean history in a racist manner by excluding, marginalising, or ignoring the indigenous Crimean Tatars.
Their pre-occupation with claiming the Crimea as “Russian” has led to them muting and denying the new round of human rights violations and crimes committed against Crimean Tatars.
In Western books written about the 2014 crisis, repression of Crimean Tatars is marginalised or downplayed by apologists and some experts on Russian politics.
Canadians, Americans, Australians, and other white settler countries also built museums and published textbooks with a similar claim that the Europeans had arrived in an empty land, but these have been long replaced by greater inclusivity incorporating indigenous First Nations.
Western and Russian scholars and Russian politicians continue to use an imperialist approach to “Russian” history and a racist exclusion of indigenous Crimean Tatars.
Magocsi and Andrew Wilson both point out that if length of time within a state is the criterion we use to decide to whom Crimea should belong, then it should be returned to Tatars who ruled the peninsula from the thirteenth to the late eighteenth century.
The Slavic population of the Crimea only arrived in the nineteenth century.
Wilson calculates that the Crimea, although annexed by Russia in 1783, “was only ever truly Russian from the Crimean War of 1853-56 until 1917” and again from 1945-54; that is, it was under Russian rule for seventy-three years.
Plokhy has written how Russian imperial identity was forged during Muscovy’s expansionism when it asserted “myths of origins” by laying historical, ideological and dynastic claims to Kyiv Rus.
Muscovite Tsars and contemporary Russian presidents claimed descent from Kyiv Rus Grand Princes as the birthplace of the “Russian” state.
As part of this mythology they claimed Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians are branches of the “Russian” people.
Moscow, the “Third Rome,” became the successor to Constantinople which had fallen to the Ottoman Turks.
This imperialist history became – and remains the norm for Western historians when writing about “Russia” and the Crimea.
HOW RUSSIA BLOCKED THE EMERGENCE OF A UKRAINIAN NATIONAL IDENTITY Muscovy and the Tsarist Russian Empire sought to block the emergence of Ukrainian national identity.
The Ukrainian language was the only one to be banned in Tsarist Empire in the nineteenth century.
Ukrainian identity was being repressed in the Tsarist Empire while it was being promoted in the Austrian-Hungarian Empire.
Anne Applebaum discusses the origins of Chekist Ukrainophobia in the early 1930s during the Holodomor and mass arrest of national 15 communists, educators and cultural elites.
This took place amid a frenzied search for “Petlurite counter-revolutionaries” allied to external enemies of the Soviet Union.
Paranoia about Ukrainian nationalism, “was taught to every successive generation of secret policemen, from the OGPU to the NKVD to the KGB, as well as every successive generation of party leaders.
Imperialist thinking permeates even left-wing scholars, such as Sakwa and Chris Kaspar de Ploeg.
Putin’s imperialism and racism emerged in 2007 with the launch of Russkii Mir which elaborates a common, “fraternal” and ever-lasting Slavic and Orthodox “civilisation” for Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians.
This was further crystallised during the 1020th and 1025th anniversaries of the adoption of Christianity by Kyiv Rus in 2008 and 2013 respectively.
During those two anniversaries, Putin was invited by his Ukrainian satrap, President Viktor Yanukovych, to participate in celebrations organised by the Russian Orthodox Church in Ukraine.
Putin’s renewed emphasis on the “fraternal” and “irrevocable unity” of the three eastern Slavic peoples and thus Ukraine’s destiny as lying within the Russkii Mir therefore predates the 2014 crisis by many years.
The Russian Orthodox Church and President Putin persistently highlight the eternal “fraternal” bonds of Russians and Ukrainians, stretching from “Kievan Russia” to the present.
Ukraine as the origin of “Russian” civilisation was clearly laid out in Putin’s 18 March 2014 speech to the State Duma and Federation Council welcoming Crimea’s accession to the Russian Federation.
This was done with no consideration for the ethnic make-up of the population, and today these 17 areas form the southeast of Ukraine.
Then, in 1954, a decision was made to transfer Crimean Region to Ukraine, along with Sevastopol, despite the fact that it was a federal city.
Tatars and Ukrainians accounted for 36% in Ukraine’s 2001 census and many of them did not support Russia’s annexation in spring 2014.
It is also impossible to accept that Sergei Aksyonov, who was installed by Russian troops as Crimean Prime Minister, was a popular political figure.
In the 2010 elections, Aksyonov’s neo-Nazi Russian Unity party, which harbours racist and xenophobic attitudes towards Crimean Tatars and Ukrainians, won only 4% of the vote.
Ukrainians and Belarusians were ignored and only appeared briefly in the mid-seventeenth century as Cossacks who allied themselves with Muscovy and then again in 1917.
It was never made clear how Ukrainians came to be living on territory that had been “primordial Russian” territory unless one believed, as does Putin and Russian leaders, that there 18 are no Ukrainian people and there are three “branches” of the “Russian” people.
Since 1992, Russia’s first nation-state should become the basis for a new history of Russia based upon the territory of the Russian Federation.
This civic-territorial approach would support Russia’s democratisation by dropping imperialist and racist approaches to history.
In the post-Soviet era, imperialist and racist Tsarist, Soviet and Western histories of “Russia” are out of step with the times.
Following the disintegration of the USSR, historians should write new histories of Russia which are confined to the territorial boundaries of the Russian Federation.
Instead, by continuing to utilise eighteenth–nineteenth century imperialist and racist approaches, Western and Russian historians support the mythology underpinning Russian territorial claims to the Crimea and“Novorossiya,” and Russian hegemony over a Ukraine that “naturally” belongs to the Russkii Mir.
This approach defines Russians not Tatars – as the so-called “indigenous” people of the Crimea.
A history of Russia territorially based upon the Russian Federation would accomplish three tasks.
Firstly, it would no longer equate the Russian empire with a budding Russian nation-state.
Secondly, it would no longer incorporate Belarusians and Ukrainians within “Russian” history.
Thirdly, it would support civic Russian nation building within the borders of the Russian Federation.
In the twenty-first century, and a quarter of a century after the USSR disintegrated, it is incumbent upon Western historians to end their use of an imperialist historiography.
Imperialist historical writing leads to chauvinism towards Ukrainians and racism towards Crimean Tatars that should have no place in the twenty first century.
Ukraine and the Challenge to the European Order, , Putin’s War Against Ukraine.
Chamber of Commerce Maastricht 41078444 20 NOTES 1 Richard Sakwa, Frontline Ukraine.
Magocsi’s and Plokhy’s histories have been re-published in Ukraine, where they are extensively used since the early 1990s.
Rethinking Modern Russian History”, The Seventeenth Annual Philadelphia Theta Distinguished Lecture on History, 1977, 9.
