Using a large set of visual data from a popular social networking site, Vkontakte, the authors employ content analysis to examine how the conflict was represented and interpreted in pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian online communities during the peak of violence in summer 2014.
The findings point to the existence of profound differences in framing the conflict among proUkrainian and pro-Russian online communities.
The former tended to interpret the conflict as a limited military action against local insurgents, whereas the latter presented it as an all-out war against the Russian population of Eastern Ukraine.
The article suggests that framing the conflict through social media facilitated the propagation of mutually exclusive views on the conflict and led to the formation of divergent expectations in Ukraine and Russia concerning the outcome of the war in Donbas.
Keywords conflict, Russia, social media, Ukraine, visual framing, Vkontakte, war An unshaven man with a machine gun waves a toy monkey from the downed Malaysia Airlines plane in front of photographers.
A column of armoured personnel carriers flying Ukrainian flags speeds through a dusty country road.
A group of armed insurgents with an Eastern Orthodox icon and a Russian imperial flag sit around a military truck.
A small company of smiling Ukrainian soldiers with new automatic rifles stand in a sunflower field under the blue sky.
These are just some among thousands of images that flooded Ukrainian and Russian social networking sites in summer 2014 and influenced how internet users from both countries perceived and interpreted the conflict between the Ukrainian army and pro-Russian insurgents in Eastern Ukraine.
In our article, we investigate the role of social media in visual framing of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine, also known as the war in Donbas.
Hoskins and O’Loughlin argue that, in the current age of mediatized war, the media become an integral part of warfare, affecting the ways in which the conflict is perceived by the general public, what decisions are made by policy-makers, and how the history of the conflict is written by historians.
The recognition of this transformation is particularly urgent in the case of post-socialist countries, such as Ukraine and Russia, where digital media ‘form a pivotal discursive territory’ for framing past and present conflict alike, and influence how these conflicts are represented and interpreted by the general public.
In order to contribute to the conflict framing research in the post-socialist context, we examined the emergence of visual frames related to the conflict in Eastern Ukraine in social media, using data from a popular social networking site, Vkontakte.
In order to explore differences in framing the conflict among pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian online communities, we examined visual images published in two public Vkontakte groups – Anti-terrorist operation and Reports from the Novorossiyan Militia – in the second half of summer 2014.
Background to the conflict The origins of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine can be traced back to a series of pro-Russian rallies, which took place in March 2014 in Eastern and Southern Ukraine.
The crisis of legitimacy of the post-Yanukovich government, together with the fear of disruption of cultural and economic relations with Russia, which were historically strong in the eastern and southern regions of Ukraine, served as a starting point for the wave of anti-government protests.
While initially insignificant, these rallies intensified during the Crimean crisis, reaching their peak after the referendum that resulted in the annexation of Crimea by Russia on 18 March.
The next day, the Ukrainian government led by Oleksand Turchinov announced that ‘anti-terrorist measures’ would be taken against armed insurgents in Eastern Ukraine.
Despite the measures, however, the proRussian militant groups, which included both local citizens and Russian volunteers, continued to expand their control over the Donbas region by capturing administrative buildings and police stations in Kramatorsk, Horlivka and Mariupol.
The city of Sloviansk, which was captured by the pro-Russian insurgents led by Igor Girkin2 on 12 April, became the centre of rebellion as well as a place of major confrontation between the pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian forces in the following weeks.
The conflict escalated in May 2014 after a referendum was held in DNR and LNR calling for two independent People’s Republics, followed by the presidential elections in Ukraine, which were won by Petro Poroshenko.
Following Poroshenko’s promise to end the anti-terrorist operation in ‘a matter of hours’ , the Ukrainian army started advancing to the insurgent-controlled territory at the end of May.
A number of skirmishes took place both in and around Donetsk and Luhansk, resulting in dozens of deaths on both the government and insurgent sides.
Despite active resistance from the People’s Republics, which presumably received military support from Russia , pro-government forces managed to re-capture a number of cities in Eastern Ukraine, including Krasnyi Liman and Mariupol.
After a massive battle near Yampil on 19 June, where both sides used armoured vehicles and tanks, the Ukrainian government declared a week-long ceasefire in an attempt to implement Poroshenko’s peace plan.
The compromise, however, was not reached, and the fighting continued with a new government offensive that started on 1 July.
Besides capturing a number of villages in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, on 5 July the Ukrainian army seized Sloviansk, which for three months remained a major insurgent stronghold.
The army’s offensive continued in the following days, resulting in the capture of Kramatorsk and Artemivsk and the retreat of insurgent troops under the command of Girkin to the Donetsk city.
The downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 on 17 July brought a brief break to the fighting, as both the Ukrainian government and insurgents blamed each other for the destruction of the passenger plane.
In a matter of days, however, the confrontation resumed as government forces continued to capture small towns across Donbas in order to surround and isolate insurgent forces; at the same time, the Ukrainian troops undertook another attempt to secure a border between Ukraine and Russia.
Similarly, the city of Horlivka, one of the major industrial hubs in the Donbas region, also came under heavy shelling, resulting in dozens of deaths and the flight of the civilian population.
Despite the quick advancement at the end of July, government forces were not able to secure the Ukrainian state border.
Similarly, attempts to surround Donetsk and isolate the territory of DNR failed after a series of meeting engagements around Shakhtarsk and Miusinsk at the end of July and the beginning of August.
Yet, the decisive breakthrough in the course of the conflict occurred in the second half of August when, during the battle of Ilovaisk, pro-Russian insurgents started their counteroffensive, which resulted in the encirclement of a significant number of Ukrainian troops, including several volunteer battalions.
According to the Ukrainian side, the insurgent counteroffensive was supported by regular Russian army troops, including attack helicopters and tanks ; some reports suggest that up to 4,000 Russian soldiers participated in the insurgent counteroffensive.
The subsequent advancement of insurgent forces resulted in the expansion of the territories of the People’s Republics and the signing of the first Minsk agreements on 5 September, which were intended to ensure a ceasefire between the Ukrainian government and insurgents.
Frames themselves, as Reese argues, can be understood as organizing principles that are both socially shared and persistent over time; by revealing those principles through symbolic forms of expressions, individuals and societies can meaningfully structure the social world around them.
D’Angelo notes that in the process of frame building both types of frames interact with each other as the prior knowledge that individuals have is essential for the processing of information conveyed in media frames; however, the differentiation between different types of frames is helpful for operationalization of the concept of framing in the context of specific case studies.
The role of media frames is important in any social context because their selection affects the way in which an audience perceives a particular issue.
The increased connectivity of today’s media ecology facilitates the dissemination of images and stories related to war and conflict across the globe; however, such an unprecedented visibility of modern conflicts has an ambivalent impact on their representation.
Despite the prevalence of analyses of verbal accounts of conflicts, the use of visual images has significant potential for the framing effort.
These arguments are supported by Schwalbe and Dougherty , who in their study on the use of images for framing the 2006 Israel–Lebannon war point out that not only are visuals processed quicker than texts, but they also produce an immediate emotional response.
Similarly, Parry in her study of visual framing of the 2003 Iraq war argues that visual frames have a higher degree of memorability, which makes their impact higher as compared with verbal ones.
The majority of works dedicated to visual framing of conflicts (Fahmy and Kim, 2008; Neumann and Fahmy, 2012; Parry, 2010) rely upon data from news media, such as newspapers and information agencies.
While images produced by professional journalists for mainstream media remain a major source of frames, the increasing role of social media should also be recognized.
Similarly, in their study of framing of the Sri Lankan civil war, Neumann and Fahmy note that social media reinforce the impact of visual images by facilitating and accelerating their distribution.
Finally, Hamdy and Gomaa in their study of 2011 civic unrest in Egypt found that social media were distinguished from other media platforms by their interactivity and participatory potential that turned them into a significant means for framing civil strife.
Yet, up to now, only a few works examine the use of social media for framing the post-Euromaidan Ukraine crisis, in particular the annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbas.
By investigating how the conflict in Eastern Ukraine was framed by pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian social media users, this article strives to achieve better understanding of the ways digital visuals are used for framing contemporary conflicts and to assess the impact of social media on the development of the Ukraine crisis.
Methodology To conduct our study we used data from Vkontake, which is one of the most popular social networking sites in post-socialist countries.
Furthermore, the audience of Vkontake in these two countries is significantly larger than audiences of other social networking sites, such as Twitter, Facebook, or LiveJournal.
According to Yandex data , 27 million users from Ukraine were registered on Vkontakte in 2014, which is twice as large as the number of Ukrainian users registered on the second most popular social networking site in Ukraine, Odnoklasniki.
The first group was founded on 6 April 2014, and at the time of data collection it included more than 118,000 members and expressed support for the Ukrainian government.
The second group was founded on 26 May 2014 and at the time of data collection it included almost 440,000 members and supported the proRussian insurgents.
Our choice of groups was related to several factors, including their similar thematic (both groups positioned themselves as sources of the latest updates on the conflict) and administrative profiles (both groups were curated by small groups of administrators who were responsible for publishing materials, including image posts), the large number of subscribers , the large amount of visual materials published and the ability of users to leave comments on published visuals.
Following earlier works (Griffin, 2004; Griffin and Lee, 1995; Parry, 2010; Schwalbe and Dougherty, 2015) that rely upon content analysis of conflict-related images, we coded all images from our sample using a selection of metrics, which are described below.
In our selection of categories, we relied on previous works, in particular the study by Griffin and Lee on visual representation of the Gulf war.
All the above-mentioned classifications were produced by two independent coders, each of whom examined all images from the collection.
In the case of discrepancies, two original coders discussed and consensus-coded them; this procedure was used for all classifications in this article.
After classifying images based on their content features, we used descriptive statistics for examining how Vkontakte users received images from different categories.
Similar to Facebook, the use of the Like button in Vkontakte indicates that a user added a certain object to the list of his or her preferred materials, which would be recommended to his or her friends.
Unlike comments (i.e. users’ reactions which usually take the form of verbal texts, but also can be visual texts), which do not appear in the activity feed of users’ friends, likes allow for not only expressing interest towards certain materials, but also automatically sharing them with friends.
Thus, we counted the number of likes and comments that each individual image received, and then calculated five-number summaries in order to examine what kind of reactions were provoked by different categories of images.
Unlike the RftNM group, which sustained consistent activity during the whole period of observation, the ATO group was mostly active in the second half of July and in the second half of August.
Furthermore, except for a few days in August, when members of both groups were actively publishing conflict-related images, the low activity in one group was contrasted by the high activity in another one.
This pattern is particularly illustrative in the period between 17 July and 28 July, when local peaks of activity in the ATO group were contrasted by activity drops in the RftNM group and vice versa.
While these distinctions can be attributed to a number of reasons, including different policies of group administrations or specific patterns of user activity, we suggest that dynamics of frame production in the ATO and RftNM groups was related to the course of the conflict.
According to our observations, the rate of frame production increased at the time of gains for a particular side and decreased at the time of losses.
In the ATO group, the largest activity was observed in the second half of July, which was the period of significant gains for the Ukrainian army that preceded the encirclement of Ukrainian troops in the south of the Luhansk region and a series of defeats in August.
Similarly, in the RftNM group, the rise of activity was observed at the end of July and the beginning of August, which corresponds to several successful meeting engagements around Shakhtarsk and the above-mentioned encirclement of the large group of Ukrainian troops, and after 20 August, which corresponds to the beginning of the insurgents’ counteroffensive near Ilovaisk, which ended with the first Minsk agreements.
The largest peak of activity of the RftNM group corresponds to the turning point in the conflict, when successful defensive actions on the part of pro-Russian insurgents allowed them to stop the advancement of the Ukrainian army in Ilovaisk and prevent the encirclement of Donetsk.
The only exception is represented by the August peak, which was related not to military gains, but to the appearance of messages about the active involvement of the Russian army in the conflict and the presence of regular Russian units near Ilovaisk.
Together, these observations suggest that the dynamics of frame production in proUkrainian and pro-Russian communities changed significantly during the conflict; furthermore, these changes seem to be influenced by the course of the conflict itself.
In both the ATO and RftNM groups, the increase in framing activity corresponded to periods of military gains with activity peaks often coinciding with the end of successful military operations.
Furthermore, it can be connected to the coverage of the conflict in mainstream media, which in the case of Ukraine was mostly focused on successful advancement of Ukrainian troops, thus being particularly active at the time of the Ukrainian army’s gains, whereas Russian media with its emphasis on the suffering endured by civilians and criticism of Ukraine’s actions was more consistent in its coverage of the conflict.
Frequency of content features After exploring the dynamics of frame production, we examined the content features of images used in pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian communities.
However, these similarities mainly concerned the least frequent thematic categories of images, which were equally rarely employed in the ATO and RftNM groups.
Similarly, both sides employed relatively few images of combat action and enemies (e.g.
Some similarities in thematic selection of images that we observed between the two groups also contrasted with recognized patterns of framing conflicts in mainstream media.
Unlike earlier studies, which examined the visual framing of the Iraq wars of 1991 and 2003 and of the Israel–Lebanon conflict , we found only a few images related to significant personalities (e.g. prominent military figures, such as Girkin, or political leaders, such as Poroshenko); instead, the majority of individuals present on images were rank-and-file combatants or ordinary civilians.
At the same time, both Vkontakte groups employed images of dead combatants and civilians more frequently than mainstream media, which can be explained by a lower risk of reputational damage and thus lesser incentive for censorship.
Despite these similarities, our findings also pointed to the presence of profound differences in how the conflict was framed by pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian internet users.
Similar to the way recent conflicts were portrayed in Western mainstream media (Griffin, 2004; Schwalbe, 2013; Schwalbe and Dougherty, 2015), the ATO group represented the war in Donbas through images of shining military vehicles and photogenic young soldiers.
This patriotic perspective on the conflict was amplified by a number of images with recognizable symbols (e.g. blue and yellow flags, and insignias with tridents), which occurred more frequently than in the case of the RftNM group.
The frequent use of such images can be viewed as a combination of two common strategies of security depiction, namely familiarization and suffering ; it is also worth noting that images of civilians were almost absent from the ATO group, which instead focused on the images of combatants and mostly ignored the presence of the civilian population in the conflict zone.
Further distinctions between framing of the conflict by pro-Ukrainian and proRussian communities can be also traced in the way human actors were represented in both groups.
Such a choice of images in the RftNM group not only accentuated non-military aspects of the conflict (e.g. the suffering of civilians and the humanitarian consequences of the conflict), but also evoked more emotional reactions from users that allowed for more effective mobilization.
Similarly, while the most common number of people showed on images was either one or between two and five, in the ATO group such images usually showed combatants, who posed as lone fighters or brothers in arms, thus amplifying the patriotic interpretation of the conflict.
In contrast, the majority of images of single individuals from the RftNM group propagated feelings of isolation and suffering by showing civilians , whereas combatants usually posed in large groups of 10+ people that embodied the all-together fight for the survival of the Eastern Ukrainian population.
These observations point to the presence of profound differences in framing the conflict in Eastern Ukraine by pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian internet users.
The former tended to use visual images for propagating the patriotic view on the events in Eastern Ukraine and emphasizing ‘the good war’ interpretation of the conflict.
For these purposes, images of combatants, military machines and captured trophies were mostly used while, in contrast, images that showed traces of destruction or civilians were underrepresented.
The opposite situation was observed in the pro-Russian community, which accentuated images of destruction and suffering civilians; such a selection of visual images led to the representation of the conflict as an humanitarian crisis, which was caused by the actions of the Ukrainian government.
Reception of content features In the final part of our study we investigated how images with different content features were received by Vkontakte users, using likes and comments as indicators of interest towards particular categories of images.
Because a separate study would be necessary for the detailed investigation of factors that influenced such a significant difference in reception of individual images, we decided to focus on general differences between various categories of images and explore how pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian users interacted with distinct categories of thematic as well as gender/ age/number content features.
One of these thematic categories was the one related to animals; images from this category usually showed kittens and puppies, often sitting on the knees of combatants or civilians.
Similarly, images of significant personalities, such as Poroshenko, Semenchenko and Girkin, were frequently liked by both sides, even though the number of such images was insignificant.
The popularity of the personalities category among Vkontakte users can be attributed to the frequent use of images of military and political leaders by mainstream media, which is one of the common patterns for framing military conflicts (Griffin and Lee, 1995; Schwalbe and Dougherty, 2015); consequently, internet users recognized this pattern and reacted to it positively by liking images of this sort.
The last category of images, which was equally popular among pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian users, was the one that showed maps of the conflict.
Unlike the animals category, the popularity of which can be attributed to affective responses elicited by the cuteness of this sort of images, we suggest that the popularity of maps can be explained by their interpretative potential, which was particularly valuable in the context of chaos and misinformation that characterized the conflict in Eastern Ukraine in summer 2014.
We also identified several thematic categories that were popular in one group, but attracted lesser attention in the other one.
For instance, in the ATO group, images of enemies, mostly, prisoners of war, attracted significantly greater attention than in the RftNM group.
Such a distinction can be interpreted as another piece of evidence of a more positive perception of the conflict among pro-Ukrainian users, who tended to like images that emphasized gains on their side, in particular captured enemy soldiers; it also can be viewed as a positive reception of the belittling strategy of the depiction of the Other , which should make the Other’s threat look manageable.
At the same time, such images had significant interpretative value because they allowed supporters of the pro-Ukrainian side to visualize their opponents.
Such a combination of content features indicates that pro-Russian users were particularly eager to like images that were dealing with insurgent forces and presented them as the defenders of the Russian population and/or the Orthodox faith in Donbas.
Finally, we identified categories of images that attracted the least popularity from Vkontakte users.
In both groups, images related to local landscapes (i.e. photos of surroundings) and documents received the least number of likes.
Similarly, images related to dead people attracted few likes compared to other categories.
While the insignificant number of likes garnered by the latter category of images can be attributed to the moral dilemma (how appropriate is it to register a like on the image of someone’s corpse?), it can be also viewed as an indication that both sides preferred to conceal more nefarious aspects of war by avoiding liking images that showed them and, thus, not recommending these images to their friends.
This suggestion is also supported by the relatively small number of likes received by the ruins category, especially in the ATO group, where this thematic category was the least liked.
Both pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian users were eager to comment on images of animals; similarly, pro-Ukrainian users were active in commenting on images that showed either significant personalities or military maps.
In both cases, images of males attracted a significantly larger number of likes than those of females.
Such a distribution can be viewed as an indicator that both sides preferred to interpret the conflict in Eastern Ukraine as a male affair.
Similarly, in both cases the number of likes was higher for images that showed adults, which can be viewed as another point of agreement between both sides.
Finally, in both cases the number of likes tended to increase according to the number of individuals present in the image.
Consequently, despite the relatively small number of images showing large groups of individuals , such images attracted the largest number of likes from Vkontakte users.
The latter observation can be connected with established patterns of portraying war both in the Soviet and post-Soviet period, where military conflicts were represented as communal efforts with a larger emphasis on collective, rather than individual, aspects of the war.
Unlike likes, which were mostly associated with images of males , comments in both cases were mostly produced in relation to images of females.
Such a distribution can be explained by the predominantly negative sentiment of the latter images, which according to Burke and Develin tends to provoke more empathic reactions from web users on social networking sites.
The same logic can explain the larger number of comments for images that showed actors of mixed ages.
The latter – especially in the case of the RftNM group – usually showed either living or dead women with children and thus invoked more compassionate reactions in the form of verbal comments.
Because like buttons in Vkontake not only provide a positive evaluation of a particular item but also allow users to share it with their friends, we suggest that the ways in which pro-Ukrainian and proRussian users tended to present the conflict in Donbas to their personal audiences outside the ATO and RftNM groups were rather similar.
Both sides preferred to avoid the more gruesome sides of the war and instead emphasize more light-hearted and/or symbolic (i.e. national flags and Orthodox icons) sides of the conflict.
Conclusions In this study, we examined visual framing of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine in pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian online communities.
However, we also found that dynamics of production of visual frames related to the war in Donbas experienced significant changes during the period of observation.
These changes seem to be common for mainstream and social media as in both cases the supply of visual materials depended on the situation in the conflict zone, increasing at a time of gains for a particular side and decreasing at a time of losses.
The fluctuations were particularly significant in the case of the pro-Ukrainian group, whereas the pro-Russian group was more consistent in terms of frame production.
While these differences between groups can be traced back to diverse patterns of mainstream media framing of the conflict in Ukraine and Russia, they can also be related to decisions on the part of group administrators and their view on the purpose behind the group, which in the case of the pro-Russian group was related to public mobilization and thus required more consistent framing effort.
Our study pointed to the presence of fundamental differences in the way the conflict was framed by pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian users.
The former tended to present the conflict in Eastern Ukraine from the patriotic perspective and frame it as ‘the good war’; such an interpretation was articulated through the predominant use of such thematic categories as military machines, combatants and trophies.
In contrast, pro-Russian users presented the conflict as an humanitarian crisis, emphasizing the destruction and suffering that the war brought through the predominant use of civilians and ruins categories.
Further distinctions were found in the use of content features related to gender/age/number of persons; while both groups tended to frame the conflict in Eastern Ukraine as a predominantly male and adult affair, the pro-Russian group provided a more nuanced representation of the conflict in terms of gender and age of human actors.
These profound differences in the choice of content features between pro-Russian and pro-Ukrainian users were contrasted by similarities in the reception of those features.
In both cases, users tended to like those images that articulated light-hearted aspects of the conflict, such as pets or symbols, or those that were common in mainstream media coverage of the conflict, such as images of political or military leaders, as well as combatants.
In contrast, images dealing with more gruesome aspects of the conflict, such as images of death and destruction, garnered less popularity and thus were confined to the online communities where they originated.
Such images, however, spawned a larger number of comments, especially in the pro-Russian group, which can be attributed to a recognized social media trend, according to which images with negative sentiment attract more empathic reactions in the form of comments.
Consequently, we suggest that users’ reactions to conflict-related frames in social media were influenced both by social media trends, such as an affinity for images of cute animals, and mainstream media patterns of conflict framing, such as a focus on recognizable political and military personalities.
The difference between the ways in which the conflict was framed inside the two initial groups and the ways in which Vkontakte users presented it to their individual audiences through the use of like buttons also poses additional questions concerning the role of agency in framing conflicts in the context of social media.
Such a double cycle of frame prosumption makes the study of frame setting more complex, because the process of frame building on social media becomes less deliberate.
Together, our observations suggest that the use of social media for visual framing of the war in Donbas facilitated construction of different and often mutually exclusive views on the conflict in Eastern Ukraine among pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian internet users.
Unlike pro-Ukrainian users, who presented the conflict in Eastern Ukraine as a limited military action against local insurgents, pro-Russian users interpreted it as an allout war initiated by an extremist Ukrainian government.
Consequently, the propagation of such contradictory interpretations has led to the formation of different views on the nature of the conflict as well as divergent expectations concerning the outcome of the war in Donbas.
Thus, we argue that social media have not only complicated the potential dialogue between Ukraine and the People’s Republics, but also aggravated collective traumas from both sides of the frontline, in particular the ones related to events such as the Ilovaisk battle and the Minsk agreements, which interfered with the above-mentioned patterns in framing the conflict in Eastern Ukraine.
Funding This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
More commonly known as Igor Strelkov, Girkin is a former Russian officer, who allegedly served in Russia’s Federal Security Service before retirement in 2013.
He participated in several military conflicts in Eastern Europe, including those in Transnistria, Bosnia and Chechnya.
In 2014, Girkin became one of the major leaders of pro-Russian paramilitary units in Crimea, which played an important role in the annexation of the peninsula by Russia.
Following the withdrawal of Ukrainian forces from Crimea, Girkin departed to mainland Ukraine, where he became one of the leaders of the military insurgency in Eastern Ukraine until August 2014, when he resigned and returned to Russia.
While the Ukraine crisis continued beyond the first Minsk agreements in September 2014, we are not examining its subsequent stages in this article because of the focus on the conflict’s early stage and the lack of data for later periods.
This suggestion is related to general confusion that characterized the representation of enemies of the Ukrainian army in Eastern Ukraine both in mainstream and digital Ukrainian media.
Unlike pro-insurgent media, which quickly adopted a set of tropes (often supplemented with visual images) that presented Ukrainian troops as fascists and/or extreme nationalists, Ukrainian media provided rather fragmentary images of opponents, ranging from Russian special forces and conscripts to local bandits and drug dealers.
Consequently, visual frames that allowed pro-Ukrainian users to actually see what kind of enemy the Ukrainian army was dealing with were able to attract significant interest.
Brantner C, Lobinger K and Wetzstein I Effects of visual framing on emotional responses and evaluations of news stories about the Gaza conflict 2009.
CSCW ‘16 Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing.
D’Angelo P, Kuypers J Doing News Framing Analysis: Empirical, Theoretical, and Normative Perspectives.
Demirjian K and Birnbaum M Russia escalates tensions with aid convoy, reported firing of artillery inside Ukraine.
Dubrovkin D Erich Fromm’s ‘Escape from Freedom’ as a ‘Field Manual’ for Donbas.
Fahmy S and Kim D Picturing the Iraq War constructing the image of war in the British and United States press.
Greenwood K and Jenkins J Visual framing of the Syrian conflict in news and public affairs magazines.
Constructing an image of the war in Time, Newsweek, and United States News & World Report.
Hamdy N and Gomaa E Framing the Egyptian uprising in Arabic language newspapers and social media.
WWW ‘14 Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web.
Kuntsman A Online memories, digital conflicts and the cybertouch of war.
Analyzing the role of technologies in various phases of the confrontation.
Markwick R The great patriotic war in Soviet and post-Soviet collective memory.
Messaris P and Abraham L The convergence of agenda setting and framing.
A war/peace framing analysis of the 2009 visual coverage of the Sri Lankan civil war in Western newswires.
Visual framing, humanitarianism and British press photography during the 2003 Iraq invasion.
Schwalbe C Visually framing the invasion and occupation of Iraq in TIME, Newsweek, and United States News & World Report.
An analysis of Georgian online and print news around the 2008 Russo–Georgian War.
Turchinov ob’javil o nachale antiterroristicheskoj operacii na jugo-vostoke Ukrainy (Turchynov declared the beginning of anti-terrorist operation in South-Eastern Ukraine) , 7 April.
CHI ‘13 Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
His PhD research is focused on Second World War memory in Ukraine and how it is affected by the processes of de-Sovietization, nationalization and digitization that the country is currently undergoing.
In his recent research, he has also explored the use of social media in the context of the Ukraine crisis and the role of cultural memory in securitization of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine.
Maryna Sydorova is an Amsterdam-based data analyst, who is currently working as an independent social media expert and information and communication technology specialist.
In the recent years she was involved in a number of research projects which were dealing with digital trauma in Eastern and Central Europe.
Her major area of expertise is audience/interest metrics and her current research is focused on digital representation of war and conflict in post-socialist states.
