USE METRO AR TO WATCH A CLIP FROM HIS NEW FILM, MOMMY THAT’S JUST TUTU CUTE A group of youngsters performs as part of a Youth Ballet and Contemporary Dance of Saskatchewan recital at Conexus Arts Centre on Sunday.
The dancers took the stage during a portion of the program based on fairy tales, including Twelve Dancing Princesses, Princess and the Pea and Sleeping Beauty.
The company also held a recital on Saturday night, ross romaniuk/metro Wildfire forces evacuation of northern town Stanley Mission.
Hundreds find refuge elsewhere as blaze threatens community's sole access road MORGAN MODJESKI Metro in Saskatoon Officials have ordered an evacuation of Stanley Mission First Nation as a wildfire threatens the northern Saskatchewan community’s only access road and power source.
The largest of nine wildfires in Saskatchewan, the blaze north of Stanley Mission is said to cover about 4,000 hectares.
To help crews trying to stop the fire from reaching the road, response teams and aircraft have joined the battle.
Saskatchewan’s water bombers are fighting the blaze out of La Ronge, about 80 kilometres away, and the province has ordered further aerial support from Ontario.
Deanna Wysoslcey, provincial co-ordinator of emergency social services, said the government is able to accommodate 1,100 more people if needed.
Emergency liaison crews were sent in on Wednesday after two fires, one of which has since been brought under control, approached the community. imaMM FLOORING pi 5/16"" Engineered Hardwood 4 colors.
FURNITURE & ACCESSORIES (kitchen tables, pictures, lamps, mirrors, coffee & end tables) TAKE AN ADDITIONAL 10% OFF* of Sale tags of items already reduced.
But most low rate mortgages come with restrictive terms that could keep you in your mortgage longer than you'd like.
So, instead of thinking about the cost of your mortgage in rate terms, think about it in dollar terms.
The key to saving interest costs is having the flexibility to increase payments or make extra payments.
With rates as low as they are, regular lump sum and increased payments will save you more interest over the life of your mortgage.
But keep in mind that small changes can make a big difference in helping you become mortgage-free faster so keeping that flexibility is essential.
Since we refuse to overload our mortgages with restrictions and we insist on giving people competitively low rates, the only way we can do it is for a limited time.
Where a typical appraisal fee of $300 is assumed , the APR equals 3.02% (compounded semi-annually, not in advance), for a term of 5 years assuming a mortgage of $100,000 with a 25-year amortization.
Where a typical appraisal fee of $300 is assumed , the APR equals 2.52% , for a term of 5 years assuming a mortgage of $100,000 with a 25-year amortization.
The Scotia Flex Value® Mortgage interest rate varies with Scotiabank Prime.
These offers expire June 7th, 2014 but are subject to change or withdrawal at any time.
Alternatively, assuming the same mortgage of $270,000 with a 25-year amortization at a rate of 2.97%, if you keep your monthly payment frequency but apply annual lump sum prepayments of $500 and increase your regular payments by just $20 every year, after your first year, you will decrease your amortization to less than 21 years and save approximately $18,923 in interest. metronews.ca Monday, May 26 , 2014 Study $82K over budget City hall.
Taxpayer advocate urges accountability after big jump in wastewater report's contract value MARCO VIGLIOTTI marco.vigliotti® metronews.ca A national watchdog group is calling for better accountability at city hall after a consultant’s report on regional collaboration opportunities for wastewater services went $82,000 over budget.
Colin Craig, Prairie-region director for the Canadian Taxpayers Federation, says city officials need to be more vigilant when it comes to safeguarding the public purse.
Craig says the amount over budget appears “fairly high” for a consultant’s report, though he cautions against prematurely ringing alarm bells over a possibility that this will lead to the city’s planned wastewater treatment plant exceeding its projected $224-million price tag.
In 2013, city staff awarded consulting firm CH2M-HILL a contract to conduct a study on the region’s water services.
As the project progressed, however, the scope of the study was “updated” to account for the “unanticipated additional amount of consultation time” required with stakeholders, according to a report prepared by administrative staff and slated to go before council on Monday.
That’s a wrap for arts festival Actor and playwright Daniel Macdonald reads poetry on Sunday at Regina’s Mercury Cafe and Grill as part of the Hair of the Dog Cafe that wrapped up the Cathedral Village Arts Festival.
The festival — held annually — included a street fair on 13th Avenue on Saturday, as well as many other events throughout its seven days, courtesy Bernadette wagner Boundary changes possible for council wards Regina is eyeing a potential adjustment to the boundaries of its 10 city council wards to reflect shifting population patterns and to incorporate newly annexed land from the neighbouring Rural Municipality of Sherwood.
Boundaries of wards in the east, west, northwest and southwest have been moved to incorporate land absorbed by the city as part of last year’s annexation agreement.
It appears that no voters would become residents of different wards, according to the map.
The changes appear poised to affect only RM of Sherwood residents who would fall within the city’s enlarged area.
The map will be on display to the public at city hall from June 9 to 13.
The commission will hold public hearings on July 3 to provide information and solicit feedback.
After the hearings, the commission will finalize its boundaries proposal and submit it to COUncil.
Pickup & Delivery Service Available NEWS Scan the photo below with your Metro News app to see a photo gallery of election day in Ukraine. _f r A Ukrainian soldier, with his daughter, casts a ballot during voting in the presidential election at a polling station in the village of Kovyri in western Ukraine, Sunday.
Ukrainian presidential candidate Petro Poroshenko speaks to press at a polling Station in Kyiv, Sunday.
SERGEI chuzavkov/the associated press metronews.ca Monday, May 26, 2014 Ukraine’s decision day Presidential election.
Billionaire chocolate magnate pledges to ‘bring peace to the Ukrainian land’ An exit poll showed that billionaire candy-maker Petro Poroshenko won Ukraine’s presidential election Sunday in the first round — a vote that authorities hoped would unify the deeply fractured nation.
The ballot took place amid weeks of fighting in the sprawling eastern regions that form Ukraine’s industrial heartland, where pro-Russia separatists have seized government buildings and battled government troops.
The rebels had vowed to block the ballot in the east — and less than 20 per cent of the polling stations were open there.
The exit poll for Sunday’s election, conducted by three respected Ukrainian survey agencies, found the 48-yearold candy tycoon Poroshenko getting 55. per cent of the vote.
At a distant second was former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenlco with 12. per cent, the poll showed.
Full results are expected Monday in the election that could be a critical step toward resolving Ukraine’s protracted crisis.
He also said his first visit would be to Donbass, Ukraine’s eastern industrial region.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS metr NEWS Low voter turnout in the east Rebels close polling stations The question of who was able to vote Sunday loomed large over the democratic process.
Some 35. million Ukrainians were eligible to vote, but separatists in the eastern Donetsk and Luhanslc regions — which have 5. million voters — said they would not hold the vote because they are no longer part of Ukraine.
There was no voting in the city of Luhanslc either, but some stations were open in the wider Luhanslc region.
Sergei Melnichulc, a Ukrainian army battalion commander in Novoaidar, said about 50 armed pro-Russia rebels attacked a polling station trying to seize ballots but government forces thwarted the move and captured 13 rebels.
The InterfaxUlcraine news agency quoted the deputy interior minister as saying one person was killed and another injured in the fighting.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Thai military threatens action on protesters Thailand’s ruling militaiy council stiffened its warnings Sunday against protests over its takeover of power, with its patience apparently wearing thin over demonstrations that have been growing in size and boldness.
Prayuth Chan-ocha, was expected to receive the king’s endorsement formalizing his status as head of government.
After that, it’s anticipated Prayuth may announce plans for reshaping Thailand’s political scene with an interim constitution to replace the one scrapped by the army after Thursday’s coup, and an appointed legislative body.
After three days of tense but mostly nonviolent confrontations between protesters and security forces, a spokesman for the ruling National Council for Peace and Order warned that officials may need to strictly enforce an army-imposed law that prohibits people from demonstrating against the coup.
Winthai Suvaree said that in case of clashes in which losses or injuries incur, no compensation can be claimed because the country is under martial law.
On Sunday, protesters against the coup appeared to number as many as 2,000, growing from a few hundred on Friday, the associated press Military custody The military has sought to limit the protests by detaining figures who might play leadership roles.
Exit polls EU Parliament shifts to the right Exit polls show the far right and Euroskeptics have made sweeping gains in European Parliament elections, signalling a major political shift toward parties that want to slash the European Union’s powers or abolish it altogether.
One of the most significant winners appeared to be France’s far-right National Front.
Two polling companies said Sunday that the party, led by Marine Le Pen, was the outright winner in France with one-quarter of the popular vote.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Egypt Interim president promises fair election Egypt’s interim president urged Egyptians on Sunday to come out and vote in this week’s presidential election, saying the vote will shape the nation’s future.
In a televised address, Adly Mansour also sought to assure Egyptians that state institutions, including his office, would not interfere in the Monday and Tuesday voting.
Choosing, without being guided or dictated to, the person we trust to have the ability to build and run the nation,” Mansour said.
Poll results from SVT Sunday suggested seven per cent of Swedes back the feminist party, which wants to boost the rights of women and minorities in the European Union.
The poll showed farright Sweden democrats with seven per cent support compared to 3. per cent in 2009.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS metronews.ca Monday, May 26, 2014 NEWS 05 Pope expresses solidarity with Palestinians Holy Land pilgrimage.
In an unscripted move, Francis arranged a meeting between the Israeli and Palestinian presidents at the Vatican next month.
The meeting, while largely symbolic, shows how the Pope has sought to Poland The general in tinted glasses dies Poland’s last communist leader, the general in tinted glasses, died Sunday at age 90 after a long struggle with cancer.
Wojciech Jaruzelski and his family were deported to Siberia by the Red Army during the Second World War.
Despite his suffering at Soviet hands, Jaruzelski faithfully imposed Moscow’s will on his subjugated nation until communism crumbled across the region in 1989.
Poland is deeply divided over whether to view Jaruzelski as a traitor or as a patriot who made an agonizing decision to spare the countiy the bloodshed of a Soviet invasion.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS transform his immensely popular appeal into a moral force for peace.
On the second day of a threeday swing through the region, the Pope arrived in Bethlehem, the birthplace of Christianity, before heading to Israel for the final leg of his visit.
While Francis mingled warmly with his Israeli hosts, his trip to Bethlehem included the day’s most powerful images as he expressed sympathy and solidarity with the Palestinians.
Even the Pope’s arrival in Bethlehem — by helicopter straight from Jordan — carried important symbolic significance.
Past papal visits to the West Bank have come through Israel, which captured the territoiy in the 1967 Mideast war.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Shark fishing in Indonesia A worker weighs a shark in Banyuwangi, Indonesia, on Sunday.
Indonesia has become one of the major exporters of meat and shark fins in the world.
So do movie features, sports highlights, celebrity gossip... metr 06 NEWS metronews.ca Monday, May 26, 2014 Jamaica Lobbyists urge government to decriminalize pot Lobbyists in Jamaica are urging the government to move quickly to decriminalize pot and establish a local medical marijuana industry.
The Cannabis Commercial and Medicinal Research Taskforce organized a threeday conference on marijuana decriminalization with Jamaica’s largest university.
On Sunday, the lobbyists issued a 12-point roadmap they want the government to follow.
They assert Jamaica can significantly benefit from cannabis commercialization.
But with some successes by the legalization movement around the globe, there’s a growing push to lift restrictions on the Caribbean island.
Some cabinet ministers have publicly taken up the idea, but the government has provided little indication of its thinking on the issue.
Belgium launches manhunt for suspect Belgium launched a nationwide hunt Sunday for a lone gunman who walked into the Jewish Museum, unpacked a Kalashnikov rifle, killed four people with a short burst of fire, packed up and briskly walked away.
Saturday’s attack led Belgian officials to raise anti-terror measures and increase the protection for Jewish sites for what was widely seen as an anti-Semitic attack.
It happened on the eve of Belgium’s nationwide election and as voters across the continent picked a new European Parliament.
Video of the attack showed an athletic man with a cap walking with determination into the small Jewish Museum in the swank Sablon area.
The fourth victim died Sunday afternoon, according to a government official who asked not to be identified because the news had not yet been officially announced.
Leaders from Belgium and France, Pope Francis, Israeli leader Benjamin Netanyahu and others condemned the cold-blooded attack.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Killer blamed women who rejected him California college rampage.
Rodger then apparently shot and killed himself inside the black BMW he used in the violence, authorities said Saturday.
The rampage played out largely as he laid it out in the public postings, including a YouTube video where he sits in the BMW in sunset light and appears to be acting out scripted lines and planned laughs.
The first three killed Friday were male stabbing victims in Rodger’s own apartment whose names have not been released, Brown said Saturday.
Then, at about 9:30m., the citywide shooting and vehicle-ramming rampage began.
No one answered the door after one to two minutes of aggressive pounding, but he soon shot three women who were standing nearby, killing two of them, 19-year-old Veronika Weiss and 22-year-old Katherine Cooper.
He then drove to a deli where he walked inside and shot and killed another UC Santa Barbara student, 20-year-old Christopher Michaels-Martinez, the sheriff said.
Michaels-Martinez was the last one killed, but the rampage would continue as Rodger drove across Isla Vista, shooting at some and running down others with his car, twice exchanging gunfire with deputies.
He was shot in the hip, but the gunshot to the head that killed him was thought to be self-inflicted, Brown said.
Thirteen people were injured, eight from gunshot wounds, four from the vehicle and one whose origin wasn’t clear.
Brown told CNN on Sunday that investigators were still finalizing next-ofkin notifications and positive identifications.
Lawyer According to the Rodgers’ lawyer, the family warned the police about the videos.
Deputies visited Rodger last month after being alerted by local health officials, who had been in touch with the family.
They concluded he posed no threat. metronews.ca Monday, May 26, 2014 BUSINESS 07 The right to be forgotten Marketing.
An American is pinning the recent court ruling on searchengine results on ‘prissy European sensibilities’ Europe’s moves to rein in Google — including a court ruling this month ordering the search giant to give people a say in what pops up when someone searches their name — may be seen in Brussels as striking a blow for the little guy.
But across the Atlantic, the idea that users should be able to edit Google search results in the name of privacy is being slammed as weird and difficult to enforce at best and a crackdown on free speech at worst.
Mountain View, Calif.based Google says it’s still figuring out how to comply with the European Court of Justice’s May 13 ruling, which says the company must respond to complaints about private information that turns up in searches.
Google must then decide whether the public’s right to be able to find the information outweighs an individual’s right to control it — with preference given to the individual, the associated press They taste a lot better than they sound.
If you have been in Ottawa recently and tried one of Angela Firman and Kathy Aldridge’s Hot Cream Holes, or stuffed your face with Maria and Claudio Santamaria’s Bunz and Ballz, you know what I mean.
Yes, the names are sexual and that’s no accident when you talk to the two ladies serving up hot donuts stuffed with ice cream.
Now if you’re not ready for dessert yet, take a bite of Santamaria’s Bunz and Balls — Italian arancini and ravazzata stuffed with ground beef, green peas and a homemade ragu sauce.
Maria told Metro that while the name is a bit racy, customers didn’t really take note until they added the cannoli to complement the Bunz and Ballz — a long, skinny dessert shaped like, well, you get it.
He said that a good brand goes beyond just a name, but encompasses the entire philosophy and personality of the people behind the business.
TREVOR GREENWAY/METRO IN OTTAWA Kid-centric brands fuming over e-cigarette flavours Shopping.
You are... but not by a store derk Owners of brands geared toward children of all ages are battling to keep notable names like Thin Mint, Tootsie Roll and Cinnamon Toast Crunch off the flavoured nicotine used in electronic cigarettes.
General Mills Inc., the Girl Scouts of the USA and Tootsie Roll Industries Inc. are among several companies that have sent ceaseand-desist letters to makers of the liquid nicotine demanding they stop using the brands and may take further legal action if necessary.
They want to make sure their brands aren’t being used to sell an addictive drug or make it appealing to children.
The actions highlight the debate about the array of flavours available for the battery-powered devices that heat a liquid nicotine solution, creating vapour that users inhale.
The Food and Drug Administration last month proposed regulating electronic cigarettes but didn’t immediately ban fruit or candy flavours, which are barred for use in regular cigarettes because of the worry that the flavours are used to appeal to children.
It’s growing pains for the industry that reached nearly $2 billion United States in sales last year in the face of looming regulation.
E-cigarette users say the devices address both the addictive and behavioural aspects of smoking without the thousands of chemicals found in regular cigarettes.
There are about 1,500 e-liquid makers in the United States and countless others abroad selling vials of nicotine from traditional tobacco to cherry cola on the Internet and in retail stores, often featuring photos of the popular treats.
Using the brand name like Thin Mint or Fireball conjures up a very specific flavour in buyers’ minds, in a way that just “mint chocolate” or “cinnamon” doesn’t.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS ‘Reducing bureaucracy’ Rogers cutting corner-office fat There will be some reductions in the management ranks at Rogers Communications Inc. and a new focus on agility but no large-scale reductions are planned, the company’s new chief executive says.
Rogers president and CEO Guy Laurence spent Friday telling the company’s workforce and reporters Rogers will untangle organizational structure that he likened to a bowl of “cold spaghetti” so it can be better at meeting the needs of customers.
Laurence said he doesn’t expect job losses among the company’s front-line employees and “in fact, I see investment in that area.” the Canadian press You’re not being paranoid.
Analytics—finding patterns in recorded data — has long been a major part of e-commerce.
The Silicon Valley, Calif., start-up RetailNext uses algorithms to interpret data taken from surveillance video cameras and smartphone trackers installed inside some of North America’s biggest retailers.
The video cameras and Wi-Fi trackers can tell store owners details, like how long a customer spends looking at a specific pair of jeans.
Wi-Fi trackers, which can be set up on store shelves, gather data by automatically activating and reading anonymous identifiers in customer’s smartphones.
Raynell Andreychuk in the thick of Sunday’s Ukrainian election was as difficult as trying to secure democracy in a nation that has seen political struggle after struggle for generations past.
When the connection was finally made, it was understandable that Saskatchewan’s senator hardly had time for an interview.
Andreychuk led Canada’s observation missions for the 2010 and 2012 elections in Ukraine.
She is leading this one as well, with former Ontario premier Mike Harris.
Andreychuk says Ukrainians — in Canada and in URBAN COMPASS Christina Cherneskey reginaCmetronews.i Ukraine — are weary of crisis after crisis and simply want to get on.
If accepted and unchallenged, this vote will help restore the stability Kyiv needs.
It will boost solidarity and pride, and perhaps shine a brighter, more hopeful light on the future.
Faith for reform in Ukraine dimmed rapidly after the Orange Revolution of2004.
A a recognition of Ukraine’s solidarity now should optimistically ease tensions with Russia.
Andreychuk said many have approached her and spoke of Saskatchewan as one of the beacons for Ukrainian immigrants — now and over the generations.
Andreychuk, who hails from Saskatoon, is a lawyer, former judge and former ambassador.
Andreychuk has been an ideal representative for Canada in Ukraine, not only because of her roots, but because of the compassion she delivers for Ukrainians andUlcrainian-Canadians alike.
When I finished my observation mission in 2012,1 was genuinely confused as to who had won — despite media reports and results, which made no sense at all.
For the observers who have taken time away from work or family, Andreychuk respects every last one of them.
The Athabasca Glacier is the la rgest of six ice sheets that form partofthe Columbia Icefield in Jasper National Park.
You should see the AR in action — like a video, slide show or mobile content experience.
You can even move your phone away from the page and interact with the content directly on your device.
DOWNLOAD METRO NEWS APP FILL SCREEN WITH METRO AR IMAGE IMAGETOSCAN JUMPSTOLIFE New phone app helps you find your perfect match ... if you’re looking for a cat or dog, that is.
The PetMatch app allows users to upload an image of a cute critter and then searches its database of animals that are almost identical, and up for adoption.
The gizmo, launched by California startup Superfish, uses techy algorithms and patented image recognition technology to plot key characteristics (eyes, mouth and colour) to speed up the search process.
Metro chats to co-founder Adi Pinhas about why pictures are worth a thousand words.
We started with animals because it’s a greatnews case study for a visual search.
It demonstrates the technology in a way that shows that visual searches can be more fun and efficient than text searches.
Rarely you know the name of a breed’s name or how to search for it, so this app does the hard bit for you.
People are taking images of desserts in a restaurant and we can show them restaurants that are selling similar desserts.
Yes, we are looking and we’re thinking how can we make the camera a lot smarter.
If someone wants a handbag or want to know the name of a flower, they can take a pic and find out its name and where it is available.
It means you can scan the photo below with your Metro News app to see a clip from Xavier Dolan’s new film Mommy SCENE 09 Young Canadian wows Cannes jury metronews.ca Monday, May 26, 2014 The Mozart Project By.
By James Fairclough & Harry Farnham iPad/iPhone Kris Abel @ReaiKrisAbei , scene@metronews.ca A mind-blowing, definitive look at Mozart’s music and genius, this ebook is astonishingly alive with sheet music, letters, paintings, timelines, and child prodigy performances.
There are hours of music, discussion, and short films, all so veiy humbling, surprising, and beautiful.
Days of Future Past is the second-highest opener in the X-Men franchise.
Xavier Dolan shares festival prize with legendary French filmmaker Canadian director Xavier Dolan won the Juiy Prize for his film Mommy at the Cannes Film Festival Saturday, sharing the honour with French filmmaker Jean-Luc Godard.
There were high hopes that Dolan would win the festival’s top award, the prestigious Palme d’Or, but that honour went to the Turkish drama Winter Sleep.
Dolan so was moved that he shared his prize with Godard, the 83-year-old film icon.
Dolan, 25, was the youngest director at the festival, while Godard (Goodbye to Language), 83, was the oldest.
Dolan was veiy emotional when he went on stage, having to interrupt his speech a few times to regain his composure.
He also seized the opportunity to urge his peers, in terms of age, to think big.
In 2009 he made a splash with his directorial debut, I Killed My Mother, written when he was just 17.
The film — a semi-autobiographical stoiy about a boy discovering his homosexuality and battling with his mother — reportedly earned an eightminute standing ovation at the festival and ultimately won three awards in the Director’s Fortnight program.
The Montreal-born filmmaker began acting in commercials at age four, appeared in the TV movie Misericorde in 1994, and the divisive 2008 horror film Martyrs in 2008.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS WITH FILES FROM TORSTAR NEWS SERVICE Julianne Moore wins Best Actress for Cronenberg satire Julianne Moore won the best actress prize at the 67th Cannes Film Festival Saturday for her role as a shallow starlet in Canadian director David Cronenberg’s biting Hollywood satire Maps to the Stars.
In the film, the 53-yearold redhead plays an aging actress feeling increasingly sidelined by an industry obsessed with youth.
When the young son of a rival for a new film role is killed in a freak drowning accident, Moore does a dance of joy that remained one of the enduring shocks of this year’s festival.
Moore has played everything from a porn star to an FBI agent in her 20-year film career, a career that has already brought four Oscar nominations, two Golden Globes and a Primetime Emmy to her name.
Her best-known films include 1998’s The Big Lebowslci, Crazy Stupid Love as well as The Hours and Far From Heaven, both from 2002.
Those last two helped her join the elite club of actors to score two Oscar nominations for different films in the same year.
Moore won a Golden Globe and an Emmy for portraying Sarah Palin in 2012’s Game Change, about Republican John McCain’s doomed 2008 White House run with the former Alaska governor as his gaffe-prone running mate, afp 10 metronews.ca Monday, May 26, 2014 Saskatoon rcnbrorrs diversity in prop**, commutM*«, and pastimes Feel at home as you make connections with fnendty locals who welcome you with warmth and spirit inviting you to join In the endless experiences our city has to offer.
TOURISMSASK ATOON COM T»l Hm 1MQJefJ444 TourismSaskatoon □ □□□□ metr METRO DISH OUR TAKE ON THE WORLD OF CELEBRITIES The Word It's Twilights out for‘too old’ Pattinson STARGAZING Maiene Arpe scene@metronews.ca Robert Pattinson says that “I couldn’t do another Twilight movie.
Women are getting plastic surgeiy on their hands so their engagement ring selfies will look better.
Gwyneth Paltrow and Chris Martin are still living together even though they’ve consciously uncoupled Awww... that’s so civilized and wonderful and gives hope to eveiyone terrified they’d inadvertently end up in a relationship with Gwyneth Paltrow.
Try to think of the longest, most rambling wedding reception speech you’ve ever had to endure.
Well, the one Kanye West gave this weekend might have been longer and ramblier.
As the whole world knows, the rapper married reality star Kim Kardashian on Saturday at Fort Belvedere in Florence.
West “went on and on about the culture of being in the limelight and that all the spoofing and tabloid covers don’t get him or the Kardashian family down.
The site also reported that West “got very heated during certain parts of his speech, but he also had veiy sweet things to say about his new bride.
Unhappily Eva after losing role to Chastain Eva Mendes is apparently bitter rivals with Oscar nominee Jessica Chastain — even if Chastain is completely unaware of it.
Mendes “feels an intense, one-sided rivalry that stems from when she lost out to Jessica for the role of Maya in Zero Dark Thirty,” a source tells Radar Online.
Complicating matters is the fact that the actresses reportedly share a talent agent.
You may not be in the red, but your closet is jammed to the rafters with stuff.
Chronic spending is often unconscious spending, so you may not even know you’re doing it.
Emotional shoppers turn to the high they derive from spending money to compensate from the low they’re feeling in their lives.
I hate to burst your bubble, but shopping isn’t going to make up for a crappy childhood.
Nor will it cure an unhappy career, a disintegrating relationship or anything else that ails you emotionally.
If you’re buying to feel better, you’re spending for the wrong reasons.
The problem for people who can’t curb their desire for immediate gratification is that they’re not prioritizing.
They’ve lost the ability to figure out if they can do without, so they’re living in debt or, worse, a centimetre away from destitution.
As counterintuitive as it may seem, some people become chronic spenders out of a fear of poverty.
If you have a trophy kitchen but you’re not cooking, take it as a sign.
Not to put too fine a point on it, but your credit limit is not actually money in your pocket.
When you shop on credit and don’t pay your balance off in full, you’re spending money you have yet to earn.
If you have 30 pairs of shoes, only five of which you wear regularly, steer clear of shoe stores.
Buy only the basic necessities such as food and transportation and keep track of every penny you spend.
Throw your credit cards behind the refrigerator and pay for everything with cash.
At some point we’ve got to move back to the idea that acquisition of stuff should fulfil our needs, not make us work longer and longer hours to accumulate things we don’t even have time to use.
In short, the study concludes that the best way to foster healthy eating habits in young children is to avoid telling them how fruits and vegetables will make them stronger, taller or smarter.
AFP Turn over healthy leaf • Meanwhile, a separate study published last year in the journal Psychological Science found that teaching kids about nutrition through books could boost their vegetable intake.
Two couples, one year to make them richer Halfway to accomplishing their goals Since January I have been working to improve the finances of two Canadian couples.
By focusing on growing their net worth, we have tackled debt, bought a home, prepared for the arrival of a new baby and started preparing for the long term — eventual retirement.
Follow along every month as we examine each couple’s bank accounts, work through any challenges they face, and celebrate all of their financial accomplishments along the way. Lesley-Anne Scorgie/For Metro Anne-Marie and Peter Carolina and Jose With two weeks left before their baby arrives, AnneMarie and Peter have raced toward firming up their insurance coverage, finishing their nursery and putting the final touches on their maternity-leave budget.
With feelings of parental protection kicking in, AnneMarie and Peter have amped up Anne-Marie’s insurance policy provided through her employer and completed their wills.
Anne-Marie now has three times her basic salary in a death benefit, approximately $200,000.
She also signed up for $500,000 in accidental death and dismemberment insurance and dependent life insurance, which gives $15,000 for Peter and $7,500 for their child, should either pass away.
Peter’s employer offers minimal life and accident insurance, so he is seeking term life coverage — “useit-or-lose-it” insurance — through an independent provider.
The couple will consider a whole-life policy, one where your beneficiaries are guaranteed a payout, in a few years.
Toronto • Ages: 37 and 33 • Occupations: Broadcasting and sports editing.
Medium — they use budgets to help guide spending, have some cies are too expensive.
The couple is focused on improving their RRSPs, and is researching their mutual funds.
Reviewing their current portfolio revealed that although Anne-Marie and Peter are balanced mediumrisk investors, they are currently invested in a low-risk portfolio, with only one year of performance history.
So they are exploring opportunities to transition into a balanced mutual fund portfolio containing a blend of bonds and blue-chip stocks with more than 10 years performance history.
Though past performance isn’t indicative of future performance, retirement savings, and are committed to paying off debt.
Pay off debt, start a savings program for child's education and down payment on first home.
Peter is in the process of confirming his freelance opportunity valued at approximately $18,000.
Anne-Marie and Peter will focus on selecting new investments, welcoming their baby, applying for a social insurance number for the baby, and setting up their child’s registered education savings plan.
After searching unsuccessfully, being outbid by other buyers and fighting the temptation to compromise on their wish list, the couple finally found a suburban townhome that meets the needs of their growing family — and still meets their budget constraints.
The townhome is well located near schools and transit, which will ease Jose’s commute to work and reduce Carolina’s time in the car driving their girls to and from various activities.
Though the townhome needs a little work, I have provided Jose and Carolina with a list of low-cost, highimpact home improvements that they can start to tackle themselves, like painting, changing knobs and making small repairs rather than replacing larger items like their furnace.
Medium to low — they recently established a budget, are term at approximately three per cent interest.
This decision reduced their overall interest expenses, and allowed them to qualify for a more suitable mortgage.
The couple’s concerns over closing costs, which are typically one to two per cent of the home’s value, have been tempered through Jose’s recent job promotion and raise, insurance savings by eliminating the mini-van loan and receiving a healthy tax return.
The focus for Carolina and Jose throughout June is to pack up and move into their very frugal spenders, have no retirement savings, and are committed to paying off debt.
To build on the couple’s financial momentum, primarily resulting from the gift of the down payment, they will also begin the process of creating a plan to officially move their net worth into a positive position by the end of the year.
Earn up to $150 with Tangerine. $50* when you open your first Chequing Account by June 30. $50* when you switch your pay by July 31. $50* when you open your first Savings Account by June 30.
Plus, get a 2.50%* interest rate on new savings deposits made until July 31.
It’s that simple. langerine.ca | 1-888 Tangerine ""langerine T Forward Banking Tangerine is a trademark of The Bank of Nova Scotia, used under license.
The combination of apricot preserves and hoisin sauce in this Apricot Glazed Shrimp Skewers and Spaghettini recipe goes well with the sweetness of the shrimp.
You can also use a variety of fish such as scallops, or a firm white fish such as swordfish, cod or halibut.
In terms of good quality pasta, Catelli has launched a preservative-free whole-wheat pasta with only wheat as the ingredient.
If you’re using wooden skewers, soak in water for 20 minutes before grilling to prevent the wood from burning.
Combine the apricot jam, oyster and hoisin sauce in a Nutritional information Per serving • Calories.3.
In the meantime, cook the pasta in boiling water just until tender, approximately 5 minutes.
In a grill pan or a skillet lightly coated with cooking spray, saute the shrimp, just until about 5 minutes.
Serve over with the remaining sauce they are no longer pink, top of the pasta, drizzle and garnish with basil.
When you need your teacher to vouch for you, make sure you reach out with respect LAKSHMI GANDHI Metro World News Recommendation letters have always been a big part of the graduate school application process.
Along with your transcripts, essays and standardized test scores, these letters provide admissions officers a window into your academic interests, job performance, and, ideally, your personality.
Students thinking about applying to graduate programs and fellowships in the fall should start thinking now about which professors they would like to ask to recommend them.
Because writing detailed recommendations can be very time-consuming for faculty members, taking these simple steps can make the entire process go smoother for everyone.
Dodd often blogs about jobs and internships on her blog Thoughts on Teaching.
It’s also a good idea to talk to your professors about your life outside of class.
Don’t be shy about inviting a professor to a concert you are performing in or mentioning the play that you are producing.
While they may not be able to come, extending the invite is a great chance to talk about your interests and goals.
Dodd recently recommended a student who had taken a class with her while he was a sophomore, yet made it a point to regularly stop by her office for two years afterwards.
When he asked her for a job recommendation, “I was really invested in him,” she said.
Ask as early as possible A good recommendation letter takes time to research and compose, so it’s important to be respectful of the faculty member’s schedule.
Ask at least a month before your deadline, says Dodd, though earlier is always better.
Keep in mind that a lot of other students are also asking for letters and that the deadlines all tend to fall around the same dates.
Also, be sure to let your instructor know which school you selected in the end.
Ask in person Schedule a meeting with your professor so you can discuss the schools you are applying for, your goals, and why you want to go to grad school.
Making a request for a recommendation over email or just after class can seem too casual and rushed.
Dodd adds that you should also tell your professor why you would like a recommendation from them specifically.
Saying something like, ‘I think as a student, you really saw me as a writer,”’ lets the professor know why you requested them in particular.
Take no for an answer You want your recommendations to be from people who are enthusiastic about you and your abilities.
If a professor tells you that they are not the best person to write your letter, believe them and move on.
Fill these positions PAULINE ANDERSON For Metro Next to the oil industry, the health-care field is probably the biggest growth area in terms of future job prospects across Canada.
As the population ages and retires, the demand for skilled health-care professionals will steadily increase, experts predict.
Health-carerelated positions consistently lead the list of top jobs across the country compiled regularly by Canadian Business magazine using Statistics Canada data.
Registered nurses: Of all the medical professions likely to be sought after in the future, nursing could be at the top of the list.
A 2009 report by the Canadian Nurses Association predicted that if action isn’t taken right away, the shortage of registered nurses, who perform all manner of hands-on bedside health care, will climb to almost 60,000 by 2022.
These professionals clean and scale teeth, take X-rays, provide fluoride treatments and oral hygiene information to patients as well as assist dentists during procedures.
Students typically must complete a three-year diploma course before being eligible to become a registered dental hygienist in the field.
Demand for these technologists, especially those with more advanced diagnostics and medical imaging skills, will increase as use of technology in the field of medicine soars.
They operate X-ray, radiographic, fluoroscopic and radiation detection equipment.
These medical professionals diagnose and treat airway-related health issues.
Expert care. makingthedifference.ca 16 HEALTH-CARE CAREERS metronews.ca Monday, May 26, 2014 metr A personal approach Radiologists.
Integral part of the health-care team that studies, diagnoses and treats JANE DOUCET For Metro Diagnostic radiology uses body-imaging techniques to study, diagnosis and treat diseases and other health conditions.
According to the Canadian Medical Association, there are more than 2,300 diagnostic radiologists practising in Canada.
From 1998 to 2004, he was chief of the radiology department at the Centre hospitalier universitaire de Quebec.
Today, Levesque is a clinical professor of radiology at the Universite of Laval and the medical director of the Clinique radiologique de la Capitale in Quebec City.
The biggest change he has seen during his 33-year career has been the technological advances in the imaging equipment used to detect things like tumours, cysts, broken bones, blocked arteries and pneumonia.
The enhancements to Xrays, mammograms, ultrasounds, CT, MRI and other imaging equipment has meant that radiologists are better able to make an accurate diagnosis at an earlier stage of the disease or condition.
Another change is that radiologists have more direct contact with patients.
Levesque finds radiology interesting because it covers all parts of the body.
He also likes working with patients’ family physicians and specialists.
But he especially enjoys what he calls “personalized medicine,” when he and his patients get to know each other.
Schooling and training • After graduating from medical school, it takes another five years of residency training to become certified in diagnostic radiology.
The residency may be followed by one or more years of fellowship subspecialty training.
We are a nursing community working together to make a difference locally, provincially and around the world.
Feeding the trend is a constellation of factors, including an aging population, the growing number of effective therapies and diagnostic tools, and increased public awareness of what it takes to remain healthy.
Given these realities, it should come as no surprise that Canadian Business magazine’s list of the top 10 jobs by demand by 2020 includes three in the healthcare sector.
Along with traditional jobs such as registered nurse and dental hygienist, demand is also expected to remain strong for new and emerging careers, such as dietician, care co-ordinator and healthpolicy specialist.
As provinces scramble to meet rising costs, many are assigning work once done exclusively by doctors to nurses, nurse practitioners and medical technologists.
Navigating these shifting sands is a challenge not only for someone building a career, but also for those who prepare people to enter the workforce.
He believes success depends largely on how much effort a person invests in learning about particular sectors and jobs.
I encourage people to learn as much as possible about what’s out there.
Attend job fairs, ask lots of questions, take advantage of co-op and volunteer opportunities.
Edmonton captures junior title behind two goals and three assists tallied by Samuelsson DAVE LANGFORD Metro in London, Ont.
The coach of the Edmonton Oil Kings did not have enough adjectives to use to describe his team after winning the Memorial Cup on Sunday in London, Ont.
Pretty simple when you break it down that way, but not so easy when you form your game plans against one of the best junior hockey teams in the countiy in the Guelph Storm.
But to a player, they all gave Laxdal credit after the Oil Kings upset the Storm 6-3 to win their first Memorial Cup in the current version of the Edmonton franchise.
Laxdal and the players shared this win with their late teammate, Kristian Pelss, who passed away last year after a diving accident back in his home countiy of Latvia.
But you The Edmonton Oil Kings react after beating the Guelph Storm in the Memorial Cup final on Sunday in London, Ont.
Henrik Samuelsson, the scoring star of the game for the Oil Kings, agreed with his coach.
I know he was watching over us today and definitely had a part of it,” Samuelsson said.
Samuelsson had two goals, including one into the empty net, and three assists.
Edgars Kulda added a goal and two assists and Cody Corbett, Tyler Robertson and Mitch Moroz added singles.
Robby Fabbri, Stephen Pierog and Zaclc Mitchell scored for the Storm, which had won three straight games before losing their first game in the championship final.
Goalie Justin Nichols had trouble with the high shot, but did make 40 saves.
MLB Dodgers’ Beckett no-hits Phillies Josh Beckett pitched the first no-hitter of his stellar career and the first in the majors this season, leading the Los Angeles Dodgers over the Philadelphia Phillies 6-0 on Sunday.
Beckett struck out six, walked three and didn’t come close to allowing a hit against a lineup that included two former NL MVPs and four former all-stars.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS French Open Raonic off to solid start in Paris Milos Raonic hopes his recent success on clay leads to a long run at the French Open.
The Canadian star won his opening match at the second Grand Slam of the year on Sunday, beating Australian wild card Nick Kyrgios 6-3, 7-6, 6-3 to reach the second round.
Raonic, the eighth seed from Thornhill, Ont., needed exactly two hours to eliminate Kyrgios.
Raonic, who came to Roland Garros from a Rome semifinal last weekend, finished with 50 winners and 30 unforced errors, breaking on four of 10 chances.
Happ pitched seven scoreless innings and Edwin Encarnacion homered as the Toronto Blue Jays defeated the Oakland Athletics 3-1 on Sunday to extend their winning streak to a seasonbest six games.
The Blue Jays have won 16 of their past 21 games to occupy first place in the American League East.
Happ allowed four hits and three walks while striking out seven in his longest outing of the season.
On Sunday Dustin McGowan replaced Happ in the eighth and allowed Josh Donaldson’s 11th homer of the season.
Casey Janssen pitched the ninth inning to earn his seventh save in as many tries this season.
A’s left-hander Drew Pomeranz allowed five hits, four walks and two runs in four-plus innings.
The Blue Jays did not have a hit until Encarnacion homered to left on a 2-2 fastball with one out in the fourth.
It was his 14th of the year and the 12th of the month, tying him with Jose Bautista for the team record for homers in May.
The run also snapped a string of 18 consecutive runless innings for Pomeranz.
Reyes finished the game with three steals, tying a career best for the shortstop, who has done it eight times.
JONATHAN ferrey/getty images metronews.ca Monday, May 26, 2014 PLAY 19 Horoscopes T Aries March 21 April 20 This should be one of the most enjoyable times of the year but if you want it to be really special, be more optimistic.
Things that have been hidden from you in recent weeks and months will be revealed over the next few days.
V Taurus April 21 May 21 The moment you start seeing yourself as a victim is the moment you lose.
No matter what others may be saying and doing you are master of your fate.
If you still don't know what you are aiming to do with your life, you must give it some thought this week.
II Gemini May 22-June 21 For some time now you have been doing too many things for too many people and hardly anything for yourself.
The most important thing over the next few days is that you don't give anyone the authority to make decisions on your behalf.
Stay in control of your destiny because everything else depends on that.
If you feel run down as the new week begins that's a sure sign you have been overdoing it.
There is so much you want to do in life but you are beginning to wonder if time and opportunity have passed you by.
You have so many options open to you now but you need to choose one and stick with it.
K Pisces Feb. March 20 You are carrying a load at the moment and need to find someone who can help take the strain.
The good news is there are people you have done favours for who would like nothing better than to return the compliment, sallybrompton TIP Virgo Aug. Sept.
People in positions of power will make demands of you over the next few days that you may find hard to meet.
Large amount 34 Cartoons voicer Mel 35 Music chord type 37 ""The Simpsons” character 38.
Yesterday's Sudoku 5 9 3 5 6 7 8 2 1 5 4 9 2 9 6 5 4 1 6 1 6 3 7 2 7 9 3 4 9 Tangerine T Forward Banking In the light summer breeze, lose yourself in the j wonderment of world-class musicians, or the enduring works of Shakespeare.
Savour one tradition after another and take a trip around the world at Folkfest.
The cultures of Saskatoon deliver an endless variety of entertainment. -> 1^1 TourismSaskatoon TOUOISMSASKATOON.COM foil r 1.800.567.
