RBTH presents a selection of views from leading Russian media on the latest developments in Ukraine, featuring analysis of the increasingly serious losses being incurred by Kiev in eastern Ukraine, as well as further discussion of the United States proposal to offer the country a special ally status, and news of plans to introduce licensing for Russian books in Ukraine.
Ukraine will not be able to become a member of NATO “even in the case that it declines to accept status as a non-bloc state,” Vedomosti writes.
This is because Kiev refuses to recognize Russia’s annexation of Crimea, and the NATO charter prohibits states with territorial claims against other countries from joining the alliance.
Furthermore, Vedomosti cites CNN as reporting that Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has already asked the United States for non-NATO ally status.
According to political scientist Boris Makarenko, the bill is an attempt by Congress to put pressure on the executive authority.
Ukraine may introduce licensing for Russian books, the newspaper Kommersant reports.
This applies not only to Russian books, but also to imported books as a whole,” Kommersant writes, citing Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister Oleksandr Sych.
Eighty percent of books in Ukraine are produced in Russia, Sych said, and therefore Ukrainian books need to be saved from excessive Russian imports.
Russian publishing houses will not be represented at the Lviv Publishers’ Forum from September 11 to September 14, and books published in Russia will be specifically indicated as such.
Kiev is expecting to change several provisions to a 10-year contract for gas transit through Ukraine, Moskovsky Komsomolets reports.
Russia raised the gas price for Ukraine from $268.50 to $485.50 per 1,000 cubic meters of gas in April 2014.
Several rounds of negotiations have produced no results except mutual lawsuits at the Stockholm arbitration court.
Naftogaz is demanding $6 billion from Gazprom in overpayment for blue fuel, while the Russian gas producer is demanding $4. billion from Naftogaz for gas that was supplied but not paid for, the newspaper reports.
Other people consider it flawless confirmation of the collapse of Kiev’s military operation in the east,” the newspaper writes.
According to Nezavisimaya, confirmation of the major blows being sustained by the Ukrainian armed forces came on Monday evening when news channels reported new losses incurred by the Ukrainian Army during fighting near the city of Lutugino.
