In March the Administration announced asset freezes against 16 senior Russian officials, 4 wealthy figures from Putin’s “inner circle,” and one Russian bank.
Until February 2014, the party of the men stormed and occupied key government ruling regime and by far the largest faction in the buildings and broadcast facilities in the key Ukrainian parliament.
It has drawn its support from cities of Donetsk and Luhansk, as well in eastern Ukraine, where suspicion of Ukrainian Slovyansk and at least 13 other towns in the nationalism is high and support for close ties with Russia is strong.
Founded by Yuliya Tymoshenko, Fatherland Luhansk “People’s Republics,” and called for has run on a populist, anti-corruption platform.
The its support from western and central Ukraine, where Ukrainian nationalism is strongest.
After the collapse of leadership of the “republics” preparing to hold the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, Fatherland referendums on independence from Ukraine effectively became the leading faction in Ukraine’s on May 11. parliament.
Many of the The Ukrainian government says it has arrested ministers of the new government also come from Fatherland.
Senior United States Ukrainian), UDAR relies chiefly on the personal officials and NATO Supreme Allied popularity of Klitchko.
Philip Breedlove have also opposition to the former regime’s corruption, has been said that they believe Russia is directing the criticized for lacking in specifics.
UDAR has no members in the new Ukrainian government. activities of the armed separatist groups in eastern Ukraine.
A party espousing extreme Ukrainian nationalism and economic populism, Freedom receives its support from western Ukraine, where Ukrainian Russia may be using the threat of invasion to nationalism is strongest.
Its activists played a key role in deter Ukraine from using its armed forces to fighting against riot police in the Maidan protests.
The neutralize the armed groups within Ukraine, party is led by Oleh Tyahnybok.
Freedom members hold thereby permitting them to continue their several important posts in the new government. efforts at destabilization unhindered.
It first attempt) that resulted in several dead and opposes market economics and favors strong ties to Russia.
It is hostile to the new government in Kyiv. wounded among the separatists, Russia announced it would hold military exercises near Ukraine’s borders.
IMF officials claim that the amount of fiscal consolidation required of Ukraine is moderate; under the plan budget deficits are permitted to increase this year over last year, due to the poor performance of Ukraine’s economy, before being required to head down in 2015.1 Ukraine’s Foreign Policy Ukraine’s new government’s main foreign policy priorities are to secure international support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and non-recognition of Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
The package includes up to 3 billion Euro in loans from the European Investment Bank and 5 billion Euro from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
On March 21, the EU imposed sanctions on 12 additional Russian leading figures, after President Putin signed an agreement with Crimean leaders incorporating the region into Russia.
Russia reacted with great hostility to the emergence of a new, more pro-Western leadership.
In an interview on Russian television on March 29, Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov called for the disarming of Pravy Sektor and other armed Ukrainian nationalist forces; making Russia the second official language in Ukraine; that constitutional reforms on “federalization” of Ukraine should begin under which the regions would have wide autonomy in the areas of the economy, finances, culture, language, education, and external economic and cultural ties with neighboring countries or regions.
Russia’s federalization proposal appears to some analysts to be an effort to permanently cripple the central government in Kyiv, giving forces in eastern Ukraine under Moscow’s sway a veto power over important decisions, including on Ukraine’s current pro-Western orientation.
President Obama acknowledged Russian ties to Ukraine, adding that “all of those interests I think can be recognized.
The companies appear to have been chosen due to their links to sanctioned persons in Putin’s inner circle, such as energy trader Genneddy Timchenko, bankers Arkady and Boris Rotenberg or to Bank Rossiya.Due to privacy laws, the names of those receiving visa bans have not been made public, but it is likely that they include those persons under asset freezes.
And that’s why the next phase if, in fact, we saw further Russian aggression towards Ukraine could be sectoral sanctions, less narrowly targeted, addressing sectors like banking or the defense industry.
Other Legislation The 113th Congress has passed legislation in response to the current political crisis in Ukraine.
