Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Cory Welt Specialist in European Affairs Updated April 29, 2020 Congressional Research Service 7-.... www.crs.gov R45008 SUMMARY R45008 Ukraine: Background, Conflict with Russia, and April 29, 2020 United States Policy Cory Welt In 2019, Ukraine transitioned to a new government under President Volodymyr Zelensky and his Specialist in European Servant of the People party.
During Zelensky’s presidency, Ukraine has enacted difficult Affairs economic and governance reforms and renewed talks with Russia on conflict resolution.
In -re-acte--@crs.loc.gov March 2020, a reshuffling of a six-month-old cabinet that had gained international confidence but lost domestic popularity raised concerns for some.
The emergence in Ukraine of Coronavirus For a copy of the full report, Disease 2019 created further difficulties but also led the government to advance key please call 7-.... or visit reforms necessary to unlock international financial support. www.crs.gov.
The United States supports Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders and promotes the implementation of domestic reforms.
Since Ukraine’s independence in 1991, and especially after Russia’s 2014 invasion and occupation of Ukrainian territory, Ukraine has been a leading recipient of United States foreign and military aid in Europe and Eurasia.
Nonmilitary aid averaged about $321 million a year from FY2015 to FY2019, plus a total of almost $240 million in humanitarian aid since 2014.
In 2019, United States relations with Ukraine became a prominent issue in United States domestic affairs, as the House of Representatives agreed to articles of impeachment related in part to alleged presidential actions regarding Ukraine.
Since 2014, many Members of Congress on a bipartisan basis have condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, promoted sanctions against Russia, and supported increased aid to Ukraine.
In 2019, during the 116th Congress, the Senate agreed to S.Res. to mark the fifth anniversary of Ukraine’s Revolution of Dignity.
Forced to confront a Russian invasion and occupation of the Crimea region, a Russian-instigated conflict in eastern Ukraine, and a tightening of Russian control in the nearby Sea of Azov and Black Sea, Ukraine has developed a military capable of territorial defense, reversed a decline in economic growth, implemented reforms, maintained a democratic path, and gained formal independence for the Orthodox Church of Ukraine.
Ukraine continues to grapple with serious Ukraine at a Glance challenges.
Kyiv Ukraine has enacted difficult economic and Ethnicity: 78% Ukrainian, 17% Russian, 0.5% Crimean governance reforms and renewed talks with Tatar Russia on conflict resolution.
Ukrainian , 68%; Russian (regional a reshuffling of a six-month-old cabinet that status), 30% had gained international confidence but lost Religion: About 75% Orthodox Christian (mostly domestic popularity raised concerns for some.
Members of Congress, on a bipartisan basis, have condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, promoted sanctions against Russia for its actions, and supported increased economic and security aid to Ukraine.
In 2019, United States relations with Ukraine became a prominent issue in U.S. domestic affairs, as the House of Representatives agreed to articles of impeachment related in part to alleged presidential actions regarding Ukraine.
Historically, Ukrainians trace their lineage to medieval Kievan Rus, an early Orthodox Christian state that Russians also consider a core part of their heritage.
In December 1991, Ukraine’s leaders joined those of neighboring Russia and Belarus to dissolve the USSR.1 Since independence, many observers have considered Ukraine to have a “hybrid” political regime, containing both democratic and nondemocratic elements.
Most prominently, Kuchma came to be suspected of responsibility for the 2000 murder of journalist Georgiy Gongadze.
In 2004, a popular movement known as the Orange Revolution thwarted the efforts of Kuchma’s team—with Russian support—to fraudulently elect as president a handpicked successor, then-Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych.
Yanukovych’s reformist opponent, Viktor Yushchenko, was allegedly poisoned during the election campaign, won the first round, and was elected in a rerun of the fraudulent second round.
Many observers considered Yanukovych to be a corrupt and authoritarian president who preferred to preserve power with Russia’s support rather than pursue Western-oriented reforms.
Yanukovych also was reluctant to fulfill a key demand of Western partners, the release from prison of Yulia Tymoshenko, a former prime minister whom he defeated in the 2010 presidential election.
In 2011, Tymoshenko was sentenced to seven years in prison for abuse of power and other charges that many observers considered to be politically motivated.
In November 2013, protests erupted over Yanukovych’s decision to postpone concluding an association and free trade agreement with the European Union.
Yanukovych had agreed to a deal with the opposition that was to lead to an early presidential election, but instead he departed for eastern Ukraine amid government defections.
Subsequently, Tymoshenko was freed from prison, Ukraine’s parliament voted to remove Yanukovych from office, and Yanukovych left Ukraine for Russia.
In 2019, Yanukovych was found guilty of treason and sentenced in absentia to 13 years in prison.
Ukraine has received a democracy score between 4 and 5 since at least 1999.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Political Developments Ukraine has a mixed presidential-parliamentary system, in which the president shares power with a prime minister appointed by Ukraine’s legislature, the Verkhovna Rada.
The most recent presidential election was held in March-April 2019, and snap parliamentary elections were held in July 2019.
The victories of political novice Volodomyr Zelensky and his Servant of the People party appeared to reflect widespread disillusionment with Ukraine’s political establishment.
International and domestic observers considered the election to be generally free and fair.
Many Ukrainians, however, believed Poroshenko had failed to combat corruption and, generally, had not done enough to restore the country’s economic health after almost five years of conflict.
Zelensky ran as an outsider ostensibly untainted by politics or corruption.
His appeal stemmed in part from his starring role in a popular television show, Servant of the People, as a beloved schoolteacher who is unexpectedly elected president of Ukraine after a video of him delivering an anti-corruption rant goes viral.
The election outcome suggested that issues of ethnic and linguistic identity mattered less to voters than expected.
Despite his outsider status, Zelensky did not campaign as a nationalist or a populist.
On the contrary, Zelensky is a native Russian speaker who also speaks Ukrainian, is of Jewish descent, and supports closer relations with the West.
He is from Kryvih Rih in Ukraine’s Dnipropetrovsk region, north of Crimea.
The party won 60% of seats, including 43% of the party-list vote and almost two-thirds of majoritarian seats, making it the first party in independent Ukraine to win an outright majority of seats.
Many of the party’s leading 3 In the first round of the election in March 2019, Volodomyr Zelensky won 30% of the vote.
Poroshenko is a wealthy businessman and member of parliament who supported the Euromaidan protests and won 55% of the popular vote in a May 2014 election to succeed Viktor Yanukovych.
Poroshenko held government positions under Ukraine’s two previous presidents, including as foreign minister (20092010) under Viktor Yushchenko and minister of trade and economic development under Yanukovych.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy members are under the age of 40 and include, among others, Zelensky associates, anti-corruption activists, and former members of other political parties.
Another four parties received enough party-list votes to enter parliament.
These are the eastern Ukrainian-based Opposition Platform–For Life ; former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko’s Fatherland ; ex-President Poroshenko’s European Solidarity ; and Voice , a new party of reformists and professionals led by rock musician Svyatoslav Vakarchuk.
Fatherland, European Solidarity, and Voice all are considered to be proWestern parties.
A few other parties won seats in the majoritarian races, but independent candidates received most of the seats that were not won by Servant of the People candidates.
Parliamentary chairperson Dmytro Razumkov was head of Zelensky’s election campaign and is a former political consultant.
Twenty-two members of parliament currently are not affiliated with any party or group.
Ukraine’s new parliament held its first session at the end of August 2019.
The parliament appointed as prime minister 35-year-old Oleksiy Honcharuk, formerly an economic adviser to Zelensky and head of an EU-funded business policy institute.
Almost all ministers in the Honcharuk cabinet were under the age of 50.8 The first Servant of the People government was in power for six months.
In March 2020, Honcharuk submitted his resignation after Zelensky expressed dissatisfaction with his cabinet, leading parliament to dismiss the government.
Zelensky praised the outgoing government for being clean and hardworking but expressed a lack of confidence in its ability to address mounting challenges, including budgetary shortfalls, declining industrial production, wage arrears, high utility prices, low pensions, and a slow pace in prosecuting high-level corruption cases.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy The reshuffling followed a minor political scandal.
Honcharuk offered to resign, but Zelensky expressed confidence in the prime minister and called on security agencies to identify those responsible for the recording.
Observers suggest a decline in public opinion ratings influenced Zelensky’s desire to replace the government.
In one regular poll, approval of the Honcharuk cabinet declined from 51% in October 2019 to 21% in February 2020.11 Zelensky’s approval rating, while higher, also declined during Honcharuk’s time in office.
From the president’s May 2019 inauguration through September 2019, his approval rating was about 70% or higher.
Under Zelensky, Shmyhal served as head of administration in the western Ukrainian region of Ivano-Frankivsk and then as deputy prime minister and minister for community and territorial development.
Shmyhal previously was a local official in the western region of Lviv and entered the private sector in 2015.
From 2017, he worked for DTEK, a major energy conglomerate, including since 2018 as head of a large power plant.
The cabinet includes several officials with previous government experience and two former military officials.
In addition to Shmyhal, about one-third of ministers remained from the Honcharuk cabinet, including Minister of Internal Affairs Arsen Avakov (an unpopular but powerful carryover from the Poroshenko government).13 Outgoing Prosecutor General Ruslan Riaboshapka defended his office’s work and implied that corrupt interests seeking to undermine reforms were behind his removal.
Some observers expressed concern about Zelensky’s decision to reshuffle the government, which had gained the support of international lenders and donors.
One concern was that the Honcharuk government had launched major reforms but was not given sufficient time to achieve results; observers feared the new cabinet might be less willing to carry out reforms.
A related concern was that the reshuffle could strengthen oligarchic influences, especially given Shmyhal’s recent tenure at DTEK, which is owned by Ukraine’s wealthiest individual, Rinat Akhmetov.
Observers also debated the implications of the reshuffle for another wealthy businessperson, Ihor Kolomoysky, who some believe has become more influential since Zelensky’s election.
Kyiv Post, “These Are the 10 Ministers Ousted in Ukraine’s Cabinet Shakeup,” March 9, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Kolomoysky controls Ukraine’s most popular television station, which aired Zelensky’s shows.
He has sought to recover or be compensated for the loss of PrivatBank, Ukraine’s largest commercial bank, which the National Bank of Ukraine nationalized in 2016 after $5. billion went missing (Kolomoysky and other owners were suspected of benefitting from fraudulent lending).17 Many observers had seen Honcharuk as acting against Kolomoysky’s interests, and some believed the government reshuffle would permit Kolomoysky to retain influence.
Some observers have expressed concern about the rise of far-right Ukrainian nationalist groups.
Such groups gained attention during the Euromaidan protests, when activists from groups such as the Freedom political party and the Right Sector movement participated in a violent wing of the resistance against the Yanukovych government.
Some of these groups transformed into wartime volunteer battalions, such as the Azov Battalion (which Kolomoysky reportedly financed), fought against Russian-led forces in eastern Ukraine, and eventually were incorporated into Ukraine’s National Guard in the Ministry of Internal Affairs (in Azov’s case, as a regiment formally called the Azov Special Purpose Detachment).20 Azov reportedly also is influential in Ukraine’s veterans’ movement.
Some groups, including Azov, have established political parties and ties with far-right movements outside Ukraine.
Although Azov and other far-right organizations have gained a certain legitimacy in Ukrainian society and government, they have not been successful electorally.
In 2014 parliamentary elections, the Freedom party won less than 5% of the vote and received six majoritarian seats; Right Sector won one majoritarian seat.
In the 2014 presidential election, the Freedom party’s leader won 1% of the vote and Right Sector’s thenleader won less than 1% of the vote.
In 2019 parliamentary elections, the Freedom party, the Azov-affiliated National Corps, Right Sector, and other far-right parties and movements united in a single bloc; the bloc won 2% of the vote and one majoritarian seat.
In the 2019 presidential election, the united right-wing candidate won less than 2% of the vote.
In September 2019, a house she owns outside Kyiv was the target of an alleged arson attack, for which she held Kolomoysky responsible.
Ukraine’s Ex-Central Banker Blames Oligarch for Attacks,” Guardian, November 12, 2019.
Zelensky’s current chief of staff is Andriy Yermak, a former foreign policy aide and media executive.
The Lessons for Other States,” Foreign Affairs, August 1, 2017; Kimberly Marten and Olga Oliker, “Ukraine’s Volunteer Militias May Have Saved the Country, But Now They Threaten It,” War on the Rocks, September 14, 2017.
American Extremists Being Co-Opted by Ukraine’s Far-Right,” Bellingcat, February 15, 2019; Michael Colborne, “Inside the Extremist Group that Dreams of Ruling Ukraine,” Haaretz, February 23, 2019.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Far-right groups and others have been implicated in violent attacks against civil society activists, journalists, and minorities, including members of the Roma and lesbian/gay/bisexual/transgender communities.
Human rights NGOs reported more than 50 attacks on activists and human rights defenders in 2018 and more than 80 attacks in 2019.23 Many of the attacks appeared to be related to local affairs, allegedly as reprisals for investigations of corruption and other illegal activities.
One prominent case was that of Kateryna Handzyuk, an activist and city council employee who was the victim of a severe acid attack in July 2018; she died of her wounds in November 2018.
Another lethal attack victim was local investigative journalist Vadym Komarov, who died of his wounds in June 2019.
During Poroshenko’s presidency, observers expressed concern that authorities did not thoroughly investigate such cases and that, when prosecutions did occur, perpetrators may have been punished but not always those suspected of ordering the attacks.
Reform Challenges After 2014, Ukraine embarked on an ambitious reform agenda.
In 2017, the International Monetary Fund praised key reforms, including a reduction of the fiscal deficit, increase in gas prices , and reform of the banking system.
During Poroshenko’s presidency, observers also noted progress in public procurement transparency, decentralization, health care reform, and judicial reform.
International partners and donors underlined the importance of further reforms in the energy sector , sustainable pension reform, the privatization of state-owned enterprises, and land sales .27 In 2016, the IMF warned that stalled reforms could lead to a halt in loan disbursements to Ukraine.
Achievements and Challenges of Ukraine’s Local Governance Reform, Kennan Institute, July 16, 2018; UNIAN Information Agency, “Council of Europe Praises Judicial Reform in Ukraine,” June 13, 2019; Melinda Haring, “Finally Some Good News from Ukraine,” Atlantic Council, June 26, 2018.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy but did not release any more funds from that package after April 2017.28 The IMF approved a new short-term loan package in December 2018.29 After taking power in 2019, Zelensky and his Servant of the People government unveiled their own ambitious reform program.
Their program included tightening anti-corruption legislation; promoting long-awaited judicial, security, land, and privatization reforms; and investing in infrastructure and defense.
Legislation attempted to advance anti-corruption and rule-of-law reforms; accelerate decentralization efforts; introduce fiscal, trade, and probusiness reforms; and pave the way for the privatization of state assets and the establishment of a land market.
In December 2019, the IMF commended Ukraine for “impressive progress ... in advancing reforms and continuing with sound economic policies,” and it announced an agreement for a new $5. billion three-year loan package conditional on the passage of legislation on land sales and on safeguarding the restructuring of the banking sector.
At the same time, observers have expressed some concerns that the rapid pace of lawmaking has introduced various substantive and procedural deficiencies in reform legislation.
Observers also have raised concerns about implementation, especially with regard to judicial reforms (see “Justice Sector Reform,” below) and other reforms that face resistance by wealthy businesspeople, corrupt actors, or the public.
In addition, some observers have expressed disapproval of what they consider the government’s pursuit of politically motivated cases against ex-President Poroshenko.
Billion Stand-By Arrangement for Ukraine, US$1.4 Billion for Immediate Disbursement,” press release, December 18, 2018.
Zelensky’s Agenda for Parliament, Government,” Kyiv Post, September 6, 2019.
RFE/RL, “Ukraine Lifts Prosecutorial Immunity for Members of Parliament,” December 19, 2019; International Foundation for Electoral Systems, “Ukraine’s Parliament Adopts Historic Election Code,” December 19, 2019; UNIAN Information Agency, “Rada Paves Path Toward Cutting Number of Parliament Seats,” February 4, 2020.
A New Government at the Center of Attention,” December 23, 2019; Roman Olearchyk, “Ukraine Sows Seeds of Suspicion with Land Sale Plans,” Financial Times, January 19, 2020; Ilona Sologoub, “Ukraine’s Top Five 2020 Reform Priorities,” Atlantic Council, January 21, 2020; and Anders Aslund, “Zelenskyy Must Not Miss His Chance to Change Ukraine,” Atlantic Council, February 6, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Although Ukraine’s March 2020 reshuffling raised some concerns about the government’s reform commitment, the emergence in Ukraine of Coronavirus Disease 2019 led to a series of rapid reform measures.
Within weeks, parliament dismissed two controversial new ministers of health and finance.
To reach an agreement with the IMF, and to receive greater COVID-19-related funding, the Ukrainian parliament preliminarily approved legislation to prevent the return of nationalized banks to their former owners.
The parliament also passed land reform legislation, which had been bogged down with more than 4,000 draft amendments.
In response to the pandemic, the Ukrainian government adopted measures similar to those in other European countries, including restricted movement into and within the country, school closures, social distancing, and mask usage.
In April 2020, the Ukrainian parliament amended the national budget to establish a $2. billion coronavirus fund and increase spending on health care and pensions.
Ukraine is hoping to receive billions of dollars in emergency financing and other assistance from the International Monetary Fund and the European Union.
In February 2020, protesters violently resisted the arrival of more than 70 Ukrainian and foreign national evacuees from Wuhan, China, who had tested negative for COVID-19 and were to be quarantined in a nearby sanatorium.
Ukraine’s then-minister of health reportedly joined the evacuees in quarantine to calm public fears.
Pavel Polityuk and Natalia Zinets, “With Selfie, Ukrainian Health Minister Joins Coronavirus Evacuees in Quarantine,” February 21, 2020; President of Ukraine, “Address by the Head of State on Counteraction to Coronavirus,” March 16, 2020; Bermet Talant, “Timeline of Ukraine’s Response to Coronavirus Outbreak,” Kyiv Post, March 19, 2020; Katya Gorchinskaya, “Ukraine Approves a Crisis Budget, But Has No Way to Cover Deficit,” Forbes, April 13, 2020.
Anti-corruption Efforts Combating corruption was to be a central focus of the Ukrainian government after the Revolution of Dignity.
High levels of corruption allegedly persisted during Poroshenko’s presidency, however, and many officials resisted anti-corruption measures.
Hromadske International, “Ukrainian Parliament Passes Land Market Law,” March 31, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy A major focus of anti-corruption reforms has been the establishment of three related institutions: the National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine , an investigative body; the Specialized Anti-Corruption Prosecutor’s Office; and the High Anti-Corruption Court.
NABU and the AntiCorruption Prosecutor’s Office were established in 2015.
After years of delay, Poroshenko agreed in 2018 to establish the Anti-Corruption Court, after the United States, the EU, the IMF, and the World Bank called on the government to do so in line with international recommendations.
Judges were selected via a competitive process that included the participation of international experts.
Various obstacles have impeded the functioning of Ukraine’s anti-corruption institutions, although their situation appears to have improved under the Servant of the People government.
NABU repeatedly has encountered resistance from within the government, reportedly due to the agency’s investigative activities and independence.
In 2017, a NABU operation targeting alleged corrupt officials at the State Migration Service was intercepted and exposed by Ukraine’s security service and the prosecutor general’s office.
In early 2019, NABU came under legal pressure to close dozens of investigations into alleged corruption, after Ukraine’s Constitutional Court issued a controversial ruling that the underlying basis for the investigations, related to the crime of illicit enrichment, was unconstitutional.
A new law on illicit enrichment enacted in November 2019 has allowed cases to proceed.
In 2019, a district court found the director, Artem Sytnyk, guilty of a misdemeanor related to vacation expenses paid by an acquaintance; an appeals court upheld the ruling in December 2019.
During Poroshenko’s presidency, many observers believed that prosecutor Nazar Kholodnytskyi did not exhibit the independence necessary for the position.
By 2017, concerns emerged that Kholodnytskyi was hindering the progress of NABU-initiated investigations.
In 2018, NABU obtained wiretaps that purported to reveal actions indicative of witness tampering and obstruction of justice.
No charges were brought against Kholodnytskyi, however, and he remained in his 41 For an overview, see John Lough and Vladimir Dubrovskiy, Are Ukraine’s Anti-Corruption Reforms Working?, Chatham House, November 2018.
During the first few months of the Servant of the People government, the prosecutor general and NABU director said cooperation with the Anti-Corruption Prosecutor’s Office had improved.
Most of these cases are under the Anti-Corruption Court’s jurisdiction.
A fourth anti-corruption institution, the National Agency for the Prevention of Corruption , also was established in 2015.
The NAPC’s main task was to establish a public electronic system for the mandatory disclosure and verification of government officials’ assets and incomes.
By 2018, up to 1 million officials reportedly had submitted required annual declarations.
The verification process moved slowly, however, and eventually stalled.
Former NAPC employees accused agency officials of corruption and collusion with other government officials to avoid asset and income verifications.
The Servant of the People government has restructured NAPC and appointed a new director.
Justice Sector Reforms Ukraine’s anti-corruption reforms are part of broader justice sector reforms.
Zelensky’s first prosecutor general, Ruslan Riaboshapka , embarked on a reform of the prosecutor general’s office that included a recertification process for central and regional prosecutors.
Of more than 1,300 central prosecutors, 54% were removed after they declined to be vetted, failed knowledge-based tests, or did not pass interviews designed as “integrity” checks.
As of March 2020, about a quarter of the regional prosecutors who agreed to be vetted reportedly had failed knowledge-based tests.
Many observers praised the recertification process, although some said integrity checks were arbitrary and nontransparent.
In his departure speech to parliament, Riaboshapka said the prosecutor general’s office had opened hundreds of new cases targeting corruption and illicit financial outflows, illegal deforestation and gambling, police torture, and war crimes.
Kyiv Post, January 17, 2020; Robyn Dixon and David L Stern, “How Ukraine’s Zelensky Lost the Anti-corruption Movement,” Washington Post, March 17, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy After the March 2020 government reshuffling, the future of prosecutorial reforms became uncertain.
The new prosecutor general, Iryna Venediktova, was a leading member of parliament from Servant of the People who served as chair of the committee on legal policy.
In December 2019, Venediktova was appointed acting director of the State Bureau of Investigation , a new law enforcement agency that had been the focus of several scandals and was restructured at the time of her appointment.
Many criticized Venediktova for appointing as her SBI deputy director a lawyer who previously represented ex-President Yanukovych.
In March 2020, Ukraine’s Constitutional Court rejected several elements of a November 2019 judicial reform law.
Observers considered the legislation to be a reboot of a Poroshenko-era judicial reform many believed to be flawed.
The Constitutional Court did not appear to invalidate new vetting regulations that some observers say are intended to keep control of the hiring process in the hands of the High Council of Justice.
The judicial hiring commission, like the AntiCorruption Court, is to be formed with the involvement of international experts.
Many Ukrainians viewed this as a major achievement in the evolution of Ukraine’s national identity.
Previously, most Ukrainian Orthodox churchgoers in Ukraine had been divided between a Kyiv Patriarchate, which was not officially autocephalous, and another wing of the church subordinated to the ROC.62 Observers consider the OCU’s development to be a long-term process.
In a January 2020 poll, 34% of respondents said they were adherents of the OCU and 14% said they were adherents of the ROC-subordinated wing.
Another 28% identified as Orthodox but not with a particular church 56 Olena Makarenko, “Ukrainian Parliament Reboots State Bureau of Investigations, Unblocks Probe into Maidan Massacre,” Euromaidan Press, December 5, 2019.
Ecumenical Patriarchate, “Patriarchal and Synodol Tomos for the Bestowal of the Ecclesiastical Status of Autocephaly to the Orthodox Church in Ukraine,” January 14, 2019.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy .63 As of January 2020, about 5% of the ROC-subordinated parishes in Ukraine had transferred their allegiance formally to the OCU.64 The Greek Orthodox Church and the Patriarchate of Alexandria have recognized the OCU; other Orthodox Churches have yet to do so.
Russia opposes the OCU’s autocephaly and initially claimed it would threaten the religious freedom and safety of ROC parishioners.
Many Russians traditionally have considered much of Ukraine to be a historical province of Russia and Ukrainians to be close ethnic brethren.
In Ukraine’s last national census , 17% of the population identified as ethnic Russians, mostly concentrated in the south and east, where ties to Russia are stronger than in the rest of the country.
In Soviet times, eastern Ukraine became home to a heavy industrial and defense production sector that retained close economic ties to Russia after independence.
Before 2014, the Russia-Ukraine relationship occasionally suffered turbulence, with disputes over Ukraine’s ties to NATO and the EU, the status of Russia’s Crimea-based Black Sea Fleet, and the transit of Russian natural gas via Ukraine to Europe.
By the end of 2013, ex-President Yanukovych appeared to make a decisive move toward Russia, postponing an Association Agreement to establish closer political and economic ties with the EU and agreeing instead to substantial financial assistance from Moscow.
This decision provoked the Euromaidan protests and, ultimately, led to Yanukovych’s removal from power.
The Kremlin Is Not Happy,” Washington Post, October 31, 2018; Christine Borovkova and Andreas Umland, “How Russia’s Orthodox Church Rejects Ukrainian Autocephaly,” Vox Ukraine, August 6, 2019.
Map information generated using data from the Department of State, Esri, and DeLorme.
Crimea Russia’s invasion of Ukraine occurred soon after Yanukovych fled to Russia in February 2014.
The Russian government covertly deployed forces to Ukraine’s Crimea region and, after holding what most observers consider to have been an illegal referendum on secession in March 2014, declared it was incorporating Crimea directly into the Russian Federation.
In explaining these actions, Russian government officials cast the Revolution of Dignity as a Western-backed “coup” that, among other things, could threaten the security of the ethnic Russian population in Crimea, eject Russia’s Black Sea Fleet from the region, and potentially even bring Ukraine into NATO, something Moscow firmly opposed.
Since 2014, Russia has significantly increased its military presence in Crimea and suppressed local dissent.
Ukrainian officials say Russia has deployed more than 31,000 troops to Crimea, as well as S-400 surface-to-air missile systems and other advanced weaponry.
Many states and international organizations have condemned Russia’s occupation as a violation of international law and Russia’s own commitments under the 1975 Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Since 2014, the United Nations General Assembly has voted several times, most recently in December 2019, to affirm Ukraine’s territorial integrity, condemn the “temporary occupation” of Crimea, and reaffirm nonrecognition of its annexation.
The Ukrainian government and state-owned companies seek to uphold their rights in and around Crimea through international arbitration.
In 2019, the Paris-based International Court of Arbitration awarded state-owned Oschadbank $1. billion in damages from Russia.
Ukrainian state-owned energy company Naftogaz seeks about $8 billion in compensation for its seized assets in the Hague-based Permanent Court of Arbitration.
In a separate case before the Permanent Court of Arbitration, the Ukrainian government seeks to broadly uphold its maritime rights around Crimea under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (for more on Russia’s maritime aggression, see “Sea of Azov and Kerch Strait,” below).77 In November 2019, the International Court of Justice ruled that it has jurisdiction to hear a case Ukraine filed in 2017 against Russia for its actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine.
OHCHR, “Situation of Human Rights in the Temporarily Occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the City of Sevastopol ,” September 25, 2017.
The United States, Ukraine, Russia and Nuclear Weapons, Brookings, May 2011.
Russia Illegally Seizes Assets of Naftogaz in Crimea,” March 1, 2019; Ukrinform, “Naftogaz Continues To Sue Russia for Lost Crimean Assets,” February 10, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Beginning in April 2014, militants forcibly took power in several cities and towns, announced the establishment of two separatist entities (the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic, or DPR, and the so-called Luhansk People’s Republic, or LPR), and gradually expanded their control in the two regions.
For Russia, the establishment of separatist entities in eastern Ukraine may have served multiple purposes.
The Russian government claimed it was seeking to “protect” relatively pro-Russian populations in these regions.
Many observers believe, however, that Moscow sought to complicate Ukraine’s domestic development and foreign policy and increase Russian leverage in potential negotiations over Ukraine’s future trajectory.
Unlike Russia’s policy toward Crimea, Moscow officially recognizes the areas it controls in eastern Ukraine as Ukrainian territory.
Although the Russian government denies military involvement in eastern Ukraine, many observers assert that the Russian government has deployed troops to fight unofficially, encouraged Russian “volunteers” to join these troops, and supplied weaponry and equipment to local fighters.
The conflict’s intensity has declined since 2015, but fighting continues.
A Brief History of the Battles of the Donetsk Airport, Institute of Land Warfare, May 2019; and Maj.
Intelligence sources indicated that separatist forces brought down the plane using a missile supplied by the Russian military.
The MH17 tragedy helped galvanize EU support for more substantial sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine.
In July 2019, these procedures were expanded to apply to all residents of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
The Ukrainian government has registered more than 1. million people as IDPs.
Government of the Netherlands, “Suspects to Be Prosecuted for the Downing of Flight MH17,” press release, June 19, 2019; Claire Parker, “Here’s What We Know About the Four Suspects Charged with Downing Flight MH17,” Washington Post, June 19, 2019.
Observers note that Russia justified its invasion of Georgia in 2008 in part by asserting a need to defend Russian citizens in Georgia’s South Ossetia region.
Ukraine’s Policy Towards Internally Displaced Persons,” OSW Centre for Eastern Studies , January 16, 2019.
In 2019, an average of about 1. million total crossings occurred per month via five official crossing points.
According to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees , most crossings are by female and elderly residents of nongovernment-controlled areas, mainly to collect pensions.
The Ukrainian government has taken measures to facilitate transit to and from the nongovernment-controlled areas.
In 2019, the government repaired the bridge that serves as the sole crossing point in the Luhansk region; the bridge was previously unsafe for pedestrian traffic .96 In 2019, the government also issued an order to liberalize the crossing regime by allowing individuals to carry all goods through crossing points except those specifically prohibited .97 In March 2020, the government restricted most movement across the contact line as part of its effort to combat the coronavirus pandemic.
Since 2017, the Ukrainian government has prohibited cargo traffic to and from the nongovernment-controlled areas.
The Minsk agreements were signed in 2014 and 2015 by representatives of Russia, Ukraine, and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe —members of what is known as the Trilateral Contact Group—together with Russian proxy authorities.
The 2014 agreements included the 12-point Minsk Protocol, signed days after the defeat of Ukrainian government and volunteer forces at the battle of Ilovaisk, and a follow-up memorandum outlining measures for a cease-fire and international monitoring mission.
Barriers to Free Movement for Older People,” November 29, 2018; Olga Malchevska, “The Killer Queues of Ukraine,” BBC World Service, May 28, 2019; RFE/RL, “In Symbolic Move, Ukraine’s Zelenskiy Opens Rebuilt Bridge In War-Torn East,” November 21, 2019.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy prompt a political resolution to the conflict.
OSCE monitoring and verification of the cease-fire regime and withdrawal of heavy weapons.
Dialogue on modalities of local elections in accordance with Ukrainian legislation and the future status of “certain areas” in Donetsk and Luhansk and specification of the areas in eastern Ukraine to which this status applies.
Amnesty via a law forbidding persecution and punishment of persons “in connection with the events” that took place in certain areas in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Safe access and delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need, on the basis of an international mechanism.
Restoration of full Ukrainian control over its border with Russia, beginning from the first day after local elections and ending after a comprehensive political settlement, following the introduction of a new constitution and permanent legislation on the special status of certain areas in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Constitutional reform, including on decentralization, and permanent legislation on the special status of certain areas in Donetsk and Luhansk, in agreement with representatives of nongovernment-controlled areas.
Local elections to be held in certain areas in Donetsk and Luhansk, in agreement with representatives of those districts and in accordance with OSCE standards.
The restoration of Ukrainian border control is to be implemented concurrently with measures designed to establish a political settlement to the conflict.
The return of Ukraine’s border is to begin immediately after the holding of democratic local elections in the nongovernmentcontrolled areas.
It is to conclude after Ukraine enacts permanent legislation providing special local government status to the nongovernment-controlled areas, as well as constitutional reforms on decentralization that reference “specificities” of these areas.
Other measures include amnesty for conflict participants and the restoration of social and economic links across the contact line.
The United Nations Security Council, which includes Russia as a permanent member, has endorsed the Minsk agreements.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy parties to fully implement the package of measures.
In 2018, a Security Council “presidential statement” condemned ongoing cease-fire violations and called for the implementation of disengagement commitments and withdrawal of heavy weapons.
From 2017 to 2019, United States policy on the Ukraine conflict was directed mainly through the office of the United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations.
Implementation Status The signing of Minsk-2, on February 12, 2015, was intended to trigger an expedited timeframe for a “comprehensive political settlement” to the conflict.
This timeframe included a cease-fire from February 15, 2015; full withdrawal of heavy weapons after 15 days of a cease-fire; full exchange of prisoners within another 5 days; and the introduction of a special status for nongovernment-controlled areas, related constitutional reforms, local elections, and Ukraine’s full control of its border by the end of 2015.
Economist, September 14, 2016; United States Department of State, “ United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker,” November 3, 2017; Tim B Peters and Anastasiia Shapkina, The Grand Stalemate of the Minsk Agreements, Konrad Adenauer Stiftung, February 2019; and Anna Hess Sargsyan, Unpacking Complexity in the Ukraine Peace Process, Center for Security Studies , April 2019.
The OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine is an unarmed civilian monitoring mission that was established in 2014 after Russia’s occupation of Crimea.
The SMM is deployed throughout Ukraine but focuses on the nongovernment-controlled areas in Donetsk and Luhansk.
The SMM issues daily and spot monitoring reports on the security situation and facilitates the delivery of humanitarian aid.9  Donors and nongovernmental organizations direct humanitarian assistance to nongovernment-controlled areas, but aid organizations’ access to these areas is not ensured and aid delivery and distribution does not operate on the basis of an agreed-upon international mechanism.
Among those freed were some of Russia’s most prominent Ukrainian political prisoners and prisoners of war, including 24 sailors Russia detained in November 2018 and Crimea-based filmmaker Oleh Sentsov.
Detainees Ukraine freed included a person of interest in the downing of MH17, whom Dutch prosecutors interviewed before his release.3 Framework Decision on Disengagement of Forces and Hardware,” September 21, 2016; Hromadske International, “Ukraine’s War-Torn Stanytsia Luhanska Sees Historic Separation of Forces,” June 27, 2019; Hromadske International, “Why Some Zolote Residents Oppose Disengagement of Forces,” October 14, 2019; Ukrinform, “Ukraine’s Armed Forces Preparing for Disengagement of Forces in Petrivske on November 8,” November 7, 2019.
Among those freed by Russian proxy authorities were Ukrainian servicemen, local residents alleged to have been cooperating with the Ukrainian government, and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty journalist Stanislav Aseyev.
Ukrainian authorities released not only fighters but also individuals who had not been involved in the conflict.
Released detainees included five members of Ukraine’s Berkut special police force accused of killing dozens of protesters during the Revolution of Dignity, as well as alleged Russian-hired hitmen and the perpetrators of a 2015 bomb attack in the city of Kharkiv.
Some observers criticized Zelensky for accommodating Moscow’s demands to release these detainees.
We Will Bring All Ukrainian Political Prisoners Home,” Kyiv Post, March 12, 2020; RFE/RL, “Abductions, Torture, ‘Hybrid Deportation’: Crimean Tatar Activist Describes Six Years Under Russian Rule,” March 17, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy illegal armed formations withdraw from the areas and democratic local elections are held.
Before the emergence of the coronavirus pandemic, residents could conduct individual trade and transit across the contact line, including to receive pensions and other social benefits.
Even when transit is open, however, it remains limited to five official crossing points, cargo traffic is prohibited, and Ukraine’s banking system does not operate in the nongovernment-controlled areas.
The Ukrainian and Russian governments each emphasize what they consider to be the other party’s responsibilities for implementing the Minsk agreements.
Ukrainian officials have emphasized the need for a permanent cease-fire and withdrawal of Russian official and unofficial forces, both on principle and as a necessary condition for establishing a secure environment to hold democratic local elections.
The Russian government, for its part, disavows direct responsibility for cease-fire violations and the failure to withdraw heavy weapons.
Russia has called on Ukraine, irrespective of the security environment, to fulfill certain political measures, including a permanent grant of special status to the nongovernment-controlled areas and related constitutional reforms.
Separate from the Minsk agreements, the Ukrainian government has called for the establishment of an international peacekeeping mission throughout the nongovernment-controlled areas to help enforce a cease-fire.
The United States government has expressed support for a peacekeeping mission as a means to establish the security conditions necessary to implement Minsk-2’s package of measures.
Russian officials have rejected the proposal.1 Ukraine and Russia Relaunch Talks President Zelensky has sought to invigorate what had been a relatively dormant conflict resolution process in eastern Ukraine.
It remains to be seen whether his efforts can lay the groundwork for discussion on thornier issues, including withdrawal of Russian forces and the legal status of Russian-controlled areas.
In December 2019, Zelensky and Putin met alongside German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Emmanuel Macron in the first meeting of leaders of the Normandy Four since 2016.
Department of State, “Latest Developments on Ukraine Negotiations,” April 13, 2018; UNIAN Information Agency, “Ukraine To Ask UN To Deploy Peacekeepers Throughout Occupied Donbas,” February 18, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy disengagement areas, opening of new crossing points, and creation of an updated demining plan.2 Meeting participants also addressed more contentious issues related to a political settlement to the conflict.
The parties expressed “interest” in the further legal development of special status for the nongovernment-controlled areas.
The four leaders also stated they consider it “necessary” to incorporate into Ukrainian law the so-called Steinmeier formula, a previously defunct proposal for establishing a particular sequence for the holding of local elections in, and granting of special status to, the nongovernment-controlled areas.
According to the formula, special status is to come into effect on a temporary basis at the close of local elections.
If international observers conclude elections were held in accordance with international standards and Ukrainian law, the special status is to become permanent.
Russia made acceptance of the Steinmeier formula a precondition of the December 2019 meeting.
Many Ukrainians appear to oppose the formula, as they do special status more generally.
The Ukrainian government’s initial announcement that it would accept the Steinmeier formula was met with protests.
Opponents of the formula express concern that Moscow will manipulate the process to entrench its proxy regimes.
Many also are concerned that Russia will refuse to withdraw its forces or restore control of the border to Ukraine after local elections.
Ukrainian officials say that Russia should return control of the border before local elections, although this would reverse the order stipulated in the Minsk agreements.
Meeting participants expressed interest in holding another Normandy summit in four months’ time, although a date has yet to be set.
In addition to uncertainty caused by the coronavirus pandemic, the Ukrainian and Russian governments have said the next meeting should be held only after implementation of the measures agreed in December 2019, including a comprehensive cease-fire.
RFE/RL, October 2, 2019; UNIAN Information Agency, “‘Steinmeier Formula,’ Explained,” December 10, 2019.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Sea of Azov and Kerch Strait Russia seeks to establish greater control over maritime regions adjacent to Crimea and eastern Ukraine, including in the Sea of Azov, the Black Sea, and the Kerch Strait, the waterway that connects the two seas.
In May 2018, Russian President Putin opened a 12-mile-long bridge over the Kerch Strait linking Russia to occupied Crimea.
The bridge was designed to accommodate an existing shipping lane, but it imposed new limits on the size of ships that transit the strait.
Since the bridge’s opening, Russia has stepped up its interference with commercial traffic traveling to and from Ukrainian ports on the Sea of Azov in Mariupol and Berdyansk, which export steel, grain, and coal.
As Russia Monopolizes Azov Sea, Mariupol Feels Heightened Danger,” Kyiv Post, August 3, 2018; Andrii Klymenko, Tetyana Guchakova, and Olga Korbut, “Russia’s Economic War Against Ukraine in the Sea of Azov as of February 1, 2020,” Black Sea News, February 13, 2020.
Dmitry Gorenburg and Michael Kofman, “Russia and Ukraine Had a Short Naval Battle.
The Military Aspects,” Centre for Eastern Studies Congressional Research Service 25 Ukraine: Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy the ships and their crew and took them to the town of Kerch, in Crimea.
Ukraine and its international partners considered the incident to be a major violation of international law and an escalation in Russia’s efforts to control maritime access to eastern Ukraine.2 The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights considered the 24 Ukrainian sailors to be prisoners of war.
On May 25, 2019, the U.N.-established International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea issued an order requiring Russia to release the sailors and ships.
Although the Russian government said it did not recognize the tribunal’s authority in this matter, it released the sailors as part of a prisoner exchange in September 2019 and returned the heavily damaged ships to Ukraine two months later.
Economy As part of the Soviet Union, Ukraine was responsible for a large share of the country’s agricultural and industrial production.
After returning to growth in 2010-2011, the economy stagnated in 2012-2013 and declined after Russia’s 2014 invasion; GDP fell by 7% in 2014 and 10% in 2015.136 In recent years, Ukraine’s economy has shown signs of stabilization, due in part to international assistance, including about $13 billion in IMF loan disbursements.
In the last two years, observers noted several positive trends in Ukraine’s economy.
These trends included declining inflation, rising incomes, growing retail trade, increased agricultural exports, and growing international reserves and a strengthening currency, in part due to an increase of foreign investment in Ukraine’s sovereign bonds.8 Nonetheless, Ukraine faces many economic challenges, and the coronavirus pandemic has worsened the country’s economic outlook.
Some argue that customary international law as reflected in the United Nations Charter on the Law of the Sea, or UNCLOS, also does that.
Modest Growth, Low Inflation, and Possible Devaluation Return,” UNIAN Information Agency, December 31, 2019; Anders Aslund, “Ukraine’s Underrated Economy Is Poised for A Strong 2020,” Atlantic Council, January 6, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy part due to Ukraine’s stronger currency) when he expressed support for a change in government.
The IMF estimates that Ukraine’s GDP could decline by more than 7% in 2020 due to the coronavirus pandemic.0 Poverty in Ukraine has declined in recent years.
About 20% of Ukrainian laborers work in agriculture, a sector of the economy that accounts for about 10% of GDP.142 Ukraine is the largest recipient of migrant remittances in Europe, according to the World Bank.
Further restrictions followed in 2014-2015, and Russia suspended its own free trade agreement with Ukraine in 2016.
Excluding exports from occupied Crimea and nongovernmentcontrolled areas in eastern Ukraine, the total value of Ukraine’s merchandise exports declined by 43% from 2013 to 2016, with the value of merchandise exports to Russia declining by 76%.144 Since 2017, Ukraine’s merchandise trade has grown.
Ukraine’s main exports include cereals, iron and steel, sunflower oil, iron ore, electrical equipment and parts, and oil seeds.
In 2019, Ukraine surpassed Russia to become the world’s largest grain exporter (including corn, wheat, and barley).145 In 2019, Ukraine’s largest merchandise trading partner was the EU, which accounted for about 41% of Ukraine’s total trade.
Trade data are from the State Customs Committee of Ukraine, as presented by Global Trade Atlas.
After a severe decline in foreign direct investment in 2014, FDI inflows recovered somewhat.
According to official statistics, total FDI declined from $56. billion at the end of 2013 to $33. billion at the end of 2016.
FDI inflows in 2018-2019 were mainly in finance, industry, wholesale and retail trade, and real estate.
The top sources of FDI in 2018-2019 were Cyprus, the Netherlands, and Russia.7 Energy Ukraine has significant energy resources, although the sector historically has performed below its potential, given an environment of low domestic energy prices, subsidies, high consumption, and corruption.
Ukraine’s primary energy mix consists of around 31% natural gas, 31% coal, and 23% nuclear.
Ukraine currently produces around two-thirds of its total energy supply, including two-thirds of its natural gas and 55% of its coal.0 With regard to natural gas, prior to Russia’s 2014 invasion, Ukraine depended on Russian imports for more than half its total consumption.
Many observers contend that Russia traditionally has used gas price hikes, debt repayments, and cutoffs as leverage in disputes with various Ukrainian governments.
After Russia’s invasion, Ukraine’s gas usage and, consequently, dependence on Russian gas declined, due to lower industrial production, the halting of gas supplies to nongovernment-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine, and higher tariffs.
Institutions, Governance, and Policy Framework, 2019; BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2019.
A Comprehensive Assessment, Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, February 2009.
RFE/RL, September 15, 2019; Ihor Orel, “Ukraine’s Plans to Get Off Energy Dependence Needle,” UNIAN Information Agency, January 22, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy At the end of 2019, the Ukrainian government fulfilled a long-standing commitment to unbundle Ukraine’s state-owned energy company, Naftogaz, into state-owned production and transmission companies.
The unbundling is intended to align Ukraine’s energy system with the EU’s “Third Energy Package,” an effort to liberalize and increase energy sector competition by separating ownership and control of gas supply and production activities, on the one hand, and delivery, on the other.
Gas Transit to Europe Ukraine is a transit state for Russian natural gas exports to Europe.
In recent years, Russia has sought to reduce the amount of natural gas it transits through Ukraine.
Before the 2011 opening of the first Nord Stream pipeline from Russia to Germany via the Baltic Sea, most of Russia’s gas exports to Europe transited Ukraine.
Since the opening of the first Nord Stream pipeline, about 40%-50% of these exports have transited Ukraine.
In 2018, Ukrainian revenues from gas transit totaled $2.65 billion.7 Nord Stream 2, currently under construction, is a second Baltic Sea pipeline that runs parallel to Nord Stream.
Prior to the December 2019 introduction of United States sanctions related to the construction of Nord Stream 2, the pipeline was scheduled for completion in early 2020.
If Nord Stream 2 becomes operational, observers expect it to further reduce gas transit through Ukraine.
This outcome would not necessarily increase Ukraine’s vulnerability to energy supply cutoffs; Ukraine stopped importing natural gas directly from Russia in 2016.
It could lead to declines in transit revenues, however, and it could increase Ukraine’s strategic vulnerability, if reduced dependence for gas transit leads Moscow to be less constrained in its policies toward Ukraine.
On December 30, 2019, Gazprom, Naftogaz, and the new Gas Transmission System Operator of Ukraine concluded a renewal contract for the transit of Russian natural gas to Europe from 2020 to 2024.159 The contract provides for transit of at least 65 billion cubic meters of natural gas in 2020, a volume equal to about 73% of the 2019 volume of 89.
BCM, and 40 BCM a year from 2021 to 2024, a volume equal to about 45% of the 2019 volume.
According to Naftogaz, the contract will lead to at least $7. billion in transit revenue over five years.
In addition, Gazprom agreed to accept the 2018 ruling of a Swedish arbitration court concerning several trade disputes with Naftogaz and paid the latter $2. billion in damages and interest.
Options for EU Natural Gas Diversification, coordinated by Michael Ratner.
Will Sanctions Stop It?, by Paul Belkin, Michael Ratner, and Cory Welt.
Opening A New Chapter,” Oxford Institute for Energy Studies, February 2020.
In 2019, a new constitutional amendment declared the government responsible for implementing Ukraine’s “strategic course” toward EU and NATO membership.
The EU is a major provider of foreign aid to Ukraine, totaling more than €13 billion (about $14.2 billion) in loans and €2 billion in grants from 2014 to 2019.
During this period, EU member states provided an additional €1. billion in bilateral assistance.
In April 2020, the EU announced it would provide more than €190 million in emergency support to Ukraine to address the coronavirus pandemic.
The European Commission subsequently proposed another €1. billion in macro-financial assistance to help “limit the economic fallout” of the pandemic.5 The EU has imposed sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine.
The EU also has supported Ukraine against Russia’s maritime aggression near the Kerch Strait.
A NATO-Ukraine Commission, established in 1997, provides the framework for cooperation.
Also see Tony Barber, “Ukraine Reaps Benefits of Trade Deal with EU,” Financial Times, September 11, 2018.
Commission Proposes €3 Billion Macro-financial Assistance Package to Support Ten Neighbouring Countries,” press release, April 22, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy participated in the NATO Response Force, a rapid reaction force.
After Russia’s 2014 invasion, Ukraine’s parliament rejected its non-bloc status and, in 2017, voted to make cooperation with NATO a foreign policy priority.
Ukraine contributes to the Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan and participated in the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, the counterterrorism Operation Active Endeavour maritime mission, and the antipiracy Operation Ocean Shield.
In addition, Ukraine has supported NATO’s maritime Sea Guardian operation.
Many observers contend that closer integration with the EU and NATO has not enabled Ukraine to improve its near-term prospects for membership in these organizations.
According to recent polls, over half of Ukrainians support membership in the EU (polls do not include occupied Crimea or Russian-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine).171 The EU is unlikely to consider Ukraine a candidate for membership soon, however, given Ukraine’s domestic challenges, the conflict with Russia, the EU’s own internal challenges, and the lack of support for further enlargement among many EU members.
In 2008, NATO members agreed that Ukraine and Georgia “will become” members of NATO, but Ukraine has not been granted a clear path to membership.
Most observers believe NATO will not move forward with membership as long as Russia occupies Ukrainian territory and the conflict remains unresolved.
Kyiv Post, December 26, 2014; RFE/RL, “Ukrainian Parliament Makes NATO Integration a Priority,” June 8, 2017.
Command, Control, Communications and Computers; Cyber Defense; Explosive Ordnance Disposal and Counter-Improvised Explosive Devices; Logistics and Standardization; Medical Rehabilitation; and Military Career Transition.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy not include occupied Crimea and Russian-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine, where support for NATO membership likely would be lower even in the absence of conflict.3 U.S.-Ukraine Relations United States relations with Ukraine are deep and multifaceted.
In 1994, former National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski justified United States engagement with the newly independent Ukraine by arguing that a strong Ukraine would not only benefit Ukrainians but also help prevent the rise of a new Russian empire, bolstering regional and global security.
American policymakers must face the fact that Ukraine is on the brink of disaster: the economy is in a free-fall, while Crimea is on the verge of a Russia-abetted ethnic explosion.
Either crisis might be exploited to promote the breakup or the reintegration of Ukraine in a larger Moscow-dominated framework.
It is urgent and essential that the United States convince the Ukrainian government—through the promise of substantial economic assistance—to adopt long-delayed and badly needed economic reforms.
Twenty years later, after Russia’s 2014 invasion of Ukraine, United States officials came to express more emphatically and frequently United States support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
In 2019, United States relations with Ukraine became a prominent issue in United States domestic political affairs.
On September 24, 2019, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced that the House would begin an impeachment inquiry related in part to alleged presidential actions regarding Ukraine.
We Asked Ukrainians This Important Question,” Washington Post, February 26, 2020.
On October 31, 2019, the House agreed to H.Res.0, which directed certain committees to continue ongoing investigations as part of an impeachment inquiry.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy soliciting the Government of Ukraine to publicly announce investigations that would benefit his reelection, harm the election prospects of a political opponent, and influence the 2020 United States Presidential election to his advantage.
President Trump and White House officials acknowledged the President’s interest in Ukrainian investigations but said those interests were tied to legitimate concerns.
White House officials generally denied that United States government acts had been contingent on an announcement of such investigations.
Other United States officials presented their views during the impeachment inquiry.
United States officials frequently call attention to Russia’s human rights abuses in occupied Crimea.
Also see United States Department of State, “Russia’s Harassment of International Shipping Transiting the Kerch Strait and Sea of Azov,” August 30, 2018.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy the Protecting Europe’s Energy Security Act of 2019 , which established sanctions related to the construction of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline (see “Sanctions Related to Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine,” below).191 United States Concerns About Technology Transfer to China: Case of Motor Sich Since 2018, United States officials reportedly have sought to deter Ukraine from approving the sale to Chinese companies of Motor Sich, a privately-owned Ukrainian company that is a major producer of airplane and helicopter engines.
The issue reportedly was a subject of discussion during an August 2019 visit to Ukraine by then-National Security Council Advisor John Bolton.
United States concerns about the sale relate to the transfer of sensitive technologies that could boost Chinese domestic military production and cooperation with Russia.
United States officials have warned Ukraine that the sale could lead China to displace Ukraine as a leading aircraft engine exporter.
United States concerns date back to 2017, when Ukrainian court documents revealed that a Chinese company had acquired majority ownership of Motor Sich.
A Ukrainian court froze 41% of the Chinese-owned shares after the Security Service of Ukraine said the company was intending to move Motor Sich’s assets abroad.
In 2019, media reports stated that the Ukrainian government had tentatively agreed with two Chinese companies on the purchase of Motor Sich.
As of April 2020, Ukraine’s Anti-Monopoly Committee reportedly was reviewing the agreement.
Media reports indicate that United States companies recently have explored the possibility of purchasing Motor Sich.
Reforms The United States has promoted domestic reforms in Ukraine since Ukraine’s Revolution of Dignity.
During Poroshenko’s presidency, the Obama Administration supported a wide range of governance and economic reforms in Ukraine, including the establishment of new anti-corruption institutions.
Then-Vice President Joseph Biden led “the Administration’s effort to support a Statements to the Press,” November 16, 2018.
In 2015, Biden reportedly told Ukrainian officials the United States would withhold a $1 billion loan guarantee (the third since 2014) if Ukraine’s then-Prosecutor General Viktor Shokin did not resign.
United States and European officials had criticized the prosecutor general’s office for hindering corruption investigations, including an investigation of an ex-Ukrainian official who reportedly controlled Burisma Group, a Ukrainian natural gas company (for more on United States aid, see “Foreign and Military Aid,” below).196 Trump Administration officials have continued to support domestic reforms in Ukraine.
United States Assistance to Ukraine Since February 2014,” June 15, 2016.
United States Department of State, “Remarks at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ Diplomatic Academy,” February 21, 2018.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Foreign and Military Aid Since independence, Ukraine has been a leading recipient of United States foreign and military aid in Europe and Eurasia.
In the 1990s , the United States government provided almost $2. billion in total aid to Ukraine .201 In the 2000s (FY2001 to FY2009), total aid to Ukraine amounted to almost $1. billion ($199 million a year, on average).202 In the five years before Russia’s 2014 invasion of Ukraine , State Department and United States Agency for International Development assistance (including foreign military financing) totaled about $105 million a year, on average.
Separate nonproliferation and threat reduction assistance administered by the Departments of Energy and Defense amounted to an average of over $130 million a year in obligated funds.3 Since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the United States has provided higher levels of annual assistance to Ukraine.
Nonmilitary aid averaged about $321 million a year from FY2015 to FY2019.204 In addition, the United States government has provided a total of more than $239 million in humanitarian assistance since FY2014 to assist internally displaced persons and other victims of conflict.
The United States also has provided three $1 billion loan guarantees to Ukraine.
The President’s FY2021 nonmilitary aid request for Ukraine was $199 million.
In addition to bilateral foreign military financing ($115 million appropriated annually in FY2019 and FY2020), United States assistance includes the Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative , which provides security assistance to support Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and to help Ukraine defend against further September 1, 2019; White House, “Readout of Vice President Mike Pence’s Phone Call with the President of Ukraine,” September 18, 2019.
FY2014 CTR funds include some assistance provided in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
Issuance of $1 Billion Loan Guarantee to the Government of Ukraine,” press release, September 30, 2016.
The Obama Administration provided nonlethal security assistance to Ukraine, due to concerns about potential conflict escalation.
Also see Fiona Hill and Clifford Gaddy, “How Aiding the Ukrainian Military Could Push Putin into a Regional War,” Washington Post, February 5, 2015.
How Long Would It Last Against Russia?,” National Interest, March 9, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Ukraine Aid and the United States Presidential Impeachment In August and September 2019, some Members of Congress expressed concern about a reported hold of security assistance funds to Ukraine that were to expire at the end of the fiscal year .a The Department of Defense had notified Congress of its intent to obligate a total of $250 million in Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative funds in February 2019 and May 2019.
The next day, the White House released a memorandum of a July 25, 2019, telephone conversation between President Trump and President Zelensky; in addition, the Office of the DNI provided Congress with a declassified version of the whistleblower complaint.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy The United States and Ukraine host regular joint military exercises in Ukraine with the participation of NATO allies and partners.
The combat training center is “co-located” with Ukraine’s International Center for Peacekeeping and Security, a preexisting multinational training center.
The United States training mission in Ukraine is overseen by United States Army Europe’s 7th Army Training Command.
Military trainers deployed to the JMTG-U and a predecessor mission (Fearless Guardian, which provided training to interior ministry troops) serve on rotational deployments.
United States interagency teams visited Ukraine in 2016 regarding December 2015 cyberattacks against Ukrainian power companies.9 Sweden.
Michael Sword, “Secretary of Army Witnesses Rapid Trident 2011 in Ukraine,” United States Army, August 5, 2011; Sgt.
Kyle Larsen, “Rapid Trident 19 Demonstrates Multinational Proficiency in Ukraine,” United States Army, September 30, 2019.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy The United States and Ukraine have held three annual Bilateral Cybersecurity Dialogues in Kyiv.
Since 2017, the United States has pledged $18 million in cybersecurity assistance to Ukraine.0 Bilateral Trade The United States granted Ukraine permanent normal trade relations status in 2006.221 From 2014 to 2016, bilateral trade declined in line with an overall decline in Ukraine’s trade after Russia’s invasion.
In 2019, the United States was Ukraine’s 6th-largest source of merchandise imports and 14th-largest destination for exports.
The value of United States merchandise exports to Ukraine—mostly coal, motor vehicles, and industrial machinery— was $2.35 billion in 2019.
The value of United States merchandise imports from Ukraine—mainly iron and steel—was $1.30 billion in 2018.
In 2017, President Trump and then-President Poroshenko agreed to increase the sale of United States coal to Ukraine, stating that it could help replace now-halted supplies of coal from the nongovernment-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine.
In 2019, United States coal accounted for almost one-third of Ukraine’s total coal imports.
Role of Congress Since 1991, Congress has supported Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty, and democratic trajectory.
Congress supported Ukraine’s democratic transition during the 2004-2005 Orange Revolution.
Congress also has agreed to several resolutions to commemorate the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear disaster, which took place in Soviet Ukraine, and to support related United States and international assistance.
Congress has regularly commemorated the Soviet Ukraine famine of 1932-1933, most recently in 2018 .227 During Ukraine’s Revolution of Dignity, Congress supported a peaceful resolution to the conflict.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, these trade restrictions formally continued to apply to Russia and other post-Soviet states, even though they received conditional normal trade relations in 1992.
The famine killed almost 4 million Ukrainians, according to current estimates.
In 1985, Congress established a Commission on the Ukraine Famine , which held hearings with eyewitnesses, published findings, and conducted a related oral history project.
Stalin’s War on Ukraine ; Commission on the Ukraine Famine, Investigation of the Ukrainian Famine, 1932-1933, April 22, 1988; Askold Krushelnycky, “How Washington Holodomor Monument Won the Race Against Time,” Kyiv Post, February 23, 2020.
Since 2014, many Members of Congress have condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, promoted sanctions against Russia, and supported increased aid to Ukraine.
The act required or authorized a variety of expanded sanctions; authorized increased nonmilitary and military assistance to Ukraine; and authorized an expansion of RFE/RL and VOA broadcasting throughout the post-Soviet states, giving priority to Ukraine, Georgia, and Moldova.
It also established congressional review of any action the President takes to ease or lift a variety of sanctions.
Since 2014, Congress has supported the provision of defensive lethal weapons to Ukraine.
For related resolutions in the Senate, see S.Res. and S.Res. in 2014, and S.Res. 52 and S.Res. in 2015.
Some Members of Congress have expressed concern about the emergence of far-right movements in Ukraine.
The U.S.-Ukraine Security Cooperation Enhancement Act , introduced in May 2019, would enhance U.S.-Ukraine security cooperation, including by authorizing the provision of more lethal defense articles.
Khanna Leads Bipartisan Members in Condemning Anti-Semitism in Europe,” April 25, 2018; Rep.
The act would impose additional sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine and for interfering with freedom of navigation through the Kerch Strait.4 The Ukraine Religious Freedom Support Act was introduced in the House and Senate in December 2019 and ordered to be reported in the House in March 2020.
The act would seek to deny United States visas to Russian officials if they committed particularly severe violations of religious freedom in occupied Ukrainian territory.
It also would require the President to consider such violations for the purposes of making a determination of whether to designate Russia as a country of particular concern for religious freedom.
Sanctions Related to Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine Most United States sanctions designations of Russian individuals and entities have been imposed in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
The EOs also establish sanctions against designated Russian government officials and persons who operate in the Russian arms sector, key sectors of the Russian economy, or occupied Crimea.
In addition, they prohibit United States business, trade, or investment in occupied Crimea.
Among those designated are Ukrainian individuals and entities, including former government officials and Russian proxy authorities in occupied Crimea and the nongovernment-controlled areas in eastern Ukraine.
Sectoral sanctions imposed in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine apply to certain kinds of transactions with specific entities in Russia’s financial, energy, and defense sectors.
SSIDES and UFSA, signed into law in 2014, expanded on the actions the Obama Administration took in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
President Obama did not cite SSIDES or UFSA as an authority for designations or other sanctions actions.
SSIDES and UFSA contain additional sanctions provisions the executive branch could use, including potentially wide-reaching secondary sanctions against foreign individuals and entities that facilitate significant transactions for Russia sanctions designees.
The White House, “Statement by the President on the Ukraine Freedom Support Act,” December 18, 2014.
PEESA provides for a 30-day wind-down period; exceptions for repairs, maintenance, environmental remediation, and safety; and a national security waiver.
As of April 2020, PEESA’s impact on completion of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline was uncertain.
The company laying the pipeline has suspended its activities, but Russian officials have said that Russia should be able to finish construction of Nord Stream 2 on its own.
Like the United States, the EU has imposed sanctions against Russia for its invasion of Ukraine.
EU sanctions are similar, although not identical, to United States sanctions.
Most EU sanctions are imposed for a defined period of time to incentivize change and provide the EU with flexibility to adjust the sanctions as warranted.
Other countries, including Australia, Canada, Japan, Norway, and Switzerland, also have imposed sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine.
Outlook More than six years after Ukraine’s Euromaidan protests and Russia’s invasion, Ukraine continues to grapple with a number of internal and external challenges.
The Curious Voyage of the Akademik Cherskiy,” Jamestown Foundation, March 31, 2020.
Congressional Research Service R45008 · VERSION 11 · UPDATED 46 EveryCRSReport.com The Congressional Research Service is a federal legislative branch agency, housed inside the Library of Congress, charged with providing the United States Congress non-partisan advice on issues that may come before Congress.
EveryCRSReport.com republishes CRS reports that are available to all Congressional staff.
The reports are not classified, and Members of Congress routinely make individual reports available to the public.
Prior to our republication, we redacted phone numbers and email addresses of analysts who produced the reports.
We have not intentionally made any other changes to any report published on EveryCRSReport.com.
CRS reports, as a work of the United States government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States.
However, as a CRS report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.
Information in a CRS report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to members of Congress in connection with CRS' institutional role.
