As Spain battles with a growing political crisis at home, some have pointed to Russia’s hand in it.
In a shocking turn of events, the affluent region in northern Spain declared independence in late October, sending shock waves across the country and the continent.
As with many political divisions emerging across Europe and the West, some analysts have mused and others even pointed to Russia’s hand in pushing Catalonia over the edge.
Days after Catalonia held a controversial independence referendum on October 1, Russian President Vladimir Putin told foreign policy experts in Sochi that the region’s breakaway bid amounted to a domestic issue.
However, the outbreak of violence during the referendum provided Russian officials with ample ammunition to criticize the European Union, a position often taken by pro-Kremlin allies to showcase the bloc’s fault lines.
While foreign ministry spokeswoman, Maria Zakharova, reiterated the official Kremlin response that Catalonia’s bid was an «internal matter of Spain,» she was more candid on her Facebook account.
In 2014, Russia illegally annexed the Crimean Peninsula in an internationally-condemned referendumafter pro-European protests led to the ousting of Ukraine’s pro-Kremlin president, Viktor Yanukovych.
For pro-Kremlin observers, Madrid’s violent actions against voters who took part in the independence referendum resembled Yanukovych’s deadly crackdown on the pro-European protests of 2013 and 2014.
Political commentator Alexey Martinov, who monitored the Catalan independence vote, called it a «paradox» that EU representatives had slammed Yanukovych for using what he described as the same brutal methods the Spanish police used against voters in Catalonia.
Although the Kremlin does not openly support Catalonia’s independence bid, what the region’s political upheaval offers Moscow is an opportunity to illustrate «double standards» within the EU’s borders.
While Spain refused to recognize Kosovo as an independent state, the majority of the EU’s 28 member states followed suit.
If anything, the view from Moscow shows that for Russia, Catalonia is not an isolated political issue but forms part of a fate the EU sealed over a decade ago – and one that serves its interest only insomuch as it exposes the bloc’s weaknesses.
