For paragraph 6 of the Autonomous Sanctions Regulations 2011, each person and entity mentioned in an item in Schedule 1 is a designated person or entity for Ukraine.
For paragraph 6 of the Autonomous Sanctions Regulations 2011, each person mentioned in an item in Schedule 1 is a declared person for Ukraine.
Member of the Federation Council and Chairman of its Committee on Constitutional Law.
On 1 March 2014 Klishas publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
On 1 March 2014, she publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Originator and co-sponsor of legislative proposals in Russia that allow regions of other countries to join Russia without their central authorities’ agreement.
As of September 2015, a Member of the Federation Council from Omsk region.
Also Senator and Deputy Head of the Federation Council Committee on Constitutional Law since September 2015.
Former Chairman of the Commonwealth of Independent States Committee of the State Duma.
Actively supported use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea.
Organiser of the process in Crimea by which local Crimean communities were mobilised to stage actions undermining the Ukrainian authorities in Crimea.
Responsible for commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory.
Aksyonov was elected ‘Prime Minister of Crimea’ in the Crimean parliament on 27 February 2014 in the presence of pro-Russian gunmen.
Also elected Head of the Republic of Crimea by Crimean State Council on 9 October 2014.
Played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the parliament concerning the referendum against the territorial integrity of Ukraine and called on voters to cast votes in favour of Crimean Independence.
Chairman of the Pro-Russian political organization Ukrainian Choice, a group which has tried to undermine democratic processes in Ukraine.
Medvedchuk also represents Ukraine in the humanitarian subgroup for the Minsk talks group.
Subject to criminal proceedings in Ukraine in connection with the embezzlement of Ukrainian State funds and their illegal transfer outside Ukraine.
A former Minister for Education and Science, Fursenko spoke in support of the integration of Crimea’s education system with that of Russia.
Both have made billions of dollars in contracts from Gazprom and the Sochi Olympics awarded to them by Putin.
SGM Group has won a major tender for the construction of the Kerch bridge that will link Crimea to mainland Russia.
One of the founders of Gunvor, one of the world’s largest independent commodity trading companies involved in the oil and energy markets.
Timchenko’s activities in the energy sector have been directly linked to Putin, who has investments in Gunvor and might have access to Gunvor funds.
Owner and manager of the Volga Group, one of the largest investment groups in Russia.
Former First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Executive Office.
Responsible for overseeing the political integration of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Chairman of the Board of state-owned Russian Railways until 20 August 2015.
On 18 April 2014, by a Presidential decree, was granted the status of ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary.
Continues ""public and charity work"" as a senior figure in several organisations.
First Deputy Chairman, Federation Council International Affairs Committee.
First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Executive Office; Member of the State Commission for the Socio-Economic Development of Crimea and Sevastopol.
Responsible for overseeing the integration of the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Head of the Government Commission for the Socio-Economic Development of Crimea.
Head of Administration under the President of the Russian Federation during the annexation of Crimea.
Initiator of the bill allowing the Russian Federation to admit in its composition, territories of a foreign country without the consent of that country or of an international treaty.
Head of the Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation since October 2016.
Chairman of the Russian Federation Council Security and Defence Committee.
On 1 March 2014 Ozerov supported the use of the Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine.
Senator and member of the Federation Council Defence and Security Committee since 29 September 2016.
Responsible for integration of the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Member of Russian Federation Council Committee on Culture, Science, Information.
On 1 March 2014, Totoonov publicly supported the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Currently, Deputy Chairman of the Federation Council International Affairs Committee.
Actively supported the use of Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea.
Became ‘Mayor of Sevastopol’ by popular acclamation on 23 February 2014 and accepted this ‘vote’ into office.
He actively campaigned for Sevastopol to become a separate entity of Russia.
He was one of the co-signatories of the ‘treaty on Crimea's accession to the Russian Federation’ of 18 March 2014.
He was acting ‘governor’ of Sevastopol from 1 to 14 April 2014 and is a former ‘elected’ Chairman of the Sevastopol Legislative Assembly.
Was also speaker of the Assembly from 22 September 2014 until he stepped down on 22 March 2016.
Returned to Russia and is believed to be in several left-wing ""patriotic"" organisations.
Currently Speaker of the Donetsk People's Republic ""parliament"", the People's Council.
He is also the Donetsk People's Republic's representative in the Contact Group for the Minsk talks.
Former Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Crimea; Crimean Deputy Prime Minister.
Played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the Crimean Parliament concerning the referendum against the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
He lobbied actively for integration of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Became Tatarstan representative in Kazakhstan but was dismissed in March 2015 after a criminal case on suspicion of fraud was launched against him in Crimea in February 2015.
Tsekov initiated, together with Sergey Aksyonov, the unlawful dismissal of the government of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
Senator and member of the Federation Council International Affairs Committee.
Played a role in preventing Ukraine’s authorities from controlling the territory of Crimea.
Former Commander of Russia’s Western Military District, units of which are deployed in Crimea.
Chief of the Collective Security Treaty Organisation Joint Staff since 10 November 2015.
Former Commander of Ukrainian Navy, who switched sides to support Russia.
Commander of the Fifth Service of the Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation.
As a senior FSB officer, he heads a service which oversees intelligence operations and international activity.
It is reported that the FSB has been involved in the funding and supporting of separatist activities in Crimea and eastern Ukraine.
As a member of the Security Council, which provides advice on and coordinates national security affairs, he is involved in and shares responsibility for policy decisions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
On 23 May 2014 he announced the inauguration of the ‘de facto embassy’ of the unrecognised, so-called, ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ in Moscow.
Currently, Head of the Sport, Tourism and Youth Affairs Committee in the State Duma.
Formerly, permanent member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation and Director of the Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation.
As a member of the Security Council, which provides advice on and coordinates national security affairs, he was involved in and shares responsibility for policy decisions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
In November 2016, Fradkov became Chairman of the Board of Almaz-Antey concern.
In January 2017, by decree of President Putin, he was appointed Head of the Russia Institute of Strategic Research.
Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
First Deputy Minister of Defence of the Russian Federation and General of the Army.
Responsible for the massive deployment of Russian troops along the border with Ukraine and lack of de-escalation of the situation.
Former permanent member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation.
One of Russia’s permanent representatives on the Contact Group for Ukraine settlement since December 2015.
He was awarded a medal “for the liberation of Crimea” by the Acting Head of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea for the support he provided to the purported annexation of Crimea.
Claimed in a recent interview to have raised over US$7 million to support separatists in eastern Ukraine.
Former ‘Acting Governor’ of the Ukrainian city of Sevastopol purportedly annexed by Russia.
Russian Presidential Envoy to the Siberian Federal District since July 2017.
Responsible for initiating legislation to integrate Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Former Chairman of the State Duma Constitutional Law and Nation Building Committee.
Responsible for facilitating the adoption of legislation on the purported annexation of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
The second largest shareholder of Bank Rossiya, which is considered the personal bank of Senior Officials of the Russian Federation.
Since the purported annexation of Crimea, Bank Rossiya has opened branches across Crimea and Sevastopol, thereby consolidating their integration into the Russian Federation.
Furthermore, Bank Rossiya has important stakes in the National Media Group which in its turn controls television stations which actively support the Russian government’s policies of destabilisation of Ukraine.
In his senior position, he holds responsibility for the deployment of Russian airborne forces in Crimea.
By accepting his appointment as so-called ‘Minister of Interior of the Republic of Crimea’ by the President of Russia on 5 May 2014 and by his actions as so-called ‘Minister of Interior’ he has undermined the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Former so-called ‘First Deputy Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of Donetsk’, responsible for security and law enforcement, until September 2014.
In taking on and acting in this capacity Berezin has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
One of the self-proclaimed military commanders of Horlivka until November 2014.
Took control of the Security Service of Ukraine’s Office in Donetsk region and seized the Ministry of Internal Affairs district station in the town of Horlivka.
In an interview published by “the Guardian” on 29 July 2014, Bezler declared that he summarily executes Ukrainian military personnel.
Gubarev is responsible for recruiting people for the armed forces of separatists.
Responsible for taking over the regional government building in Donetsk by pro-Russian forces.
Despite being arrested for threatening the territorial integrity of Ukraine, and subsequently released, he has continued to play a prominent role in separatist activities.
Acting Head of the Crimea directorate of the Russian Federal Migration Service.
So-called ‘Supreme Council Chair of the People’s Republic of Luhansk’ until March 2016.
The self-described “president” of the so called “Republic of Novorossiya” which has called on Russia to deploy troops to Ukraine.
Currently, a member of the People’s Council of the Donetsk People’s Republic.
Responsible for commanding separatists in eastern Ukraine fighting against the Ukrainian government forces.
Acting Head of the Sevastopol division of the Federal Migration Service until August 2015.
As of 22 July, Chairman of the so-called ‘Supreme Council’ of the so-called ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ until May 2016.
He was responsible for developing policies relating to, and the organisation of, the illegal referendum leading to the proclamation of the so-called ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’, which constituted a breach of the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Head of the ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ Central Electoral Commission until April 2016.
Malofeev is known to be closely linked to Ukrainian separatists in eastern Ukraine and Crimea.
Made a number of public statements supporting the annexation of Crimea and the incorporation of Ukraine into Russia and notably stated in June 2014 that ‘you can’t incorporate the whole of Ukraine into Russia.
So-called ‘First Deputy Prime Minister of the Luhansk People’s Republic until January 2016.
Responsible for the statement of the Army of the Southeast that the Ukrainian presidential election cannot take place in the ‘People’s Republic of Luhansk’ due to the ‘new’ status of the region.
As former Prosecutor of Crimea, Poklonskaya actively implemented Russia’s purported annexation of Crimea.
Poklonskaya has been a member of the Russian State Duma since September 2016 and is currently Deputy Head of the Security and Anti-Corruption Committee.
Acting Prosecutor of Sevastopol and is actively implementing Russia’s annexation of Sevastopol.
Spokesperson of the so-called “government” of the so called ‘People’s Republic of Luhansk’ who made declarations justifying, inter alia, the shooting down of a Ukrainian military airplane, the taking of hostages and fighting activities by the illegal armed groups.
He was awarded the medal “for the liberation of Crimea” by the Acting Head of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea for the support he provided to the purported annexation of Crimea.
Publicly called for the creation of the Federal Republic of Novorossiya, composed of south-eastern Ukrainian regions.
In taking on and acting in this capacity, Zdriliuk has supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Until May 2016, member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation, which provides advice on and coordinates national security affairs.
Ivanov was involved in and shares responsibility for policy decisions which undermine or threaten the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Former Foreign Minister of the ‘People’s Republic of Donetsk’, replaced Ekaterina Gubareva in August 2014.
A Transnistria native, who previously served as Deputy Prime Minister on Social Policy.
Took part in the seizure of the building of the Luhansk regional office of the Security Service, and recorded a video addressed to President Putin and Russia from the occupied building.
Presidential Envoy to the Southern Federal District of the Russian Federation.
Appointed as Commander of the Southern Military District in September 2016.
Appointed as Commander of the Western Military District in November 2015.
Former Plenipotentiary Representative of Crimea to the President of the Russian Federation.
Foreign Minister of the self-proclaimed 'Donetsk People's Republic' from February 2016.
As of 14 August 2014, he replaced Igor Strelkov/Girkin as the Defence Minister of the Donetsk People's Republic.
He has reportedly commanded a division of separatist fighters in Donetsk since April 2014.
Associated with Vladimir Antyufeyev, who is responsible for separatist activities.
Former Finance Minister of the so-called 'Donetsk Peoples Republic' and is now a member of its Council.
Prime Minister of the self-proclaimed 'Luhansk People's Republic' from 25 December 2015.
Prior to his appointment he held the position of the Vice-Commander of the Corps of the Republic.
Led troops in the annexation of Crimea and commanded Russian troops in the Donbas.
Gas pipeline construction company owned or controlled by Arkaday Rotenberg.
Involved in ground infrastructure for the Business Aviation Centre at Sheremetyevo International Airport in Moscow offering aircraft maintenance services, including aircraft storage and organization support services for flight operations.
Provides management services for corporate aviation at Pulkovo International Airport in Saint Petersburg.
An investment strategy group that is owned or controlled by Gennady Timchenko.
On 18 March 2014 the Crimean Parliament transferred the seized Crimean assets of a subsidiary of a Ukrainian state-owned gas company to Chernomorneftegaz.
