Many civilian “volunteers” also moved to the peninsula to finalize a plan that was secretly carried out and successfully completed.
The first obvious sign that Crimea was being taken from Ukraine appeared on Friday, February 28, when Russia set up checkpoints in Armyansk and Chongar, the two main road junctions between mainland Ukraine and the Crimean peninsula.
A “soft” invasion Following Yanukovych’s ouster, the Crimean Parliament elected a pro-Russian prime minister and voted to secede from Ukraine.
Pro-Russian leaders claimed they needed to protect Crimeans from “extremists” who had seized power in Kiev and threatened the right to speak Russian in the region.
On March 16 they organized a referendum in which people were asked if they wanted the autonomous republic join russia.
Ukraine and the West judged the referendum to be illegal, while Russia he strongly supported it.
According to local officials, 95.5% of voters in Crimea supported the option of joining Russia at controversial referendum that was carried out without any credible international observer.
On March 18, two days after the publication of the results, Putin made the invasion official by signing a bill incorporating Crimea into the Russian Federation.
George’s Hall of the Kremlin before the signing, Putin had assured that Crimea is “Russian holy land” and opined that, in Ukraine, the United States and its Western partners crossed the line.
BBC journalist John Simpson, who was in Crimea at the time, wrote that it was the “softest” invasion in modern times.
On March 16, pro-Russian leaders in Crimea organized a referendum that was described as illegal in Kiev and by the West.
Until that day, when a group of pro-Russian gunmen attacked a small Ukrainian army base in Simferopol, killing one officer and wounding another, there had been no bloodshed.
Putin argued in April of that year that he had made the final decision on Crimea after opinion polls, secret and undatedshowed that 80% of the inhabitants of the peninsula were in favor of joining Russia.
But a year later, he admitted for the first time that the Crimea annexation plan had ordered it weeks before the controversial referendum of self-determination.
During the invasion of Crimea, hundreds of heavily armed soldiers displaying no identifying insignia took up position outside a military base in the region.
During a television intervention in March 2015, the Russian president assured that he had made the decision to “bring Crimea back to Russia” on February 23, at the end of an overnight emergency meeting, hours after the Ukrainian leader fled Kiev.
The commitment of Russia to respect the borders of Ukraine A stream in Russia He maintains that historically Crimea is part of his country.
In the 18th century, it was part of the ottoman empireruled by the Khan of the Crimean Tatars.
It remained under Ottoman rule until Catherine the Great seized it from the Tatars, annexing the peninsula to the Russian Empire.
But in 1954 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev transferred the territory, in which an ethnic Russian majority lives, to Kiev.
After Ukraine’s independence in 1991, Kiev kept Crimea, but Russia it retained control of a Sevastopol naval base in the region, home to the Black Sea Fleet.
An agreement that he violated in 2014 and that he has just violated again with the invasion launched at dawn this Thursday, February 24.
Russia’s commitment to respect Ukraine’s borders A stream in Russia He maintains that historically Crimea is part of his country.
Since the annexation of Crimea, the peninsula has been a point of antagonism between RussiaUkraine and the West.
While the West considers Crimea part of Ukraine, Putin remains determined to defend the idea that the peninsula belongs to Russiaand warned that allowing Ukraine to join NATO could lead the West to war with Russia for control of the territory.
We will not usurp what is not ours, but we will not give up our land“He assured last week.
This Thursday, hours after the beginning of the Russian invasion in Ukraine, several Western leaders harshly condemned the Russian military intervention.
Emmanuel Macron affirmed that France “will respond without weakness” to the “act of war” of Russia in Ukraine.
For his part, British Prime Minister Boris Johnson assured that the United Kingdom “cannot and will not look the other way” after the “appalling and barbaric” attack ordered by the Kremlin.
In Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelensky broke diplomatic relations with Moscow in response to the invasion and assured that they were giving weapons to everyone who wanted to defend the territory.
