In spite of the hybrid nature of Russia's military aggression against Ukraine, the Russian occupation of some districts of the Ukrainian Donetsk and Luhansk regions over the last three and a half years has acquired classical forms masterminded by the Kremlin using three vertical levers.
The first vertical is the occupation army represented by the permanent contingent of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, which includes two army corps of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
Also, the main commanding and headquarter positions in those corps disguised as the 'troops of the DPR and the LPR' are held by the regular Russian officers, while more than a half of ordinary soldiers are contracted Russian soldiers and mercenaries.
The second vertical is the occupation administration headed by the self-proclaimed 'heads of the DPR and the LPR', their 'governments', 'parliaments' and other 'bodies' of civil administration of those quasi-state formations.
The 'branch of power' political and ideological management has so far been monopolized by Vladislav Surkov – assistant of the Russian President Vladimir Putin, while global social and economic processes in the occupied part of Donbas are managed by the representatives of the Russian government headed by the Vice-Prime-Minister of the RF Dmitriy Kozak in full dependence on subsidies provided from Moscow.
Both the administrative, and the controlling verticals have been established with direct involvement of 'specials' — the citizens of the RF who are mainly traitors who breached the oath given to the Ukrainian people, conscripted by the Russian special services and various collaborators.
Their minions and former subordinates are everywhere in the 'administrations of the DPR and LPR', but Akhmetov and Yefremov have actually lost comprehensive control over them due to certain situation in the gangsters' enclaves of the cleptocratic dictatorship, which the so called 'people's republics' in fact are, and which are based on the Akhmetov's and Yefremov's staff capacity.
Alexander Kozakov, a former resident of Riga, is his personal image-maker.
Kozakov officially holds the position of 'the advisor to the head of the DPR' and is a member of Vladislav Surkov's pool of political technologists.
The latter is the assistant to the Russian President Vladimir Putin and the curator of the Russia-occupied part of Donbas.
Another Zakharchenko's well-known 'advisor' is the Russian fascist writer Zakhar Prilepin.
He is Surkov's distant relative . 41-year-old Zakharchenko was born in Donetsk, graduated from a local school and a Donetsk Technical College of Industrial Automatics with 'Mining Electromechanics' as a major.
According to some reports, in 2006, he was the CEO at the 'Trading House 'Continent' LLC, affiliated with Donetsk billionaire Rinat Akhmetov.
In December 2013, he was among the 'titushky' mercenary gangs, met with Eugene Zhilin, and then headed the branch of his radically pro-Russian organization 'Oplot' in Donetsk.
He took an active part in capturing government buildings and armed clashes with the Ukrainian Army.
It was Zakharchenko who led the group of 'Oplot' militants to seize the Donetsk city council in April 2014.
After that, he tried to gain control of all military and political processes among the Donetsk collaborationists, and seemed to be a sort of 'moderator' between different clans.
He also radically reduced his ties with Akhmetov, whose business in the Russia-occupied part of Donbas was 'nationalized', and the structures of the Akhmetov's humanitarian fund 'We Shall Help' were forced out.
In Donetsk and adjoining cities, the 'head of the DPR' runs a protection racket, involving a significant part of the markets, supermarkets, shopping malls, restaurants and cafes, and also food smuggling, the abduction of Russian humanitarian aid and the petrol trade.
He formally commands the whole 'army' of the quasi-republic, which is de facto a limited contingent of Russian troops on the occupied territory.
Because of this, he has direct links to the top leadership of the Russian Defense Ministry and is accountable only to them and to the representatives of the Main Intelligence Office of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
The Kononov's influence is ensured by the fact that he is firmly embedded in the command chain of the Russian military.
They are actual decisive force in the occupied part of the Donbas, including the control over the budget flows from the Russian Federation for the development of local army structures.
Basically, the leadership of the 'operational command 'Donetsk' includes Russian officers only.
The main command and staff positions in the 'corps' are also occupied by Russian military personnel.
The 'DPR' army' is staffed with contractors and mercenaries from Russia by more than half.
Unlike Igor Girkin , his predecessor in office, he is a native of Luhansk after all.
All his pre-war adult life Kononov spent in the town of Sloviansk, where he worked as a coach in Judo Federation of Donetsk region.
After Girkin's sabotage group arrival to Sloviansk in April 2014, he immediately joined its ranks, first as a chief of the checkpoint, then – a company leader, and later – a whole brigade commander.
Now he is the 'Lieutenant General of DPR', first recipient of the 'Gold Star Medal of the Hero of DPR' and other fake awards like 'St.
In addition, he constantly fights an internal struggle in the collaborationist's environment with variable success.
In September 2015 he compelled the 'Speaker of the People's Council' Andrey Purgin to leave office.
This became a kind of victory of Pushilin's curator in the Kremlin, Putin's assistant Vladislav Surkov over his foul enemy Volodin.
Now 36-year-old Pushilin is seen in Moscow as a major contender to replace Alexander Zakharchenko.
In particular, 'the head of DPR' forced Pushilin's relative Elena Nikitina to resign from the 'information minister of DPR' office.
Remarkably, Pushilin, as well as Zakharchenko, earlier largely guided by Rinat Akhmetov, now fully depends on Vladislav Surkov.
In the spring of 2014, as a 'co-chairman of the provisional government of DPR', he was engaged in financial support for all separatist actions in Donetsk.
Pushilin has received his organizational and financial experience in the financial pyramid of MMM-2011, which in 2012 had already become a party, and in 2013, together with other pro-Russian forces, organized protests against the shale gas extraction on the Donbas territory.
He has been managing the actual FSB representation office in the occupied territory of Donetsk region for a long time – since December, 2015.
For example, his predecessor Sergei Lukashevich was heading 'DPR State Security Ministry' for only nine months.
Under Pavlenko, this office actually was able to take control over the whole 'power' block of 'DPR' with the exception of military, of course.
Modern Donetsk security and military officials conduct a permanent conflict to control budget flows from Russia.
Pavlenko also has a decisive influence on the 'head of Organized Crime Department of the Interior Ministry of DPR' Sergei Tishchenko and 'Interior Minister of DPR' Alexei Dikiy.
However, the Security and Interior 'ministers' are having some conflicts from time to time.
The Pavlenko's personal data is quite contradictory, since he does not appear in public, has no official biography nor even official photo.
For a long time 'MGB head' was considered a former 'people's mayor' of Sloviansk, KGB and SBU retiree Vladimir Nikolayevich Pavlenko.
He held the 'mayoral' chair for less than a month, since Igor Girkin arrested the first 'people's mayor' Vyacheslav Ponomariov.
After the liberation of Sloviansk by Ukrainian Army Pavlenko escaped in an unknown direction.
But these Pavlenkos differ in patronymic, therefore, most likely, 'the head of the MGB of DPR' Pavlenko is a citizen of Russia and an officer of the FSB of the Russian Federation.
He is the key person, coordinating the local collaborationists of the administration in the Russia-occupied Donbas.
He had created the the office himself as then leading economic strategist of Alexander Zakharchenko's 'administration', although he remains in the status of 'acting minister' for more than 1,5 years.
Granovsky has no public conflicts, preferring to resolve the issues behind the scenes.
Although he has a decisive influence on all processes in 'DPR' in industry, trade and 'foreign trade' activities.
Currently all this group is actively involved in the process of so-called 'nationalization' of Ukrainian enterprises in the Russia-occupied territory of Donbas. 43-year-old Granovsky during the last three years played several important roles.
From May to November 2014 he was the first 'Minister of Fuel and Energy of DPR,' and retired because of his disagreement with the contemporary idea of the 'nationalization' of Akhmetov's industrial assets.
The party cell was headed by Oleksandr Bobkov, close companion of Boris Kolesnikov, and then – by Donetsk Mayor Oleksandr Lukyanchenko, tied directly to Akhmetov.
During the Revolution of Dignity Granovsky coordinated 'titushky' gangs in Donetsk, and drove them to the Mariinsky Park in Kyiv.
That means he now is in charge of all those 'nationalized' factories, predominantly owned by the oligarchs Rinat Akhmetov and Viktor Nusenkis.
In particular it refers to the Nusenkis' PJSC 'Donetsksteel' , Akhmetov's PJSC 'Yenakiieve Iron and Steel Works' and its Makiivka branch, as well as of Yenakiieve, Makiivka and Yasynivka coke plants, Khartsyzsk Tube Works, Dokuchayevsk Flux-Dolomite Plant, 'Komsomolske mine administration' and so on.
There is also 'International Accounting Bank' there, used to transfer money from Russian government to puppet 'states' of 'DPR' and 'LPR' to form their budgets.
This kind of cover is used by Kremlin to avoid further sanctions from the West.
Volodymyr Pashkov, aged 56, was born in the Russian town of Bratsk, Irkutsk region.
But in 2008 Pashkov was appointed Vice Governor, and later – the First Vice Governor of the Irkutsk region.
Later Pashkov left for Moscow and took over 40% of the shares of the IT company 'Expertek', which began to win tenders for contracts with the state corporation 'Rosneft' and its branches throughout Russia.
Having that, we might consider rumours that Pashkov is a creature of the fled Ukrainian oligarch Serhiy Kurchenko inadequate.
It means 'Minister' Timofeyev as a militant nicknamed 'Sasha Tashkent' runs large scale corporate raids and organisation of smuggling and sale of counterfeit alcohol and cigarettes as a head of armed gang.
For example, he has overtaken the 'Amstor' supermarket chain, and then presented it to Alexander Zakharchenko, who seems to be the relative of Timofeev's first wife.
For himself personally he 'nationalized' Zasyadko and Kiselyov mines, brought bankruptcy and encroached on state enterprise 'Makiivvuhillia', stole the gasoline supplied to the occupied Donbas from Russia by the Ukrainian fugitive oligarch Sergey Kurchenko.
Also Timofeyev took control over depots with tobacco, alcohol and jewellery, smuggled coal, fuel and lubricants, etc.
For these purposes he used the armed militants of the 'Oplot' brigade, where Tymofeyev was listed as the 'Chief of Staff' in 2014.
His closest partner in black business schemes is Konstantin Kuleshov, who has long been running the 'state' enterprise 'Markets of Donbass', created especially for him, and administered along with Timofeyev the contents of the first humanitarian convoys from Russia in 2014.
They supposedly sent the humanitarian aid to 'military commandants', but in reality it was sold in stores controlled by them and other 'DPR' warlords.
That was cause of violent conflicts with representatives of the Russian GRU and the FSB and their entire structure in the occupied Donbas.
At the moment, militant 'security officials' have somewhat weakened the influence of 'Minister of Revenues and Duties', but they cannot remove him from the game completely due to the Zakharchenko's relentless support of his protege.
His nickname 'Tashkent' he gained due to the studying in Tashkent Higher Combined Arms Command School in 1989-1991.
He finished his military education in 1993 at a similar school in Blagoveshchensk, Russian Far East.
One of the iconic traitors to Ukraine, and an example of collaborationism among the officials of the law enforcement system.
In the spring of 2014, as Head of Organized Crime Department in Donetsk regional office of Ukraine's Interior Ministry, he quickly switched sides to pro-Russian militants, whose main base was just a base of his Department.
He was one of the organizers and curators of attacks on the government buildings, and the capture of the regional prosecutor's office in particular, where many criminal cases and other important documents were stored.
Then, in April 2014 Dikiy was issued a passport of the Russian Federation , with nominal place of residence in the town of Yevpatoria in Russia-occupied Crimea.
His authority covers not only all the local 'policemen', 'Migration Service' and 'Traffic Police', actively issuing 'DPR passports' and car licence plates with separatist symbols, but also all kinds of prisons on the occupied territory.
But the backbone of Dikiy's 'office' are the Organized Crime Department , 'Berkut' riot police unit , a 'quick response' special unit , etc.
Also he controls 'Internal Troops of the DPR', headed by 'Deputy Minister' Oleg Makarchenko, who in 2014 worked in private security companies in Donetsk.
All these illegal formations are directly involved in combat operations and guard duty at checkpoints.
Also they are actively used during the organization of various parades in Donetsk.
Dikiy has a permanent conflict of interests with the 'State Security Ministry' , he was repeatedly lowered in status to 'Acting Minister', and in 2015 even held under short-term arrest.
However, recently the 'head of the Interior Ministry of the DPR' again got rid of the 'acting' status.
On the other side, Dikiy was sentenced in absentia by the Ukrainian court in Toretsk to 12 years in prison.
Works in conjunction with another unofficial Akhmetov's ally, 'Acting Minister of Industry and Trade of the DPR' Aleksey Granovsky.
Trapeznikov has a fierce backstage confrontation with Alexander Timofeev – ' Deputy Head of the Government' and 'Minister of Revenues and Duties', and the head of Zakharchenko's administration Maxim Leshchenko.
Their relations spoiled so much that one day Trapeznikov even shot Leshchenko in his leg with his own pistol.
Also the 'vice PM' has some influence on 'the head of the secretariat of the administration' Olena Filippova.
In the pre-war period, Trapeznikov was the head of the 'Ukoopzovnishtorg' Trading House.
Before that he worked as deputy head of the Petrovskoy District Council of Donetsk city and at the same time was the leader of the fan-club of Donetsk 'Shakhtar' football team, belonging to Rinat Akhmetov.
He started working as the FC Shakhtar manager back in 2001, while studying in the Donetsk State Academy of Civil Engineering and Architecture.
As the former chief organizer and financier of the Kharkiv 'Oplot' and his Donetsk branch, he has a serious impact on the 'head of the DPR' Alexander Zakharchenko.
Moreover Bobkov himself and 'Vice Premier of the DPR – Minister of Revenues and Duties' Timofeev are mentioned from time to time as possible replacement for Zakharchenko.
Previously Timofeyev was Zakharchenko's 'chief of stuff', while the latter commanded the 'Oplot' militants in Donetsk.
Also he is one of the links connecting 'the leaders of the DPR' with the criminal world, the oligarch Rinat Akhmetov and Putin's assistant Vladislav Surkov.
The whole biography of the 57-year-old Bobkov is connected with Budonivskyi District of Donetsk city.
Thus he became the Akhmetov's supervisor of Donetsk mayor Alexander Lukyanchenko.
In 2010, Bobkov was promoted – powerful Boris Kolesnikov made him a deputy in the regional party organization.
Also he runs the export of counterfeit alcohol and scrap metal from the Russia-occupied territory.
One of the few members of the 'government of the DPR', still in office since the first day of its existence.
She has been bypassing all personnel perturbations, cleansing and arrests for more than three years.
From the very beginning, she has been issuing normative acts on behalf of the fake 'Ministry of Finance', and organized the collection of material aid for the militants.
She has a direct connection with the economic curators of the 'DPR' in the Russian government, in particular, with Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Kozak, who, in fact, is responsible for all budgets and intergovernmental relations in Russia.
Also she is connected with Deputy Minister of Economic Development of the Russian Federation Sergey Nazarov, Russia's Deputy Minister of Finance Leonid Gornin, and others. 38-year-old 'Vice Prime Minister of the DPR' Matyuschenko has orders and medals from her chief, Alexander Zakharchenko.
Her alleged merits include introducing at least some rules in the process of budgeting and cash operations in the 'young republic', and inventing some system of budget classification according to certain norms and standards.
It is noteworthy that the only experience in this field the 'head of the Ministry of Finance' ever had has been gained back in 2002-2008.
She was listed then as the chief specialist of the budget department of financial board in the Yasynuvata Town Council.
Therefore, it seems that all these accomplishments on the 'budget of the DPR' she was awarded for, has been made at least under strict control of her 'mentors' from Moscow.
In reality, the daily paper work of the 'Ministry of Finance of the DPR' is in the deep crisis.
Even the basic mechanism of the reception of documents has not been established, causing unprecedented delays in the consideration of elementary issues.
Instead, there is a clear timetable for taking bribes, which, at least, allows Matyuschenko to regularly show off in public in a new and expensive fashion clothes with exquisite accessories.
At the same time the absolute majority of the population of the Russia-occupied territory lives in extreme poverty.
He is known as a militant field commander 'Frantsuz' , 'Commander of 'The Legion' particular risk unit of the Ministry of Emergency Situations of DPR' in the rank of 'colonel', 'MP of the DPR People's Council', and 'the secretary of the executive committee of the separatist organization 'Donetsk Republic' – 'cartel party' in the occupied part of Donetsk region.
In all his hypostases, he performs the functions of Alexander Zakharchenko's personal 'special task expert', ly, 'the head of the Dnieper', acting as a hammer against his domestic among other collaborationists.
Commission adopted a resolution banning Khodakovsky from holding any office in the puppet state.
Another 'interim commission', headed by Zavdoveev, was responsible for the 'nationalization' of markets in the occupied territory.
As a result, after the few months of 'work' he managed to overtook control over more than two dozen markets to Zakharchenko's benefit.
It caused some conflicts with the 'Minister of Revenues and Duties of DPR' Alexander Timofeyev and his business partner Konstantin Kuleshov, who also actively raided small businesses, but in their own favour.
Currently Zavdoveev as a head of this 'interim commission' is replaced by the head of the 'Donetsk Republic' parliamentary fraction Alexander Kostenko ), and this rotation was controlled by Timofeev-Kuleshov duet.
Previously, the 'Legion' was part of the militant 'Oplot' brigade under Zakharchenko's command and carried out reconnaissance-sabotage and assault missions.
In fact, before becoming in 2014 a militant, 'Frenchman' worked in 'Unitech' company, producing and selling children's playgrounds and fitness equipment.
Then he was a sales manager in several firms in Makiivka that were retailing building materials, plumbing and electrical appliances, or computer and office equipment.
However, today Zavdoveev is a key element in the confrontation between Zakharchenko and 'speaker of the parliament' Denis Pushilin.
Zavdoveev is pushing him back in the 'parliament' by taking control over former head of the 'Donetsk Republic' Anatoly Koval's group of MPs, and in this 'cartel party' itself.
The member of the inner circle of the Alexander Zakharchenko since 2014.
His influence among the collaborationists is weakened due to the sharp and constant conflict with his former subordinate and current 'vice-premier of the DPR' Dmitry Trapeznikov.
Noteworthy, that both Leshchenko and Trapeznikov are commonly listed among those dependent from the Donetsk oligarch Rinat Akhmetov.
His brightest career success was the chair of the director of the economic issues of the 'Zhdanovska' mine, owned by the businessmen Oleksandr Rotov and Anatoly Diachenko.
The main consumer of the mine's coal was 'DTEK Trading Ltd' of the same Rinat Akhmetov.
Later on, when Dubovsky headed 'the Coal and Energy Ministry of the DPR' in 2015-2016, the coal from the occupied territories has been actively sold in free Ukrainian regions, and now he returned successfully to his chair in 'Zhdanovska' mine.
By the moment Leshchenko, aged 44, is trying hard to retain his influence in Zakharchenko's 'administration' by pulling his men to Donetsk.
The current head of the 'administration of the Kalininsky district of Donetsk' Vasily Tkachuk , and 'first deputy minister of Revenues and Duties of DPR' Alexander Zakharov are originated from that town.
He controls the production of counterfeit vodka and its trading in 'DPR', 'LPR' and Ukraine.
Chertkov has strong influence on other crime bosses, running businesses in Russia-occupied territory and taking part in massive smuggling schemes to Russia, Ukraine and from there.
At the time he was the member of the Vasily Sorokin gang, who controlled Petrovsky district of Donetsk.
Official biography of MP Chertkov is blank since 1988, when he retired from the position of the digitally programmed worktables on Petrovsky repair-mechanical plant, till 1997, when he became the director of ' Petrovske' private enterprise.
During this period he is mentioned in many criminal cases and different police files.
Leading positions in this unit were occupied by Pysarchuk brothers, Ruslan and Andriy.
They were well-known in Donetsk in 1990s as 'Philia' and 'Pisar' – Chertkovs personal killers, experts in murders and terror.
There is an unconfirmed information, that Chertkov currenly lives in Kyiv, and visits 'DPR' from time to time.
As his secretary, she controls the contacts of other collaborationists with their leader.
She is successfully manoeuvring between different centres in Zakharchenko's 'administrtion', above all – between conflicting nominal chief of the 'administration' Maksim Leshchenko and most influential 'vice-premier of the DPR' Dmitry Trapeznikov.
On July 14, 2015 she survived the assassination attempt – the bomb was planted on her Range Rover and exploded on the way. 48 years old 'Chief of the Secretariat of the head of DPR' was introduced into Zakharchenko's inner circle by Russian FSB Lieutenant General Vladimir Antiufeyev.
Basically, short stay of experienced FSB official Antiufeyev, who was 'State Security Minister' of self-proclaimed 'Transnistrian Republic' on Moldovan territory for 20 years, had two aims.
As a result of this volcanic criminal actions Filippovs family managed to buy 5-room apartment in Moscow, villa in Moscow region and even opened the bank account on Cyprus.
Long-time partner of Donetsk 'Orthodox oligarch' Victor Nusenkis , whose industrial assets on Russia-occupied territory were 'nationalized' in March, 2017.
Their business involves both small illegal mines and seized state mines.
But in 2012 he fell into disfavour due to the conflict over the control over the 'Makiivvuhillia' state enterprise with the most powerful party member Yuri Ivaniushchenko, and the latter won the battle.
Today 47 years old Orlov is not seen in public, which is understandable, due to his past and current unofficial control over lots of enterprises beyond both sides of the frontline.
Also he controls Horlivka chemical plant, 'Energotrans' transportation company, 'Energocaital' metal plant, and 'Europe' hotel in Russia-occupied Crimea.
Since the end of 2016 the illegal coal businesses of Orlov's commercial structures are under the investigation by the Prosecutor's office of Donetsk region.
On the contrary, his 'Europrombank,' named 'problematic' by National Bank of Ukraine in 2015, still working, after changing his legal address from Donetsk to Kyiv.
After he lost all his positions in the puppet state, he declared himself and his organisation 'Donbas Patriotic Forces' in opposition to Alexander Zakharchenko.
Still he was mentioned in media and internet almost as often, as the 'head of the DPR', leaving far behind 'the speaker of the parliament' Denis Pushilin and other collaborationists.
Khodakovsky, 44, is perhaps the most famous traitor to the oath to the Ukrainian people.
Prior to Russian aggression, he was the head of the Special Operations Center 'A' of SBU Office in Donetsk region.
During the events at the Kyiv Maidan, he participated in the assault on the House of Trade Unions – the headquarters of the opposition to Yanukovych regime.
With the onset of the so-called 'Russkaya Vesna' in Donbas, he immediately switched sides to the Russian aggressors.
Also he is one of the key 'assets' of Donetsk billionaire Rinat Akhmetov on Russia-occupied territory.
Khodakovsky controlled the western frontiers of the 'DPR' For a long time, and had his share in the smuggling of grocery goods and drugs across the frontline.
Also, Khodakovsky' militants escorted and secured the humanitarian goods of Akhmetov's fund 'Pomozhem' ('We will help' and alternative supplies of petrol from Ukraine and its trading in the 'DPR', in particular, through gas stations network 'Parallel', then controlled by Akhmetov's affiliates.
He is playing the main propaganda and deceptive role, regularly reporting 'republic's' view of the fighting on briefings.
He is acting strictly according to instructions, received from Russian generals, who are in charge of the war in Donbas.
It gives him good contacts in the Russian Defense Ministry and the GRU of the General Staff of the Russia's Armed Forces.
He is considered as a 'spare' in case of a possible rotation of 'Defense Minister of DPR' Vladimir Kononov.
According to formal features, the 'Deputy Commander of the 1st Army Corps of DPR' is considered to be local, since he was born and raised in Donetsk, where he also resided for the past 20 years.
However, after graduating from 1987 Donetsk General Yepishev High Political And Military School of Engineers and Signal Corps, he was sent to the Urals – to the town of Kungur in Perm region.
Basurin retired from the Russian Army in 1997, then returned to Donetsk, where he first began to work as a history and physical education teacher, and then in various polyethylene production companies.
Subsequently he became the 'political officer of the 'Kalmius' battalion, which was quickly reformatted into 'Separate Artillery Brigade 'Kalmius' of militant forces.
In particular, this unit took an active part in the bloody battles for Saur-Mohyla mounting.
Since the battle for Debaltseve in January and February of 2015, this character is also the unofficial press secretary of the 'DPR Forces,' telling lies about 'ISIS militants in the service of the Kyiv junta,' 'sacrificing of Donbas residents to pagan god Perun by Ukrainian punishers,' and the other outright nonsense.
Besides that, Basurin has friendly relations with the infamous Kremlin propagandist Graham Phillips, and is constantly hindering the OSCE mission with their duties in Russia-occupied territory.
Since October 2016, he rules the 'capital of the DPR' in the status of 'acting mayor', positioning himself as some kind of 'manager', bothered exclusively with Donetsk communal problems.
The latter, who has been 'mayor' since October 2014 to October 2016, is currently in charge of the entire social bloc in the 'administration of the head of the DPR', and therefore retains a significant influence on the Donetsk municipality and Kulemzin himself.
The 43-year-old Kulemzin before the Russian invasion has always been working in the Donetsk Regional State Administration.
In 2007, he became the Head of the Department of Foreign Economic Relations and European Integration of Donetsk Region State Administration, and since 2011 became Deputy Head of the Main Department for Regional Development, Investments and Foreign Economic Relations.
Despite this European name, under the Yanukovych regime this association was supposed to facilitate border cooperation between the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine and the Voronezh and Rostov regions of Russia.
Under his leadership the enterprise decreased 14 pre-war tram routes to alleged 9, and 19 trolleybus routes – to alleged 11.
He lives in the occupied Donetsk, performing almost all his liturgies in the territory of the 'DPR,' welcoming all leading militants and local collaborationists, including Alexander Zakharchenko.
Due to that, the occupation administration supports all dioceses of the Moscow Patriarchate Church in the territory under its control in obtaining land plots and various property, repairing temples, etc.
But occasionally Metropolitan Illarion goes to Ukraine-controlled Mariupol, where he incites the people with there the propaganda slogans of the Kremlin and the Moscow Patriarchate during the worships.
One of the most passionate supporters of the so-called 'Russian world' among the highest clergy of the Ukrainian Church.
He strictly follows all instructions of Moscow Patriarch Cyril , and even forces the subordinate clergy to hold prayers for Russia, her power and the army.
Despite the fact that Roman Shukalo was born in 1951 in the village of Rudne near Lviv, all of his life he lived in Donbas.
Then he was appointed the head of Kherson diocese, and in 1996 he was finally transferred to Donetsk.
In 2000, the head of the Donetsk diocese Illarion was given the rank of Metropolitan, and made friends with Viktor Yanukovych.
Since October 2015, Metropolitan Illarion transferred all Ukrainian Church's internal financial issues in 'DNR'-controlled territory to using Russian rubles and set new higher prices for rituals and the sale of church stuff.
This caused the indignation of some clerics, who said that 'raising tariffs' during the war was burdensome for parishioners.
In response, Metropolitan declared those clerics as 'saboteurs,' and began to threaten them with the pushing them off the diocese with negative characteristics, that will no longer allow to find a place in other dioceses of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate.
