This description contains information not contained in the original broadcast.
In journalistic coverage of Ukraine, there is a tendency to differentiate between the “neo-Nazi” militia combatants and their associated political parties and “mainstream,” “centrist” and, therefore, somewhat more respectable elements.
Recent events in that unfortunate country illustrate that such a dichotomy is essentially false.
Both parties like Svoboda and Pravy Sektor and the so-called “conservative” parties such as those of President Poroshenko and Arseniy Yatsenyuk incorporate fascist heirs to the OUN/B Nazis of Stephan Bandera.
Advised by Roman Svarych, OUN/B World War II leader Jaroslav Stetsko’s personal secretary, Poroshenko is also advised by Oleh Makhnitsky, the former Justice Minister from Svoboda.
In a signature gesture, Poroshenko advocated providing veterans’ entitlements to members of the UPA –the combat wing of the OUN/B and a military ally of the Third Reich.
The recent combat in Eastern Ukraine has minimized electoral participation by the Russian ethnic minority, in effect, realizing an ethnic cleansing dynamic.
Illustrating the type of governance instituted by the OUN/B heirs, an investigation of the Maidan shootings earlier in the year has omitted any substantive investigation of the shooters of policemen, and focused on a former government security officer, Dmytro Sadovnyk, who–supposedly–was photographed holding a rifle.
Supposedly, he was using the rifle in the sniper attacks on the Maidan demonstrators.
This “evidence” was unearthed during the “investigation” presided over by the Justice Minister of the provisional government, Oleh Makhnitsky of the Svoboda party.
President Vladimir V Putin of Russia on Friday unleashed perhaps his strongest diatribe against the United States yet, using an international meeting of Russia experts to sell Moscow’s view that American meddling has sparked most of the world’s recent crises, including those in Ukraine and the Middle East.
Mr Putin, however, specifically denied trying to restore the Russian Empire.
He argued Russia was compelled to intervene in Ukraine because that country was in the midst of a “civilized dialogue” over its political future when the West staged a coup to oust the president last February, pushing the country into chaos and civil war.
Of course, all the “smart people” of Official Washington know how to react to such statements from Putin, with a snicker and a roll of the eyes.
Clashes broke out Tues­day between demon­stra­tors and police in front of Ukraine’s par­lia­ment in Kiev as deputies inside repeat­edly voted down pro­pos­als to rec­og­nize a con­tentious World War II-era Ukrain­ian par­ti­san group as national heroes.
Thou­sands of Svo­boda nation­al­ist party sup­port­ers ral­lied ear­lier in the cap­i­tal in cel­e­bra­tion of the Ukrain­ian Insur­gent Army, whose strug­gle for inde­pen­dence for Ukraine was tainted by its col­lab­o­ra­tion with the Nazis.
Later, masked men attacked and threw smoke grenades at lines of police out­side par­lia­ment as law­mak­ers met inside.
Mean­while, at least 14 peo­ple, includ­ing seven civil­ians and seven ser­vice­men, were killed in fight­ing between pro-Russian sep­a­ratists and gov­ern­ment forces in east­ern Ukraine.
A cease-fire has been in place since early Sep­tem­ber but vio­la­tions are reported daily.
Svo­boda said its mem­bers were not respon­si­ble for the unrest in Kiev, which police said was orches­trated by a small group of peo­ple at the rally.
The unrest over­shad­owed the pas­sage of laws the gov­ern­ment hopes will con­tain the gal­lop­ing cor­rup­tion that has long hin­dered Ukraine’s scle­rotic econ­omy.
Pres­i­dent Petro Poroshenko urged law­mak­ers to keep up the fight against cor­rup­tion, a prob­lem that he equated with terrorism.
Other approved pro­vi­sions included laws to stem money-laundering and to increase cor­po­rate transparency.
Par­lia­ment also approved a new defense min­is­ter — for­mer National Guard head Stepan Poltorak — a press­ing pri­or­ity con­sid­er­ing the clashes with pro-Russian sep­a­ratists in its indus­trial east­ern regions.
Historians blame the UIA and other Ukrainian fascist forces for the extermination of thousands of Poles and Jews during World War II as these right-wing Ukrainian paramilitaries sided with the German Nazis in their fight against the Soviet Union’s Red Army.
Svoboda and the Right Sektor have elevated UIA leader Stepan Bandera to the level of a Ukrainian national hero. . . . . 4b.
In FTR #779. we noted the dominant presence of Svoboda and Pravy Sektor ministers in the interim government in Ukraine.
This may well have affected the investigation of the sniper deaths that take place during the demonstrations that brought about the fall of Viktor Yanukovych.
Oleh Makhnitsky is from Svoboda and has been central to the “investigation” of the sniper attacks.
The result of the ascent of Swoboda, Pravy Sektor and the other OUN/B-related elements in Ukraine has had the effect of elminating much of the pro-Russian voting bloc in the Eastern part of the country.
Ukraine’s next par­lia­ment will be pro-Western and strongly nation­al­ist, and it won’t be to Russia’s liking.
Can­di­date lists for the Oct. elec­tions show how per­sonal favourites backed by old school power­bro­kers in the out­go­ing par­lia­ment are set to make way for peo­ple who made their names in Kiev’s “Maidan” rev­o­lu­tion last win­ter, or in resist­ing Russ­ian encroach­ment in east­ern Ukraine.
Already a war widow at 35, she is a can­di­date for Prime Min­is­ter Arseny Yatseniuk’s party.
We will see peo­ple with a mil­i­tary back­ground, though they will not have polit­i­cal and juridi­cal knowl­edge,” said polit­i­cal ana­lyst Mikhailo Pogrebinsky.
The make-up of the new assem­bly will reflect months of war and a con­fronta­tion with Rus­sia that has cre­ated a Cold War-style cri­sis between Moscow and the West around Ukraine and redrawn its polit­i­cal landscape.
The Maidan rev­o­lu­tion drove out Moscow-backed pres­i­dent Vik­tor Yanukovich in Feb­ru­ary.
Krem­lin alarm at his oust­ing and the prospect of a pro­nounced shift west­wards by Kiev led to Rus­sia annex­ing Crimea in March and pro­voked pro-Moscow sep­a­ratist rebel­lions in Ukraine’s east.
The loss of Crimea and pre­ven­tion of nor­mal vot­ing in the east, where vio­lence per­sists despite a cease­fire between Ukrain­ian forces and the rebels, will mean the num­ber of seats occu­pied in the new par­lia­ment will shrink to 424, accord­ing to cen­tral elec­tion author­i­ties.
The oth­ers – and Savchenko’s if as expected she is elected – will remain vacant.
Even in the new-look assem­bly, Poroshenko will have to work hard to win sup­port for his plan to bring peace in the east as sev­eral other pro-Europe par­ties fear a sell-out to Rus­sia and the separatists.
Pro-Western Poroshenko called the elec­tion to secure fur­ther legit­i­macy after the rev­o­lu­tion, which Rus­sia denounced as a fas­cist coup to jus­tify its back­ing of the separatists.
But there is lit­tle sign of national rec­on­cil­i­a­tion, with the rebels threat­en­ing to hold their own elec­tions in early Novem­ber, peo­ple still dying every day in the east despite the cease­fire and anti-Russian feel­ing high in the capital.
Ukraini­ans are also express­ing increas­ing dis­en­chant­ment with the slow pace of reforms to improve liv­ing standards.
I hope he under­stands this and will under­take steps towards reform,” said Mustafa Nayem, a jour­nal­ist and Maidan activist who is run­ning for the Poroshenko bloc.
The Com­mu­nists, who usu­ally backed him, might lose all rep­re­sen­ta­tion for the first time since inde­pen­dence in 1991.
All other par­ties are seek­ing the vote of the Maidan – the local name for Kiev’s Inde­pen­dence Square where tens of thou­sands protested against Yanukovich and which com­mands moral author­ity in polit­i­cal life.
With the par­ties enlist­ing war vet­er­ans, vol­un­teer bat­tal­ion lead­ers and heroes such as Savchenko, Chornovil, Mam­chur, the new assem­bly is likely to be hos­tile to Moscow.
But there might be com­pe­ti­tion to see who can be the best nation­al­ist and the biggest enemy of Rus­sia,” Pogre­bin­sky said.
Poroshenko is hop­ing for a man­date to pur­sue the peace plan for the east which he reluc­tantly accepted after bat­tle­field defeats in which hun­dreds of Ukrain­ian sol­diers may have died.
But even with a strong pro-European major­ity, Poroshenko, a 49-year-old con­fec­tionery tycoon, may not find it easy to win sup­port for his plan and his deal­ings with Russ­ian Pres­i­dent Vladimir Putin.
On the Maidan, stalls are sell­ing toi­let paper printed with Putin’s image.
At inter­na­tional foot­ball matches an obscene chant about Putin is now as much a fix­ture as the singing of the Ukrain­ian national anthem.
Some sup­port­ers of the old elite have come under attack while out cam­paign­ing.
Sev­eral have been seized, pelted with eggs and dumped in rub­bish bins.
Both have sharply crit­i­cised parts of Poroshenko’s peace plan and say his pro­posal for giv­ing lim­ited self-rule to the sep­a­ratists for a pro­vi­sional period will only encour­age the rebels to press ahead with plans to form a break­away entity.
Over 75% of vot­ers sup­ported Ukraine’s ‘course towards Europe,’ says Poroshenko.
Ukrain­ian Pres­i­dent Petro Poroshenko on Sun­day claimed a landl­side vic­tory for pro-western par­ties in the country’s key par­lia­men­tary elections.
More than half of the votes went to pro-government par­ties, and “a con­sti­tu­tional major­ity” of more than 75 per cent of vot­ers sup­ported the country’s course towards Europe, Poroshenko said in a statement.
And exit poll released after polls closed on Sun­day said that the President’s newly formed party, the Poroshenko Bloc, stands to get 23 per cent, fol­lowed by prime min­is­ter Arseniy Yatsenyuk’s National Front with 21. per cent.
The pro-European Samopomich party, led by the mayor of the west­ern city of Lviv, came in third with 13. per cent.
For­mer prime min­is­ter Yulia Tymoshenko’s Pro-western Father­land party man­aged to just meet the 5-per-cent hur­dle for stay­ing in the leg­is­la­ture by get­ting 5. per cent, accord­ing to the national exit poll con­ducted by three polling institutes.
Yat­senyuk and many other promi­nent fig­ures left the Father­land party in August.
Among those who failed to get in are the Com­mu­nists with 2. per cent and the nation­al­ist Right Sec­tor party with 2. per cent.
How­ever, exit polls pre­dict that Right Sec­tor leader Dmytro Yarosh won a direct seat in his native Dnipropetro­vsk region, accord­ing to Svy­atoslav Oliynyk, a deputy regional governor.
Poroshenko has said he hopes that the snap elec­tion will bring more sta­bil­ity to the crisis-hit coun­try, where more than 3,600 peo­ple have been killed in a con­flict with pro-Russian sep­a­ratists in the east.
Ear­lier, the pres­i­dent showed up dressed in fatigues in a polling sta­tion in Kram­a­torsk, a city in the east­ern Donetsk region that was recap­tured by gov­ern­ment forces in July.
Poroshenko said that he aimed to pro­tect the right to vote of the more than 10,000 sol­diers serv­ing in the region.
Observers doubt, how­ever, that a new gov­ern­ment — expected to be formed as early as next week — will be able to end the fight­ing with pro-Russian sep­a­ratists in the east quickly.
Secu­rity was tight on Sun­day, and some 84,000 police offi­cers were on duty through­out Ukraine to ensure a peace­ful vote, the Inte­rior Min­istry said.
Vot­ing did not take place in the dis­tricts con­trolled by the sep­a­ratists, whose lead­ers have vowed to ignore Sunday’s polls because they con­sider Ukraine a neigh­bour­ing state.
Turnout in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, which are partly rebel-held, was much lower than else­where — just 31 per cent in Donetsk and 27 per cent in Luhansk, accord­ing to offi­cial figures.
Some 1.83 mil­lion vot­ers were reg­is­tered in both regions — only a frac­tion of their com­bined peace­time pop­u­la­tion of almost 7 million.
More depth on the nature of the “new” political makeup of the Ukrainian government is provided by German-Foreign-Policy.com.
Note that the “moderate” Yatsenyuk’s party has Andriy Biletsky, founder of the Azov Battalion as an adviser.
Poroshenko has Svoboda member Oleg Makhnitsky as an adviser, as well as Roman Svarych, the personal secretary to Jaroslav Stetsko.
The election campaign, ending this week in today’s pro-Western Ukraine, is characterized by extremist nationalism.
According to opinion polls, the party of the politician, who had promoted himself using videos of his violations of the human rights of alleged pro-Russian separatists, is set to become second in Sunday’s elections.
Considering the civil war’s nationalist upsurge, other parties have begun accepting militiamen into their ranks.
The commander of the fascist Asov Battalion, for example, is a member of the “military council” of Prime Minister Arseniy Jazenjuk’s party.
Last week, Asov Battalion militia members participated in the violent attacks on the Ukrainian parliament.
During the election campaign, it was alleged that Kiev’s troops had used internationally banned cluster munitions in the Donetsk region.
New social cuts are anticipated – regardless of the winner of the elections – to pay for the essential supplies of Russian gas.
Berlin and the EU, whose hegemonic sphere Ukraine joined this year, are refusing to give Kiev additional material assistance.
Aside from these issues, the former Polish foreign minister, Radoslaw Sikorski, admitted that he had completely invented the serious allegations he made against the Russian president.
The election campaign in today’s pro-Western Ukraine has been shaped, to a growing extent, by extremist nationalism.
Opinion polls predict the victory of the “Petro Poroshenko Bloc,” whose top candidate, Vitali Klitschko, had been systematically groomed by the CDU-affiliated Konrad Adenauer Foundation.
With his violations of the human rights of alleged pro-Russian separatists, Lyashko seems to attract a significant number of potentially fascist voters.
Most recently, he aroused attention, when, in a TV talk show, he presented a prisoner – whom he claimed was a Russian soldier.
Lyashko also announced that, in the future, he will have captured separatists summarily executed.
Svoboda may also lose votes to the “Right Sector,” which hardly has a chance of winning seats in the Verkhovna Rada.
Beyond the spectrum of overtly fascist parties, particularly the “People’s Front” – the party of Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk, who had been put in power by the West – is campaigning with well-known rightwing extremists.
The “People’s Front” has also established a “Military Council” to profit from the country’s nationalist war frenzy.
The “Military Council” also includes Asov Battalion commander Andriy Biletsky.
His Asov Battalion had participated in the violent attacks on the Ukrainian parliament.
These attacks began October 14, when the majority of the deputies rejected the motion for declaring October 14 an official holiday.
The Ukrainian Insurgent Army , which had also committed massacres on more then 90,000 Christian and Jewish Poles, was founded October 14, 1942.
During the election campaign, there were also serious allegations raised against the government.
According to recent reports – including those by western human rights organizations – Kiev government forces, particularly fascist militias, are committing serious human rights violations in the civil war in eastern Ukraine.
It has also been reported that government units have used internationally banned cluster munitions in the Donetsk region.
The Ukraine has not joined the treaty even after the pro-western coup in Kiev.
According to Human Rights Watch , there is strong evidence of Kiev’s government forces having used cluster munitions in attacks in early October – at the time, the ceasefire was already in effect.
According to HRW, at least six people have been killed and dozens wounded by these internationally banned munitions.
The real number of victims is probably higher, according to the human rights organization.
For the period following the elections, regardless of election results, there are already indications of new social cutbacks.
This year’s economic performance will shrink by up to ten percent, correspondents report.
The budget could reach a deficit of more than seven percent of the gross domestic product.
In addition, the costs of energy have also been rising; inflation is running at around twelve percent.
No one expects the United States $17 billion in IMF bailouts – up to 2016 – to suffice.
The German government is only willing to participate in limited financing.
At best, a limited share of the costs for Russian gas deliveries to Ukraine could be covered, according to the EU’s Energy Commissioner Günther Oettinger’s entourage.
The fact that no final agreement has been reached with Russia on the supply of natural gas is advantageous to President Petro Poroshenko and Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk.
The absolutely essential agreement and, with it, also the debate on more cuts, are, therefore, postponed until after elections.
The Kiev Escalation Strategy, The Free World, A Fatal Taboo Violation, The Europeanization of Ukraine, Crisis of Legitimacy, “Fascist Freedom Fighters”, The Restoration of the Oligarchs , Second-Class Stakeholders, Ukrainian Patriots, Ukrainian Maneuvers, A Lesson Learned and Under Tutelage.
Rechter Politiker Ljaschko: Der Mann, der die Ukraine aufhetzt. www.spiegel.de 22.10.2014.
It turns out one of the key fig­ures in the Poroshenko admin­is­tra­tion, who was also heav­ily backed by Pierre Omidyar’s pro-Maidan out­fits, was the per­son in charge of push­ing the lus­tra­tion laws.
Shortly before the elec­tions, on Octo­ber 17, Zal­ishchuk used her Omidyar-funded out­fit, “Chesno,”to orga­nize a round­table with lead­ers of pro-EU and neo-fascist par­ties.
Lyashko’s cam­paign posters fea­tured him impal­ing a car­i­ca­tured Jew­ish oli­garch on a Ukrain­ian trident.
The fas­cist UPA par­tic­i­pated in the Holo­caust, and were respon­si­ble for killing tens of thou­sandsof Jews and eth­nic Poles in their bid to cre­ate an eth­ni­cally pure Ukraine.
Many UPA mem­bers filled the ranks of the Nazi SS “Gali­cia” Divi­sion.
Ukrain­ian Inte­rior Min­is­ter Arsen Avakov appointed chief of Research Affairs in Kyiv oblast party ATO, deputy bat­tal­ion com­man­der “Azov” Vadim Troyan.
And today, the deci­sion of the min­is­ter, he’s a police chief of Kiev region “said the head of the Inte­rior Ministry.
In reply, Vadim Troyan assured that the Ukraini­ans will not let such a respon­si­ble posi­tion.
I think that this case is that God has given me — the bat­tal­ion, the min­istry and the peo­ple — I will not fail, “he said.
According to the Financial Times, New Citizen, which received hundreds of thousands of dollars from Omidyar, “played a big role in getting the protest up and running” in November 2013.
The Poroshenko Bloc is named after Ukraine’s pro-Western president, Petro Poroshenko, a billionaire with a lock on Ukraine’s confectionary industry, as well as owning a national TV station and other prized assets.
He came to power this year thanks to the revolution originally organized by Zalishchuk’s Omidyar-funded NGOs, and has rewarded her with a seat in the Rada.
In an interview with channel TVi, the commander of the Donbas Battalion, Taras Konstanchuk, stated that if the President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko, surrenders a single kilometer of Ukrainian land in negotiations with the “DNR” and “LNR”, he can expect a military coup and the central government will be seized by soldiers.
He added that every time the soldiers feel that the deputies of the Verkhovna Rada are adopting incorrect or useless laws, they will come and set fire to tyres before the parliament building.
There’s only one way you’ll leave here, and that’s feet first.”said Konstanchuk.
On Tuesday, October 4, the President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko, repealed the law on the special status of Donbas.
DONETSK, Ukraine — The shelling of a high school in Ukraine’s rebel stronghold of Donetsk has chilled even the battle-hardened in this weary nation.
The killing of two teenagers as they were playing soccer after lunch Wednesday is a stark reminder that the cease-fire agreed upon in September has only really ever existed on paper.
Vladimir Voropayev, chief of the children’s trauma unit at the regional hospital in Donetsk.
Alexander Yeliseyev, the father of one victim, 18-year-old Andrei, walked by in shock as he gathered belongings left behind when his son’s body was removed — a dark brown coat and a pair of sneakers.
Government officials have failed to produce cast-iron evidence of such claims in the past, and independent rights groups say there’s evidence that government artillery has hit homes in eastern Ukraine.
Residents of stricken areas have frequently complained that rebels deploy artillery near homes, invariably drawing return fire.
