On January 13th, the Public Broadcasting System telecast the FRONTLINE documentary, “Putin’s Way,” which purported to be a biography of Russia’s President, Vladimir Putin.
Drawing on firsthand accounts from exiled Russian business tycoons, writers and politicians, as well as the exhaustive research of scholar and best-selling Putin’s Kleptocracy author Karen Dawisha, the film examines troubling episodes in Putin’s past, from alleged money-laundering activities and ties to organized crime, to a secret personal fortune said to be in the billions.
This documentary opens by describing the corruption that pervaded post-Soviet Russia and the Presidential Administration of Putin’s sponsor Boris Yeltsin during the transitional period of ending communism and starting capitalism, which was the period of privatization of the former Soviet Government’s assets.
This film ignores the role that the United States and especially Lawrence Summers and his protege Andrei Shleifer and other members of Harvard’s Economics Department played in planning and largely overseeing that entire process.
Yeltsin brought that team in, to plan and oversee the process, because he figured that Harvard would know how to set up capitalism.
However, this FRONTLINE documentary ignores all of that history, and pretends that Yeltsin established Russia’s crony-capitalism with no help or guidance from the U.S., the World Bank, and Harvard’s economists.
Putin is instead portrayed as having been, and as now being, just a continuation of Soviet-era corruption, not at all as functioning in what was, to a significant extent, actually a U.S.-headed transition into capitalism.
It also notes that both Yeltsin and Putin refused to allow those bombings to be officially investigated, and that a possibility exists that the Russian Government itself had bombed the apartment buildings and falsely blamed it on Chechen separatists in order to enable Putin to win a popular election so as to succeed Yeltsin.
The first of those incidents was done by the Obama Administration in order to enable Ukraine to be used as a base for NATO nuclear missiles aimed against Russia; and the second of them was done in order to get the EU to hike its economic sanctions against Russia.
Whereas it’s likely that the 1999 Moscow apartment-building bombings were a false-flag operation, it’s practically certain that the two recent events in Ukraine were false-flag events — but they were perpetrated by our side, not by Russia, and so this documentary ignores these Ukrainian incidents and pretends that whereas Putin uses false-flag tactics, Obama and the United States do not.
Before the wake of the Dagestani invasion had settled, a series of bombings took place in Russia and in the Dagestani town of Buynaksk.
On 4 September 1999, 62 people died in an apartment building housing members of families of Russian soldiers.
Khattab initially claimed responsibility for the bombings, but later denied responsibility.
This was followed by an anonymous caller, who said he belonged to a group called the Liberation Army of Dagestan.
The fact that the Chechen separatist movement was supported by the Saudis and entailed “Wahhabist militants from Chechnya” wasn’t even mentioned in the PBS documentary, though it certainly is relevant to deciding whether Putin waged the second Chechen War solely in order to win election to the Presidency and was doing something he shouldn’t have been doing there.
They saved the corrupt division of property that took place after the fall of the Soviet Union.
They cost thousands of innocent lives, both Russian and Chechnyan, by starting a new war.
They brought to power someone from the security services — and that’s Putin — who, of course, had no interest in democracy.
His first act as president was to grant his predecessor, Boris Yeltsin, immunity from prosecution.
Nothing is said about United States President Barack Obama’s having done the same thing with respect to his predecessor, George W Bush, who had lied his country into invading Iraq in 2003, and also about Obama’s having protected from criminal prosecution the megabank chiefs who grew rich from mortgage-backed-securites frauds that brought down America’s economy in 2008, and whose Administration covered up much else besides.
The pretense is instead put forth that Putin is evil in ways that today’s American Presidents are not.
Then, Russia’s richest man, whom Putin had placed in prison for tax-evasion, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, is interviewed and says that all he was really trying to do was to fight against corruption and against dictatorship, and for capitalism and democracy.
Then, the liberal political leaders Tony Blair from UK and Gerhard Schroeder from Germany are described as having been corrupt for having supported Putin’s policies.
He’s good at persuading people and intimidating them, and he’s been doing this with Western leaders, sometimes with charm, sometimes with threats.
If you are on a list of possible people who might be approached to be a member of the Duma, for example, you have to pay for your seat.
Once you’re in there, then you can turn around and charge businessmen to have line items in the budget.
Then, Putin is described as being like an unpopular Middle Eastern tyrant.
The Arab spring surged out of Tunisia into Tahrir Square and on to Tripoli.
For Putin, these mass demonstrations overthrowing powerful dictators must have been worrying.
It was the first stage of his coming to understanding that he could never quit the post because the destiny of Gadhafi could be waiting for him.
In 2011, when Vladimir Putin announced he would run again for Russia’s presidency, the response was mass demonstrations in Moscow’s streets, protests which had to be put down by police.
This documentary assumes, unquestioningly, the U.S.-propaganda line, that Russia invaded Crimea in 2014, and that the economic sanctions against Russia are punishment for that, and also punishment for Russia’s supposed guilt in the shooting down of the MH17 airliner.
And we think we’re trying to calm things down, but in fact, what we’re doing is we’re stoking things.
We’re giving Mr Putin the impression that we’re not to be taken seriously, and he continues to push us harder and harder and harder, and that’s extremely dangerous.
But then in July 2014, one violent act would transform the political landscape.
Malaysian passenger plane MH17 was shot down over eastern Ukraine by what was widely believed to have been a Russian-supplied weapon.
I demand that Russia fully cooperate with the criminal investigation into the downing of MH17.
We’re opposing Russia aggression against Ukraine, which is a threat to the world, as we saw in the appalling shootdown of MH17.
However, actually, Russia didn’t “invade” Crimea, but instead there was a coup on 22 February 2014, which installed a new Ukrainian Government, which wanted to oust from Crimea Russia’s Black Sea Fleet, which had been stationed there since 1783, and Crimeans immediately demonstrated against that coup-Government, and they held a referendum on rejoining Russia, of which Crimea had been a part until 1954. 96% voted to rejoin Russia.
Gallup polls taken in Crimea both before and after that referendum showed similar majorities wanting to rejoin Russia.
What was illegal wasn’t Crimea rejoining Russia; it was instead the coup that precipitated Crimea’s rejoining Russia.
But this documentary doesn’t even mention that coup, at all, nor the ethnic cleansing that has followed it.
Russia’s accepting Crimea back into Russia was legal, and it was also essential for Russian national security.
The coup, however, and the Obama-demanded ethnic cleansing of Ukraine’s Donbass region — the area that had voted 90% for the Ukrainian President whom Obama overthrew — were violent U.S.-backed actions to impose upon all of Ukraine a far-right, rabidly anti-Russian, Government, which authentically constitutes a national security threat against Russia.
