Putin reportedly advised former United States President sound and timely analyses and recommendations on current issues of particular concern for the AlGeorge W Bush during the 2008 NATO Summit in Bucharest.
This perspective is also implied by the equally a variety of disciplines and interests covering a broad spectrum of security-related issues.
Some of them are members of the European Union and NATO, while others are desperately trying to achieve The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the this goal.
In his North Atlantic Treaty Organization or the NATO Defense College. article “Why the Ukraine crisis is the West’s fault” he argues that NATO has expanded too far to the East, “into Russia‘s backyard”, against Moscow’s Printed copies of this paper can be obtained by contacting declared will, and therefore carries responsibility for recent events; however, Mary Di Martino atdimartino@ndc.nato.int this seems to ignore that NATO was not hunting for new members, but found them knocking at its door.
It is true the Russian leadership felt Research Division threatened, not by NATO’s “open door” but by the prospect of the EU’s soft NATO Defense College Via Giorgio Pelosi, 1 power transforming its neighbour, the “brother” nation or “Little Russia” as 00143 Rome – Italy Ukraine has been referred to since the 18th century.
The views expressed in V.le Scalo San Lorenzo 55, 00185 Rome, Italy this paper are the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the NATO Defense www.dedaedizioni.it College or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
The Research Diviand Azerbaijan); and the Central Asian States (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and sion would appreciate a courtesy copy of reprints.
These include the use of that prompted the Putin regime to go to war and use all special operations forces and internal opposition to the means available – if necessary. creation of a permanent front throughout the enemy state, as well as the impact of propaganda instruments, forms All this is nothing new.
The Kremlin’s growing concern, and methods which are constantly being improved.”6 as autocratic regimes were swept away in the Arab Spring To make a virtue of necessity Russian military planners or in colour revolutions, was plain for all to see.
Finally, how NATO could respond to Russian military leaders came to the conclusion that the those undeclared wars in Europe. “colour revolution is a new form of warfare, taking the form of armed struggle according to the rules of military engagement but, in this case, involving all available It was all on the cards – Moscow “threatened” by tools,” Russian Defence Minister Sergey Shoigu stated in colour revolution his speech.
Gerasimov wrote in early 2013: “Armed conflicts, including those associated with the so-called color “First, the military potential of countries organizing revolutions in North Africa and the Middle East, have the overthrow of the enemy government is used for open demonstrated, that a prosperous state, in a matter pressure.
The goal of this pressure is to prevent the use of months or even days, may turn into a bitter armed of the security forces to restore law and order.
Later, a coalition of avoid a colour revolution at all costs; and take a close look countries can start a military operation to assist the at how to make the use of your own military and nonopposition in the seizure of power.”10 military resources more sophisticated.
Most famous are the Rose Revolution in Georgia in 2003, the Orange Revolution in Ukraine in 2004, and the Cedar Revolution in Lebanon in 2005.
Then it began to support the separatists, sending of the Russian military in Ukraine.
In this context, the and regulations have been introduced or simplified, in annexation of Crimea and the war in Eastern Ukraine can order to facilitate Crimea’s integration be considered as a kind of “counter-colour revolution.” into the Russian Federation and the recognition of new Russian citizens.
They have been an effective and and a total absence of credible international oversight. sometimes surprising mix of military and non-military, The results were nevertheless as intended, making it conventional and irregular components, and can include possible to counter accusations that Moscow has broken all kinds of instruments such as cyber and information international law by picturing the take-over of the region operations.
The Russian approach seems to be based on the lessons This increases the number of Russian citizens that have learnt at various testing grounds, especially during and to be protected. after its war with Georgia in 2008, where Russian armed 2.
This time Moscow used mainly special forces and its “soft power” On 26 February 2014, in the midst of the Maidan clashes, such as propaganda and technical assistance.
Additional Russia started bringing troops and equipment on a large components, such as energy security and economic scale to the Russian Western Military District, close to pressure, will come to the fore during the oncoming the Ukrainian border, for a so-called snap inspection winter.
Military units in full formation were ready for deployment within 72 hours.
They are hardly effective in In Crimea, the presence of these unidentified special terms of any actual improvement in military capacity, forces was a means of psychological warfare.
As the show of Consequently, Russia was not obliged to invite any military force was enough to take Crimea, the situation observers.
Officially, Moscow did not even recognize the did not get to the point where the Geneva Conventions existence of the military build-up along the border. would even come into play.
Taking advantage of local tensions and local militias The “little green men” (or “polite people”, as Putin prefers The technique was to team up and support local Russian to put it) are Russian special forces in their familiar green minorities in venting their dissatisfaction with the apparel, acting as “local security forces”, without national local political leadership, before moving on to covert or other identification tags.
For the outside has been in the news only recently, it is actually nothing world, this is labelled “protecting Russians abroad”. new.
A long-standing practice of the Spetsnaz, the Special With a content Russian minority, loyal to the Ukrainian 16 This scenario had already been “tested” in Russia’s ZAPAD 13 exercise.
Analysis of photos and videos posted on social networks, as well as reports of the Ukrainian and Russian press, suggests that some elite units sent their battalion tactical groups for “training” in the border region with Ukraine ‒ for instance, the 4th Guards Tank Division and the 2nd Guards Motorized Rifle Division from Moscow, the 76th Guards Air Assault Division, the 31st Guards Air Assault Brigade, the 106th Guards Air Assault Division, and the 23rd Motorized Rifle Brigade 25.
Following the capture of Russian troops in late August, this list should be completed with the 98th Airborne Division and the 18th Motorized Rifle Brigade.
The war in Eastern Ukraine is The Kremlin is fully aware of the important role of media combination of actions by paramilitary groups and the like the Russia Today TV channel, social media and regular army.
The transition from guerrilla warfare to internet portals, as well as PR campaigns worldwide.
All classic military operations was actually rare in the course of these were extensively used to prepare the ground for of previous proxy wars during the Cold War, for obvious action in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.
Both sides preferred to avoid a direct military disinformation campaign included multiple components. confrontation.
South Africa provided support to the UNITA Targeted and systematic disinformation took different forces during the civil war in Angola, in 1970-1980. forms, like labelling the Maidan movement as “fascist” Whenever the rebels were defeated by government troops, to awaken memories of the Soviet fight against Nazi units of the South African regular army crossed the border Germany.
Ukrainian army has surrounded small towns and big cities However, when the Ukrainian military began to push and is firing directly at residential areas in order to destroy back the separatists, threatening to cut off the border with infrastructure and crush the will to resist and so on.
The superiority of in Eastern Ukraine under heavy fire but also knocking the Russian troops was evident; however, the offensive out economic infrastructure is not borne out by data on against Mariupol in August 2014 was stopped.
For example likely, the Russian government did not want to dispel the the production of coal in the region declined by merely illusion of non-participation in the war.
However, the 13. percent compared to the same period in 2013 – even escalation of operations had already reached a level where in July 2014, in the midst of the fighting, 2. million tons it no longer made any sense to deny the participation of coal were produced. of Russia.
To cover up their real aims and actions, Russian officials offered strange explanations to the world 5.
The way Moscow has exploited collective memories of World War II (from the fascism narrative to the humiliation of Ukrainian prisoners being paraded through the centre of Donetsk on Ukrainian Independence Day, with the streets cleaned after them) would deserve and require an own analysis.
Especially as the Kremlin extends this narrative beyond the Ukraine crisis.
The pro-Russian rebels also stuck to this version, as it Russia denied its involvement in the fighting in Eastern emphasized their own narrative of a fight for ideals and Ukraine, even in the face of growing evidence to the for freedom.
After the battle for Donetsk Airport on 26 May,25 fighting for their freedom.”31 with the first reports of Russian casualties and burials of paratroopers, the official narrative changed.
When the Ukrainian Russian servicemen were now “volunteers” following army seemed to be regaining territory occupied by the their convictions to fight for freedom.
These volunteers separatists, the Kremlin changed tack by projecting were fighting in Ukraine, without their commander’s or itself as the defender of humanitarian issues.
If Russian minority” (actually, in many cases, Russian Russian servicemen then did not come home safely from citizens being taken by bus to Ukraine as “tourists”). their “vacation”, Russian authorities needed more time to Another example was the queue at the Ukrainian-Polish adjust the narrative. border showing Ukrainians purportedly trying to escape fascism and move to safety in Russia.
For and demanded humanitarian corridors for refugees and example, in early September the local state TV channel Ukrainian soldiers.
After the activist Yelena Vasilyeva created a Facebook page under this name, where information is shared about Russian soldiers fighting in Ukraine, the code became a synonym for Russian servicemen dying in the fight against Ukrainian forces.
I saw the reactions violence and calling for humanitarian corridors for the of mothers and wives of these Ukrainian servicemen Ukrainian services, “giving them the opportunity to who are surrounded.
This leave the combat area unimpeded and reunite with their was why I appealed to the Donbass militia to open a families, to return them to their mothers, wives and humanitarian corridor so that people could leave.
One of the most important differences from Guard of Ukraine and the right wing have given orders to the war with Georgia in 2008 was that, in 2014, the kill solely Russian-speaking citizens living in the Luhansk Kremlin was able to make effective international use of and Donetsk republics, violating the Convention of the “Russia Today” TV channel.
With Russia’s true ambitions still unclear, the a pro-Kremlin line but also working with targeted controversial concept of “Novorossiya” disinformation. emerged.
The “People’s Republic Simonyan made clear that objectivity was never her goal. of Donetsk and Luhansk” announced the independence RT was set up in 2005 to send a specific message.
He had already used the the media focused predominantly on the destruction term “Novorossiya”, meaning Eastern Ukraine.
This time Russian regular cut Crimea off from the rest of Ukraine by controlling the armed forces were used only to create the right backdrop highway and railway through the Isthmus of Perekop, but or, at most, to support local militias.
The main players the Donetsk and Luhansk regions cannot be dealt with in were specialized units, present in Crimea as “little green the same way.
Here, Russian troops would have to establish men.” “state” borders where they have never existed.
Hundreds of roads linking the area with the rest of Ukraine would have to be cut off.
Something like this cannot be done in The course of the war in Eastern Ukraine – limitations a secret operation, or even a covert invasion, but would of Russian capabilities require the establishment of traditional checkpoints on all reasonably important lines of communication and the In Eastern Ukraine, the most likely reason the “Crimean ability to prevent troops arriving from the rest of Ukraine. script” was not repeated was the limited level of Russian Even if the Kremlin has indeed been able to concentrate capabilities.
The Kremlin did not have the necessary about 40,000 troops on Ukraine’s borders, more than troops available to occupy the Luhansk and Donetsk twice that number would be needed for an occupation. regions.
It is important to note that all elite units of the Russian army had already been used.
The most important Ironically, Russian strategists seem to have created these result of the military reform, which took place from 2008 rapid deployment forces along the lines recommended by to 2012, was the discontinuation of mass mobilization former United States Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Colin of reservists.
This ability for to containing the Taliban within Afghanistan, beating rapid deployment was demonstrated during the Crimean any attempts to break into the territory of the Central stage of the operations in Ukraine, and again during the Asian states; but these troops are neither sufficient nor invasion of the Donbas region.
Russia presumably kept particularly well suited for the occupation of several its forces in permanent readiness close to the border, regions in Ukraine. exchanging one battalion tactical group with another from the same division or brigade.
Kyiv did not get far with a toolbox full of old tools The Kremlin began in 2013 to set up a pool of rapid deployment forces, in order to be able to intervene in With hybrid warfare techniques, own deficits can be its neighborhood.
At the same time these techniques allow modern forces consist of Airborne Forces (four divisions, optimal exploitation of the opponents’ vulnerabilities. five brigades), Marines (four brigades, eight separate Ukraine under President Janukovych was fragile, regiments), GRU Intelligence Special Forces (GRU fragmented, corrupt and on the whole badly governed, spetsnaz) brigades, three or four elite Ground Forces offering an easy target for Russia’s hybrid tactics.
The defence military answer to the separatists and the Russian invasion ministry planned that, in the coming years, all these was desperate, and might have made matters even worse. units would be made up of professionals.
After the Russian annexation of Crimea, the Ukrainian There is every reason to believe that the 30,000-40,000 leadership was under increased pressure to take action and troops transferred in February to the south-eastern border avoid losing any more territory.
In early April 2014, they of Ukraine are the backbone of these rapid deployment decided to carry out an “anti-terrorist operation,” using forces. the regular army against the Moscow-backed warlords.
The task would have required special forces Ukrainian armed forces’ needs in terms of equipment, prepared for combat in urban areas, not regular forces, protective clothing, medicines and meals are covered by who would not be able to make effective use of armoured the government.
Sixty percent of supplies come from vehicles, artillery or air strikes.
The Ukrainian units deployed were Further rounds of mobilization are under way, but such thus made up mostly of conscripts in their final months efforts are completely anachronistic and inappropriate for of service. operations in Eastern Ukraine.
Reservists, who have not touched any military equipment for years, even decades, Explaining to the Verkhovna Rada why it was not possible have no place there.
They would be in danger and also to organize military resistance to the seizure of the represent a danger to others.
They would probably even damage ready units totalling 20,000 men on paper but actually relations with the local population. reaching no more than 6,000.42 It is no surprise that, during the entire operation, the The situation then worsened.
The authorities delayed the morale of Ukrainian soldiers was very low; many of them demobilization of conscripts who had been called up for surrendered and tried to escape.
The Ministry battalions, formally commanded by the Ministry of the of Defence set up a partial mobilization for more than Interior’s National Guard, with good morale but a low 90% of the available resources.
In Kyiv, only every tenth level of training. reservist was mobilized voluntarily, according to Military Commissioner Vladimir Kidon.
The armed forces were On the Ukrainian side, a total of almost 50,000 men were in a critical condition and also the Ukrainian oligarchs involved.
The plight of the armed forces reservists, fighting alongside the newly created volunteer is described by Maksim Muzyka, a parliamentarian from units of the National Guard, the special units of the the new pro-European party “United Ukraine”, who Security Services and the Ministry of the Interior, other supports the “Narodnyy Tyl” troops and a number of volunteer militias, created under organization for bringing supplies to soldiers in Eastern the auspices of the Ministry of the Interior.
Efficient command and control under such circumstances is 42 Aleksey Nikolskiy, Ukraina ne boyets, Vedomosti, 12 March 2014.
It is no coincidence that Russian generals also rejected the idea of mobilization even in the most pressing situations, for instance when Chechen rebels broke into Dagestan in 1999.
An important role in fighting was played by volunteer formations, not subordinate to the state.
The battalion is made up of activists from the Social-National Assembly, Patriot of Ukraine, Avtomaydan, Bratstvo and Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists movements, as well as fans of the Dynamo football club.
At the same time, the Kremlin may be inspired by its success in Ukraine to repeat the venture in other post“The more Ukrainian army battalions or brigades are Soviet states like Moldova or Kazakhstan.
In addition, the brought up, the more troops there are from the Russian fact that Russia owns the world’s second-largest nuclear Federation,” Ukrainian President Poroshenko said in an arsenal takes on new relevance under these circumstances. interview.
His admission that Ukraine lost 65 percent of In the recent past the world relied on the rationality of its military hardware on the front line during fighting in Kremlin leaders, and believed that under no circumstances the Donetsk and Luhansk regions gives a strong indication would they be prepared to “press the button.” that there is no military solution to the conflict.
Military action has made it worse, creating deep resentment on Now the situation might have changed.
For many people in Eastern Ukraine, staying becoming a lonely pariah, without real allies or sufficient in Ukraine now seems an impossible prospect.
The conventional military capabilities to achieve its grown conflict in Eastern Ukraine will hardly lead to positive objectives.
Russia may continue its destabilization of Even Belarus has distanced itself from its closest ally. the Ukraine for the foreseeable future, but all possibilities President Lukashenko rejects the recognition of the of a closer political co-operation have been lost.
Let’s take a look back at the time of Khan Batyi, view mirror the time of the Mongol-Tatar Yoke.
We would have to give virtually entire Russia, Western Europe, and Eastern Russia’s hybrid warfare in Ukraine demonstrated the new Europe to Kazakhstan, Mongolia or someone else.
There is no sense in going back to the past.”52 , a relatively high level of training, and professional forces.
At the same time, The position of President Lukashenko confirms the quiet however, it is clear that these rapid deployment units are but growing unease that Russia’s hybrid war cannot be not sufficient to carry out large-scale military operations deterred outside NATO territory.
Where military capabilities the borders in Europe guaranteed by NATO are safe. are not sufficient, the Kremlin is ready to bridge the gap with all non-military means available, hand tailored to NATO was not the trigger of the crisis in Ukraine, but the 48 For example, Semen Semenchenko, commander of the “Donbass” volunteer battalion, complained that the Ukrainian military ignored his requests for support when his unit was encircled near Ilovaisk.
First of all, Ukraine is not a ensure that balance could be restored in security.
The and diplomacy so that Russia can realize that its current challenge for the Alliance was to react adequately and at politics will not be successful in the long run. the same time to avoid returning to Cold War thinking, or to the action/reaction logic associated with that period.
Russia’s hybrid warfare cannot be answered by a military Thirdly, and most importantly, this war was undeclared. alliance alone.
NATO can take care to have the right Russia’s actions were deliberately placed beneath the radar. forces available, to overcome its political disagreements, It was not a party in the war; its invasion of Eastern Ukraine and enhance the comprehensive approach with other was run by several thousand fully equipped servicemen international organizations such as the EU and the OSCE officially spending their vacation in battles between also in addressing hybrid threats;56 main components Luhansk and Donetsk.
The Russian hybrid model thus of the Russian model are non-military and need to be outflanked NATO’s reaction patterns.
The Alliance and addressed with economic and information campaigns its 28 nations have therefore remained bystanders during which NATO does not and should not control.
The the war in Ukraine, though the conflict could clearly nations, however, carry major responsibility to prepare extend far beyond Ukraine and goes politically beyond and prevent becoming a target of Russia’s hybrid methods Ukraine.
Former Polish Foreign Minister Sikorski hit the of the questions raised by hybrid warfare and are ready to nail on the head when he reportedly stated at NATO’s act, as was reported also in the Russian media.
Among these was the Readiness including to clarify what could require it to invoke Article Action Plan , which is intended to ensure that 5.
It does not have to reinvent the wheel – discussions NATO has the right forces and the right equipment, on emerging security challenges, including cyber defence in the right place and at the right time.
In addition, and energy security, have been on the agenda for years. the implementation of more than 40 military exercises Optimization of information and intelligence sharing in Eastern Europe in 2014 demonstrates that NATO is also necessary, as well as streamlining of the decisionnations are sending a clear signal not only to Allies and making process.
