Ukraine; Donbas; Kharkiv; Although the Crimean gambit was quickly resolved in Russia’s identities; historic memories; favor, at least on the ground, the fighting in the Donbas region geopolitical narratives; of eastern Ukraine continues with huge loss of life, well over 2 Russia million internally displaced persons, and massive damage to infrastructure.
On the other hand, in the neighboring Kharkiv region, the population remained loyal to the Ukrainian state and Russian incitements to rebellion were rebuffed.
This paper delves deeper into the mindset of the residents of eastern Ukraine to ascertain why support for Russia differs between these two regions.
It focuses on the identities, memories, and narratives of the main groups of residents inhabiting the Donbas and Kharkiv Oblast.
Then it compares the attributes of these main groups to each other to illustrate their differences.
It characterizes the geopolitical narratives promoted by Russia to generate support for its actions to re-construct the Russian geostrategic area of control and demonstrates where and with which group these emotive narratives were successful and where and why they failed.
A reasonable assumption is that from the perspective of Russian President Vladimir Putin, the invasion of Ukraine was exigent because of the success of the Euromaidan popular movement that resisted the pro-Russian President of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, in late 2013 and then deposed him in February 2014.
From a geopolitical viewpoint, Putin and the Russian elite generally saw the Euromaidan as a revolution sponsored by Western powers to wrest Ukraine away from the inherent domain of Russian influence, what has come to be called the “Near Abroad” , and thereby threatened the security of Russia.
The tight geographical nexus between those two factors meant that the change of regimes in Kyiv would not be taken lightly in these regions.
Thus, it was not surprising that a confrontation developed, curated from Russia with a deluge of political narratives, spurring protests and seizures of public buildings.
President Putin deemed it his obligation to protect the Russian-speaking people in Ukraine who he claimed were threatened by Euromaidan.
Southeastern Ukraine, an arc from Odesa through Kherson, Dnipro, the Donbas, and Kharkiv, where ethnic Russians formed a significant minority and Russian speakers a majority, he said, was Soviet Russia’s “gift” to Ukraine, a gift that he wanted to reclaim.
More specifically, he takes up the activation of Novorossiya; focuses on localized power struggles; and then discusses the divergence of the Donbas, the function of filibusters from Russia, the amplification, and then the abandoning of Novorossiya and “saving” of the Donbas.
Ultimately, the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic became Russia’s protectorates, maintaining a war of attrition with Ukraine that continues to this writing.
Toal also summarized why the takeover of Crimea was easy compared to eastern Ukraine, in that Crimea had a powerful affective appeal to ordinary Russians both as a storied sacred place in Russian history and as a beloved vacation spot that held happy memories for many people.
As a peninsula, it was geographically separate and distinct – by virtue of its ethnic Russian majority – from other parts of Ukraine.
It was also home to strategic Russian military bases with Russian forces deployed there already.
Finally, the Ukrainian forces on the peninsula were not ready and ordered not to fight.
By contrast, southeastern Ukraine was a much larger space that had no uniformly clear physical geographic dividing line from the rest of Ukraine.
It had many distinctive places forged by tsarist and Soviet power, but no oblasts where ethnic Russians were a majority.
As a result, it was a more challenging terrain for the operationalization of an assisted secessionist project.
My contention is that the prevalence of regional over national identity rather than the use of Russian language influenced how receptive the population was to the Kremlin’s affective geopolitical discourse.
This will be tested by comparing the Donbas with the neighboring Kharkiv Oblast, where in both cases Russian speakers prevailed but identities differed.
Loyalty to Ukraine as a state and identity as a Ukrainian could, then, affect the number of supporters, the views of local decision-makers and police, and the outcome of the rebellion.
As will be seen, national or regional identities of groups of people, shaped by their collective memories and narratives, was decisive in mobilizing people to support one side or the other.
In order to operationalize this study, a conceptual framework is provided.
But another important consideration was the external normative power of the United States as manifested in NATO’s eastward expansion to shore up Ukraine’s independence, and, arguably, to contain any Russian attempts to assert control over Ukraine.
Initially, same Ukrainian power elite that set Ukraine’s geopolitical culture was intrinsically Soviet.
Yet, after Ukrainian independence, presidents Leonid Kravchuk and Leonid Kuchma converged on cautious Ukrainian nation-building.
First, both identified Russia as the “other” against whom the inhabitants of Ukraine might define themselves as Ukrainian.
Second, both promoted a sense of nationhood based on inclusive criteria of citizenship.
In the event, it was his decision to not sign an association agreement with the EU in November 2013 that triggered the Euromaidan uprising and activated the anti-Euromaidan and pro-Russian protesters, most notably in Crimea and southeastern Ukraine.
Moreover, economic factors played an important role in ensuing regional turmoil.
Finally, the use of the Russian language and preference for Russian media, particularly in Crimea and southeastern Ukraine, would make the population more receptive to the Russian discourse.
The “antidote,” Ukrainian national consciousness, coexisted and slowly grew in southeastern Ukraine, in particular among the younger generation.
Definitions of languages and dialects are often key discursive battlefields in national and regional identity narratives and identities of resistance.
National and regional narratives are very powerful tools in the formation of identity because of their emotive appeal.
As Paasi reminds us, national or regional identity formation is a process that involves inputs into the human consciousness and may produce nested identities.
Social institutions such as culture, media, and administration are crucial in these processes.
History is a specific form of narrative that develops social identity, cohesion, and purpose.
It plays a major role in the formation of national, ethnic, religious, and regional identities.
Kappeler described how the legacies of the imperial past and competing memories play out today geopolitically between Ukraine and Russia.
Karina Korostelina demonstrated that in Ukraine, since 1995, Ukrainian history textbooks for students not only differentiated Russia from Ukraine, but also portrayed it as an oppressive and aggressive enemy.
She cautioned that these perceptions complicate international relations between Russia and Ukraine and contribute to ethnic tensions within Ukraine.
Meanwhile, Rodgers indicated that certain regions corrected for this stance by having their own regional histories emphasizing friendly relations with Russians.
Political narrative is also a powerful tool for motivating political action.
Public political narratives are artificial constructs, making selective use of different EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 33 elements to create a desirable account.
In the analysis of public political narratives, these elements – or narrative parts – are identified and interrogated.
Applying the narrative analysis approach to Russia’s stance on Ukraine in 2014 facilitates clarification of those elements that particularly motivate Russian actions.
National and regional identity in Ukraine In post-Soviet Ukraine and Russia the various identities can be tested by asking about one’s territorial identity, or homeland.
The perception of homeland varies considerably among the residents of Ukraine, ranging from identifying with the former USSR through contemporary Ukraine to its specific regions.
Although 38% identified themselves most of all with Ukraine, 25% did so with the USSR, 21% with the “region where I live,” 11% with the “region where I was born,” and 2% with Russia.
While in western and central Ukraine the national identity of being Ukrainian was strongly developed, in southern and eastern Ukraine, for deeper historic reasons, this was not the case.
A large influx of Russians and others into industrial cities in the late nineteenth–early twentieth centuries was conducive to the emergence of a Russian-speaking proletarian culture in those regions.
Places or areas perceived to be different, as the social psychologists Moles and Rohmer postulated, or have a historic resonance, as the political scientists Michael Keating and Zimmermann-Steinhart suggested, helped in the development of strong regional identities.
Thus, in well-defined regions such as Crimea and the Donbas, permanent residents identified themselves through interaction with natural features; historic, political, and socioeconomic attributes of their areas; and collective memories.
Territorial-political identity also varies by regions and over time in conjunction with political narratives.
In neighboring Kharkiv Oblast, however, residents identified themselves even less with the USSR and their region in 1994 than the Donbas residents.
A year later their identification with the USSR or with their region declined to 19% and 13%, respectively.
In the Donbas, much more so than in Kharkiv Oblast, the natural environments, populations, and socio-economic conditions differed from adjacent parts of Ukraine.
Moreover, as will be discussed below, the population consisted of several different groups with distinctive collective memories.
Leaders within those groups developed competing narratives within their region that would further their own group’s interest; while one group tended to support loyalty to Kyiv, another threatened separatism with a link to a broader Russian identity.
But the deciding factor in taking sides is dependent on the feeling of identity, political conviction, and motivation for a cause.
For Putin, these would be crucial in deciding whether or not to intervene in different regions of Ukraine.
The timing was also crucial, inasmuch as the common Soviet identity since the demise of the Soviet Union was increasingly being replaced by a Ukrainian civic identity.
The issues of regional identity, developed through memories and narratives, which involve ethnic, linguistic, historic, and socioeconomic variables as inputs, will now be addressed for the Donbas oblasts and, by comparison, Kharkiv Oblast.
First, relevant geographic, demographic, and socioeconomic information will be presented to identify major groups in each region.
Second, each group’s collective memories and narratives will be assessed.
Third, their social identities and political preferences as determined by some surveys will be examined.
Then, conclusions will be drawn on the effectiveness of imposed narratives on existing ones in an effort to re-construct this geostrategic area for Russian control.
The Donbas The Donbas forms a belt of industrial cities and coal-mining towns that straddle Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
This urban cluster evolved in the late nineteenth and much of the twentieth century and forms the demographic and economic nucleus of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
Its two largest cities, Donetsk and Luhansk, are administrative centers that also serve as foci for the Donbas identity.
But the oblasts that include the Donbas are not uniform geographically or historically.
The northern half of Luhansk Oblast is predominantly rural and, like Kharkiv Oblast, was settled by Ukrainian Cossacks and peasants in the seventeenth century.
The southern part of Donetsk Oblast is also mainly rural EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 35 and was sparsely settled until colonization in the eighteenth century.
The coal mines and factories that opened in the nineteenth century did not attract local peasantry but instead drew workers from central Russia.
It is based on a sense of belonging to a community forged through the industrialization of the Donbas since the 1860s.
This distinct Donbas identity was formed in the 1930s when official propaganda imagined the Donbas as a leading industrial-proletarian region.
During the Soviet period, managers of all-Union enterprises and strategic institutions were directly responsible to Moscow.
After Ukraine’s independence, the Donbas elites found it difficult to reorient their respect and loyalty from Moscow to Kyiv.
Regional elites did this by drawing on collective memories and developing narratives to generate the loyalty of their subordinates and support for political action to suit their needs.
The oligarchs who gained control of the enterprises developed a strong patron-client relationship with workers reminiscent of feudalism.
Population Russian-speaking Ukrainians formed the majority in both Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
Because of a large minority of ethnic Russians, there were many mixed Russian-Ukrainian families, particularly in the cities.
By contrast, there was a major difference between urban and rural populations in terms of ethnic make-up.
Linguistic Russification of Ukrainians was particularly strong in the urban areas, where the majority considered their mother tongue to be Russian.
Data on language of instruction in schools allow us to gain some insights into ethno-linguistic trends since the 2001 census.
Although it is difficult to say with certainty owing to the lack of a census after 2001, by 2013–2014 it probably exceeded the share of the population whose mother tongue was Ukrainian but less than the share of ethnic Ukrainians.
Although some Russian-speaking parents were willing to send their children to schools with the Ukrainian language of instruction, others were angered by this change, making it a wedge issue during the Ukrainian presidential elections of 2010.
The victory of Yanukovych put a stop to this trend and even reversed it slightly, leaving the Russian language of instruction as the majority in the secondary schools of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
Mother tongue of Ukrainians in Donetsk, Luhansk, and Kharkiv oblasts in 2001.
Change in the share of secondary school students taught in Ukrainian and Russian in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, in percent.
It was prevalent in the belt of industrial cities that form the Donbas core and was used to the advantage of the Donbas elite.
A competing “Ukrainian Donbas” identity narrative was inspired by local Ukrainian dissidents, developed by formerly suppressed scholars, and promoted by Ukrainian activists and some teachers.
It had supporters in the region’s centers of education and in the rural areas.
It competed as an alternate historical memory aligned with Ukraine proper.
The Novorossiya geopolitical narrative relating to the idea of a Russian Imperial region was infused from Russia.
Following the insurgency in the Donbas, advocates of Ukrainian Donbas have for the most part had to seek safety outside the DNR and LNR, while Novorossiya, formally comprising DNR and LNR, failed to gain traction in southeastern Ukraine.
By the 1970s, however, coal production had peaked and began to decline.
In the post-Soviet 1990s, the reality changed as the region became a rustbelt, dependent on subsidies.
Living in a heavily polluted environment, workers began to experience more social and health issues.
Blaming the decline of their economy on the government in Kyiv, they aimed to win elections by promising to reinvigorate the economy.
They resented the push for Ukrainian schooling, calling it forced Ukrainization.
In return, most Donbas voters supported Yanukovych as their native son who would restore the Donbas to its former glory.
The second aspect of the Soviet Donbas narrative is the emphasis on its multinational character, the Russian language as the mode of communication, and the historic presence of ethnic Russians in the region.
History teachers in Luhansk, too, were not happy with the new official history books from Kyiv.
Cleavage tactics were used to generate emotional response and maximize voter turnout.
Moreover, economic factors played an important role in the political campaigns.
Workers dependent on employment in industries exporting to Russia were convinced their jobs were at stake.
After Euromaidan there were economic factors that were conducive to the recruitment of rebels.
As Zhukov demonstrated, the loss of jobs in machine-building industries with exports to Russia was the leading factor in explaining the level of rebel activity among the municipalities in the Donbas.
Then, after the Kyiv government stopped paying salaries of state-owned mines under rebel control, many miners joined the DNR and LNR fighters to earn some money.
Ukrainian Donbas The Ukrainian Donbas narrative drew on the Zaporozhian Cossack heritage of its easternmost territory, the Kalmius Palanka.
Proud of their local Ukrainian cultural and political achievers, its adherents see the Donbas as an integral part of Ukraine.
Displaced from the DNR and LNR, some of them are fighting for its liberation.
Historically, Novorossiya was an Imperial Russian marchland facing the Ottoman Empire.
Kharkiv Oblast Located adjacent to the Donbas, Kharkiv Oblast also borders the Russian Federation.
Yet the Russian intervention of March 2014 did not succeed in the city of Kharkiv or its surrounding areas.
Aside from the differences in the positions of political actors and their success in preventing pro-Russian activists from winning , there was a substantial difference in the population and the main identity narrative in Kharkiv Oblast that produced a different outcome during the crucial period in early 2014.
Although dominated by the metropolis of Kharkiv and its cluster of towns and satellite cities, it has a large productive agricultural countryside served by a number of outlying cities.
Like the Donbas, Kharkiv’s story began with the seventeenth century Ukrainian colonization of Muscovy’s steppe frontier.
As renowned warriors, the Ukrainian Cossacks were invited to serve on the Belgorod defense line and beyond with freehold privileges and the retention of their traditional regimental organization.
Sloboda Ukraine emerged as a refuge for Ukrainian Cossacks and peasants from war with Poland, and Kharkiv became its central fortified town.
The legal status of the Cossack regiments provided the basis for the formation of their distinct “Sloboda Ukraine” regional identity , the dominant identity in the region to this day.
Population Although Russian language was dominant, the ethnic composition of Kharkiv Oblast was significantly different from that of the Donbas.
Kharkiv Oblast Ukrainians formed clear majorities in both urban and rural areas.
Even more telling was the difference in the degree of linguistic Russification.
The language of instruction in secondary schools of Kharkiv Oblast also differed from that of the Donbas.
By 2001 the Ukrainian language of instruction made small gains in the Donbas, but in Kharkiv Oblast it surpassed the share of students taught in Russian.
Indeed, while the effort to increase the Ukrainian language of instruction to match the share of Ukrainian speakers in the Donbas alienated some parents, in Kharkiv Oblast this objective was attained with relative ease.
The Kharkiv narratives As is the case with the Donbas, there are three competing narratives in Kharkiv Oblast.
The main overarching narrative, the “Sloboda Ukraine,” is inclusive and regional in nature.
Change in the share of secondary school students taught in Ukrainian and Russian in Kharkiv Oblast, in percent.
EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 41 Soviet Union and tends to be pro-Russian, but not as much as the Soviet Donbas narrative.
Its leitmotif is Ukrainian-Russian cooperation in colonization, defense, and regional development.
This narrative accepts the historic Ukrainian Cossack colonization of the Muscovite steppe frontier.
It notes that the Ukrainian Cossacks, together with the Russian streltsy, fended off the Crimean Tatar raids.
It credits both Ukrainians and Russians with the transformation of the land and the development of cities, culture, science, and industry that followed.
They adopted the Sloboda Ukraine narrative as an outreach policy for cross-border cooperation and the construction of regional identity.
On either side of the Russia-Ukraine border, however, the objectives and interpretations of the regional projects proved to be different.
The Euromaidan and its aftermath brought this cross-border effort to a stop.
Soviet Kharkiv Those nostalgic for the Soviet Union, notably the remaining Communists, Soviet war veterans, and members of small pro-Russia organizations, like Oplot, remember Kharkiv as part of the Soviet heartland.
In keeping with the Soviet narrative, it is silent on the Holocaust, denies the Holodomor, and denounces Ukrainian nationalism.
Ukrainian Kharkiv Supporters of the Ukrainian Kharkiv narrative include some university faculty, students, human rights groups, and like-minded civic organizations that emerged during and after the Gorbachev Glasnost.
Their narrative emphasizes the indigenous ethnic Ukrainian nature of the region, and it points to Ukrainian cultural and 42 I STEBELSKY political actors in the nineteenth–twentieth century and highlights the cultural Ukrainian revival of the 1920s in Kharkiv.
It also laments the historic injustices committed by Imperial Russia and the Soviet Union; the imposition of serfdom; the Russification of the Ukrainian society, the Soviet collectivization of peasantry, and the purging of Ukrainian intelligentsia.
Political implications of narratives in the Donbas and Kharkiv Oblast Narratives propagated in the Donbas and Kharkiv Oblast shaped the attitudes of the people regarding Euromaidan and the governance of Ukraine.
Among the questions asked were some that would shed light on the political preferences of residents in the Donbas and in Kharkiv Oblast.
Regional identity, as we have seen, was supported by dominant narratives both in the Donbas and in Kharkiv Oblast and, according to Korostelina had the highest salience in Ukraine.
The second-most common choice was “federal” , with this choice ranging from the highest of 42% in Luhansk, 38% in Donetsk, to 32% in Kharkiv oblasts, reflecting their strong regional narratives.
By comparison, the lowest support for federalism, only 7%, was in Kherson Oblast.
This choice ranged from 33% in Kherson and 23% in Kharkiv to 12% in Luhansk and 11% in Donetsk oblasts.
Using this survey, Kudelia assessed the separatist movement in the Donbas that emerged in response to the violent regime change in Kyiv.
He noted that the Donbas respondents to the KIIS survey had the most negative opinion of the Euromaidan.
My assessment of the results of this KIIS survey provides other insights into the attitudes of respondents by oblasts.
It demonstrates the relationship between the human geography of the regions, their prevalent narratives, and political attitudes.
The armed capture of administrative buildings was more or less opposed by 72% in Donetsk and 58% in Luhansk oblasts.
Only 18% in Donetsk Oblast and 24% in Luhansk Oblast more or less supported such actions.
Those who opposed Euromaidan and questioned the legitimacy of the provisional government, however, did not necessarily desire to separate from Ukraine and join Russia.
Only 30% in Luhansk Oblast and 28% in Donetsk Oblast were clearly or somewhat in favor of secession, while Kharkiv Oblast came in third with only 16% in support.
For Russian speakers who don’t speak Ukrainian, the promotion of Ukrainian language was a major grievance.
While 3–4% of the Ukrainian speakers thought their rights were constrained by Russian speakers, 40% of Russian speakers in Donetsk Oblast, 30% in Luhansk Oblast, and 25% in Kharkiv Oblast thought they were constrained.
In the event of an incursion of Russian troops into southeastern Ukraine, however, the largest share of respondents (ranging from 36 to 55%) would stay at home and not interfere.
It confirmed that two-thirds of the Donetsk Oblast residents wanted to remain in Ukraine.
This poll demonstrated that even in the midst of instability and Russian intervention, the majority in Donetsk Oblast preferred to stay in Ukraine, of whom the largest number wanted more prerogatives of self-administration.
Susceptibility to political narratives pitching geopolitical discourses could be gaged by how much listeners trusted Russian and Ukrainian mass media.
This shift also occurred, more or less, in all the regions of Ukraine, but in different ways.
In Kharkiv, as in central and western Ukraine, the shift was even more dramatic.
Residents of southern and eastern Ukraine saw Novorossiya for what it was – an Imperial Russian political narrative.
Even fewer among ethnic Ukrainians and ethnic Russians considered it a basis for separatism.
Respondents in Odesa Oblast came second, with 45% choosing Russian technology and 31% self-expression.
The remainder of respondents in those oblasts chose either don’t know or refused to answer.
It had the highest share of urban population, the highest share of ethnic Russians, and the highest proportion of Russian-speaking Ukrainians.
Its Russian-speaking residents also manifested the strongest resistance to the introduction of Ukrainian in schools.
Residents of the Donbas were divided between two narratives; the dominant Soviet Donbas narrative and the opposing but growing Ukrainian Donbas narrative.
With the eruption of the anti-Euromaidan rebellion in the Donbas, this division led to protests and counter-protests by both groups.
The more aggressive stance of the first group, supported by disgruntled former Yanukovych servicemen and led by Russian mercenaries, culminated in their victory in major cities against the supporters of a Ukrainian Donbas narrative.
More importantly, Novorossiya was to have superseded the Soviet Donbas and other regional narratives of southeastern Ukraine to form a pro-Russian Ukraine.
Even so, Russia tried to unify its client rebel entities of the DNR and the LNR into a union called “Novorossiya” as a springboard for expansion beyond the Donbas.
The Novorossiya concept is being imparted as an overarching concept in the DNR and the LNR through Russian affective geopolitics of sustained war, military service, and Russian-like iconography.
But the utility of the Novorossiya narrative has been seriously limited, as even the two existing separatist entities have yet to merge or attract any adherents in the other areas of the former Imperial Novorossiya.
The competing narratives approach provides a good understanding of the interplay between leading actors and their subject populations.
It offers an appreciation of the relative strengths and weaknesses of pre-existing national and regional narratives, their internalization by targeted populations, and their uses in geopolitics for making and unmaking identities and regions.
The narrative analysis and an appreciation of associated social and demographic structures also explain the greater openness of the Donbas population to Russian intervention than that of Kharkiv Oblast.
In Kharkiv Oblast, by contrast, the elites who supported the dominant Sloboda Ukraine narrative were neutral with regard to Ukrainization.
They balanced the two ideologically competing Soviet/pro-Russian and Ukrainian /pro-European narratives, in the end siding with the Ukrainian Kharkiv supporters to forestall Russian intervention.
But the narratives-based analysis, combined with the extensive survey research conducted in southeastern Ukraine, also points to the daunting task that Kyiv faces in holding together the country’s disparate regions.
After the revolution, the Bolsheviks, for a number of reasons – may God judge them – added large sections of the historical South of Russia to the Republic of Ukraine.
They were won by Potyomkin and Catherine the Great in a series of well-known wars.
The center of that territory was Novorossiysk, so the region is called Novorossiya.
It emerged in opposition three days after the government of Ukraine signed the treaty of Brest-Litovsk, which recognized the borders of Ukrainian People's Republic that would include those industrial areas.
On March 20 the Donetsk–Krivoy Rog Soviet Republic was disbanded when the newly formed Ukrainian Soviet Republic, with its capital in Kharkiv, replaced it.
These include the Congress of Ukrainian Intelligentsia, the Memorial, the Prosvita 5.  , and the Association of the Victims of Political Repressions.
Formed by the Ukrainian Helsinki Association in 1989 and headed by the physicist Professor Petro Cheremsky, it was to instill pride in Ukrainian heritage.
A secret organization by the same name existed in Kharkiv since 1926, then purged with a show trial in 1930.
In the rest of the southeastern Ukraine this opinion ranged from 24% in Mykolaiv to 43% in Kharkiv.
Moreover, 53% of the respondents in Donetsk and 50% in Luhansk oblasts believed the acting president and new government were illegitimate.
Disclosure statement No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
Freedom and Terror in the Donbas — A Ukrainian-Russian Borderland, 1870s–1990s.
EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 49 O’Loughlin, John, Gerard Toal, and Vladimir Kolosov.17.
