A call for a return to Yalta-Potsdam diplomacy has become for the Russians, a slogan for restoring Russia’s lost great power status and equality with the United States.
Russia intends to be accepted again as a great power by bringing the other former Soviet republics back under its control, weakening NATO and the EU, and establishing new East-West structures, in which Russia would have a veto, to be the principal instruments for governing European affairs.
Consequently, in our relations with Russia, we are traversing a long, difficult, and dangerous period with no easy solutions.
Under the circumstances, we must maintain robust sanctions against Russia, NATO, and enable Ukraine to continue to withstand a long war of attrition.
He noted the continuity between the first two Soviet objectives and Czarist aims in the First World War.
At the Potsdam Conference, the Soviet Union had to accept that the third goal, a preponderant voice in the organization of the rest of Europe, was not attainable because the United States would not be withdrawing from the continent.
The task of the Conference was to decide on the structure of the administration of Germany and Austria, the distribution of German reparations, the location of Poland’s boundaries, the Soviet Union’s role in Eastern Europe and the prosecution of the war against Japan.
In an atmosphere of increasing suspicion and acrimony, the Potsdam Conference initiated the division of the continent.
In order to avoid having the Western zones of occupation in Germany pay for the Soviets’ considerable demands for reparation, the United States Secretary of State, James Byrnes, proposed, and Stalin accepted, to divide Germany into two economic units.
Stalin built on this division by suggesting that the German liquid assets should be split between the parties along a line running from the Adriatic to the Baltic, the border of the zone of nascent Soviet control.
For the Russians, furthermore, the three summits established a basis for dealing with major international issues during the Cold War, under which the Soviet Union, as a great power, negotiated on an equal standing with the West, and especially the United States.
The Russians complain that, since the end of the Cold War and the breakup of the Soviet Union, Russia is no longer treated as an equal, and the United States acts unilaterally.
At least since the return to power of President Putin in 2012, Yalta-Potsdam has become for the Russians, a symbol for its lost great power status and equality with the United States.
The aim of current Russian policy is to recover its great power status by bringing the other former Soviet republics back under effective Russian control, weakening NATO and the EU, and establishing new East-West structures, in which Russia would have a veto, to be the principal instrument for governing European affairs.
The continuity between these goals and the Soviet Union’s wartime aims, may not be coincidental.
The chief instrument for establishing Russian dominance is the Eurasian Economic Union. , which replaced the Customs Union on 1 January 2015.
For Russia, Ukrainian membership in the EEU was essential to the success of the organization.
The overthrow of President Yanukovych of Ukraine in February 2014, and the decision of the new government to sign the EU Association Agreement, and to apply for membership in NATO, launched President Putin on his campaign to subjugate Ukraine.
To achieve this goal, Russia, not only seized Crimea, but launched the secessionist movement in Donetsk-Luhansk for the purpose of giving the Moscow-controlled areas a veto over the domestic and foreign policies of the central government.
What should replace the current security architecture, was spelled out by President Medvedev in 2008, immediately following the Russian-Georgian War.
Russia did not accept the primacy of the United States in the international system.
The Union would co-ordinate energy, military, political, and strategic matters.
In October 2014 Foreign Minister Lavrov stated that this agreement would be based on a system of indivisible security where no country would strengthen its security at the expense of the others.
Such provisions could prevent the EU from acting independent of Moscow in important areas.
For several reasons, the West has largely ignored the Russian proposal, although the EU has offered to negotiate free trade with the Eurasian Economic Union, provided East European countries would be free to decide whether or not they wished to join the Eurasian Economic Union.
The present lull in the fighting in the Donbas does not mean a change in Russian policy.
Putin has evidently not given up his aim of rendering Ukraine ungovernable so as to keep it out of NATO and the EU, and eventually to bring it into the Eurasian Economic Union.
Unless the West accepts the Medvedev proposals, a Western abandonment of Ukraine, whether by removing sanctions against Russia, by not providing sufficient aid to Ukraine, or by recognizing the seizure of Crimea, could merely invite Russian moves against the Baltic States and Moldova.
Western acceptance of the Medvedev proposals as they now stand, can lead to the unravelling of NATO, hamstringing the EU, and excluding North America from Europe.
