The Legal Aspects of Crimea’s Independence Referendum of 2014 With the Subsequent Annexation of the Peninsula by Russia.
Crimeans, Ukraine, Russia, Crimea’s Tatar minority, and the international community.
It presents a host of legal opinions on the issue, trying to answer whether Russia’s annexation of the peninsula can be considered legal under international law.
Virtually all Western analysts declare the 2014 referendum illegal under international law, even though most of them also admit that there is no legal precedent to support or overturn such a verdict.
This admission brings us to the ultimate answer – without a clear legal precedent in international law, Crimea’s independence from Ukraine was no more or no less legal than Ukraine’s own independence from the Soviet Union twenty-three years prior.
Introduction On February 27, 2014, a group of gunmen seized the parliament building of Crimea in Simferopol, the capital of the then still autonomous republic of Ukraine, and raised a Russian flag.
Thus began a series of events culminating in the still-simmering war in the East of the country and widespread outrage over the invasion and annexation of this Ukrainian territory by Russia.
In this thesis, I examine the volatile history of the Crimean peninsula, the numerous transfers of power it has experienced, the similar precedents of territorial changes around the world, and whether the annexation of Crimea by Russia truly represented the will of the Crimean population, and whether such annexation can be legal under international law.
My hypothesis is that such “land transfers” do in fact have a precedent in recent history and they may be considered legal in international norms.
On the other hand, many a land-grab in history has been carried out “in the name of the people,” and this particular transfer, even if desired by the majority of the peninsula’s population, does not easily pass the test of legality under any norms.
In order to comprehend the legality of what has transpired in Crimea, we must examine the legal history of events that led to the Russian takeover.
During the two decades prior to 2014, the peninsula has experienced an arduous struggle for a degree of autonomy from Ukraine.
Several legal precedents have among other things shed light on 1 the political opinions of the Crimean population.
I find that the history surrounding the sovereignty status of this region indicates that the 2 eruption of this conflict should not have been a surprise to anyone who has studied the motivations of the people living there.
In fact, Crimea, as a prescient analysis suggested in 1994, has been a “pot ready to boil”1 and “a political tinderbox”2 for quite some time now, ever since Ukraine became independent, to be exact.
History is replete with examples of both successes and failures of regions trying to gain independence either diplomatically or, more often than not, by force.
On the other hand, there have been examples of countries breaking up without much violence.
For example, Czechoslovakia broke in two through a “Velvet Divorce” in 1993 without conflict.
Norway and Sweden parted ways in 1905 without any violence, albeit after a period of saber-rattling on both sides.
The purpose of this thesis is to examine the legal aspects of the Crimean Peninsula’s annexation by Russia in March of 2014.
In light of the still ongoing struggle within Ukraine itself, it may be useful to examine both sides of the issue in order to understand the motivations of the participants and examine the possible outcomes of the conflict.
Historical Background The Crimean Peninsula has an area of 10,000 square miles (roughly the size of the state of Massachusetts), and occupies a commanding position on the Black Sea.
Russia came to the possession of the peninsula in 1783, after a series of wars with the Ottoman Empire, of which the Crimean Khanate had heretofore been a nominal vassal.
The naval base of Sevastopol, which the Russians established on the southwestern shore of Crimea, had a dominating position on the sea, and was to be fought over in several wars since then.
This city, and the naval base within it, has held a particularly sensitive significance to the Russians – it is a place in which they have invested too much blood and history to give it up easily.
Under the Russian rule in the ninteenth century, a steady stream of new settlers arrived on the peninsula, and they slowly displaced the Tatar population.
In the Russian Civil War of 1917-1920, Crimea was one of the last strongholds of the anti-Bolshevik forces before they were defeated in 1920.
World War Two saw some of the bloodiest battles on the Eastern Front taking place in 5 Crimea.
Sevastopol in particular endured a bloody siege in 1941-1942, during which the city was virtually destroyed.
Following the liberation of the peninsula in 1944, the Soviet government accused the Tatar population of having collaborated with the Nazis, and deported the entire Tatar population to Central Asia.
The Crimean Autonomous Republic existed until 1945, when its status was changed to a mere oblast.
These two identities are the key to understanding the divide between the East and the West of the country.
Both sides of the conflict are right in their own way (or at least have a valid point), but that is not the real source of tension.
Both sides claim to be “true” Ukrainians, with Westerners often calling the eastern half of Ukraine “Russian” – which is simplistic and incorrect.
It is true that Easterners are tied to Russia by centuries of common history and identity, but they are not “Russians” – they are Russian-speaking Ukrainians with historic ties to Moscow.
By 2001, according to the Ukrainian Census, ethnic Russians comprised only 17.3% of Ukraine’s population,3 and since a significant proportion of those resided in Crimea, that percentage has dwindled with the separation of the peninsula from the country.
In the West, Greek Catholic churches predominate, Ukrainian is widely spoken, and architecture is often Baroque.
In the east, Russian Orthodoxy dominates religious life, onion-domed churches and log huts dot the landscape, and most people speak either Russian or Ukrainian dialects similar to Russian.
An oft-quoted perception in the West of the country is that the East is so proRussian because it has been settled by ethnic Russians under Imperial Russian, and later Soviet rule.
The Eastern, or Left-Bank, Ukraine as it was historically known (because the country’s biggest river, Dnieper, which flows south, roughly divides the land along linguistic and political preferences) began drifting into the Muscovite orbit in the mid-seventeenth century during the Khmelnitsky Uprising, when the rebellious Cossacks enlisted the help of the Russian tsar in their fight with Poland.
The Transfer of Crimea to Ukraine In 1954, ostensibly to commemorate the three hundredth anniversary of the union of the core Ukrainian land with Russia, Nikita Khrushchev, then the leader of the USSR, arranged the transfer of the peninsula from the authority of the Russian Federation to the Ukrainian Soviet Republic.
Since both were part of the Soviet Union at the time, it meant little, in practical terms.
For average Crimeans, nothing changed, apart from Ukrainian becoming mandatory in the school curriculum overnight.
The transfer was obviously not done with the acquiescence of Crimea’s population, this being the Soviet Union, run as a one-party dictatorship.
As Putin pointed out in March of 2014, the opinion of the people who lived there did not factor much into this act.
The city had a republican subordination , not regional , and was not a part of the Crimean region of Ukraine and was not transferred together with the Crimean region.
In this regard it should be pointed out that the decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of Russia from October 29, 1948 separated the city of Sevastopol in a single administrative center and classified it as a city of republican subordination.
In reality, the city and the naval base within it remained what was called a “closed city” administered by the Ministry of Defense.
Whether it was part of Ukraine on paper, for all practical purposes it did not fall under the administration of the regional government in Simferopol, and thus not under the authority of Ukraine’s communist leadership in Kiev.
The transfer of the peninsula created several problems that would come to the fore later on.
It was what they called a “closed city” – a military base with strictly controlled territory and population, subject more to the command of the navy than civilian authorities.
Because it did not fall under the authority of the regional government, the question of whether it fell under the authority of Ukraine’s Soviet government was left in a limbo.
Legal Events Between the end of the Soviet rule in Ukraine and the return of the Crimean Peninsula to Moscow’s control, several legal events stand out that shaped the political arena for the current crisis.
To the outside observers, the peninsula’s quickie declaration of independence and a similarly fast absorption into Russia in 2014 appears as a clear-cut case of a land-grab.
The crux of the controversy lies in the fact that while much of the world considers the 2014 Crimean referendum invalid, it was preceded by two others, in 1991 and 1994, in which a clear majority of the peninsula’s residents voted for greater autonomy from Ukraine, and which the world opinion has not cared to remember, and the Kiev government has chosen to ignore.
In the last years of USSR’s existence, ethnic conflicts were breaking out throughout the country, in some cases leading to civil wars that would eventually cost thousands of lives.
Ukraine was spared such tragedy at the time, but did not escape separatist sentiment.
After four decades of being part of Ukraine, the majority of Crimea’s population never identified itself as Ukrainian, Kremlin’s directives notwithstanding, so the drive began to organize a referendum and vote on a measure of autonomy from Kiev.
As a result of the referendum, the Supreme Soviet of Ukraine recognized the peninsula as being an autonomous republic.
Regional Patterns,” Europe-Asia Studies 47, no. : 98. 11 claims that had Crimeans desired independence from the start, they should have used this instrument to try to achieve it.
The Soviet government proposed a referendum on whether the country should be kept whole.
This referendum, held on March 17, 1991, was to affirm the existence of USSR less than a year before it ceased to exist.
It was probably the only truly democratic vote in the history of a state known from its creation to be undemocratic.
In those areas of USSR where the vote was held however, the clear majority everywhere voted to stay with the union.
The Breakup of the USSR Entirely contradicting the above, Ukraine’s population voted to become independent of USSR on 1 December 1991.
In every single region of the country, including Crimea, the overwhelming majority cast their ballot in favor of independence.
This vote, which seemed to go against the established views of the Crimean population, has been a source of puzzle for political analysts ever since.
It has also presented a powerful argument to the opponents of Crimea’s autonomy – since the majority voted for independence from Moscow, they had no business to vote for a “reattachment” later on.
That the Western part of the country would prefer immediate independence from Moscow’s control was not surprising, since these regions were forcibly attached to USSR during World War II and had no prior history of living under the Kremlin rule.
But the support for independence in the Eastern regions of the country, where the pro-Russian sentiment ran high, including Crimea, was more puzzling.
Support for independence was strongest in the western provinces, where Ukrainian nationalism has its deepest roots.
In the more Russified districts in the east, the republic's industrial heartland, support for independence was based more on economic calculation – there is more food available in Ukraine than in Russia – than on nationalism.
Public Opinion, Voting and Legislative Behaviour,” Europe-Asia Studies 52, no. : 283.
As the 1980s ended, polling in Ukraine did not indicate an overwhelming desire in the population to secede from the Soviet Union, with only 20% favoring independence.
Ukrainian independence came about not because of Ukrainian nationalism and a cohesive popular consciousness and struggle leading to revolution, but because of the unexpectedly swift economic and political collapse of the USSR, the specter of Soviet revanchism as exemplified by the August 1991 coup attempt, and the political opportunism of consequential personalities.
The clear majority in all twenty-five constituent regions of the country, including Crimea, voted to go with an independent Ukraine, although in Crimea the majority margin was the smallest of twenty-five.
This vote would haunt all future attempts by Crimeans to distance themselves from Kiev with some measure of autonomy.
Although Crimea was the least supportive of Ukrainian independence, a majority, 54%, voted in favor.
In Sevastopol, the “Russian Hero City” on the peninsula, it is surprising to hear in retrospect that support for Ukrainian independence was even higher – 57%.9 Thus, in 1991, the Soviet Union dissolved into fifteen newly independent nations, and with its dissolution communism and the Cold War came to the end.
Outside the new sovereign borders of Russia remained some 25 million ethnic Russians, whose treatment 8 Lawrence A Howard, “The Historical, Legal, and Political Contexts of the Russian Annexation of Crimea,” New English Review, March 2015.
Sevastopol in Russian Historical Mythology,” Journal of Contemporary History 35 : 371. 15 by the native governments varied considerably.
Russia was hardly alone in questioning the newly-independent Ukraine’s borders.
In March of 1992, the “Republican Movement of Crimea” collected over 200,000 signatures in support of an independence referendum.
Public Opinion, Voting and Legislative Behaviour,” Europe-Asia Studies 52, no. : 283. 17 politicians chose to pursue a negotiated compromise, a Bill on the Separation of Powers between Ukraine and Crimea, to be approved by parliaments on both sides, and which effectively granted these parliaments equal status.
This Crimea’s Verkhovna Rada quickly approved it before submitting to the Parliament of Ukraine.
Agreeing to grant Crimean politicians more power would surely put the peninsula on the path of outright independence, but ignoring the wishes of hundreds of thousands of independenceminded Crimeans living there was risking another sectarian conflict.
Politicians witnessed the current ethnic wars throughout the former Soviet Union, such as Karabakh and Transdnistria, with thousands of people dead or displaced.
On one hand, Crimeans were emboldened by Ukraine’s conciliatory approach to the Bill, and saw it as a green light on the path to outright independence.
On the other hand, the Ukrainian side believed that granting generous autonomy to the peninsula was a compromise that would prevent Crimea’s alienation and separation.
Chronicle of Separatism (Kyiv: Ukrainian Center for Independent Political Research, 1996), 8.
Any talk of independence was contrary to Ukrainian constitution, which declared the country’s borders to be inviolable.
Ukraine monitored the developing situation closely, and declared the proposed vote (whenever it might take place) to be illegal.
The Crimean Supreme Soviet adopted a declaration of independence in early May 1992, subject to approval through referendum.
The Bill on the Separation of Powers was renamed “On the Status of Autonomous Republic of Crimea” to make it sound less ambiguous.
Crimeans consoled themselves with a policy of generous autonomy granted by the central government, while the rest of Ukraine chose 15 The Crimea, 12.
In the end, both sides chose to exercise sober judgment, and preferred a variation on the status quo to acting on extremist impulses and escalating the conflict.
However, in the long run, this simply meant putting the issue on the back burner, and pushing the problem further away into the future.
The Tatars’ Position Caught in the middle of two countries’ territorial dispute was the Tatar minority, which inhabited and ruled Crimea for centuries.
Theirs was a difficult situation, because they were a minority within the region’s population, and had a history of conflict with both Ukraine and Russia.
Invaded and annexed by the Russian Empire in 1783, the Tatars saw their ancestral land steadily settled by the newcomers from both Russia and abroad, to the point where their majority status eroded to the point of being a minority.
Accused of collaboration with the invading Germans during the Second World War, in 1944 the Tatar population was rounded up en masse and resettled in Central Asia on the orders of Stalin.
Although Khrushchev eventually issued amnesty to many victims of Stalin’s terror, the Tatars were not included in this policy.
They were not able to return to their historic homeland until the Soviet Union started breaking up in the late eighties.
Given such a history of conflicts with both the Russian government and ethnic Russians, Tatars tended to side with independent Ukraine, if only by default.
When the split between Crimea and Ukraine appeared, the Mejlis was quick to announce that it would not recognize any legislature separating the peninsula from Kiev’s authority.
The widening gap should not have come as a surprise to those who cared to monitor this situation.
The election of secessionist Yuri Meshkov in the presidential election in Crimea demonstrated the erosion of popular support for Ukrainian independence in one of the country’s crucial regions.
Crimea’s complex history and politics make it the region most likely to secede from Ukraine.
The idea was revived two years later, when a pro-Russian official Yuriy Meshkov was elected President of Crimea.
Despite explicit warnings from Kiev that the Ukrainian government would not recognize the results of any such vote, Crimeans went to the polls to decide the political future of their land.
Facing the threat that no independence of Crimea would ever be recognized by Ukraine, the option to vote for actual sovereignty was dropped from the ballot shortly before the referendum.
However, the drive to de facto separate itself from Ukraine was obvious.
The Ukrainian government saw the referendum for what it was – a vote on de facto, if not de jure, independence.
Realizing that Crimea was on the path to formal sovereignty, the Kiev powers boldly stepped in just two weeks later, on April 11, and simply overturned the results of the referendum by fiat.
They abolished both the peninsula’s constitution and the post of the Crimean president.
The local authorities were powerless to do something about it; Meshkov subsequently fled to Russia.
The Crimean legislature had no choice but to write a new constitution, more amenable to Kiev, which the Ukrainian government ratified in 1998.
Because the issue of independence was not voted on, it created confusion in the later interpretation of the 2014 referendum vote.
Nevertheless, at the time, this act of the Ukrainian government turned the issue into a political time bomb.
All of the above referendums are used by both sides of the conflict 23 as justification of their actions, even though the results of these referendums are contradictory.
The Run Up to Crimean Independence As Ukrainian living standards steadily declined throughout the two decades, many Crimeans looked to Russia where life was not as bad and the economic decline of the nineties reversed during Putin’s presidency.
At the same time, among the older generation, there remained a nostalgia for the Soviet past.
On the peninsula, antiUkrainian sentiments reached the point where even speaking Ukrainian in public was unacceptable to some.
Despite this pro-Russian sentiment, political drive to re-join Russia lay dormant.
The electoral history of Crimea during twenty-three years as part of Ukraine shows that political forces demanding outright independence had minimal success.
Pro-independence parties and candidates never scored more than a few percent of the vote in the region, and their influence on the politics of the peninsula was always marginal.
Political elements demanding unification with Russia had even less electoral success, even though there is zero evidence of Ukrainian government tampering with the vote.
Historical Legacy and Contemporary Divides, Extreme Movements and Ideological Preferences of Eastern and 25 Thus, political developments on the peninsula in the two decades prior to independence suggest strong pro-Russian bias but no significant legal drive to reunite with Russia.
The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe notes that “neither secessionism, nor integration with the Russian Federation, was prevalent on the agenda of the Crimean population, or widely supported, prior to Russian military intervention”20 Whether these issues were not widely supported because of fear of Ukrainian reprisals or were they not prevalent because Kiev would not allow for such opinions to surface, remains a subject of debate.
Perhaps no one was willing to risk violence to advance the Crimean cause, and nobody believed Russia would actively and strongly back them up.
As for the Crimean Tatars, they had to choose between the two sides, and tentatively chose to support Ukraine.
From that point on, the city was effectively subordinate to the Soviet, Ministry of Defense, with little interference from the local civilian authorities.
The issue of what to do with them was debated until 1997, when the two countries signed a Friendship Treaty, dividing the fleet and leasing the naval base to Russia for twenty years to be used jointly by the navies of both nations.
It thus enjoyed the status similar to that of Guantanamo – part of Cuba in name only, but for all practical purposes, a United States territory.
Notably, the treaty allowed Russia to keep up to 25,000 troops there, which would play a role in the 2014 Russian takeover.
Unfortunately, the document was more of an “executive agreement” between the leaders of the four nations, rather than a binding treaty, meaning it does not specify how to enforce it.
One party could violate the provisions, which Russia did in 2014, without anyone else being required to respond.
In the most extreme case, it promised that the parties would seek UN mediation.
The document stated that the signatories agreed to recognize the existing borders of Ukraine in return for Ukraine giving up its nuclear stockpile.
Respect Ukrainian independence and sovereignty within its existing borders.
Refrain from using economic pressure on Ukraine in order to influence its politics.
Consult with one another if questions arise regarding these commitments.
There are several problems with this strange and contradictory document.
It was not supposed to be ratified by any of the signatories, meaning it does not obligate them to do anything about it.
It does not specify the “assurances” it provides, yet clearly states that they fall short of providing military intervention to ensure the integrity of Ukraine’s borders.
The very fact of Ukraine ever being a nuclear power in the first place is questionable.
It is true that Ukraine had nuclear silos on its territory, but the Ukrainian authorities had neither operational control over them, nor the capability to launch the missiles inside those silos.
These weapons were operated by Russian (exSoviet) military personnel answerable to Moscow, who did not take orders from the newly minted Kiev government.
To muscle one’s way into the “Nuclear Club” would be extremely difficult for the newly independent Ukraine seeking friendship with the West.
Evidently, the West not only did not want a nuclear Ukraine, but did everything to bring her into the non-proliferation fold.
However, Ukraine was never a nuclear power because it never had possessed operational control over the nuclear weapons stationed on its territory.
It’s imperative was how best to pressure Ukraine into prompt ratification of the START I Treaty, with the dismantling of all remaining Ukrainian nuclear weapons and an accession to the Nonproliferation Treaty soon to follow.
Yet all this does not change the fact that Russia signed the agreement and then broke it.
The Economic Split After over two decades of independence, Ukraine remained deeply divided; it was a nation with substantial cultural, linguistic, and religious differences between East and West,24 which created differences in the politics of the two halves of the country.
Not only had the two parts spoken different languages, they also voted differently.
Monuments to Lenin and the Red Army remained, Soviet holidays still celebrated.
Monuments to the anti-Soviet resistance were being built, and ultra-nationalist rallies held.
So big was the divide that some extreme voices on both sides were calling for splitting the country.
That the economic crisis has contributed to growing regionalism and polarization is clear from the preliminary composition of the new Rada.
The results of the referenda held in both Eastern Ukraine (on integration in the CIS economic union) and in Crimea flow largely from the population’s discontent with current economic conditions and the Ukrainian leadership’s inaction.
Compounding the problem of the East/West split is the economic division, not unlike the one facing the United States in the run-up to the Civil War, with half the country having a predominantly agricultural economy which favored free trade with Europe, and the other half with a predominantly industrial economy demanding protectionism.
The coal-rich Eastern Ukraine began industrializing in the nineteenth century and even more rapidly in the 1930s, while the economy of the Western part, as part of Poland, remained predominantly agricultural.
Because of this discrepancy, the industrialized regions contributed disproportionally to the country’s GDP since independence, so that the industrial pro-Russian East of the country has been effectively subsidizing the agricultural anti-Russian West.
The oft-repeated stereotype is that Ukraine, like much of Europe is heavily dependent on Russia for its supply of natural gas.
What is rarely mentioned is the fact that Ukraine does in fact produce some gas and oil of its own.
The problem is that much of the energy supplied by Russia is in fact used for industrial purposes by the factories in the East, which then sell their products back to Russia.
Politically, it has been difficult for Kravchuk and his Kiev-based colleagues to move against powerful regional economic interests, especially in Russian-speaking eastern Ukraine which has traditionally enjoyed a close relationship with the neighboring Russian provinces.
In late 2013, probably hoping to repeat the success of the 2004 Orange Revolution, which had resulted in a pro-Western president, Victor Yushchenko, elected in a close election marred by widespread vote-rigging and fraud, crowds of protesters came together on the Independence Square of Ukraine’s capital, Kiev, and began a series of protests opposing what the protesters believed were pro-Russian policies of the current Ukrainian administration.
The president of Ukraine, Victor Yanukovich, was a leader by this time deeply unpopular with the people, yet democratically elected.
This would be a perfect solution to the country’s problems of energy dependence on Russia, that is, if one does not mind millions of people in East Ukraine losing their livelihood, which depends on these factories.
The president’s alleged Russian sympathies triggered the reaction of some Ukrainians who saw this as betrayal and contrary to Ukraine’s economic interests.
An initially peaceful protest soon turned violent, with both the protesters and the government accusing each other of using snipers.
In February 2014, after the discontent welled up and casualties grew, Yanukovich fled the country, and soon after, the Parliamentary majority voted for his removal (bypassing the constitutional impeachment procedures).32 Replacing the former president was a provisional government whose members were heavily representative of the western, Ukrainian-speaking regions of the country.
After seizing power, the radicals in the Rada influenced the parliament to overturn the 2012 Law on Regional Languages, which had granted Russian, together with other minority languages (Hungarian, Moldovan, Romanian) regional status in the areas where such languages were in use up to a specified level.
Tale of Two Nations for Country Locked in Struggle over Whether to Face East or West,” The Guardian, December 14, 2013.
Seeing this as an encroachment on their liberties, the Russian-speaking eastern and southern areas of the country erupted in a series of their own, often violent protests against the new government.
Mindful of the danger of the brewing conflict, the acting President Oleksandr Turchynov vetoed the action just five days later, but it was too late.
In Crimea, a cascade of events culminated in the outright declaration of independence from Ukraine.
The full content of the ballots was publicized just ten days before the actual referendum, although details had been discussed earlier.
Notably, the ballot did not offer the choice of staying part of Ukraine without an autonomy.
From the Crimean point of view, the second option did not question Ukraine’s sovereignty over the peninsula, but rather would overturn the earlier decision of the Kiev government to squash the autonomous republic’s constitution – the vote simply restored what the people had already voted for two decades prior.
Thus, contrary to the established view in the West, the 2014 referendum clearly allowed the voters a choice to remain part of Ukraine.
Some observers questioned whether voting for the second option in fact meant remaining with Ukraine, since the original version of the 1992 constitution granted the “Crimean Autonomous Republic” such options as the right to establish diplomatic relations with other countries – a privilege usually exercised by sovereign nations.
If so, 37 the referendum was meaningless, because it did not offer voters any real choice in remaining with Ukraine.
In addition, there is evidence that the 97.5% of voters that Russia initially claimed opted for secession did not accurately reflect voter turnout.
Besides irregularities such as a 123% turnout in Sevastopol, a sizeable Crimean Tatar minority boycotted the vote.
Earlier, the City Council had declared the city to be independent of Ukraine in a joint resolution with the Supreme Council of Crimea on March 11, 2014.36 As for the Tatar minority, the leaders of their organizations were quick to side with Ukraine.
On March 17, the “republic” appealed to become part of the Russian Federation.
Apart from the cultural affinity, there was also a clear economic benefit – with the per capita income in Russia being three times higher than in Ukraine,38 switching loyalty would boost the region financially.
Still, behind the application were not only the ethnic or economic reasons; there was also a security concern about Ukraine trying to reattach the peninsula by force if Crimeans did not immediately appeal to Russian protection.
Had they not, they surely would have experienced the fate of Donetsk and Luhansk regions in Eastern Ukraine, which also declared their independence, but never applied to join Russia.
In the case of the Donbas regions, the Kiev government responded with force and the result was a stillongoing war that devastated the area and cost thousands of lives.
Most available media sources suggest that the vast majority of people living in Crimea itself are supportive of the Russian annexation.
Notably, an anonymous telephone survey conducted in January of 2015 by a Ukrainian political scientist Taras Berezovets with the help of a German market research group GfK, found that “Eighty-two percent of 37 Anne Peters.
January 20, Referendum to become 1991 autonomous republic February Crimean Autonomous republic Autonomous status allowed 12, 1991 created independence from Ukraine.
Crimea’s independence and subsequent annexation by Russia was a case of conquest, pure and simple, a blatant violation of international norms.
Although pro-Russian elements have always had a strong presence in Ukrainian politics since independence, they were never dominant enough to split the country, at least until recently.
It is worth noting that the referendums of 1991 and 1994 in Crimea demanded a greater autonomy from Kiev, rather than outright independence.
This fact means that Crimea willingly joined Ukraine in becoming independent from the Soviet Union.
Brookings Senior Fellow Fiona Hill argued that Putin’s current policies toward Ukraine were really a continuation of those of his predecessor, Boris Yeltsin, who had proclaimed the right of Russia to influence the internal politics of the former Soviet 43 republics – the claim which Putin’s administration often continues to repeat.
When the Soviet Union was falling apart because of sovereignty aspirations of its various ethnic groups, and the world recognized their right to self-determination, they let a very dangerous genie out of the bottle – ethnic nationalism.
Many honest folk feel it hard to deny the Sudetens self-determination, if they want to belong to the Reich.
In politics, as in physics, you come to a point where you cannot go on splitting things.
Past Russian Policies Provide Mr Putin’s Playbook in Ukraine,” News, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School, March 18, 2014.
The-limits-of-selfdetermination-forracial-minorities/c2011/FADE7319-76D1-46FF-94CE-A171AAB3A9B5.
Sovereignty trumps people’s aspirations, even if these people have become part of that state only recently and against their will.
It is not all that clear why Crimea should belong to Ukraine in the first place.
The substantial majority of the population is ethnically, linguistically, and religiously Russian.
The majority of its population probably prefers to be ruled from Moscow rather than Kiev.
In 1954, the first secretary of the Central Committee detached Crimea from the Russian Soviet Socialist Republic and gave it to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
He did not consult the Crimeans, but it did not much matter, as everyone was ruled from the Kremlin anyway.
From that moment on, official internal Soviet borders included Crimea in Ukraine.
Thus, all Ukraine has for its claim of title to Crimea is a dead dictator’s whim.
Thus, even a democratic vote is not enough to reverse the decision of a bygone authoritarian government.
Notably, the 42 Lea Brilmayer, “Why the Crimean Referendum Is Illegal,” The Guardian.
Not that Russia’s recent actions regarding it’s “near abroad” could not be predicted.
To Settle the Ukraine Crisis, Start at the End,” Washington Post, March 5, 2014.
The United States Has Treated Russia Like a Loser since the End of the Cold War,” Washington Post, March 14, 2014.
Precedents The incident that may have very well set the legal confusion in motion toward Crimea was the separation of the province of Kosovo, populated mainly by Kosovar Albanians, from effective Serbian control in 1999, and its subsequent declaration of independence in 2008.
The separation was achieved only after a prolonged bombing of Serbia by NATO air forces.
The action did not receive UN approval; it was effectively carried out at gunpoint by Western governments.
The region’s early years of independence were largely guaranteed through the presence of the Kosovo Force on its territory – consisting of NATO and EU troops.
NATO did not have UN authorization for the intervention, nor for a while did it have any kind of justification under international law for its actions.
Only later was a justification named, stating that the action was “illegal but legitimate” because of its urgent humanitarian purpose.
This led to the creation of an exception to the use-of-force restrictions under the UN Charter that permits humanitarian military interventions without UN authorization in cases of urgent and mass human rights violations.
Pushing the United States and Russia Apart,” Diplomatic Courier, May 8, 2014.
We have repeatedly expressed our opposition to the holding of the general elections in Kosovo scheduled for November 17 this year.
With more than 300,000 non-Albanian citizens expelled from the province their outcome may be practically annulled.
But we favour fair elections with the participation of all the groups of the population living in this area.
The question remains, is the Kosovo “precedent” valid in the case of Crimea, as well as in other cases of regions striving for independence, and whether it is even a precedent.
The answer, again, depends on how you look at it, and who does the looking.
Given that there are literally hundreds of regions, tribes, and ethnic and religious groups on the planet aspiring to sovereign statehood, the question looms large, but there is no clear-cut solution.
However, if the international community intends to keep the floodgates of secessionist movements closed, it would do well to learn from Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
The international community must move away from black-and-white conceptions of statehood – the choice is not between independence and territorial integrity.
The Western States tried to argue that Kosovo is a special case and does not count as a precedent.
But this is a fragile and dangerous argument, both politically and legally.
Russia’s ability to exploit the legal ambiguities shared by Crimea and Kosovo arises in large part because of the inherent tension between two oft conflicting principles that have been at the heart of the international legal and political systems since 1945.
Lawrence A Howard of The New English Review compares the Russian intervention in Crimea to United States interventions in both Kosovo and Bosnia, and argues that the latter two involved much more tampering with the local politics and elections by outside force.
At this writing, the best authority on whether a group or province within an existing state has a right under international law to self-determine it is the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice as to the Accordance with International Law of the Unilateral Declaration of Independence in Respect of Kosovo.
In that opinion, the court evaded the issue of whether the right of self-determination confers upon a population of an existing state the right to secede.
It however found that international law did not generally prohibit declarations of independence.
No matter how one looks at the Crimean situation, the parallels with Kosovo are inescapable.
By citing the independence of Kosovo, Putin and his diplomats, rightly or wrongly, have managed to turn the tables on the West and come up with a convincing legal explanation for Russia’s own foreign policies.
In the case of the dissolution of Czechoslovakia – the split was accomplished without consent of the people of either country; no referendum of any kind on this issue was ever held.
A much more bloody and drawn out affair was the breakup of Yugoslavia in the early nineteen nineties.
Perhaps the bloodiest breakup of them all – the partitioning of India in the last days of the British rule, and the creation of Pakistan (which itself would later get partitioned to give birth to Bangladesh) involved borders drawn at at neckbreaking speed, and ethnic strife that caused millions of deaths.
An Empirical Critique of the Theoretical Literature,” Alternatives: Global, Local, Political 27, no. : 80.
The Legal Aspects One could find a list of peaceful land transfers throughout recent history, some peaceful, some not, yet conducted with the will of the majority of people living on that land.
After all of the above examples of independence achieved, we come to the the most telling example of all – namely, Ukraine itself becoming independent from USSR in 1991.
As far as the will of the people actually living there is concerned, it came into the Russian possession because the overwhelming majority of Crimeans wanted so.
Unfortunately for “overwhelming majorities,” they do not constitute the United Nations and do not have authority to draw nations’ borders.
People have no right to “renew” their contract with the constitution, nor do they have the right to redefine national boundaries.
To begin with, for a secession to be legal, the laws of the mother country must allow it.
John Balouziyeh argues that “the Ukrainian Constitution does not contemplate the secession of territories, and where referendums are contemplated, they must be organized on a national, not regional, level.
America’s own Revolutionary and Civil War experience proves that a drive for independence can be a bloody affair without a guarantee of success, even though in the latter case, United States constitution neither allows nor prohibits secession, therefore making the legal aspect of that issue moot.
In Ukraine’s case, any threat to the country’s territorial integrity was met with government’s disapproval and hostility, and it acted again and again against the wishes of those who questioned it.
A right to unilateral secession can be defined as a right of a minority-people to separate a part of the territory of the parent State on the basis of that people’s right to selfdetermination.
However, as it follows from the Declaration on Principles of International Law, the Kosovo Advisory Opinion and the Quebec case , in modern international law unilateral secession of “substates” is neither prohibited nor allowed.
Although the author claims that none of the above apply in Crimea’s case, this is debatable.
Crimea may not be a “colony” in the usual sense of the word, but it was conquered and “colonized” by the Russian Empire in the 1700s, just as the rest of the world was being colonized by European powers.
Its territory is inhabited by “a certain people” whose land was transferred from Russia to Ukraine in 1954 without their assent, and then became part of an independent state in 1991.
These “people” have no history of being part of Ukraine before 1954 and repeatedly displayed their displeasure with being such.
As for the issue of “human rights,” a lot depends on the question of the language laws mandated by the Ukrainian government.
Unlike many comparing the Crimea situation to that of Kosovo, Jure Vidmar of the European Journal Cyprus argues that it actually has more in common with Cyprus.
The problem is not so much with a territory demanding independence, but with an outside power assisting with independence.
The international law itself is actually neither here nor there of the subject.
It falls on the other countries to recognize a newly independent land as a “nation” – which most countries are reluctant to do not to damage relations with the parent state and for fear of their own secessionist movements.
Groups seeking independence usually present self-determination as an absolute entitlement.
Conversely, states countering secession usually present territorial integrity as an absolute entitlement of states.
As follows from the General Assembly’s Declaration on Principles of International Law , the Quebec case and partly also from the Kosovo Advisory Opinion , international law is actually neutral on the question of unilateral secession.
In case of Quebec, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled that a vote in favor simply compels the two sides to “negotiate” on the future status of the country; independence for separatists is not guaranteed.
And the Canadian Parliament then adopted a “clarity bill” further constraining future referenda.
Thus, even if every single person in the land voted to secede, it would still be illegal.
If that were the case, then under international law, any geographically cohesive group could vote on independence.
That would mean the Basques should be free from Spain and France, and the Kurds would have an independent nation; the large community of Cubans living in Miami could vote to separate from the United States.
If a referendum were the right way to decide these issues, Russia ought to be holding a referendum to determine the future of Chechnya.
Clear Breaches of International Law in Crimea,” International Bar Association.
Countries can acquire territory by discovering uninhabited land, signing a treaty – as with Khrushchev’s transfer of Crimea to Ukraine in 1954 – or occupying an area peacefully over a long period of time.
The legal methods for resolving questions of sovereignty are founded on widely recognized principles of international law.
These do not include, and have never included, a simple referendum of people living in a contested territory.
The fact that the Kurds have lived in a de facto independent nation since 1991 seems of no concern to Brilmayer.
However, the legitimacy of International Policy Ukraine’s current authorities itself is in question.
Clear Breaches of International Law in Crimea,” International Bar Association, 20 February 2015.
However, such a Opinio Juris declaration of independence or merging is not effective in international law by itself.” “there can be no international legal effect of any independence or merger declaration that might arise from a referendum”91 Probably illegal. “apples and oranges” “You can’t ignore the Benjamin J Rhodes, context that this is taking place days after the violation of President Obama’s Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Crimea, Ukraine and Russia: Self-Determination, Intervention and International Law,” Opinio Juris.
By contrast, the new Kiev government “lacks legitimacy”93 Samuel Charap, Neither here nor there.
Under international law, a secession is Chris Borgen, Opinio neither a right nor necessarily illegal.
If it were not so, new countries would be born with all their borders in dispute, and endless frontier conflicts between neighbors would ensue”98 Illegal because outside force was used.
Secession is neither a right nor necessarily a breach under international law.
It is treated as a fact,e. secession is René Värk, Diplomaatia successful or fails.
The success depends of political recognition by States — if the seceding State gains enough international recognition, it gains gradually legitimacy and finally statehood.
Any action by the Security Council would be compromised by Russian interests.
The Mills of International Law Grind Slowly but They Do Grind,” International Law Studies 91 : 425.
Resolution Declares Crimea Referendum Invalid,” Global Legal Monitor, April 2, 2014.
Crimean Annexation and Lessons on the Boundaries of Self-Defense,” Michigan Journal of International Law.
Annexation and Recognition – The Legal Battles Ahead,” Radio Liberty, March 16, 2014.
Revisiting Self-Determination in Light of the 2014 Events in Ukraine,” Brown Journal of World Affairs.
There is no legal precedent in international law supporting unilateral secession, although 3.
This however does not address the issue of the referendum not having an option of staying within Ukraine without an autonomy.
Yet the fact that the overwhelming majority chose independence makes this point somewhat, if not entirely, moot ex post facto, because few voters would choose such an option anyway.
The first to go were the former members of the Warsaw Pact; three former republics of USSR itself, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania were soon to follow.
Form the strategic point of view, this eliminated the “buffer zone” between Moscow and the West, which the Soviets had acquired as a result of the Second World War.
That Russia would not object to these countries becoming democracies was not in doubt, inasmuch as, Russia itself insisted it was on the road to democracy.
However, facing a phalanx of nations whose military posture was not in tune with Moscow raised a specter of historic threats the West had posed over the centuries.
Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, already in NATO, there remained only three neutral nations between Russia and the West: Moldova, Belarus and Ukraine.
Moldova was kept in check by the separatist enclave of Transnistria, whose independence no country in the world would recognize, but which housed a contingent of Russian troops, posed to protect it in case the frozen conflict were to flare up.
This unsettled dispute effectively kept the otherwise pro-Western Moldova from joining NATO, because the alliance would not accept new members with unsettled borders.
Belarus was kept in Moscow’s orbit by Putin’s support of its pro-Russian dictator, Lukashenko, thus making that country “the last dictatorship in Europe” in the words of many commentators.
Ukraine, the biggest of the three, was left as the only viable battleground up for grabs.
Since its independence in 1991, the politics of Ukraine was characterized by the struggle between eastern and western halves voting to elect the central government representing their respective interests.
The to-and-fro between pro-Russian and proWestern parties continued for the first two decades after independence, with neither side managing to seize lasting control over the country’s politics.
Eventually, this struggle culminated in Ukrainians taking to the streets of Kiev in late 2013 in protests against the pro-Russian president Yanukovich, over his refusal to sign an association agreement with the European Union.
The original protest, which started over the issue of police brutality, soon evolved into a revolt against a corrupt administration.
However, both the West and the pro-Western Ukrainians soon saw this protest as an opportunity to replace the pro-Russian administration with a pro-Western one.
A new “Orange 70 Revolution” was too much for the Kremlin, but it in itself might have not been enough to cause Russia’s soon violent involvement in Ukraine.
What finally pushed Putin over the edge was apparently the fear of a supposed United States plan for the establishment of an American naval base in Crimea, a proposal that might have never been real,117 but the possibility of which, however remote, Putin could never risk to entertain.
He said as much himself.8 Whether United States was really planning to open a base on the peninsula is debatable, but the steady advance of NATO deployments in the last twenty five years closer to Russia’s borders is indisputable.
Since the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, NATO has enlarged from sixteen members to twenty eight, with plans for more to join.
Whereas twenty-five years ago, Kremlin had troops stationed on the Elbe in the middle of Europe, today the NATO borders have shifted four hundred miles to the East, some sixty miles away from St.
Such strategic imbalance cannot but make a lot of people in Russia and its political establishment nervous.
The so-called flexible frontline American bases with up to five thousand men in each.
It turns out that NATO has put its frontline forces on our borders, and we continue to strictly fulfil the treaty obligations and do not react to these actions at all.
I think it is obvious that NATO expansion does not have any relation with the modernisation of the Alliance itself or with ensuring security in Europe.
On the contrary, it represents a serious provocation that reduces the level of mutual trust.
I would like to quote the speech of NATO General Secretary Mr Woerner in Brussels on 17 May 1990.
He also knows that, after two inconclusive wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the American public is weary of “foreign entanglements,” and support for any new foreign involvement is low.
Americans have long born the lion’s share of NATO defense spending, and have long been asking Europeans to increase their financial commitment to security, a request that, in view of the current economic recession, is only apt to grow louder in the near future.
Putin’s policies in Ukraine and other countries surrounding Russia follow in the footsteps of his Soviet and Imperial Russian predecessors – not to allow unfriendly powers to emerge on the borders or, at least maintain a buffer zone between them and Russia.
In the case of East Ukraine, he is attempting to salvage whatever minimum “buffer” he can.
At the other extreme is the possibility of Putin ordering his troops to invade and take over the whole of Ukraine.
In the end, his rule depends on his popularity at home, and this popularity at the moment depends on his foreign policy.
It’s likely that he will stand pat and support the insurgency in the Eastern Ukraine for as long as possible, while not resorting to open aggression.
After a century of border changes, the demarcation line between the West and Russia may end up where it was a hundred years ago – between Minsk and Pinsk.
All of them have one serious limitation – they presume a compromise is possible.
With war raging in the eastern regions of the country, and with both the West and Russian threatening each other with the everexpanding list of economic sanctions, it is far from certain that both sides can sufficiently trust each other to agree on some kind of middle ground.
The much touted idea of bringing Ukraine into NATO is not feasible for a very simple reason – the organization has a strict rule not to accept new members with unsettled borders.
But short of the Ukrainian army’s reconquering the peninsula by force, the only way for Ukraine to join NATO is, ironically, by acceding to the loss of Crimea, and thus consenting to Russia’s actions regarding it.
One is for the Kiev government, after securing foreign military aid, to mount a successful invasion of Crimea and take it back by force.
Given that Ukrainian military currently struggles to contain the separatist rebellion in the two regions in the east of the country, it is doubtful any action will be taken against Crimea.
If it does 74 happen, it would lead to an outright war between Russia and Ukraine, a war the latter side is unlikely to win, and a war that can only lead to a greater partitioning of Ukraine.
The second option is that Ukraine (and by extension, most of the rest of the world) accepts the loss of Crimea as a fait accompli, recognizes it as part of Russia, and moves on.
Some argue that the European opinion has in fact already moved on.0 However, this is also very unlikely because, with few exceptions, countries do not part with their constituent lands easily.
And with the world opinion behind it, Kiev is not likely to budge, whatever the real situation on the ground.
A somewhat more likely scenario is both sides accepting the status quo, and accepting the situation as is without any diplomatic recognition.
Both sides stop fighting, the ceasefire holds, and Ukraine will be effectively partitioned.
In this case, Crimea is bound to be seen by the international community as part of Ukraine in all but a name for decades to come.
If the past is any indication, disputed national borders sometimes take decades to settle.
Six decades after the Korean War, that country continues to be divided.
Such an outcome may be the lesser evil for everyone as long as peace holds.
A more dangerous, but also the most likely scenario is the conflict in Ukraine continuing for years.
Separatist conflicts have a tendency to simmer for decades, not just years.
Russia’s own protracted struggle with Muslim insurgency in Caucasus is a good example.
The fear of losing more land is a good reason for Ukraine not to give up fighting, lest newer independent entities start emerging, threatening to destroy the country completely.
Crimea will probably escape the carnage, but the two enclaves in the east of the country, Luhansk and Donetsk, will continue to suffer from the protracted conflict.
The difference between the last two outcomes effectively means the difference between peace and war.
Either way, Ukraine is bound to be a divided country for years to come.
There is an option of bringing Ukraine into the EU, but the EU is not a military alliance, and cannot protect it in case of war.
If Russia becomes hostile to the West, Ukraine will probably fall back into Moscow’s orbit; the task of propping up weak Ukraine against a hostile and xenophobic Russia will be beyond the military and financial capabilities of the Western alliance.
A RussianUkrainian conflict arising from a crisis in Crimea, such as the one that took place in May of 1994, would endanger Russia’s already difficult reforms, destroy the weak remaining chances for the survival of independent Ukraine, and push Russia on the path of reexpansion in defense of an illegitimate secessionist movement created by domestic stagnation in Ukraine.
If they get embroiled in a war with Russian separatists, Putin might send in his troops to protect them.
But if the United States does not come to help it would destroy the American credibility to the extent from which it would never recover.
Japan, South Korea, etc. – a security pact that has been in place since the end of the Second World War.
The most viable solution, Allison believes, is to find a compromise for Ukraine becoming a neutral state.
I have analyzed the political history of Crimea between the dissolution of USSR and its becoming independent from Ukraine, attempting to understand the opinions of the people living on the peninsula, and whether the electoral history of that region can explain and possibly justify its independence.
The emphasis was made on the elections and referendums, as well as various legal agreements made by various powers.
Although the Ukrainian conflict does not seem to be over, the extensive media coverage can give a relatively accurate picture of various parties’ opinions and political aspirations.
Given the uncertainty of the still-ongoing war in Ukraine, it would be impossible to predict the course of the future events.
However, significant body of research does exist to give a glimpse of public opinion in various parts of the country, which allows us to understand how different actors of this drama see the conflict, and how they may attempt to act in the near future.
News, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School, March 18, 2014.
Dept. of National Defence Canada, Operational Research and Analysis, Directorate of Strategic Analysis, 1994.
Frankreich, Deutschland und die Ukraine im Vergleich, edited by Yves Bizeul.7-258.
