In response, the United States has imposed economic and diplomatic sanctions related to Russia’s actions in Ukraine and Syria, malicious cyber activity, and human rights violations.
The United States also has led NATO in developing a new military posture in Central and Eastern Europe designed to reassure allies and deter aggression.
United States policymakers over the years have identified areas in which United States and Russian interests are or could be compatible.
The United States and Russia have cooperated successfully on issues such as nuclear arms control and nonproliferation, support for military operations in Afghanistan, the Iranian and North Korean nuclear programs, the International Space Station, and the removal of chemical weapons from Syria.
In addition, the United States and Russia have identified other areas of cooperation, such as countering terrorism, illicit narcotics, and piracy.
Like previous United States Administrations, President Donald J Trump has sought to improve U.S.Russian relations at the start of his tenure.
At initial meetings with President Putin in April and July 2017, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and President Trump said they agreed to find ways to improve channels of communication and begin addressing issues dividing the two countries.
At the same time, the Administration has indicated that it intends to adhere to core international commitments and principles, as well as to retain sanctions on Russia.
Secretary Tillerson has stated that Ukraine-related sanctions will remain in place “until Moscow reverses the actions that triggered” them.
Secretary Tillerson and other officials also have noted the severity of Russian interference in the 2016 United States presidential election and the need for an appropriate response.
This report provides background information on Russian politics, economics, and military issues.
It discusses a number of key issues for Congress concerning Russia’s foreign relations and the U.S.-Russian relationship.
Background and United States Policy Contents Political Structure and Developments.
European Imports of Russian Natural Gas .20 Contacts Author Contact Information.
From 1922 to 1991, Soviet Russia was the core of the USSR, established in the wake of the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 and the civil war that followed.
The USSR spanned much the same territory as the Russian Empire before it.
Prior to the empire’s establishment in 1721, Russian states had existed in various forms for centuries.
Today, Russia’s multiethnic federal structure is inherited from the Soviet period and includes regions, republics, territories, and other subunits.
The country’s constitution provides for a strong presidency and central authority.
In recent years, opinion polls have reported increased levels of support for President Putin.
Since the annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea region in March 2014, he has consistently received approval from more than 80% of respondents in opinion polls.
This reported approval level is considerably higher than what Putin received in polls over the previous two years, when his approval rating was in the low 60s.
These deputies are not directly elected but are chosen by regional executives and legislatures.
Courts are widely perceived to be subject to manipulation and control by government officials.
Basic Facts Land Area: 6. million square miles, about 1. times the size of the United States.
Russian law considers Ukraine’s occupied region of Crimea and the Crimean city of Sevastopol to be additional administrative subdivisions.
President: Vladimir Putin; Prime Minister: Dmitry Medvedev; Speaker of the State Duma: Vyacheslav Volodin; Speaker of the Federation Council: Valentina Matviyenko; Foreign Minister; Sergei Lavrov; Defense Minister: Sergei Shoigu.
The Constitutional Court rules on the legality and constitutionality of governmental acts and on disputes between branches of government or federative entities.
Democracy and Human Rights Under Putin’s rule, Russia has experienced a steady decline in its democratic credentials.
At the start of the 2000s, the United States government-funded nongovernmental organization Freedom House classified Russia as a “hybrid” regime, with democratic and authoritarian elements.
By the 4 Many observers believe that the intent of this law was to enable Russia to ignore rulings by the European Court of Human Rights , which Russia joined in 1996.
Background and United States Policy end of Putin’s second term in 2008, Freedom House considered Russia to be a consolidated authoritarian regime.
This status continued during the tenure of Putin’s handpicked successor for one term, Dmitry Medvedev, despite some signs of liberalization.
Since Putin’s return to the presidency in 2012, Freedom House has noted a new rise in authoritarian governance in Russia.
In its 2016 annual report, Freedom House assigned Russia the same “freedom rating” it gave to China, Yemen, Cuba, and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Vladimir Putin After more than 15 years in the Soviet Union’s Committee for State Security , Vladimir Putin held a variety of governmental positions from 1990 to 1998, first in the local government of St.
In 1998, Russian President Boris Yeltsin appointed Putin head of the Federal Security Service , a successor agency to the KGB, and prime minister a year later, in August 1999.
Yeltsin unexpectedly resigned on New Year’s Eve, 1999, and Putin became acting president.
Putin served eight years as president before stepping down in 2008, in compliance with constitutional limits on successive terms.
His successor was Dmitry Medvedev, a trusted former presidential chief of staff, deputy prime minister, and board chairperson of the state-controlled energy company Gazprom.
As prime minister from 2008 to 2012, Putin continued to govern Russia in tandem with Medvedev, who remained informally subordinate to Putin.
In September 2011, Medvedev announced that he would not run for reelection, paving the way for Putin to return to the presidency.
Putin’s return to the presidency had always been plausible, but the announcement was met with some public discontent, particularly in Moscow.
Putin has not confirmed if he is planning to run for reelection, although many observers believe he plans to do so.
Russia’s authoritarian consolidation has involved a wide array of nondemocratic practices and human rights violations.
In addition, a 2015 law enables the government to identify as “undesirable” foreign organizations engaged in activities that allegedly threaten Russia’s constitutional order, defense capability, or state security, and to close their local offices and bar Russians from working with them.
Russia’s Democracy Score has gone from a 4.88 in 2001 to a 6.57 in 2017.
Just before the September 2016 Duma election, a well-known polling organization, the Levada Center, also was branded a foreign agent; in October 2016, a prominent human rights group, Memorial, was so labeled, as well.
Eleven organizations or their subsidiaries have been barred from Russia for “undesirable” activity.
In 2015-2016, barred organizations included the National Endowment for Democracy, Open Society Foundations , U.S.Russia Foundation for Economic Advancement and the Rule of Law, National Democratic Institute, International Republican Institute, and Media Development Investment Fund.
In April 2017, three allegedly foreign-registered affiliates of the NGO and civic movement Open Russia were added to the list; Open Russia was founded by former oil magnate Mikhail Khodorkovsky, who served 10 years in prison on charges deemed by the opposition and most observers to be politically motivated.
In June 2017, the German Marshall Fund’s Black Sea Trust for Regional Cooperation also was barred.
Public demonstrations require official approval, and police have broken up protests by force.
The fine for participation in unsanctioned protests can be thousands of dollars; repeat offenders risk imprisonment.
In 2016, new “antiterrorism” legislation hardened punishments for “extremism” (a crime that has been broadly interpreted to encompass antistate criticism on social media), required telecommunications providers to store data for six months, and imposed restrictions on locations of religious worship and proselytization.
A 2013 law restricts lesbian/gay/bisexual/transgender rights by prohibiting “propaganda” among minors that would encourage individuals to consider “non-traditional sexual relationships” as attractive or socially equivalent to “traditional” sexual relationships.
In June 2017, the European Court on Human Rights ruled that the law is discriminatory and violates freedom of expression.
These laws and related discriminatory actions have impacted religious and sexual minorities.
In April 2017, for example, Russia’s Supreme Court upheld a March order of the Justice Ministry banning the operations of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Russia for what it ruled to be “extremist” activity.
Since then, Jehovah’s Witnesses have reported increased harassment and violence.
Some organizations classified as foreign agents have been declassified after the government determined that these organizations no longer receive foreign funding, and others have shut down.
In May 2017, Putin said that he would speak to Russia’s prosecutor-general and minister of internal affairs “concerning the rumors” about the detentions, but it is unclear what, if any, subsequent measures the government took.
Over the years, a number of opposition-minded or critical Russian journalists, human rights activists, politicians, whistleblowers, and others, including opposition politician Boris Nemtsov in 2015, have been reported murdered or have died under mysterious circumstances.
Although those who commit crimes are often prosecuted, suspicions frequently exist that such crimes are ordered by individuals who remain free.
Corruption Observers contend that Russia suffers from high levels of corruption.
The United States State Department’s 2016 Human Rights Report notes that corruption in Russia is “widespread throughout the executive branch ... as well as in the legislative and judicial branches at all levels of government.
In a February 2016 poll by the Russia-based Levada Center, 76% of respondents said that Russian state organs were either significantly or wholly affected by corruption.
In December 2015, Russia’s Ministry of Internal Affairs reported that the average amount of a bribe in criminal cases was around $2,500.
In February 2017, opposition figure Vladimir Kara-Murza, who lives part-time in the United States, fell seriously ill for the second time in two years while visiting Moscow and had to be placed in an induced coma.
KaraMurza is a frequent visitor to Congress and campaigned in favor of United States sanctions on Russian officials.
Several Members of Congress issued statements of support for Kara-Murza after learning of his illness.
Background and United States Policy calculated the average reported bribe to be around five times that amount.
Government officials are occasionally arrested for bribery or compelled to resign from their posts.
In 2016, cases included a regional governor who was once an opposition figure, the mayor of Russia’s Pacific port city Vladivostok, an Interior Ministry anticorruption official, and the head of the Federal Customs Service.
Although observers often presume there may be grounds for arrest or dismissal, these cases tend not to be interpreted as elements of a serious anticorruption campaign but rather as manifestations of political and economic infighting or as a way to remove ineffective or troublesome politicians.
Few of Russia’s most senior officials are arrested or dismissed for corruption.
On the contrary, many observers, including within the United States government, believe that Putin and several of his closest colleagues have amassed considerable wealth while in power.
Szubin also noted that Putin “supposedly draws a state salary of something like $ I 10,000 a year.
Government Reshuffles Many observers agree that Vladimir Putin is the most powerful person in Russia.
For most of his tenure, he has presided over a complex network of officials and business leaders, many of whom are individuals Putin knew from his time in the Soviet KGB or when he worked in the St.
Petersburg local government in the early 1990s. ls An influential leadership circle below Putin includes government officials, heads of strategic state-owned enterprises, and businesspersons.
Since 2012, the Russian-based Minchenko Consulting group has produced a series of well-regarded studies that assess who, besides Putin, are the most influential figures in the Russian policymaking process.
This list specifies 8 to 10 individuals who wield the greatest influence , including some who do not hold official positions, as well as around 50 other key individuals in the security, political, economic, and administrative spheres.
Another prominent list of influential Russian elites counts Putin’s chief of staff, Anton Vaino, and his deputy, Sergei Kiriyenko, among the top 10 leading officials.
Background and United States Policy Observers have noted some recent changes to this system of governance.
The first change is a reduction in influence of several of Putin’s longtime senior associates, including Putin’s former chief of staff (and former minister of defense), Sergei Ivanov, who was once pegged as a possible successor to Putin.
A related change is a steady rise in the number of senior officials who are at least a decade younger than Putin and have risen as Putin’s subordinates more than as his colleagues.
Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev straddles this divide; he has worked with Putin since St.
Petersburg and was Putin’s handpicked successor to the presidency after Putin’s first two terms.
Others have served Putin or Medvedev for several years and have gained relatively powerful positions.
They are generally seen as having no real power bases of their own and as entirely loyal to Putin.
First, there does not appear to be a single explanation for the declining influence of Putin’s longtime colleagues.
Head of the Presidential Administrative Directorate Vladimir Yakunin: Head of the Russian Railways Viktor Ivanov: Head of the Federal Drug Control Service General Yevgeny Murov: Head of the Federal Guard Service (a more powerful version of the United States Federal Protective Service and Secret Service) (retired May 2016) Andrei Belyaninov: Head of the Federal Customs Service Sergei Ivanov: Presidential Chief of Staff (and former minister of defense) Note: Kozhin, Yakunin, V Ivanov, Murov, and S Ivanov are subject to United States Ukraine-related sanctions.
Background and United States Policy declining efficiency or increasing mismanagement.
Considerable speculation has occurred that such rivalries on occasion lead to developments that Putin does not control.
Potential examples include the February 2015 murder of opposition politician Boris Nemtsov, which was blamed on people close to Kadyrov, and the November 2016 arrest of Minister of Economic Development Alexey Ulyukaev, which observers suspect is linked to a rivalry with Rosneft CEO Igor Sechin, considered one of Russia’s most influential policymakers.
CEO of Rostec, Russia’s large state-owned military-industrial complex, who oversees scores of hi-tech and defense companies across the country.
He is thought to have had considerable influence in shaping Russia’s recent anti-Western foreign policy trajectory, including the annexation of Crimea.
Last year, Sechin was subject to some speculation that he risked overstepping his bounds and losing power, but he ultimately appeared to strengthen his position at the expense of various rivals.
He now heads a new security apparatus that officially serves as a special police force to combat terrorism and organized crime but is widely considered to be Putin’s “personal army” and, potentially, a repressive tool for fighting civil unrest.
In addition, Rostec is subject to United States (and, partially, EU) Ukraine-related sanctions and Rosneft is subject to United States and EU Ukraine-related sanctions.
September 2016 State Duma Elections On September 18, 2016, Russians elected the State Duma, the lower house of parliament.
Russia’s last parliamentary elections, in December 2011, triggered a wave of protests against electoral fraud and heralded the rise of a revitalized opposition against Putin’s government.
All other seats went to those considered loyal opposition parties and deputies.
Total party list percentage is calculated out of the total number of valid and invalid ballots. a.
The KPRF, LDPR, and A Just Russia parties are considered the loyal opposition parties.
These parties criticize the government, if not Putin, but typically support its legislative initiatives. b.
Yabloko and PARNAS are liberal opposition parties considered to be genuinely in opposition to the government.
They fall under the “Other” category, which includes several small parties that did not meet the 5% threshold for party list representation.
The ruling UR party traditionally polls lower than Putin, who does not formally lead the party, but it appeared to benefit from a surge in patriotic sentiment unleashed by Russia’s annexation of Crimea, Russia’s so-called defense of pro-Russian populations in eastern Ukraine, and appeals for national solidarity in the face of Western sanctions and criticism.
UR also experienced a certain renewal in advance of elections; party primaries promoted the rise of many candidates new to national politics and eliminated a number of sitting deputies.
A Preview of the Duma Elections?,” Russian Congressional Research Service 9 Russia: Background and United States Policy At the same time, the Russian government took measures after the last election to bolster the victory of UR and minimize opposition gains across the country.
Fourteen parties that received at least 3% of the vote in the last election or held at least one seat in a regional council competed in the 2016 election.
Other parties technically could register after collecting 200,000 signatures, but no such registrations were approved.
In addition, state-controlled media and government officials subjected opposition leaders to a barrage of negative publicity, branding them as agents of the West.
A centrally controlled redistricting process led to the carving up of urban centers that leaned toward the opposition.
Finally, the election date was moved up from December 2016, considerably shortening the campaign period.
UR also benefited from a change in electoral rules restoring a mixed electoral system that had been in place through 2003 parliamentary elections.
UR’s financial and administrative resources across the countryside were expected to help the party win more seats via single-member races than it would in a purely proportional contest; indeed, UR candidates won more than 90% of these races.
The election observation mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe noted that the counting process was bad or very bad in 23% of the polling stations it observed.
Besides UR, the three parties that gained seats have served in parliament already and are known as the loyal opposition.
These parties criticize the government, if not Putin, but typically support its legislative initiatives.
The End for A Just Russia,” Institute of Modem Russia, January 29, Congressional Research Service 10 Russia: Background and United States Policy The Opposition As noted above, no liberal opposition party won Duma seats in the 2016 elections.
Both parties consider themselves European-style liberal democratic parties, though other parties criticized PARNAS in 2016 for including at least one populist firebrand near the top of its list.
In addition, 18 single-member races were contested by candidates representing the Open Russia movement, founded by former oil magnate Mikhail Khodorkovsky.
The party of another prominent opposition leader, anticorruption activist and 2013 Moscow mayoral candidate Alexei Navalny, had its registration revoked in 2015, ostensibly for technical reasons, and thus was unable to participate in the election.
Navalny himself is barred from running for political office due to a 2013 criminal conviction that resulted in a suspended sentence.
Navalny supporters and most outside observers deemed the case to be politically motivated, and in February 2016, the European Court of Human Rights concluded that the trial had violated Navalny’s rights.
It was barred from registering candidates in September 2015 regional elections, and in spring 2016 the coalition collapsed after PARNAS leader Kasyanov was targeted in a scandal involving alleged hidden video footage of an affair with a party colleague.
For now, observers tend to see Vladimir Putin’s rule as relatively stable, although new signs of discontent have arisen.
Background and United States Policy grown, and social spending has been reduced.
In March and June 2017, nationwide protests spearheaded by Navalny’s Anti-Corruption Foundation reportedly attracted thousands, many of whom were university-aged or younger, to demonstrate against corruption.
Whether such protests are sufficient to catalyze a more substantial political movement remains to be seen.
Some observers believe that the government is seeking to minimize popular discontent by continuing to increase social benefits in the lead-up to the next presidential election, scheduled for March 2018, even as expenditures in education, health care, and defense stay flat or decline.
Potential future scenarios tend to center on succession politics, whether engineered by Putin or prompted by his incapacitation or untimely passing.
As late as June 2017, Putin still would not say if he was planning to run for reelection, although many observers believe he plans to do so.
In the event of a controlled succession , observers speculate about a number of well-known potential successors.
However, the eventual choice also coidd be a relatively unknown figure; Putin himself was a highly unexpected choice to succeed his predecessor, Boris Yeltsin.
Many observers put little stock in the possibility of a democratic transition of power.
In such a scenario, candidates are thought more likely to emerge from right-wing nationalist forces or a new post-Communist left, not from a liberal, pro-Western opposition or civil society, whose influence has been seriously undermined by the Russian government.
Other scenarios involve a loss of control by Putin or members of his inner circle, as a result of a collapsing economy, weakened state apparatus, or an external war gone wrong.
Some observers have speculated that rival political centers could compete for power in Putin’s absence and that this competition could turn violent.
In addition, some have voiced concerns that an uncontrolled transition could lead to the rise of more nationalist forces.
Local Elections Formally, Russia has a robust system of subnational elections; in practice, the country's top-down system provides centralized control over key issues.
All but one of Russia’s 83 governors are United Russia members or other government-backed figures.
UR also has majorities, typically substantial ones, in all regional councils; only a handful of regional deputies across the country are affiliated with the liberal opposition.
Although Russian law allows for the direct election of mayors in cities other than Moscow and St.
Petersburg, most municipalities have an indirectly elected mayor or council head who shares authority with a more powerful appointed or indirectly elected city manager.
A few opposition candidates have won competitive mayoral elections, although some of the more prominent were subsequently removed from office and even imprisoned.
The Economy 42 The Russian economy has gone through periods of decline, growth, and stagnation since 1991.
A decade of strong economic growth followed, in which Russia’s GDP increased on average 6.9% per year.
The surge in economic growth—largely the result of increases in world oil prices—helped to raise the Russian standard of living and brought a significant degree of economic stability.
The Russian economy was hit hard by the global financial crisis and resulting economic downturn that began in 2008.
The crisis exposed weaknesses in the economy, including its significant dependence on the production and export of oil and other natural resources and its weak financial system.
The Russian government’s reassertion of control over major industries, especially in the energy sector, also contributed to an underachieving economy.
As a result, Russia’s period of economic growth came to an abrupt end by 2009.
Although Russian real GDP increased 5.2% in 2008, it declined by 7.8% in 2009.
For more, see CRS Report R43895, United States Sanctions and Russia’s Economy, by Rebecca M Nelson.
Russia’s economy only slightly contracted ; net private sector capital outflows slowed, from more than $150 billion in 2014 to $19. billion in 2016; inflation fell by more than half since 2015, to 7.0%; the value of the ruble stabilized; reserves began to rise; and the government successfully sold new bonds in international capital markets in May 2016.
Around 19. million (13.5% of the population) were estimated to be living in poverty.
Net inflows of foreign direct investment into Russia, which essentially came to a halt in late 2014 and early 2015, started to resume in 2016.
The purpose and method of the sale has raised some questions among observers.
Background and United States Policy consolidating its two sovereign wealth funds as the government continues to face budget shortfalls.
Russia’s other sovereign wealth fund, the National Wealth Fund, was designed to help balance the pension system and has about $75 billion.
In the longer term, Russia’s economy faces long-standing structural challenges, including slow economic diversification, weak protection of property rights, burdensome administrative procedures, state involvement in the economy, and adverse demographic dynamics.
The IMF argues that sanctions dampen the potential for accelerating investment growth.
Some analysts also have noted that the low value of the ruble may hamper Russia’s attempts to innovate and modernize its economy and that the economy’s continued reliance on oil makes it vulnerable to another drop in oil prices.
Despite Western sanctions and Russia’s own retaliatory ban against agricultural imports, the EU as a whole remains Russia’s largest trading partner.
In 2016, 47% of Russia’s merchandise exports went to EU member states and 38% of its merchandise imports came from EU member states.
Sanctions were imposed at the same time the price of oil, a major export and source of revenue for the Russian government, dropped significantly, by more than 60% between the start of 2014 and the end of 2015.
At the start of 2016, a State Department official argued that sanctions were not designed to push Russia “over the economic cliff’ in the short run but rather were designed to exert long-term pressure on Russia.
Similarly, Russian economists estimated that the economic sanctions would decrease Russia’s GDP by 2.4% by 2017, but the effect would be 3. times less than the effect from the oil-price shock.
In November 2016, Putin stated that the sanctions are “severely harming Russia” in terms of access to international financial markets, although the impact was not as severe as the harm from the decline in energy prices.
In December 2016, the Office of the Chief Economist at the United States State Department published estimates of the impact of the United States and European Union sanctions in 2014 on a firm-level basis.
The main finding was that the average company or associated company in Russia subject to sanctions lost about one-third of its operating revenue, more than one-half of its asset value, and about one-third of its employees relative to nonsanctioned peers.
The longer-term effect of sanctions, if they are kept in place, is unclear.
The economic bite of restrictions on United States long-term financing for certain sectors or technology for specific Russian oil exploration projects may manifest more prominently in coming years.
At the same time, the longterm impact may depend on whether Russia can develop viable and reliable alternative economic partners, particularly among countries that have refrained from sanctions (such as China, India, and Brazil), to fulfill economic activities restricted by United States and EU sanctions.
U.S.-Russian Trade and Investment Even before sanctions were imposed, the United States had relatively little direct trade and investment with Russia.
Over the past decade, Russia has accounted for less than 2% of total United States merchandise imports, less than 1% of total United States merchandise exports, less than 1% of United States FDI, and less than 1% of FDI in the United States.
United States merchandise exports to Russia fell from $11. billion in 2013 to $5. billion in 2016.
United States merchandise imports from Russia fell from $27. billion in 2013 to $14. billion in 2016.
United States investment in Russia was $9. billion in 2015, down from a peak of $20. billion in 2009.
United States merchandise imports from Russia tend to be dominated by oil and unfinished metals.
These products accounted for more than 85% of United States imports from Russia in 2016.
United States merchandise exports to Russia tend to focus on machinery and manufactured products.
These products accounted for more than 75% of United States exports to Russia in 2016.
Created by CRS using United States Census Bureau data, as accessed from Global Trade Atlas.
Even though overall trade and investment flows between the United States and Russia are limited, economic ties at the firm and sector levels are in some cases substantial.
Data are United States direct investment position abroad on a historical-cost basis.
Russia’s actions continued to depart from the WTO’s core tenets of liberal trade, transparency, and predictability in favor of inward-looking, import-substitution economic policies.
Separately, some analysts have raised questions about whether Russia’s retaliatory ban on agriculture imports from the United States and other countries is compliant with its obligations under the WTO, whereas others argue that the ban may be permitted under the national security exemption.
Energy Sector 68 Russia is a significant producer of energy in various forms, including crude oil, natural gas, coal, and nuclear power.
In 2016, Russia was the third-largest oil producer, behind the United States and Saudi Arabia; the second-largest natural gas producer, behind the United States; and the sixth-largest coal producer.
It is also a significant exporter of oil and the largest natural gas exporter, the latter providing Russia with market power, which it has exploited for geopolitical purposes.
Natural gas is more of a regional commodity than oil because natural gas requires expensive infrastructure for transport.
Russian gas imports made up more than half the total gas consumption in 20 countries.
However, only three EU countries (Hungary, Latvia, and Lithuania) and three non-EU countries depended on Russian gas for more than 20% of their total primary energy consumption.
To maintain its leverage and position as Europe’s dominant gas supplier, Russia has sought to develop multiple pipeline routes to reduce its dependence on transit states such as Ukraine and to satisfy regional markets.
To the north, the Nord Stream pipeline runs under the Baltic Sea from Russia to Germany; Russia’s state-controlled natural gas company, Gazprom, is seeking to build a second, parallel pipeline, Nord Stream 2, with the financial support of five European energy companies.
Options and Challenges to Natural Gas Supply Diversification, coordinated by Michael Ratner.
Background and United States Policy Finland, and Sweden, whose waters it would cross.
The European Union (specifically, the EU’s executive branch, the European Commission) also is considering whether and to what extent the proposed pipeline would be subject to existing EU regulations.
Opponents of the pipeline—including, among others, the governments of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Ukraine, and many Members of the United States Congress—argue that the pipeline runs counter to the stated EU goal of diversifying European energy supply sources by increasing reliance on Russian gas.
In addition, they contend that by bypassing existing pipelines to Eastern Europe through Ukraine, Nord Stream 2 could leave Ukraine and other countries in Central and Eastern Europe more vulnerable to supply cutoffs or price manipulation by Russia.
To the south, Russia had long planned the South Stream pipeline that would have run under the Black Sea to Bulgaria.
Despite initial skepticism and a temporary decline in Turkish-Russian relations, however, the planned South Stream pipeline has been replaced to an extent by the Turk Stream project, which follows a similar route across the Black Sea but stops at the Turkish-Greek border.
Gazprom has signed some contracts for the project, including one for the laying of pipe.
Background and United States Policy Foreign Relations In recent years, many Members of Congress and other United States policymakers have paid growing attention to Russia’s active and increasingly forceful foreign policy, both toward neighboring states, such as Georgia and Ukraine, and in regard to operations further afield, such as the intervention in Syria and interference in political processes in Europe and the United States.
Many observers inside and outside Russia interpret this policy as laying claim to a traditional sphere of influence.
Although Russian policymakers avoid reference to a sphere of influence, they have used comparable terms at various times.
The CIS includes as members or participants all post-Soviet states except the Baltics and Georgia.
The organization has had limited success in promoting regional integration, however.
Background and United States Policy Russia has had relatively more success developing multilateral relations with a narrower circle of states.
Although these aims could include the facilitation of trade and investment, as well as protection against a variety of external threats , they also may include a desire to accommodate Russia, ensure opportunities for labor migration, promote intergovernmental subsidies, and bolster regime security.
Russia’s relations with its CSTO and EEU partners are not always smooth.
In addition to expressing differences over the principles and rules of the two institutions, Russia’s closest partners have been reluctant to bind themselves entirely to Russia on matters of foreign policy and economic development.
None of them followed Russia’s lead in recognizing Georgia’s breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent states in 2008.
Russia secured relatively greater support from partners in its annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea region.
In March 2014, Armenia and Belarus voted with Russia to reject United Nations General Assembly Resolution 68/262, which affirmed Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
In December 2016, Armenia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan voted with Russia to reject UNGA Resolution 71/205, which “condemn the temporary occupation” of Crimea and reaffirmed nonrecognition of its annexation.
The Armenian government, which was planning to conclude an association agreement with the EU, abruptly reversed course and declared its intent to join the EEU after a meeting of the Russian and Armenian presidents in September 2013.
Background and United States Policy Russia’s partners also have cultivated strong ties with other countries.
Although Armenia and Belarus have close bilateral relations with Russia in the security and economic spheres, they also have established economic ties to Europe, and Belarus’s authoritarian leader Alexander Lukashenko periodically criticizes Russia for what he considers unfair bilateral trading practices and strongarm diplomacy.
These three states have opted to pursue independent foreign policies and do not seek membership in Russian-led or other security and economic blocs.
In addition, Russia has cultivated a partnership with Uzbekistan, although the latter competes with Kazakhstan for regional leadership in Central Asia and has long-standing disputes with Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan.
All three states have concluded association agreements with the EU that include the establishment of free-trade areas and encourage harmonization with EU laws and regulations.
Moldova’s current president, Igor Dodon, seeks to reorient Moldova closer to Russia, although his formal powers to do so are relatively limited in Moldova’s political system.
Uzbekistan was a member of the Collective Security Treaty Organization from 2006 to 2012.
Azerbaijan contributes troops to the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan.
In 2010, Ukraine adopted a “non-bloc” status, but its parliament rejected that status in December 2014, after Russia’s annexation of Crimea and support of separatists in eastern Ukraine.
Background and United States Policy Ukraine Conflict 79 Many observers consider that of all the postSoviet states, Ukraine has been the most difficult for Russia to accept as fully independent.
Even before 2014, the RussianUkrainian relationship suffered turbulence, with disputes over Ukraine’s ties to NATO and the EU, the status of Russia’s Crimea-based Black Sea Fleet, and the transit of Russian natural gas via Ukraine to Europe.
Under Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych , such disputes were largely papered over.
By the end of 2013, Yanukovych appeared to make a decisive move toward Russia, postponing the conclusion of an association agreement with the EU and agreeing to substantial financial assistance from Moscow.
The decision to postpone Ukraine’s agreement with the EU was a catalyst for the so-called Euromaidan protests, which led to a government crackdown on demonstrators, violent clashes between protestors and government forces, and eventually the demise of the Yanukovych regime.
In late August 2014, Russia stepped up support to separatists in reaction to a new Ukrainian offensive.
However, the protocol failed to end fighting or prompt a political resolution to the crisis.
The parties met again in February 2015 and reached a more detailed cease-fire agreement known as Minsk-2.
Dialogue on modalities of local elections in accordance with Ukrainian legislation and the future status of certain districts in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Pardon and amnesty via a law forbidding persecution and punishment of persons involved in the conflict.
Restoration of full Ukrainian control over its border with Russia alongside the conflict zone, beginning from the first day after local elections and ending after the introduction of a new constitution and permanent legislation on the special status of districts in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Withdrawal of all foreign armed groups, weapons, and mercenaries from Ukrainian territory and disarmament of all illegal groups.
I I Constitutional reform in Ukraine, including decentralization and permanent legislation on the special status of districts in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Local elections in districts of Donetsk and Luhansk, to be agreed upon with representatives of those districts and held according to OSCE standards.
Intensification of the work of the Trilateral Contact Group , including through working groups on implementation of the Minsk agreements.
To date, most observers perceive that little has been achieved in implementing the provisions of Minsk-2, despite commitments made by all sides.
Although the conflict’s intensity has subsided at various times, a new round of serious fighting arose at the end of January 2017 and lasted for several days.
As of mid-May 2017, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights estimated that the conflict had led to at least 10,090 combat and civilian fatalities.
Background and United States Policy separatists with weapons and armed vehicles.
Estimates of the number of Russian troops in eastern Ukraine have declined since their height in 2015.
Even before the Ukraine conflict, post-Cold War efforts to build a cooperative NATO-Russia partnership had at best mixed results.
The principal institutional mechanism for NATO-Russia relations is the NATO-Russia Council , which was established in May 2002, five years after the 1997 NATO-Russia Founding Act provided the formal basis for bilateral cooperation.
Recognizing that NATO and Russia face many of the same global challenges and share similar strategic priorities, Russian and NATO leaders structured the NRC as a forum of equal member states, with goals that included political dialogue on security issues, the determination of common approaches, and the conduct of joint operations.
Formal meetings of the NRC were suspended in April 2014 and resumed in 2016.
Prior to the suspension over events in Ukraine, NATO and Russia had identified a number of areas for cooperation.
In 2010, they endorsed a Joint Review of 21 st Century Security Challenges, intended to serve as a platform for cooperation.
For additional background on Russia’s militarization of Crimea, see Reuters, “In Crimea, Russia Signals Military Resolve with New and Revamped Bases,” November 1, 2016, and Dave Gilbert and Fred Pleitgen, “Russia Puts on Show of Military Strength in Crimea,” CNN, September 9, 2016.
Response to the Crisis in Ukraine and Security Concerns in Central and Eastern Europe, coordinated by Paul Belkin, and CRS Report R44550, NATO’s Warsaw Summit: In Brief, by Paul Belkin.
Background and United States Policy challenges, including instability in Afghanistan, terrorism, and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
In the past, observers highlighted operations related to Afghanistan as a key example of enhanced NATO-Russia cooperation.
From 2009, Russia allowed the transit over its territory of cargo for NATO’s International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.
In partnership with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime , Russia and NATO member states also jointly trained Afghan, Pakistani, and Central Asian countemarcotics officers, with a view toward reducing narcotics transit to and through Russia.
In 2011, NATO and Russia established a Helicopter Maintenance Trust Fund to provide maintenance training and spare parts for Afghanistan’s Russian-produced helicopters.
After Russia’s actions in Ukraine, NATO moved to implement what its leadership characterized as the greatest reinforcement of NATO’s collective defense since the end of the Cold War.
The United States has been a key architect of and contributor to NATO’s reassurance and deterrence initiatives, and it has sought to bolster United States force posture in Europe in response to Russian actions.
Background and United States Policy its proposed FY2018 budget, the Trump Administration requested $4. billion for ER1, a 40% increase over the Obama Administration’s FY2017 request.
Recent Air and Sea Incidents Since 2014, Russia has adopted an increasingly aggressive posture with its air and sea patrols and military exercises.
Background and United States Policy EU-Russia Relations 92 Like NATO, the EU has had to reconsider its relationship with a more assertive Russia and the implications for European security and stability.
Others, such as Poland and the Baltic states, by contrast, have tended to view Russia more as a potential threat to themselves and their neighbors.
Pragmatists moved more into alignment with those who have tended to view Russia with greater wariness.
Media reports and outside experts contend that the Russian government is seeking to influence European political discourse, policymaking, and electoral processes with an array of tools.
Such measures reportedly have included the use of disinformation, the spread of fake news, cyberattacks on government or political party computer systems, and the cultivation of relations with European political parties and allies broadly sympathetic to Russian views.
In recent years, a new and increasingly evident ideological link has appeared between European far-right parties and the Russian leadership.
Most of these far-right parties tend to be antiestablishment and anti-EU, and they often share some combination of extreme nationalism; a commitment to “law and order” and traditional family values; and anti-immigrant, anti-Semitic, or anti-Islamic sentiments.
A few parties on the left or far left also appear to harbor more friendly views toward Russia.
Concrete evidence of direct financial support from the Russian government to European political parties is difficult to identify.
Widespread speculation exists, however, that the Russian government has funneled money through Russian ha nk s or other organizations and individuals to far-right parties in Europe.
Many suggest that Russia also has been proactive in offering organizational expertise, political know-how, and media assistance to parties on Europe’s far right.
Russian support reportedly has included establishing and coordinating pro-Russian parties, nongovernmental civil organizations, and think tanks, and supporting friendly media outlets.
The Spread of Pro-Russian Policies on the European Far Right, Congressional Research Service 29 Russia: Background and United States Policy Many experts note that the Russian government under Putin has become very sophisticated in its efforts to exert influence in Europe.
At the same time, analysts point out that many European countries have been dealing with Russian disinformation and political meddling for decades, although they acknowledge that Russia’s digital and cyber capabilities have greatly increased in recent years.
Russia-China Relations 95 Russia and China have many reasons to cooperate.
Both countries have a desire to counter what they see as United States hegemony, regionally and worldwide.
Both are wary of the United States military presence in Asia and often criticize United States efforts to upgrade the United States’ defense capabilities with its treaty allies, Japan and South Korea.
Both hold vetoes on the United Nations Security Council and often work together to adjust or oppose United Nations Security Council resolutions that are supported by Western states.
China and Russia are far from embracing a full alliance with one another, however.
To a large extent, the partnership depends on external events in a web of relationships around the world.
In recent years, Beijing has not wanted to enter into an explicitly anti-Western alliance; its trade volume with the United States dwarfs that with Russia, and it has been loath to confront the West directly.
Russia’s intervention in Ukraine also has affected its relations with China.
On the one hand, the intervention drove closer cooperation and a strong show of solidarity as Western countries imposed sanctions and attempted to isolate Putin diplomatically.
On the other hand, it also created an imbalance in the relationship, as Moscow’s need for Beijing’s support increased.
Beijing also appeared to be uneasy with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which was at odds with China’s official statements concerning respect for the sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity of other countries.
Tensions also have periodically risen because of a perception in Russia that large numbers of Chinese migrants are crossing the border for possible economic opportunity in the sparsely populated Russian Far East.
Many observers assert that the numbers of Chinese in Russia are much lower than suspected, and some suggest that the flow of Chinese migrants from Russia may now be going in the other direction, given the comparative economic vibrancy of the Chinese side.
China is Russia’s largest trading partner, but Russia does not ra nk in China’s top 10 partners.
Energy deals have played an important role in Russia and China’s partnership, particularly after Moscow’s relations with the West soured after its actions in Ukraine.
China has been willing to sign large oil-for-loan deals with Russia, which has supplied around 14% of China’s crude oil imports since 2012.
Russia and China have discussed additional gas pipeline routes, although construction plans have been repeatedly postponed.
Russia-China security relations have advanced significantly in recent years.
Under the auspices of the multilateral Shanghai Cooperation Organization , Russia and China have held increasingly large and sophisticated bilateral and multilateral military exercises, dubbed “Peace Mission,” since 2005.
Some analysts say that by holding these high-profile exercises, Beijing and Moscow intend to send strong signals to the West, particularly the United States.
Soviet and Russian naval forces have accessed a facility at the Syrian port of Tartus since the early 1970s, using it as a logistical hub to enable longer Mediterranean operations.
Former Syrian President Hafez al Asad regularly hosted Soviet military and economic advisers but resisted Moscow’s attempts to leverage Russian military assistance to gain greater or permanent access to shore facilities.
Before the start of Russia’s current intervention in Syria, Russian personnel continued to be based in Syria to maintain Russian military equipment and train Syrians, although their numbers fluctuated over time.
After the NATO-led 2011 military intervention in Libya, the Russian government came out more strongly in support of President Bashar al Asad’s regime.
It also provided Asad with diplomatic support, insisting that United Nations efforts to promote the establishment of a transitional government focus on brokering an agreement between the Syrian government and rebel movements, rather than what the United States and its allies typically characterized as the negotiated departure of Asad.
Russia’s Syria Policy, Carnegie Congressional Research Service 31 Russia: Background and United States Policy differences, Russia and the United States cooperated in the United Nations and with the League of Arab States in a fitful and unsuccessful string of peacemaking endeavors.
In September 2013, the Russian government made a surprise proposal to work with the United States in establishing an international mission to remove chemical weapons from Syria as a way to avoid United States military intervention.
Over the summer of 2015, Moscow began a gradual buildup of Russian personnel, combat aircraft, and military equipment in Syria.
In 2016, Russia expanded its targeting to include Islamic State forces, although it continued to occasionally target U.S.-backed rebel groups.
In addition, Russia continues to resupply Syrian military forces, although Russian officials have stated they are merely fulfilling existing contracts.
To date, airstrikes have constituted Russia’s primary offensive military effort in Syria.
These strikes have enabled forces loyal to Asad to reverse some opposition gains, particularly in and around Aleppo.
Russia’s introduction of advanced air defense systems in Syria also reportedly constrains the ability of other aircraft to operate freely in the area and complicates proposals calling for the establishment of a no-fly zone.
At the same time, Russia has pushed for cooperation between United States and Russian military forces in Syria against terrorist groups, which in Russia’s view include a number of groups fighting the Asad government.
Russian ground forces in Syria appear to have played a limited combat role and seem to be focused primarily on defending Russian bases and installations, although some may be embedded as advisers with Syrian military forces.
Russia’s transfer of modernized weapons systems to the Syrian military, which prior to the unrest had relied on older Russian equipment, has bolstered the capabilities of Asad government forces.
It also has provided the Russian military with an opportunity to test new weapons systems and a platform to market Russian equipment to potential regional buyers.
Russian media have highlighted the performance of the T-90 battle tank in Syria, claiming that it is able to withstand strikes from U.S.-made TOW missiles.
Background and United States Policy could place the Syrian regime in a stronger negotiating position vis-a-vis rebels, while also accomplishing Russia’s goal of avoiding Western-led regime change in Syria.
Over the long term, Russia may seek to retain influence with the Syrian government by continuing to advise and assist the Syrian military.
Russia has agreements to maintain a long-term presence at both the Tartus naval facility and the Hmeimim airbase in Latakia.
Russia has adopted an increasingly active role in political negotiations between the Syrian government and opposition groups.
Since January 2017, Russia, Turkey, and Iran have hosted peace talks in Astana, Kazakhstan.
During a fourth round of talks in early May, representatives of Russia, Iran, and Turkey signed a memorandum calling for the creation of four “de-escalation areas” in Syria.
The memorandum stipulated that the de-escalation areas be administered by forces from the three signatory countries, or “guarantors,” raising the possibility that these areas might become de facto spheres of influence for Russia, Iran, or Turkey, and generate an additional influx of personnel from those countries into Syria.
Laying the groundwork for two of the four de-escalation areas, Russia has deployed military police and set up monitoring stations in the eastern suburbs of Damascus and in southwestern Syria, along the Jordanian border.
The planned de-escalation area in southwestern Syria emerged from a cease-fire deal brokered in July by the United States, Russia, and Jordan.
In 2015, the prospect of Asad’s defeat had several negative implications for Russia.
It would have meant the loss of a key partner in the Middle East, a region in which Russia had begun to expand its influence to help establish itself as a global power and peer competitor to the United States.
It also would have set another major precedent for a United States military-backed transition in the Middle East after Iraq and Libya, something Moscow firmly opposed.
Finally, Russian authorities insisted that the final beneficiary of the Asad regime’s collapse would be the Islamic State and other extremists who would be the likely victors in the ensuing contest for national power.
Such an outcome, in turn, could promote the spread of Islamist extremism to other countries, including within Central Asia and Russia itself.
Russian authorities have said that up to a few thousand Russian citizens, predominantly from Muslim-populated republics in the North Caucasus, have fought with the Islamic State and other extremist movements in Syria and Iraq.
Idlib Province and its surroundings, some parts of northern Homs Province, eastern Ghouta in the Damascus suburbs, and parts of the southern provinces of Dar’a and Quneitra.
Background and United States Policy Since Russia’s intervention, commanders once affiliated with the A1 Qaeda-aligned Islamic Emirate of the Caucasus, established in 2007, reportedly have pledged allegiance to the Islamic State and formed a local affiliate, the Wilayah Kawkaz.
Russia’s leadership may have believed that intervention, although potentially risky, could help to avoid these negative outcomes by shoring up the Asad regime, bolstering Russian influence, and staving off the collapse of the state and a takeover by Islamist extremists.
Russia's Global Engagement With the exception of Russia’s relations with China and its Syria intervention, Russia’s foreign policy priorities traditionally have focused primarily on the post-Soviet region and the West.
Russia plays a significant global role as one of five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.
In these and other international fora, Russia has engaged on global issues such as nonproliferation (including combatting the nuclear weapons programs of Iran and North Korea), counterterrorism, counterpiracy, and global health challenges.
In Asia, Russia also has cultivated good relations with Japan, with which it still has a territorial dispute over islands Russia annexed at the end of World War II, as well as with India, Pakistan (more recently), Afghanistan, Vietnam, and across Southeast Asia.
In the Middle East, Russia’s Syria intervention is exceptional in scope but reflects a long-standing policy of fruitful relations with regional governments including Algeria, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, and Libya.
In sub-Saharan Africa, Russia has not developed similarly strong relations; however, it has begun to expand its focus on this region, where the Soviet Union used to have several close partners.
Since the end of the Cold War, conventional wisdom about the Russian military has tended to indicate a force in relative decline, with aging Soviet-era equipment and with technology and a philosophy of warfare lagging well behind that of the United States and other NATO members.
It also has highlighted the Russian military’s ability to effect “area denial” with an air defense “bubble” of overlapping advanced missile systems.
Background and United States Policy Russian Military Modernization Since 2008, Russia’s military has undergone substantial reforms.
Russia also has pursued an ambitious modernization program as it steadily increased defense spending, at least until 2016, when the defense budget declined for the first time in years.
The plan calls for upgrading I 1% of military equipment each year, with a final goal of increasing the share of modern weaponry to 70% of total inventory by 2020.
For 2015, Putin related the expected share of “modern weapons” was 32% in the Army, 33% in the Air Force, 40% in airborne units, and “over 50%” in the Navy and aerospace defense forces.
Some analysts have questioned the definition of modem in this context, noting that in some cases the term appears to include newer versions of older designs.
The Western Military District includes the 6 th Army, 20 th Guards Army, and 1 st Guards Tank Army; the 6 th Air Force and Air Defense Anny, as well as Airborne Troops; the Baltic Fleet , naval infantry, and coastal defense forces; and intelligence, support, and special forces units.
Background and United States Policy Western Military District and another in the Southern Military District (Caucasus, Black Sea, and Caspian region), totaling approximately 30,000 new troops.
Kaliningrad is a key strategic territory for Russia, allowing the country to project military power into NATO’s northern flank.
The territory has a heavy Russian military presence, including the Baltic Fleet and two airbases.
In October 2016, the Russian Minister of Defense reported that Russia had temporarily deployed Iskander short-range nuclear-capable missiles in the region, something they have done in the past.
Many consider the deployment to be a response to new NATO deployments, and some observers suspect that Russia is planning to deploy the missiles to Kaliningrad on a permanent basis.
Background and United States Policy Ukraine, including unofficially deploying as many as 12,000 troops to the region in 2015 and, more recently, 4,200-7,500 troops, according to Ukrainian government sources.
Russia also has stationed military forces in Georgia and Moldova without these states’ consent.
Since Russia’s 2008 war with Georgia, its military bases in the breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia have housed some 3,500-4,000 personnel each.
In 2016, Russia finalized an agreement with the de facto authorities of Abkhazia, establishing a combined group of military forces in the occupied region.
Earlier this year, Russia concluded an agreement with South Ossetia to integrate the breakaway region’s military forces with its own.
In recent years, Armenia also has concluded agreements with Russia to establish a joint air defense system and a combined group of forces, both on the basis of previous arrangements.
Russia’s Military Footprint in Europe SWEDEN Baltic Fleet FINLAND 'ESTONIA ( LATVIA LITHUANIA''' Northern Fleet St.
Strategic and Snap Military Exercises In recent years, Russia has significantly increased the frequency of large-scale strategic exercises and short-notice snap drills, serving to bolster the readiness of its forces, rehearse for a variety of contingencies in its neighborhood, and gain experience in the rapid redeployment of large numbers of personnel and equipment.
In 2009, Russia alarmed many United States and European observers with exercises rehearsing an attack on Poland and the Baltic states and culminating in a simulated nuclear strike on Warsaw.
In March 2013, according to NATO officials, the Russian Air Force conducted a mock nuclear strike against Sweden.
An exercise in western Russia involving 150,000 troops in FebruaryMarch 2014 unfolded in conjunction with the seizure of Crimea.
Background and United States Policy live-fire exercises reportedly also have increased in frequency.
NATO officials assert that Russia staged about a dozen unannounced, large-scale, snap military drills in 2015-2016, including in the run-up to the July 2016 NATO summit in Warsaw.
Besides testing units’ readiness for battle, mobilization procedures, equipment, and command systems, the exercises were presumed to be a signal to NATO through the display of forces and weaponry.
NATO countries such as Poland, Romania, and the Baltics have been concerned about a repeat of tactics used during the takeover of Crimea, with putative exercises morphing into an actual assault operation.
Russia’s next major strategic exercise, Zapad-2017 , is scheduled for September 2017, raising concerns among Russia’s western neighbors.
Regularly scheduled every four years, the exercise will take place in western Russia, including Kaliningrad, as well as in Belarus.
This is a far greater number than were involved in the last Zapad exercise in 2013 but similar to the number of participants in last year’s major strategic exercise in southern Russia, Kavkaz-2016.
United States Policy Toward Russia For more than 25 years, the U.S.-Russian relationship has gone through positive and negative periods.
The spirit of the U.S.-Russian “strategic partnership” forged by Presidents Bill Clinton and Boris Yeltsin in the early 1990s was gradually overtaken by increasing tension and mutual recrimination, in large part as a consequence of disagreements over Russia’s efforts to reestablish a sphere of influence in the post-Soviet region, United States promotion of NATO enlargement to Central and Eastern Europe, and NATO’s military intervention in the former Yugoslavia in the mid-1990s.
However, tensions arose again around a number of issues, including the Iraq War; the so-called color revolutions in Ukraine, Georgia, and Kyrgyzstan involving protests against electoral fraud that unseated corrupt regimes; Russian energy and security pressure on its neighbors; and United States and NATO plans to deploy missile defenses in Europe.
Cooperation continued in some areas, but the August 2008 Russia-Georgia conflict caused bilateral ties to deteriorate to their lowest point since the Cold War.
United States Policy Under the Obama Administration On entering office, the Obama Administration asserted it could prompt a “reset” of relations with Russia’s new president, Dmitry Medvedev.
During the Obama Administration, the United States and Russia cooperated in a number of areas.
Despite this progress, U.S.-Russian relations remained challenging in several respects.
Although in 2011 Russia joined China in abstaining from a United Nations Security Council vote establishing a no-fly zone in Libya, Putin expressed disapproval of the decision as an unwarranted intrusion into Libya’s internal affairs.
U.S.-Russian relations worsened with Russia’s disputed December 2011 parliamentary elections and Putin’s March 2012 return to the presidency.
Putin infused his presidential campaign with a heavy dose of anti-Americanism, painting the Russian opposition and prodemocracy NGOs as Western pawns.
Russian state television accused the new United States ambassador and architect of the reset policy, Michael McFaul, of plotting revolution after his first meeting with opposition and civil-society activists.
In December 2012, Congress passed and the President signed into law the Sergei Magnitsky Rule of Law Accountability Act as part of a broader piece of legislation normalizing United States trade with Russia.
The Magnitsky Act required the President to identify and impose sanctions on individuals involved in the detention, abuse, or death of Sergei Magnitsky, a Russian lawyer and auditor who died in prison after uncovering massive tax fraud that implicated the government, as well as others whom the United States determines are “responsible for extrajudicial killings, torture, or other gross violations of internationally recognized human rights” in Russia.
Background and United States Policy terminated an adoption agreement that had entered into force the month before and banned United States adoptions of Russian children.
In September 2012, Russia requested that the United States close down foreign assistance programs run by the United States Agency for International Development.
In August 2013, the White House announced it would “postpone” a U.S.-Russian presidential summit planned for September because of inadequate “progress in our bilateral agenda” since Putin returned to the presidency.
In 2014, United States relations with Russia deteriorated further in reaction to Russia’s invasion and annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea region and its subsequent support of separatists in eastern Ukraine.
The Administration said these measures were a response to the increased harassment of United States diplomatic personnel in Russia over the previous two years.
United States Policy Under the Trump Administration Like the Administrations before it, the Trump Administration came into office seeking to improve relations with Russia.
Following a January 28, 2017, call between Presidents Trump and Putin, us-russia-usa-rights-idUSBRE85Q0EK20120627.
Many observers concur that improved U.S.-Russian relations would be welcome.
Questions concerning the extent of Russian interference in the United States presidential election also have imposed constraints on the Administration’s ability to improve relations with Russia.
Media reports in March 2017 suggested that the Administration believed the time “may not be right” for seeking cooperation with Russia in the battle against the Islamic State.
Background and United States Policy Secretary Tillerson’s April 2017 meeting with Putin covered other issues as well.
In August 2017, Russia joined the United States, China, and other members of the United Nations Security Council to impose new sanctions on North Korea in response to recent missile launches.
The Administration has said it supports the establishment of a dialogue with Russia on cybersecurity, although United States officials suggest this will take time to evolve.
In July 2017, President Trump appeared to reject the idea of establishing a joint “cybersecurity unit” with Russia.
The Administration also seeks to promote change in Russia’s policy toward Ukraine.
She stated that “the United States continues to briefing-presidents-meetings-g20-july-7-2017.
On several occasions, he has stated that Ukraine-related sanctions will remain in place “until Moscow reverses the actions that triggered” them.
The law codifies sanctions on Russia provided for in existing Ukraine-related and cyberrelated executive orders.
In addition, the act strengthens other sanctions on Russia and requires or recommends several new sanctions, as well as establishes a congressional review of any presidential move to ease or lift sanctions.
Background and United States Policy United States usage of storage and resort facilities in Moscow.
Observers viewed these measures, in part, as a delayed response to the Obama Administration’s December 2016 decision to evict Russian personnel and deny access to Russia’s diplomatic compounds.
As of August 2017, congressional committees have held more than 20 hearings on matters relating to Russia, including on United States election interference, other influence campaigns, sanctions, INF Treaty violations, civil society, Russian military and security policy, and United States responses to Russian activities.
Such measures, including from other draft legislation, initially were included in Title II of S 722, Countering Iran’s Destabilizing Activities Act of 2017, which passed the Senate in June 2017.
The President signed the bill, which also includes sanctions on Ran and North Korea, into law on August 2, 2017.
Legislation also has been introduced calling on the United States government to assess and respond to Russian influence operations, illicit financial activities abroad, or INF treaty violations.
Assistance is to be provided to NATO and EU members and aspirants to strengthen their democratic institutions, counter Russian disinformation and cyberattacks against critical infrastructure and electoral mechanisms, and promote energy security.
Background and United States Policy government and on the use of Russian funds intended to influence the outcome of elections or campaigns in Europe and Eurasia.
Current foreign operations appropriations restrict funds for implementing policies and actions that would recognize Russian sovereignty over Crimea or support Russia’s occupation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
President Obama, in issuing decisions to impose economic sanctions on Russia, declared that Russia’s activities in Ukraine threaten the peace, security, stability, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of its neighbor and constitute a threat to United States national security.
Also see CRS Insight IN10634, Overview of United States Sanctions Regimes on Russia, by Cory Welt and Dianne E Rennack; CRS In Focus IF10614, EU Sanctions on Russia Related to the Ukraine Conflict, by Kristin Archick, Dianne E Rennack, and Cory Welt; and CRS Report R43895, United States Sanctions and Russia’s Economy, by Rebecca M Nelson.
EU sanctions are broadly similar to United States sanctions, although each has imposed sanctions on individuals and entities that the other has not.
Background and United States Policy assets; annexed Crimea to Russia; used illicit armed force in Ukraine; or conducted business, trade, or investment in occupied Crimea.
Any individual or entity designated pursuant to these orders is subject to the blocking of assets under United States jurisdiction and denial of entry into the United States.
In addition, United States persons are prohibited from engaging in transactions with designated entities or persons.
The Department of the Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control continues to investigate transactions and designate persons and entities, most recently in June 2017.
In addition, in what are known as sectoral sanctions, OFAC restricts transactions by persons under United States jurisdiction related to investment and financing for designated state-controlled companies in Russia’s financial sector and financing for designated companies in Russia’s energy and defense sectors and prohibits transactions related to the development of deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale oil projects within Russia.
In addition, the Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014 , as amended by RL. 11544, requires sanctions that were previously discretionary on foreign persons who make “a significant investment” in deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale oil projects in Russia, and on foreign financial institutions that fund such projects or engage in transactions for any person subject to Ukraine-related sanctions.
Actions in Response to Russian Malicious Cyber Activity and Harassment,” December 29, 2016.
Background and United States Policy prohibitions on transactions with United States persons, and denial of entry into the United States.
Sanctions for Human Rights Violations and Corruption Human rights-related sanctions also are specified in legislation.
The Sergei Magnitsky Rule of Law Accountability Act of 2012 requires the President to identify persons involved in the detention, abuse, or death of Sergei Magnitsky (see “ United States Policy Under the Obama Administration,” above), and the ensuing cover-up, or who are “responsible for extrajudicial killings, torture, or other gross violations of internationally recognized human rights” in Russia.
Designees are subject to the blocking of assets under United States jurisdiction, prohibitions on transactions with United States persons, and denial of entry into the United States.
The act, as amended, also requires sanctions on foreign persons who support serious human rights abuses in territory Russia occupies or controls.
Other Sanctions The Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014 requires sanctions against Russian state-run arms exporter Rosoboronexport; Russian entities that transfer weapons to Syria, Ukraine, Georgia, or Moldova and foreign financial institutions that engage in related transactions; and Gazprom, if the company is found to withhold natural gas from NATO member states.
The act requires sanctions on foreign persons that materially contribute to the Syrian government’s ability to acquire or develop a variety of advanced or prohibited weapons and defense articles.
The act also authorizes, but does not require, sanctions on United States or foreign persons who make investments or engage in trade, valued at $1 million, or $5 million over 12 months, that enhances Russia’s ability to construct energy export pipelines.
The act also requires reports by the Secretary of the Treasury on the potential effects of expanding sanctions to include broader sets of Russian political and economic elites and parastatal entities, and to sovereign debt and derivative products, as well as on United States efforts to combat illicit finance relating to Russia.
Russian individuals and entities also have been designated under sanctions regimes related to Syria, North Korea, terrorism, transnational crime, and weapons proliferation.
Unofficial allegations of Russian interference in the presidential election were made public in or around June 2016.
The majority of released emails, including most of those from the DNC and Podesta, were disclosed by WikiLeaks, which allegedly received emails from Russian intelligence-connected sources.
Although some state-level voter registration systems may have been hacked, the ODNI report said that there was no evidence of tampering with vote tallies or that information in emails released by WikiLeaks had been tampered with prior to the emails’ release.
Background and United States Policy Congress is investigating Russian interference in United States elections.
In January 2017, the House and Senate Select Committees on Intelligence launched inquiries into Russian cyber activities and “active measures” surrounding the United States election, as well as more broadly.
The Senate Committees on Armed Services, Foreign Relations, and Judiciary have conducted related hearings.
Other Activities The United States government also has taken legal actions against Russian individuals for alleged malicious cyber activities that are apparently unrelated to elections.
In March 2017, the Department of Justice indicted four individuals, including one of those subject to sanctions and two FSB officers, on charges related to the theft of Yahoo user information.
The Department of Justice is seeking the extradition from the Czech Republic and Spain of two other Russian individuals suspected of cybercrimes.
In April 2017, another Russian individual, who is the son of a Russian member of parliament, was sentenced to 27 years in prison for charges related to credit card and identity theft.
In recent months, several people have been prosecuted inside Russia for other alleged cybercrimes.
Although details are scant, those arrested include FSB officials who are reportedly being tried for treason, including one subsequently indicted in the United States for economic crimes.
Some Russian media have speculated that the arrests were related to Russia’s interference in United States elections.
After reportedly cooperating with authorities and pleading guilty, the head of the hacking group was sentenced to two years in prison in July 2017.
During the 1990s, as the relationship between the United States and Russia improved, arms control no longer played as central a role in fostering cooperation between the two nations.
The Trump Administration has not offered any official statements on the future of New START and has not indicated whether it might seek a five-year extension of the treaty or negotiate a new treaty before New START’s 2021 expiration.
With regard to the INF Treaty, most experts agree that the elimination of intermediate-range missiles in Europe mitigated a key source of potential instability.
In testimony before the House Armed Services Committee on March 8, 2017, General Paul Selva, the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, confirmed press reports that Russia had begun to deploy a new ground-launched cruise missile.
Background and United States Policy deployed the missile to pose a threat to NATO facilities, and that it showed no inclination to return to compliance with the treaty.
The United States and Russia still use the system; reports indicate that President Obama used it to communicate with Putin about the hacking and interference with the United States elections.
In addition, since 1992, the United States has spent more than $10 billion to help Russia (and the other former Soviet states) dismantle nuclear weapons and ensure the security of nuclear weapons, weapons-grade nuclear material, other weapons of mass destruction, and related technological know-how.
Outlook Moving forward, most expect Congress to continue to play an active role in shaping United States policy toward Russia.
