Ukraine is mobilising its reserves and reinforcing borders in preparation to resist an attack by Russia after an aggressive move by Moscow.
Now Ukraine is mobilising in the fear Russia is about to cast aside all pretence, and outright invade.
Moscow used military force to seize control of the Crimean Peninsula from Ukraine in 2014.
It’s since been waging a barely covert campaign to support pro-Kremlin insurgent forces in an insurrection against Kiev.
The move comes after Moscow moved suddenly to seal the narrow channel between the Black and Azov Seas.
Russian special forces seized three Ukrainian naval vessels attempting to pass through the Kerch Strait international waterway on November 25.
It effectively blockades the Ukrainian port city of Mariupol, severely restricting the flow of trade and materials in and out of the east of the embattled country.
Over the weekend, President Poroshenko warned that Russia has deployed a large number of troops along its border with Ukraine and alleged that the Kremlin intends to push inland into Ukraine after blockading its ports on the Sea of Azov.
A spokesman for Vladimir Putin called Poroshenko’s move “absolutely absurd”, accusing him of “provoking tensions” and seeking to posture ahead of presidential elections early next year.
The S-400 ‘Triumph’ surface-to-air missiles and radar Moscow claims capable of tracking and shooting down modern stealth aircraft.
Russian media indicates this will be the fourth such S-400 battalion to be stationed in Crimea.
Moscow also has moved a large number of mobile anti-ship missiles to the annexed Crimean city of Kerch, overlooking the narrow Kerch Strait.
The Russian military admitted its forces in Crimea were ‘conducting drills’ involving Bal and Bastion long-range anti-ship missile systems.
These missiles can effectively seal off the Azov Sea to all but those Moscow let past.
And now, Moscow has ordered a naval military exercise in the narrow waterway closing it to all but Russian Navy traffic.
It is yet to present evidence of claims of dangerous behaviour and as the Sea of Azov is an agreed ‘free navigation’ zone, no permission was needed.
International military analysts see Moscow’s move as securing its hold on Crimea after the completion of a 15km-long bridge connecting mainland Russia to the occupied territory earlier this year.
For the duration of the 30-day martial law, Ukrainian authorities will bar entry to all Russian males aged 16 to 60 in a move the Ukrainian leader said was needed to prevent Russia from further destabilising the country.
Poroshenko said overnight that some reservists will be summoned for training as part of martial law.
He also said that some military units will be redeployed to strengthen the nation’s defences.
The separatist conflict in eastern regions forming Ukraine’s industrial heartland already has taken a toll on the national economy, reducing the cargo flow through the Ukrainian ports of Mariupol and Berdyansk on the Sea of Azov.
The United States and its NATO allies have strongly urged Russia to free the Ukrainian vessels and the crews.
He added that NATO allies have helped modernise Ukraine’s armed forces, have boosted their presence in the Black Sea over the last year, with more ships deployed in the region and more air policing.
Last week’s incident was the first open military confrontation between Russia and Ukraine since 2014, when Moscow annexed the Crimea peninsula.
But it has since been almost openly supporting pro-Kremlin separatists in the east in their conflict with Ukrainian forces.
Russian troops, tanks and equipment have regularly been observed fighting alongside pro-Kremlin insurgents, though Moscow maintains its denials.
