ASSER PRESS and the authors 2018 No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microﬁlming, recording or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher, with the exception of any material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
Heidelberger Platz 3, 14197 Berlin, Germany Foreword The current conflict in Ukraine has had tremendous repercussions both on the individuals living in the affected territory and around the world.
The ‘Maidan’ protests which began in November of 2013 as a response to the decision of Ukraine’s pro-Russian former President Viktor Yanukovych not to sign an association agreement with the European Union set off a chain of events that not only toppled Yanukovych from power, but also provoked a furious Russian response that ultimately led to Crimea’s annexation by the Russian Federation1 and a war in Eastern Ukraine.
Jus ad Bellum, Jus in Bello, Jus post Bellum, represent an impressive attempt to address the legal and practical challenges posed by this difﬁcult state of affairs.
This book nuances the readers’ understanding of the conflict, taking the perspective of those on the receiving end.
Instead of involving authors only from Russia and Ukraine, a choice justiﬁed perhaps by the rawness and ongoing nature of the conflict, this book assembles a wide variety of scholars from around the world to address the complexities of Crimea’s sudden incorporation into the Russian Federation and the conflict in Eastern Ukraine.
It goes beyond complaining about the international illegality of the Russian Federation’s activities to explaining how the Russian Federation has, for the most part, not dismissed international law as irrelevant, but has indeed endeavoured to explain it away or even redeﬁne it.
As one of the editor's notes, this represents a real challenge to both the content and the relevance of international law today.
Henceforth, all matters taking place in or in relation to the territory were subject to Russia’s domestic jurisdiction and governed by Russian administrative bodies including its law enforcement authorities, judicial system and legislature.
After annexing Crimea, Russian authorities expedited the issuance of Russian passports for the residents of the peninsula.
As several authors noted, individuals who refused to take Russian nationality were allegedly subject to discrimination, while those who opposed the annexation, and certain minority groups, were subject to persecution.
The International Criminal Court Prosecutor’s Preliminary Examination 2017 Report contains allegations of disappearances, killings, ill-treatment, forced conscription, deprivation of fair trial rights, transfer of population from the Russian Federation into Crimea, seizure of property and alleged harassment of the Crimean Tatar population.
Although the absorption of Crimea by the Russian Federation was rapid and the numbers of speciﬁc violent crimes are not high, the overall impact of Crimea’s integration into the Russian Federation has been enormous, causing ﬁnancial and psychological harm in addition to the speciﬁc harms detailed above.
In Eastern Ukraine, the struggle between government and anti-government forces has already resulted in more than 10,000 deaths and 25,000 injuries, including thousands of civilians, and the alleged commission of war crimes including illegal detentions, torture and ill-treatment, sexual and gender-based violence, and disappearances.
This conflict continues today and threatens Ukraine as well as its neighbours.
Given the scope and magnitude of this ongoing conflict, the importance of this timely volume cannot be overstated.
The ﬁrst seven chapters discuss issues relating to the jus ad bellum, or the legality and characterisation of the conflict itself.
Both he and Oleksandr Merezhko in Chap. address the thorny question of the conflict’s characterisation as international or non-international.
Foreword vii authors conclude in the light of the facts, treaties and customary law at play that both the conflict in Eastern Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea are international in nature.
They observe that the international community has, nearly unanimously, refused to recognise any new States emanating from Ukraine, noting that only a handful of States have ‘joined’ Russia in either backing the Crimean ‘referendum’ or actively opposing measures supporting Ukraine’s territorial identity.
She concludes that international law’s ‘foremost concern is to reverse the situation of suffering that results in the continuous production of violations States and international organisations are charged with the heavy lifting necessary to achieve these ends by upholding these obligations in their transactions with the occupying state and its subordinate authorities.
Eleven States voted against, ﬁfty-eight abstained and twenty-four were absent.
This thoughtful chapter illuminates the wisdom, as seen in hindsight, of Nottebohm’s distinction between nationality as deﬁned under municipal law and the international validity of a State’s assessment regarding whom it may extend diplomatic protection.
This chapter suggests that the tendency of other States to use a ‘self-defence’ rubric to justify protection of their nationals abroad, such as the Israeli evocation of it in the Entebbe case and the US arguments in favour of the invasion of Grenada, should be treated with the utmost caution, as incidents justiﬁed, if at all, by extreme necessity, as opposed to an inherent rule of customary international law under Article 51 of the UN Charter.
William Burke-White makes a similar point in Crimea and the International Legal Order, arguing In claiming the legality of its actions, but twisting the law in subtle ways, Russia is taking a card straight from America’s playbook.
In Crimea, Russia is, perhaps for the ﬁrst time since the Soviet Union, asserting itself as a renewed hub for a particular interpretation of international law, one that challenges the balance at the heart of the post-Second World-War order and the ability of the United States to lead that order.
Is There a Place for Legal Norms at All?, Gergely Tóth argues that the Russian Federation is using ‘hybrid’ or ‘asymmetric warfare’ to achieve its ends in Ukraine, thereby blurring the 7 In a similar vein, Bill Bowring suggests that the justiﬁcation for annexation of a ‘right to self-determination by the people of Crimea’ is unpersuasive.
In his view, the only ‘people’ potentially having such a right would be the Crimean Tatars, who would potentially have such a right as an indigenous Turkic people.
Unlike the so-called United States ‘war on terror’ in which a small but feisty adversary who does not respect the traditions of the jus in bello is thought to asymmetrically attack a large, otherwise compliant adversary, the use of the term ‘hybrid’ or ‘asymmetric’ warfare in this volume, as also suggested by Olga Butkevych , centres upon the fact that Military aggression is just one element of the Russian hybrid warfare against Ukraine.
According to Toth and Butkevych, hybrid conflicts involve multilayered efforts designed to destabilise a functioning State and polarise its society.
Unlike conventional warfare, the ‘centre of gravity’ in hybrid warfare is a target population.
The adversary tries to influence influential policy-makers and key decision-makers by combining kinetic operations with subversive efforts.
They argue that aggressors will often resort to clandestine actions, to avoid attribution or retribution.
As he notes in Chap., non-destructive cyber-operations, like the attacks on the conﬁdence of the national government, do not involve the use of force, at least according to the Tallinn Manual on the International Law Applicable to Cyber Warfare, which suggests that cyber-operations involve the use of force only when their ‘scale and effects are comparable to a non-cyber operation rising to the level of a use of force’.10 This does not mean, however, that cyber-operations which do not include the use of force are consistent with international law.
They may be prohibited by rules such as the principle of non-intervention, which forms part of the principle of the sovereign equality of States and is embodied in Article 2 of the UN Charter.
The principle of non-intervention is also part of customary international law and according to the Nicaragua case ‘forbids all states or groups of states to intervene directly or indirectly in the internal or external affairs of other states’.11 He distinguishes the attacks in Ukraine as involving largely ‘political and ideological effect’, from those carried out presumably by the Russian Federation in Georgia, which were more closely allied, in his view, with military operations and therefore more clearly fell within the ambit of the laws of war.
In Chap., Foreign Fighters in the Framework of International Armed Conflict between Russia and Ukraine, Anastasia Frolova considers whether international humanitarian lawfully addresses the complexities presented by the high level of foreign nationals’ involvement in the ongoing conflict on Ukrainian territory.
She points out, for example, that Belarus nationals—who formed part of the so-called Pahonia unit ﬁghting on behalf of Ukraine—might not have protected status under the Third or Fourth Geneva Convention if captured by Russia if it can be argued that Russia usually exercises diplomatic protection over them.
The plight of children afflicted by the conflict in Ukraine is taken in Chap., Children and the Armed Conflict in Eastern Ukraine, penned by Natalia Krestovska.
She notes the toll of the war on children, many of whom have been killed or wounded, and thousands more have been internally displaced.
Children’s living standards, educational attainment, health and security have been negatively affected by the conflict in violation of international humanitarian law and human rights law.
In Chap., on the International Legal Dimensions of the Russian Occupation of Crimea, Evhen Tsybulenko and Bogdan Kelichavyi develop further the complications of Russia’s occupation in terms of the legal regimes applicable to the annexed territory and the lives of the inhabitants there.
As Butkevych’s earlier chapter notes, the legal relationship between Russia and Ukraine and between individuals living in Crimea and both governments has been upended by the war.
Tsybulenko and Kelichavyi note that this has imposed real challenges to individuals currently living in Crimea as well as those displaced, who may have lost their passports, property rights, rights to social services and even political freedoms.
Thus, the protection of human rights for all the individuals living in Ukraine has been compromised.
A particular worry evoked by this chapter, as well as Bowring’s earlier essay on the fate of the Crimean Tatars , is that the Russian invasion has put the Tatars of Crimea again ‘on the brink of extinction’, evoking the possibility that violation of the Genocide Convention may be in play.
Ukraine, as they note, has turned to international legal institutions to make its case, submitting two declarations to the International Criminal Court relating to the conflict; applying to the European Court of Human Foreword xi Rights for relief; initiating proceedings against Russia under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea; and ﬁling a claim against the Russian Federation with the International Court of Justice.
While it may or may not be correct, as the authors’ claim, that the ‘possible destructive effects’ of this historical revisionism are more harmful than those which took place in other twentieth-century European conflicts, it is likely that they helped to solidify the aggression that did take place much more quickly than in the past.
As he notes, the Genocide Convention protects ‘national’ and ‘ethnic’ groups, and although language can be an indicator of nationality or ethnicity, ‘Russian language speakers’ as such are not a group protected under the Convention.
This permits Russia to promote and even insist upon the use of the Russian language in countries, such as Kazakhstan, which are challenging it and, combined with the extraterritorial application of Russian criminal law to this alleged ‘genocide’ in Ukraine, permits Russia to engage in a form of legal warfare that accompanies the acts of physical violence and territorial conquest discussed in other chapters.
In Chap., Gerhard Kemp and Igor Lyubashenko address the conflict in the Donbas region of Ukraine in terms of International, regional and comparative perspectives of the jus post bellum options.
Their project is to canvas the broad ﬁelds of ‘post-conflict justice and transitional justice’, in considering responses to the conflict.
They suggest that criminal remedies should be ‘exceptional’ rather than 12 Subsequent to the writing of this chapter, the Court found that Russia must refrain from imposing limitations on the ability of the Crimean Tatar community to conserve its representative institutions, including the Mejlis, and ensure the availability of education in the Ukrainian language.
They worry that the hybrid nature of the conflict may be ‘a signiﬁcant constraint on the goal of peace’ because it ‘effectively conceals the international dimension of the conflict’ and poses an obstacle to truth.
The focus on truth as one of the primary casualties of the conflict is reinforced by the ﬁnal chapter of this volume, Post-Conflict Reconstruction of Trust in the Media, written by Katrin Merike Nyman-Metcalf, who notes that creating trust in media, in a time of ‘post-truth’ and ‘fake news’ is particularly challenging.
She catalogues the struggles Ukraine is facing with propaganda, intimidation of journalists, lack of access to information and other difﬁculties but concludes that the best response is to vigorously protect freedom of information.
Three chapters focus on the possibility of an International Criminal Court intervention into the situation in Ukraine.
Beatrice Onica Jarka takes up the ICC’s preliminary examination of the situation, noting the two Article 12 declarations ﬁled by Ukraine regarding alleged crimes committed in its territory from 21 November 2013 to 22 February 2014 in the ﬁrst instance and from 20 February 2014 onwards in the second instance.
Her analysis covers the Preliminary Examination Reports from 2014, 2015 and 2016.
While she is sympathetic to the ICC’s possible intervention, she suggests that by ﬁling Article 12 declarations rather than ratifying the Statute as a whole, Ukraine may have hurt its cause and may have provoked the Russian Federation into formally withdrawing its signature from the Rome Statute.
What Should the ICC Focus On?, adds to Jarka’s chapter by examining the possible violations of the laws of war that may have been—and continue to be —committed—as a result of the conflict.
In Chap., Ioannis Tzivaras complements Atadjanov by focusing on the possible application of the Rome Statute to crimes involving sexual violence in Ukraine.
His chapter discusses the possibility not only of war crimes charges but the possibility of crimes against humanity as well.
This book reveals a complex and sad struggle for control of Eastern Ukraine and Crimea, pitting Ukraine’s government on the one hand and the Russian Federation and its allies and surrogates on the other.
Foreword xiii capturing the conflict at a particular point in time and leaving out some of the historical and geopolitical context—it is an extraordinarily useful collection of essays on how international law and international legal institutions interact with the use of force.
In making its case for the annexation of Crimea and the conflict in Eastern Ukraine, the Russian Federation used international law, twisting it to its advantage and often bending the facts to ﬁt the law.
The ability of international law, international legal institutions and effective diplomacy to resolve the crisis in Ukraine will be a test of its efﬁcacy and resiliency.
Both States have tried to use the media to sway public opinion to them; Russia may have prevailed inside the Russian Federation, but it is clear that Ukraine has the sympathies of most of the rest of the world, at least for the time being.
The conflict is currently considered a stalemate, and although ﬁghting continues, sanctions on Russia, such as its removal from the G8 in 2014, and a tentative rapprochement of Ukraine with NATO have helped strengthen Ukraine’s position.
The election of United States President Donald Trump, with his pro-Putin leanings, gave rise to speculation that the USA might recognise the annexation of Crimea by Russia, but thus far that has not happened.
This book thus appears at a critical time in which the legal consequences of Russian activities are under scrutiny by courts and international organisations around the world, and these activities combined with effective international diplomacy might help to thaw this otherwise ‘frozen’ conflict and redress some of its more pernicious effects.
The authors, and the two co-editors, are to be commended for this important contribution.
Louis Preface The effects of Crimea’s occupation and illegal annexation by the Russian Federation since early 2014, and of the ensuing Russian aggression in Eastern Ukraine, extend far beyond Ukraine’s borders.
Individuals’ daily lives are affected by broken friendships, and new friendships are made on the basis of respective afﬁliations.
On the international plane, most States and international organisations—inter alia, the UN, PACE, OSCE—aligned themselves with Ukraine, and sanctions against the Russian Federation were introduced, notably, by the USA, the European Union, Japan and some other States.
In response, the Russian Federation introduced so-called countersanctions against States, which had introduced the ‘original’ sanctions against it,15 empowered its Constitutional Court, in violation of the European Convention on Human Rights, to authorise (or decline authorising) the enforcement of the European Court of Human Rights’ decisions on its territory,16 and put in question the validity of international law as such, as a threat to its national sovereignty.
Some commentators went even further and asserted that, at this time, ‘international law was absolutely not there only the law of the strong work’,18 whereas others, including a co-editor of the present volume, by contrast, regarded the armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine as a challenge to international law, which could make this law ever stronger.
It is also understood that all contributing authors were guided by academic freedom, and hence the co-editors do not necessarily share the views expressed in individual chapters.
Miras Daulenov’s inaugurating chapter recalls Russia’s fundamental obligation under applicable international law not to have used force against Ukraine.
Bill Bowring’s and Valentina Azarova’s chapters focus on aspects of Russia’s use of force in Crimea.
In the next chapter, Sabine Hassler and Noëlle Quénivet test the validity of Russia’s claim to use force against Ukraine to protect ‘nationals’ abroad.
Gerhard Kemp and Igor Lyubashenko consider possible models of post-conflict justice, which could be used in Ukraine.
Beatrice Onica Jarka and Rustam Atadjanov study, in their respective chapters, the International Criminal Court’s jurisdiction with respect to the core crimes under international law (with a focus on war crimes) committed during the armed conflict in Ukraine.
Ioannis Tzivaras identiﬁed sexual violence in the conflict as a challenge to international Preface xvii criminal justice.
Finally, Katrin Merike Nyman-Metcalf’s chapter considers the post-conflict reconstruction of trust in the media.
The Appendix contains links to the most signiﬁcant resolutions adopted by international organisations and institutions and dealing with various aspects of the armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine, as well as Sergey Sayapin’s amicus memorandum in defence of Nadiya Savchenko.
The co-editors take this occasion to thank all contributors wholeheartedly for their excellent work.
English language editors at Academic Proofreading Services Ltd. trading as www.englishproofread.com were very helpful in proofreading selected chapters.
Asser Press for their excellent support throughout the publication process.
This volume is dedicated to the memory of Professor Oleksandr Zadorozhny, former President of the Ukrainian Association of International Law.
Professor Zadorozhny taught and inspired many scholars and practitioners of international law in Ukraine and abroad, including both co-editors of this volume and several contributing authors.
Professor Zadorozhny was invited, and agreed, to contribute a chapter to this book but passed away before this book was completed.
He will remain in our memory as a patriot of sovereign Ukraine and a brilliant scholar and mentor.
Formerly a Legal Adviser at the Regional Delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross in Central Asia dealing with international humanitarian law and public international law issues.
She has worked with and advised civil society working on Palestine for close to a decade and published extensively on international law issues including occupation and third-state responsibility with a focus on the context.
As a practising barrister since 1974, he has represented applicants before the European Court of Human Rights in many cases since 1992, especially against Turkey and Russia.
In 1999, she earned an LLM degree in international law from the same Institute.
He is a critical reviewer of the Wrocław Review of Law, Administration and Economics, Poland, and of the Law and State Journal, Kazakhstan.
His research interests include Public International Law, International Humanitarian Law, European Union Law, European Comparative Law, Constitutional Law, Contract Law, Legal Philosophy and Foreign Policy.
He is the recipient of many awards to include receiving the Prime Minister’s Scholarship Grant in 2014, being recognised as one of the four best freshmen students at Tallinn Law School in 2015, and receiving the Performance-based Scholarship in 2015 and 2017.
Upon his return to TUT in 2016, he was one of three pleaders from the Tallinn Law School team that won the All-European International Humanitarian and Refugee Law Moot Court Competition 2016 in Ljubljana, Slovenia.
In the 2017–2018, he will be pursuing postgraduate studies and research in his ﬁeld of interests.
Between 2010 and 2016, he held a position of editor-in-chief of an academic journal Acta Iuridica Olomucensia.
Nowadays, he is responsible as an editor-in-charge for another academic journal, International and Comparative Law Review.
In his research, he focuses on the relations and interactions between EU law and national law, the theoretical impacts of the membership in the EU on the state sovereignty, the legitimacy and rule of law within the EU, in particular system of protection of fundamental rights at supranational level.
Sabine Hassler in European Comparative Law, LLM in International Law, Ph.D.) is a Senior Lecturer in Law at the Department of Law, UWE Bristol.
He is an Advocate of the High Court of South Africa and member of the board of directors, Institute for Justice and Reconciliation, Cape Town.
His academic interests are various aspects of transition to democracy in post-communist states, in particular Poland and Ukraine.
Previously, he worked as an analyst at the Polish Institute of International Affairs, focusing on politics and international relations in Eastern Europe.
She is active as an international consultant primarily in the area of information and communication technology law including freedom of expression, as well as e-governance.
Her research interests include how law and technology meet with special emphasis on IT and communications.
She has published several articles in international humanitarian law and international criminal law, authored Sexual Offences in Armed Conflict in International Law and co-edited two books, one on the relationship between international humanitarian law and human rights law and another on international law in armed conflict.
In 2000–2014, he held a number of posts at the Regional Delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross in Central Asia.
His areas of expertise include international conflict and security law, international human rights and humanitarian law, and international criminal law.
Historical Development, Comparative Analysis and Present State and over 50 academic and publicist articles, chapters and essays.
He is the Founding Editor-in-Chief of the Central Asian Yearbook of International and Comparative Law.
He previously worked as a Legal Advisor at the Regional Delegation for Central Europe of the International Committee of the Red Cross and currently serves at Hungarian Ministry of Defence’s Department for Coordination of Public Relations.
She currently teaches the Theory of Politics , Corporate Social Responsibility, Religious Factor in International Relations and Social Policy.
He is also an Adjunct Professor and Senior Visiting Mentor at the Joint Command and General Staff Course at Baltic Defence College.
He is the head of the group of authors of several textbooks in the ﬁeld of public international law.
