KYIV, Ukraine—A top Chinese official visited Kyiv this week to announce a host of new infrastructure projects and investments in Ukraine, underscoring a burgeoning economic relationship between the two countries that could nudge Kyiv away from the West—a scenario that would ultimately benefit Moscow, some say.
Ukraine is at the nexus of a spider’s web of geopolitical interests, including those of Russia, the United States, the European Union—and now China.
For its part, Beijing has ramped up its investments in Ukraine to prepare Ukraine’s transportation infrastructure for its role as a portal into Europe for China’s proposed One Belt, One Road overland trade route across Asia.
Also known as the “New Silk Road,” the One Belt, One Road initiative is Chinese President Xi Jinping’s foreign policy mantelpiece.
Accordingly, Beijing wants Ukraine to become a stable, reliable partner through which Chinese goods can flow into Europe.
To that end, during his visit to Kyiv, Kai announced plans for $7 billion in joint projects between China and Ukraine.
In turn, Groysman announced that 2019 would be the “year of China” in Ukraine.
Meanwhile, Ukraine and Russia have been in a de facto state of war for almost four years, dating back to Russia’s March 2014 invasion and seizure of Crimea.
The war is now a low-intensity, static, trench warfare conflict in which, on average, one Ukrainian soldier dies every three days.
At first take, Russia and China appear to have conflicting interests in Ukraine.
Not at all,” Fatima-Zohra Er-Rafia, a corporate consultant and researcher who specializes in Asia, told The Daily Signal.
One line of thinking is that China would ultimately prefer Ukraine to be in Russia’s orbit rather than the West’s.
And the level of instability in Ukraine due to Russian aggression is not likely to rattle Chinese investors, who are well acquainted with doing business in risky markets.
Russian influence in Ukraine evaporated after the 2014 Maidan revolution overthrew Ukraine’s then-President Viktor Yanukovych—a Kremlin ally who dutifully fled to exile in Russia after his ouster.
Russia’s subsequent hybrid war gambit to obstruct Ukraine’s turn to the West has backfired.
Anti-Russian sentiments have skyrocketed within Ukrainian society and its politics.
Rolls of toilet paper adorned with the likeness of Russian President Vladimir Putin have been a staple among street merchants in Kyiv since 2014.
One telling signal of the Russo-Ukrainian split has been the renaissance of Ukraine’s military, which was a broken force prior to 2014.
To counter Russia, Ukraine has since rebuilt its armed forces into Europe’s second-biggest in terms of active-duty ranks , singling out Russia as the “aggressor nation” in the process.
The end goal of Ukraine’s military rebuild is to meet NATO interoperability standards by the year 2020.
On the economic front, Ukraine has undergone a purge of all things Russian since the 2014 revolution.
Although, the Kyiv Post reported in March that Russia remains Ukraine’s top export destination and biggest foreign investor.
Of note, Ukraine has completely weaned itself off of Russian natural gas, as well as Russian-made parts for its military equipment—no small feats for the post-Soviet country.
Moscow may not be able to re-establish its direct influence over Ukraine in the current political climate.
So, from the Russian perspective, a Ukraine economically beholden to China might be the next best option to forestall Ukraine’s pro-Western transformation.
The post-revolution economic divorce between Russia and Ukraine has left Ukraine looking for new markets in which to sell its goods, as well as new foreign investors to jump-start its economy.
In both respects, China has proven to be a lucrative alternative to Russia.
Although, swapping China for Russia may not be the economic emancipation Ukraine is looking for.
Over the first nine months of 2017, trade between Ukraine and China increased by 14. percent—reaching about $5. billion.
Ukraine has taken over from the United States as China’s top supplier of corn.
Five years ago, the United States supplied about 97 percent of corn imported by China.
China is now the top purchaser of military equipment from Ukraine, totaling $90 million in sales in 2016.
China has already had a hand in rebuilding Ukraine’s transportation infrastructure, underscoring the importance of Ukraine to the One Belt, One Road initiative.
Kyiv has awarded multiple contracts worth tens of millions of euros for Chinese companies to upgrade Ukrainian highways.
Beyond roadwork, Beijing has plans for a $400 million passenger railway connecting Kyiv Boryspil International Airport and Kyiv.
And a Chinese company has been dredging Ukraine’s Yuzhny port, the country’s busiest.
Ivan Miroshnichenko, a Ukrainian member of parliament, told Ukrainian media that China could invest $8 to $12 billion in Ukraine over the next five years.
Lingering corruption and Russia’s war in the east have dampened Western investment in Ukraine.
Kai’s visit to Kyiv came as both the EU and the United States unleashed criticism on Ukraine’s government for its faltering anti-corruption reforms.
Kyiv’s failure to fulfill reform requirements spurred the move, the EU said.
On Dec., the State Department issued a blunt statement urging Ukrainian lawmakers to pick up the pace of anti-corruption efforts.
With both the EU and the United States apparently losing patience with Kyiv, China could have an opening to quietly gain leverage through economic inducements that are not tied to any to-do list of reforms.
Russia and China are in the midst of a diplomatic rapprochement, founded, in principle, on a common aversion to the U.S.-led, post-war world order.
Putin and Xi outlined their common worldview in a July joint statement.
The two countries, therefore, are inclined to see eye to eye in areas of overlapping interests, such as their respective goals in Ukraine, for the sake of maintaining good relations in pursuit of a common cause.
China may want to set a historical precedent in Ukraine by nudging the country back into Russia’s orbit, as Cheng suggested.
Although, Beijing may not ultimately see Ukraine’s fate as an either-or choice between Russia and the West, as Moscow does.
Kai’s visit to Kyiv this week underscored a broader Chinese effort to increase its sway over Central and Eastern Europe.
A gambit, some say, that should raise United States officials’ eyebrows, especially in light of Russia’s continuing hybrid aggression in that same region.
China has positioned itself as a regional power broker in Central and Eastern Europe.
Across the region, China has been laying the groundwork for its One Belt, One Road Initiative through a laundry list of various agreements and initiatives.
Comprising 11 EU member states and five Balkan countries, the Chinese brainchild was launched with the goal of “intensifying and expanding cooperation” among countries in the transportation corridor of China’s New Silk Road project.
In 2016, China and a handful of Central and Eastern European countries signed the Riga Declaration, reaffirming their support for the Chinese plan.
One outcome of the 16+1 format has been the Three Seas Initiative, a North-South trade corridor among the EU member states of Central and Eastern Europe, which was first proposed by Premier Li Keqiang during the China-CEEC Summit in 2015.
Beijing claims the trade corridor will “contribute to greater synergy” between the transportation infrastructures of Central and Eastern European countries and its One Belt, One Road initiative.
China’s 16+1 format highlights another collision of Russian and Chinese interests.
With so many countries’ interests converging in Central and Eastern Europe—including America’s—it could spark something analogous to a geopolitical bidding war for influence.
