This comes after Kiev left Crimea totally in the dark a few months ago – and this was no story for the Western media.
When one looks at the Western interpretation of news from Ukraine and Crimea, the impression is that journalists in modern Germany have an even more crooked psyche and conscience than journalists in the Hitler-dominated Nazi Third Reich.
ORDLO is the abbreviated name which the Ukrainian “revolutionary” authorities gave to those areas in Donetsk region which did not recognize the post-Maidan “revolutionary” government of Ukraine and managed to fend off the Ukrainian army’s punitive onslaught during the summer war in 2014.
In the neighboring Lugansk People’e Republic, where 1. million people live, Ukraine cut all energy supplies back in April.
Now all the electricity that Donetsk and Lugansk consume is either produced by themselves or supplied from neighboring Russia – much to the chagrin of the German chancellor Merkel and similar European humanists from France, the UK and Poland, who set themselves the aim of reducing Russia’s involvement in these areas to zero.
The story with the total cut of Ukrainian energy supplies to Donetsk, however, did not interest the EU countries’ media in the least.
What kept them busy was the recent scandal with Siemens infuriated as they were with Russia’s “abuse” of its confidence.
Siemens even offered to “buy back” from Russia the gas turbines produced with the use of Siemens’ technologies on Russian territory and brought for installation in Crimea.
These turbines may help to provide warmth and light to 2 million of Crimeans, so that they don’t share the gloomy fate of the people of Donbass.
Indeed, Siemens’ turbines in Crimea – this is a total breach of the great world order which the EU and the United States have been building during all of those years since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
So, no wonder the German authorities issued a tough statement about Russia’s “breach of confidence,” generously allowing the insulted and sobbing Siemens to go off the hook without fines – for now.
There was, of course, no German protest against Ukraine’s cutting electric supplies to its own citizens or to Crimea.
Merkel and other humanists from the EU are NEVER concerned by the continued water and food blockade of Donetsk and Lugansk from the Ukrainian side, which has been continuous since 2014.
Almost no one in the Western press was concerned when the so called “Ukrainian nationalist activists” a few months ago plunged Crimea into darkness by blowing up the energy lines near the Crimean border.
These lines for decades have been allowing Ukraine’s electricity to flow to Crimea.
Putin’s horrible Russia signed a contract on energy supplies to Crimea with Poroshenko’s government in 2014-2015, but Poroshenko still allowed the electric lines to be blown up.
No one in the Western publications was then concerned about young women in Crimea giving births in maternity wards in complete darkness and without minimal medical aid.
No one in Germany, supposedly full of regret about the World War II, asked questions about the transportation in Crimea, which came to its first full stop since 1943 because of the German-supported Ukrainian and Tatar nationalists.
The Fuhrer dreamed of that “new consciousness” under which only the “right” suffering will be pitied and alleviated – that is, the suffering of Nazi Germans and their allies among Ukrainian and Tatar anti-Russian nationalists.
Now show me ONE difference between the attitudes to Donbass and Crimea from the German press of 1941-1945 and of 2014-2017. wherever there’s a few shekels to be made, or the pretense of solidarity with the united snakes, Britain will always be there, regardless of right or wrong. and Geoffrey R Pyatt helped organise it, along with Insane McCain and Nudellmann.
