I have made some progress in delving into the rich compost of back stories which illuminate the territory which talmudic kabbalists try so hard to keep under wraps.
A critical analysis of the converging American/Russian loss of sovereignty to the forces of Lubavitcher darkness is forthcoming.
On the same day this slip of the tongue was uttered, on the Chabadnik Internet site run by the Or Avner educational network, which is funded by Israeli billionaire Lev Leviev, a petition was published calling for the immediate removal of Vadim Rabinovich, the president of the All-Ukrainian Jewish Congress.
Rabinovich, who defines himself as a fervent Zionist, is considered a long-standing personal friend of Yuschenko.
He says he has spoken to the rabbis who signed the petition and most of them said their names had been added without their knowledge or agreement.
The petition was signed by 32 Chabad rabbis in Ukraine whose congregations are members of the Federation of Jewish Communities of the CIS, which is considered the Jewish organization closest to Putin.
Hence there is the suspicion that the initiators of the petition were harnessed to help Putin in his fight against the ""Zionists"" who are among those close to Yuschenko.
The Federation of Jewish Communities makes a point of distancing the Jews from politics.
In the case of Rabinovich, there is a group of rabbis who wanted to raise an outcry against the attempt to involve the Jewish community in the support of one of the candidates in the elections.
Vladimir Guzinsky, a media tycoon and hero of the age of privatization during Boris Yeltsin's presidency, was the dominant figure in the Russian Jewish Congress.
The conflicts between Guzinsky and Putin severely damaged the strength and prestige of the congress.
Its budget, which at its peak was $10 million a year, has plummeted in recent years to less than $1 million annually.
For the sake of comparison, the budget of the Federation of Communities was $70 million last year, $40 million of which was in Russia alone.
The joint communal activity of Lazar and Leviev, who is the president of the Federation of Jewish Communities, began at the end of the 1980s.
The federation has been impressively successful in recent years, but at the same time there has been increasing criticism of its policy.
This year there is a conflict between the federation and the Liaison Bureau Nativ over the return to Russia of Jews who immigrated to Israel.
The Nativ people claim the federation is intentionally exaggerating the phenomenon to encourage more Jews to return to Russia.
According to Nativ, the number of holders of Israeli passports who are currently in Russia is no more than 13,000.
Other critics of Lazar say he has refrained from expressing criticism of the impotence of the authorities in dealing with the increasing anti-Semitism in the country and that he intentionally makes the situation of the Jews in Russia sound better than it really is in order to deter them from immigrating to Israel.
They say that this is not a blessing for Ariel Sharon, because the million Jews we know here don't want to immigrate to Israel.
In 1992, Leviev and Lazar tried to get a permit to open an Or Avner school in St.
Petersburg and they needed an authorization from one of the deputy mayors.
The second deputy, who provided the authorization with no delays, was Vladimir Putin.
When Lazar was chosen as chief rabbi of Russia in June 2000, Putin was quick to recognize him.
Lazar was chosen by the communities that are members of the organization he heads.
Putin ignored other organizations in the country, which refused to accept the federation's choice.
Since then the federation has made use of Putin's services quite a few times in order to obtain ownership of properties throughout Russia.
With the president's help, the federation obtained ownership of old synagogues that had been diverted to other uses and of buildings where schools and community institutions will be located.
In the federation they like to tell of hostile or corrupt local politicians who gave its representatives the runaround but changed their approach after a phone call from the ""friend"" in the Kremlin.
Putin's support of the federation is worth a lot more than a few hundred pieces of real estate.
In September 2000, Putin participated in a ceremony for the dedication of a Jewish community center in the Marina Rusha neighborhood of Moscow.
The luxurious, modern seven-story building has become the liveliest Jewish center east of Israel.
In recent years it was decided to dedicate a corner of the first floor to plaques of recognition for the largest donors.
After some thought, it was decided that the size of the plaque would be directly proportional to the size of the donation.
However, the most famous man of all, who until recently topped the list, is not there.
Mikhail Khodorovsky hasn't contributed,"" says the guide, who is from Chabad.
However, sources close to Chabad admit in private conversations that the federation repays Putin with its willingness to provide a sort of kashrut certification.
Global Security has hypothesized that Donald Trump may be a Manchurian Candidate planted by the Russian mafia in collusion with the Russian government.
Using a network of hackers and Internet trolls controlled by the Russian mob, the Russian government was able to influence the 2016 United States Presidential election in favor of Trump.
The basis of Trump’s cooperation in the plot has been alluded to in 35-page report, known as the Trump Dossier, first reported by CNN and then published by BuzzFeed on January 11, 2017, which alleges that Russia has gathered damaging intelligence on Trump which it is using to blackmail Trump.
In fact, a series of studies by the Financial Times has shown how after he suffered a string of six successive bankruptcies, Trump was bailed out by Russian crime lords.
Lubavitch messianism involves the belief in the coming of the Messiah and a goal of raising awareness that his arrival is imminent.
In addition, the term also refers more specifically to the hope that Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson , known to many as the Rebbe, could himself be the Messiah.
Schneerson was a Russian Empire-born American Orthodox Jewish rabbi, and the last Lubavitcher Rebbe, and considered one of the most influential Jewish leaders of the 20th century.
Schneerson transformed the Chabad-Lubavitch movement, that almost came to an end with the Holocaust, into one of the most influential movements in world Jewry, with an international network of thousands of educational and social centers, known as Chabad Houses.
Chabad’s goal, explains Sue Fishkoff, author of The Rebbe’s Army, is to reach every Jew in the world.
Chabab seeks out the support of the rich, famous and powerful, including celebrities like Bob Dylon, Jon Voigt, Whoppi Goldberg and Al Gore.
The late Rebbe’s eminence as a moral leader for our country was recognized by every president since Richard Nixon.
For over two decades, the Rabbi's movement now has some 2000 institutions; educational, social, medical, all across the globe.
We recognize the profound role that Rabbi Schneerson had in the expansion of those institutions.
Schneerson took great interest in the affairs of the state of Israel, where he was a major political force, both in the Knesset and among the electorate.
Although he never visited Israel, many of Israel's top leadership made it a point to visit him.
Prime Minister Menachem Begin who came to visit him before going to Washington to meet President Carter.
Shimon Peres and Benjamin Netanyahu also visited and sought Schneersons advice.
Netanyahu later retold this episode in a speech at the General Assembly, on September 23, 2011.
By the late 1990s the actual chaos that resulted from Yeltsin’s warped policies had laid the foundations for a strong counterrevolution, including the rise of ex-KGB officer Putin and a massive outpouring of oligarchic flight capital that has continued virtually up to the present.
But for many banks, private bankers, hedge funds, law firms, and accounting firms, for leading oil companies like ExxonMobil and BP, as well as for needy borrowers like the Trump Organization, the opportunity to feed on post-Soviet spoils was a godsend.
Putin’s Kremlin has used organized crime to carry out arms smuggling, assassinations, raising funds for black ops, or fomenting subversion in the former Soviet regions.
Moscow relied heavily on local organized crime structures in its support for separatist movements in Transdniester, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, Crimea, and the Donbas.
Grinda said the mafia now exercised tremendous control over sectors of the global economy.
Gonzalez claimed the KGB and its SVR successor had deliberately created the Liberal Democratic party of Russia , which worked hand in hand with mafia groups.
Grinda said he agreed with claims made by former FSB officer Alexander Litvinenko.
Organized crime in Russia uses legal businesses as fronts for illegal activities and for setting up illegal product lines.
The expansion of organized crime in Moscow, for example, occurred through buying real estate, and through gaining controlling shares of banks and other enterprises.
Shortly after his rise to power, Putin exploited his influence over the Russian legislature to create an oil and gas monopoly under Gazprom, Russia’s largest company, as a state-controlled operation that has exclusive rights to export natural gas from Russia.
Terror from Within and Lubyanka Criminal Group, in which he accused the Russian secret services of staging the Russian apartment bombings and other terrorism acts in an effort to bring Putin to power.
November 23, 2006, Litvinenko died from what was established as a case of poisoning by radioactive polonium-210.
Shortly before his death, former FSB officer Alexander Litvinenko claimed that Simeon Mogilevich, believed to be the “boss of bosses” of most Russian Mafia syndicates in the world, has allegedly had a “good relationship” with Vladimir Putin since the 1990s, and has contacts with al Qaeda to whom he sells weapons.
In the year he was murdered, Litvinenko was investigating suspicions that Roman Abramovich was involved in money-laundering and illegal land purchases.
In early 1990, Mogilevich and his top associates settled in Israel, where they received Israeli citizenship.
Mogilevich “succeeded in building a bridgehead in Israel” and “developing significant and influential ties,” according to an Israeli intelligence report.
In Europe and Russia, the “corruption of police and public officials has been part of the Semion Mogilevich Organization’s modus operandi,” says a classified FBI document.
In 1998, the German national television network ZDF reported that the BND had entered into a secret contract with Mogilevich to provide information on the Russian mob.
His reported ties to the BND and also ex­police officers in Hungary keep him informed of police efforts to penetrate his organization.
Between 1993 and 1998, Mogilevich caught the FBI’s attention when he allegedly participated in a $150 million scheme to defraud thousands of investors in a Canadian company, YBM Magnex, based just outside Philadelphia, which supposedly made magnets.
Russian mafia is suspected of having a sizable investment in General Motors via its interest in Canadian auto parts maker Magna International.
Among the 48 Jews who made the list, 42 are Ashkenazi and together have a net worth of $122. billion, even though they comprise only 0.11% of the population.
The wealthiest Ashkenazi is Mikhail Fridman, who has a net worth is $17. billion and is Russa’s second richest man.
Under Putin, the Hasidic Federation of Jewish Communities of Russia became increasingly influential within the Jewish community of Russia, partly due to the influence and support of businessmen close to Putin, notably Lev Leviev and Roman Abramovich.
Known as the “King of Diamonds,” Leviev has come under scrutiny by the United States government and international media for, among other things, both his partnership with a Chinese business group believed to have funded North Korea and his possible role in developing West Bank settlements.
Chris Hutchins, a biographer of Putin, describes the relationship between Putin and Abramovich as like that between a father and a favorite son.
Abramovich was the first person to originally recommend to Yeltsin that Putin be his successor.
Abramovich is the primary owner of the private investment company, Millhouse LLC and is best known outside Russia as the owner of Chelsea Football Club, a Premier League football club.
In 1996, acquired the oil company Sibneft, for about $US100 million, and sold it to Gazprom for $US13 billion a decade later.
His $5.6-billion legal dispute with a former business partner, Boris Berezovsky, nicknamed the “Godfather of the Kremlin,” uncovered evidence involving illicit activity including protection rackets, contract killings, arms dealings.
Abramovich is a chairman of the Federation of Jewish Communities of Russia , and donates money to the Chabad movement.
In 1987 Donald Trump purchased his first casino interests when he acquired 93% of the shares in Resorts International, which evolved from a CIA money-laundering front company set up by CIA chief Allen Dulles in the 1950’s.
Resorts International has a sordid history which began in the early 1950’s when it evolved from a CIA and Mossad front company which had been established for the purpose of money laundering the profits from drug trafficking, gambling, and other illegal activities.
The appropriation by the mafia of casinos like those operated by Resorts International was the result of a decision by the Meyer Lansky Syndicate to expand operations outside Las Vegas.
On October 30, 1978, The Spotlight newspaper reported that the principle investors of Resorts International were Meyer Lansky, Tibor Rosenbaum, William Mellon Hitchcock, David Rockefeller, and one Baron Edmond de Rothschild.
Rothschild & Sons, Wilber Ross, who Trump would later appoint to Secretary of Commerce.
Ross, who is known as the “King of Bankruptcy,” specializes in leveraged buyouts and distressed businesses.
Rothschild & Sons, where he ran the bankruptcy-restructuring advisory practice.
Along with Carl Icahn, Ross convinced bondholders to strike a deal with Trump that allowed Trump to keep control of the casinos.
Ross has had direct financial ties to several leading oligarchs from Russia and the Former Soviet Union.
As of February 2017, Forbes magazine lists Ross as one of the world’s billionaires, with a net worth of $2. billion.
Ross has been Vice Chairman and a major investor since 2014 in the Bank of Cyprus, the largest bank in Cyprus, one of the key offshore havens for illicit Russian finance.
Since the 1990s, Cyprus has served as one the top three offshore destinations for Russian and former Soviet Union flight capital, most of it motivated by tax dodging, kleptocracy, and money laundering.
The Trio recently attracted the attention of many investigators and news agencies, including the September 11 Commission Report, the Guardian, Forbes, and the Wall Street Journal.
The litany of the Trio’s alleged activities include resource grabbing, money laundering, bribery, and racketeering.
In 2010, Arif and other members of Bayrock’s Eurasian Trio were arrested together in Turkey during a police raid on a suspected prostitution ring, according to the Israeli daily Yediot Ahronot.
At the time, Turkish investigators reportedly asserted that Arif might be the head of a criminal organization that was trafficking in Russian and Ukrainian escorts, allegedly including some as young as 13.
As Bayrock’s COO and managing director, Tevfik Arif hired Felix Sater, the son of a reputed Jewish-Russian mobster.
How the Russian Mob Has Invaded America that the “Russian” mafia was in fact more Jewish than Russian.
Sater had already served time prison for stabbing a man in the face with the stem of a margarita glass.
Sater pled guilty in 1998 to one count of racketeering for his role in a $40 million stock fraud scheme involving the Genovese and Bonanno crime families.
According to a certified United States Supreme Court petition, Sater’s FBI handler stated that Sater’s father was a boss for the crime syndicate of Simeon Mogilevich.
Their best-known collaboration was Trump SoHo, which was featured in Trump’s television show The Apprentice.
Most of the Bayrock-Trump projects either never materialized or were complete failures.
SoHo was foreclosed by creditors and resold in 2014 after more than $3 million of customer down payments had to be refunded.
Bayrock’s Trump International Hotel & Tower in Fort Lauderdale was foreclosed and resold in 2012, while at least three other Trump-branded properties in the United States, in addition to many other concept projects pursued by Bayrock, from Istanbul and Kiev to Moscow and Warsaw, never happened.
Trump and Bayrock partnered with the Sapir Organization, led by the now-deceased Tamir Sapir and his son Alex, in the development of Trump SoHo.
During the Cold War, Tamir Sapir, who was born to a Jewish family Tbilisi, Georgia, emigrated to the United States where he sold electronics to KGB agents from a storefront in Manhattan.
Sapir was ranked on Forbes Magazine’s list of billionaires and was a donor to Chabad Lubavitch.
Alex Sapir’s business partner Rotem Rosen is a former lieutenant of Lev Leviev.
All the while, Sater also served as a government informant on the mob and mysterious matters of national security.
In his own words, Sater explained that his effort aimed of achieving Tikkun Olam.
Trump Tower has received press attention for including among its many residents tax-dodgers, bribers, arms dealers, convicted cocaine traffickers, and corrupt former FIFA officials.
A typical example involves an illegal gambling operation that reportedly took up the entire 51st floor run by the alleged Russian mobster Anatoly Golubchik and Vadim Trincher, a dual citizen of the United States and Israel, Trincher’s son Illya, Hillel Nahmad, the son of a billionaire art dealer and heir of a descendant of a Jewish Lebanese art family, and another follower of Chabad-Lubavitch.
The indictment filed by against the gambling ring was filed Preet Bharara, then the United States attorney in Manhattan.
Following the 2016 election, Bharara claimed that Trump asked Bharara to remain as United States Attorney, and Bharara agreed to stay on.
However, he was eventually fired, after refusing to resign, as a result of Attorney General Jeff Sessions' request for all remaining 46 United States Attorneys appointed during President Obama's administration to resign.
Trump had reportedly personally sold five separate condos in Trump Tower to David Bogatin.
David’s brother Jacob Bogatin was CEO of a fraudulent company YBM Magnex International, supposedly a world-class manufacturer of industrial magnets, was founded by the Mogilevich.
And Vyacheslav Ivankov, another key Mogilevich lieutenant in the United States during the 1990s, also lived for a time at Trump Tower, and reportedly had the private telephone and fax numbers for the Trump Organization in his personal phone book.
In all but a handful of cases, Trump’s Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach, FL, which describes itself as “one of the most highly regarded private clubs in the world,” sought to fill the jobs with hundreds of foreign guest workers from Romania and other countries.
A Reuters review found that at least 63 individuals with Russian passports or addresses bought as much as $98. million worth of property in seven Trump-branded luxury towers in southern Florida.
The buyers include Alexander Yuzvik, a former executive in a Moscow-based state-run construction firm involved in construction projects of the FSB and GRU; Andrey Truskov, co-owner of Absolute Group, the biggest wholesale electronic business in Russia; and Alexey Ustaev, the founder and president of St.
Petersburg-based Viking Bank, one of the first private investment banks established in Russia after the fall of Communism.
Trump’s personal counsel, Michael Cohen, along with Trump’s Russian mob-affiliated Lubavitcher business associate Felix Sater, and Ukrainian lawmaker Andrii V Artemenko, delivered a “peace” plan for Russia and Ukraine to former national security adviser Michael Flynn before Flynn was asked to resign.
The plan involved lifting sanctions on Russia in return for Moscow withdrawing its support for pro-Russia separatists in eastern Ukraine.
It would also allow Russia to maintain control over Crimea, which it annexed in 2014.
In 2013, as director of the Defense Intelligence Agency , Flynn travelled to Moscow where he became the second director of the DIA to be invited into the headquarters of the GRU, though he will later boast of being the first.
Flynn was also paid $11,250 that year by the American subsidiary of a Russian cybersecurity firm, Kaspersky Lab, and another $11,250 by a United States air cargo company affiliated with the Volga-Dnepr Group, which is owned by a Russian businessman.
Kaspersky Lab, which makes some of the world’s most popular anti-virus software, has long suspected by United States intelligence of being used to assist Russian espionage efforts.
However, in December 2016, a top Kaspersky Lab official was arrested by Russian authorities and accused of spying for American companies and intelligence services.
In 2007 Volga-Dnepr was removed from a list of approved UN vendors following corruption allegations against two Russian officials who steered contracts to the firm.
One of Manafort’s biggest clients was the shady pro-Russian Ukrainian billionaire Dmytro Firtash.
By his own admission, Firtash maintains strong ties with Ukrainian/Russian mob boss Semion Mogilevich.
Firtash and a partner owned half of RosUkrEnergo , which was founded in 2004 and emerged as Ukraine’s sole gas importer in 2006 to 2009.
Ukraine’s security service in 2005 said may be indirectly controlled by Semion Mogilevich.
Manafort stepped down as Trump’s campaign manager in August of 2016 in response to press investigations into his ties not only to Firtash, but to Ukraine’s previous pro-Russian Yanukovych government.
Bankers close to Putin granted Firtash credit lines of up to $11 billion, which helped Firtash to back Yanukovich who won power and went on to rule Ukraine for four years.
Yanukovich ended up steering the Ukraine away from the West and towards Moscow until he was overthrown in February 2014.
Yanukovych is mentioned in the unverified Trump Dossier that went public just before the inauguration.
He was said to have assured Putin that no one would ever trace alleged cash payments to Manafort back to the Russian president.
Additionally, Trump recently recruited Carter Page, who is well familiar with Russian politics, as one of his foreign-policy advisors.
Page, who maintains close ties to a number of prominent Russian politicians and businessmen, worked to open a Merrill Lynch office in Moscow.
His partner in that venture is former Gazprom executive, Sergei Yatsenko.
Page is known as a staunch defender of Russia’s ambitions as well as a routine critic of current United States policymakers.
The Kushner’s were friends with Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu, who stayed at their home in New Jersey, sleeping in Jared’s bedroom.
Trump’s foundation has donated thousands of dollars to Chabad institutions, and Haaretz also reported that the foundation of Jared’s parents gave $342,500 to Chabad institutions and projects over a 10-year period.
Jared’s father, Charles Kushner, was a real-estate titan and one of the most important Democratic donors in the country.
He was arrested on charges of tax evasion, illegal campaign donations, and witness tampering in 2004 and was eventually convicted on all charges and sentenced to two years in federal prison.
In 2004, Charles Kushner was investigated for hiding violations of federal limits on campaign contributions.
He then hired a prostitute in order to blackmail one of the case’s key witnesses, whose wife then informed investigators of his attempts at obstructing justice.
As Director of the United States National Economic Council, Trump appointed Gary Cohn, who is currently the president and COO of Goldman Sachs, the investment bank for which Trump took Hillary Clinton and Ted Cruz to task for their connections.
On January 27, 2017, the Kushners invited Cohn, Department of the Treasury appointee Steve Mnuchin and several members of the President's cabinet for a Shabbat meal, along with Rabbi Levi Shemtov, from the local Chabad-Lubavitch house, which is only a few blocks away from their home.
Also attending were Department of Commerce pick Wilbur Ross and his wife Hilary Geary Ross, and Strategic Communications Director Hope Hicks.
Shemtov serves the daily governmental and diplomatic needs of the international Chabad-Lubavitch movement, flying to Buenos Aires, Moscow and other capitals.
Shemtov is often at the White House, Pentagon, United States Department of State and other venues in official Washington, and maintains close relationships with numerous members of the United States Congress, senior Administration officials and leaders in the international community, including a number of heads of state and government.
Kushner has acted as a liaison with dozens of influential figures, including Henry Kissinger, Paul Ryan, Rupert Murdoch, and, until recently, Roger Ailes, founder and former Chairman and CEO of Fox News.
Jared and Ivanka are close friends with Rupert Murdoch’s former wife Wendi Deng, who was rumored to be dating Putin.
They are also friends with the wife of Abramovich, Dasha Zhukova, who Ivanka invited to Trump’s inauguration.
All of them were guests in August 2016 on medial mogul David Geffen’s Geffen’s $200 million yacht off the coast of Croatia, and a few weeks later at the United States Open.
According to the Jewish Telegraphic Agency, Putin is popular amongst the Russian Jewish community, who see him as a force for stability.
In 1992, Lazar became acquainted with Putin confidant Lev Leviev, who introduced him to Boris Berezovsky and Roman Abramovich.
Putin set up a Kremlin-affiliated Jewish structure called the Federation of Russian Jewish Communities.
In 1999, Putin’s ally Leviev established the new organization, which was chaired by Abramovich.
Lazar, an American citizen and a native of Milan, Italy, was quickly granted Russian citizenship and appointed chief rabbi of the new federation.
Chabad members are a small fraction of Russia’s small Jewish community.
Adolf Shayevech, a prominent figure in the Jewsh community since the late Soviet period, was considered chief rabbi until 2000, and still claims the title.
The Russian Jewish Congress, the country’s largest secular Jewish organization, also recognizes Shayevech.
However, FEOR had received government support, which has restored dozens of synagogues and built Jewish community centers throughout the country.
Jason Greenblatt, a former Trump Organization lawyer and now a special representative for international negotiations at the White House, met with Lazar in the summer of 2016.
Orthodox scholars and rabbinic authorities generally believe that rebuilding of the Third Temple of Jerusalem, should occur in the era of the Messiah.
The revived Sanhedrin contacted Trump, who has promised to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, and Putin who expressed desire for the same, to join forces and fulfill their Biblically-mandated roles by rebuilding the Jewish Temple in Jerusalem.
The revived Sanhedrin, also known as the Nascent Sanhedrin, was established in 2004.
It represents the sixth attempt in recent history, after Rabbi Jacob Berab in 1538, Rabbi Yisroel of Shklov in 1830, Rabbi Aharon Mendel haCohen in 1901, Rabbi Zvi Kovsker in 1940 and Rabbi Yehuda Leib Maimon in 1949.
The Nascent Sanhedrin regards itself as a provisional body awaiting integration into the Israeli government as both a supreme court and an upper house of the Knesset, while the Israeli secular press regards it as an illegitimate fundamentalist organization of rabbis.
Its long-term aims are to build the third Jewish temple on the Temple Mount.
The most immediate and obvious obstacle to realization of these goals is the fact that two historic Islamic structures which are thirteen centuries old, namely the Al Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock, are built on top of the Temple Mount.
Muslims believe that Muhammad was transported from the Sacred Mosque in Mecca to al-Aqsa during the Night Journey, known as the Isra and Mi’raj.
Putin approached the man, who explained the importance of the Temple Mount and the Jewish Temple.
The Jerusalem Embassy Act, passed in Congress in 1995, initiated the move of the embassy, but has been vetoed by every American president since.
The Sanhedrin calls on Trump to withhold the veto after he takes office.
The political conditions today, in which the two most important national leaders in the world support the Jewish right to Jerusalem as their spiritual inheritance, is historically unprecedented,” Rabbi Weiss told Breaking Israel News.
The BEST, most complete and enlightening compendium of articles and information on Putin the crypto-zionist, the Talmudic Jews infesting the planet, and their Russian and American connections.
