THE INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL MEDIA ON COLLECTIVE VIOLENCE IN UKRAINE by Yee Hur William Chew and Weiqi Kuah December 2018 Thesis Advisor: T Camber Warren Second Reader: Hy S Rothstein Approved for public release.
ABSTRACT The Euromaidan Revolution in Ukraine in 2014 saw a series of violent events leading to the ousting of then-President Yanukovych.
Opposition to the revolution spiraled into the annexation of Crimea by Russia and ongoing skirmishes in eastern and southern Ukraine.
Akin to the Arab Spring in 2011 that illustrated the influence of new media in galvanizing disparate groups to revolt against state authorities, we show that the analysis of sentiments through social media messages relating to the Euromaidan movement in Ukraine from 2013 to 2014 can reveal evidence of nascent plots against Ukrainian state authorities.
We systematically examined the exonyms in native languages used by the groups for and against the Euromaidan movement in reference to outsider groups during their mobilization in Ukraine, and conducted a series of statistical tests to analyze the significance of social media-derived sentiment metrics in predicting violence across different periods of political administration in Ukraine.
Our analysis of the Euromaidan mobilization indicates that the application of algorithms coded to detect and measure prevalent dissent expressed in native lexicons through social media can be used to substantially improve the accuracy of geospatial forecasts of violent events.
RESEARCH METHODS ....................................................................................21 A HYPOTHESIS..........................................................................................21 B DATA AND METHODS .........................................................................22 1.
Social Media .................................................................................22 2.
Dissent Lexicon.............................................................................23 C REGRESSION ANALYSIS ....................................................................24 1.
Regression Model .........................................................................24 2.
Dependent Variable .....................................................................25 3.
Independent Variable ..................................................................28 4.
CONCLUSION ....................................................................................................47 A RECOMMENDATIONS.........................................................................48 B ADDITIONAL RESEARCH ..................................................................49 APPENDIX A LIST OF RUSSIAN LEXICONS ........................................................51 A PRO-EUROMAIDAN TERMS ..............................................................51 1.
President Yanukovych-Related Terms ......................................51 vii 2.
UK Parliament-Related Terms ...................................................52 3.
Anti-Euromaidan Forces-Related Terms ..................................53 4.
UK Special Forces-Related Terms .............................................54 5.
Russian Media-Related Terms....................................................54 6.
President Putin-Related Terms ..................................................55 7.
Russia-Related Terms ..................................................................57 8.
Crimea-Related Terms ................................................................59 9.
Russian Region-Related Terms ..................................................60 B ANTI-EUROMAIDAN TERMS ............................................................60 1.
Maidan Verbs ...............................................................................60 2.
Maidan Derivatives ......................................................................62 3.
Ukraine-Related Terms ...............................................................63 4.
Ukraine Historical-related Terms ..............................................65 5.
Ukraine Organization-Related Terms .......................................66 7.
West-Related Terms ....................................................................68 APPENDIX B LIST OF UKRAINIAN LEXICONS ..................................................71 A PRO-EUROMAIDAN TERMS ..............................................................71 1.
President Yanukovich-Related Terms .......................................71 2.
Ukraine Slogan .............................................................................77 7.
Euromaidan Protester-Related Terms .......................................77 8.
Euromaidan Slogan .....................................................................77 B ANTI-EUROMAIDAN TERMS ............................................................78 1.
West-Related Terms ....................................................................79 6.
Russia Media-Related Terms ......................................................80 7.
We would also like to extend our gratitude to Professor T Camber Warren for his invaluable guidance and assistance throughout the course of our thesis, and to Professor Hy Rothstein for his useful comments to further refine the paper.
Tanya Clark, and their supporting teams for their phenomenal effort in collating an extensive library of Russian and Ukrainian lexicons for our data analysis.
With the help of everyone, we were able to expand the existing sphere of knowledge concerning the influence of social media on social behavior. xvii THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK xviii I INTRODUCTION The fixation with the internet and social media has permeated across modern society, with the number of users, diversity of social media platforms, and average time spent on those platforms surging over recent years.
This has inadvertently altered prior cultural and societal norms that impact how people interact with, and process, information.
The advancement in information and communication technologies has provided an alternate channel for entities to exploit the utility of social media platforms to promulgate narratives, modify cognitive structures, and potentially polarize factions along lines of social difference.
This phenomenon was evident during the Euromaidan Revolution in 2014 where Ukraine’s population was fractured between pro-West and pro-Russian factions.
The situation was exacerbated as Ukrainians broadcast their negative sentiments on social media, leading to increased aggression, cumulating in a series of violent events that led to the ousting of then-President Yanukovych.
Opposition to the revolution ignited further clashes that spiraled into the annexation of Crimea by Russia and ongoing skirmishes in eastern and southern Ukraine.
Civil unrest has historically been attributed to the state’s incapacity to exert its influence on the people.
Conversely, the side that dominates the social media realm may potentially possess the corresponding power to manipulate the populace’s emotions.
It is important that we unravel this enigma as social media’s extent of influence over the public’s interpretation of information grows exponentially.
The impetus for our investigation is a desire to evaluate social media’s distinctive capacity to influence one’s convictions in order to instigate specific behavioral impulses.
If a correlation could be drawn between the virtual propagation of public sentiments and the physical manifestation of violent predispositions, then state administrations can potentially utilize a cyber trawling algorithmic tool to closely monitor the pulse of the populace’s sentiments and develop accompanying policies to foster affirmative social expectations while mediating any potential political quagmires before the onset of collective violence.
Chapter II focuses on a literature review of theories that illustrate the efficacy of “hard power” versus “soft power” by state authorities to manipulate human behavior; the mechanisms used to quantify human sentiments promulgated on social media through the application of specific lexicons; and new media's capacity to establish group identities that band like-minded individuals together, thus increasing the propensity toward collective violence.
Chapter III delves into the power struggle between the Ukrainian and Russian government, the precarious complications of high ethnic polarization existent within Crimea and the Donbass region, as well as how both states exploited the utility of new media communication channels as part of their “soft power” strategy to further their respective political objectives, resulting in the development of the Euromaidan movement within Ukraine in 2014.
Evans, and Robert H Hodges Jr., “Understanding Violence through Social Media” (master's thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, 2017), 1-2. 2 the propensity for violence within the corresponding region.
To further augment the robustness of this field of analytics, our thesis seeks to investigate the influence of social media in other parts of the world experiencing similar political struggles that result in violent conflicts.
In order to establish the legitimacy of our research, we adopted a similar quantitative approach.
We coded a set of predictive algorithms to consolidate online propagation of dissent against the Ukrainian government in native lexicons extracted from Twitter data and overlaid it with a geospatial archive of violent events in Ukraine across a parallel time frame.
We then analyzed the correlation between the volume of specific kinds of messages and the onset of civil violence occurring within the region across the various periods of state administrations, from pro-Russian to the installation of a pro-West administration under the leadership of President Poroshenko following the ousting of former President Yanukovych.
Chapter IV details the research method and variables taken into account for our statistical models.
The data consolidated to develop our algorithm consist of three billion messages and 40 terabytes of pre-collected Twitter data, licensed by NPS, between August 2013 and July 2014, which coincides with the duration of the Euromaidan Revolution.
Through collaboration with language experts from the Defense Language Institute , we were able to trawl through the extensive Twitter data by referencing a comprehensive library of lexicons in both Russian and Ukrainian.
In order to ascertain the veracity of the relationship between related Tweets and the occurrence of violent events, we further incorporated several control variables such as economic conditions, population density and ethnic composition within the region of study.
Chapter V examines the results of our statistical analysis and elaborates on the key findings of our thesis.
The Arab Spring in 2011 illustrated the influence of new media in galvanizing disparate groups to revolt against state authorities.
Through the application of our algorithms, coded to detect and measure prevalent dissent expressed in native lexicons against the incumbent government in each specific political time frame, the resultant statistical models derived from our data analysis demonstrate a strong correlation between negative sentiments propagated on Twitter and the manifestation of violent events in Ukraine.
Chapter VI summarizes the entire thesis and distills the lessons learned through the integration of both the conceptual and statistical analysis to understand the relationship between social media’s influence on people and its capacity to incite collective violence.
Based off the insights gleaned, we then propose feasible recommendations to mitigate the political struggles faced in volatile regions.
The inadequacies of our research and other potentially uncharted areas that future academics can explore within this novel field of research are also discussed.
HARD POWER VERSUS SOFT POWER The rise of civil violence has historically been attributed to the failure of the state to exert its influence on a sizeable share of the populace.
Given the legitimacy of the state authority to rule, the rise of civil violence seemingly alludes to failure of the state authority’s ability to suppress emerging insurgency or rebellion through mechanisms of “hard power,” such as the power to coerce, the purchase of compliance, or the power to reward.
In the coercion camp, Fearon and Laitin propose the use of gross domestic product per capita as a proxy for the state authority’s strength, measured in terms of its military and its administrative and bureaucratic capacity, and contend that such measures of economic advancement reflect the state authority’s capacity to impose coercive force to deter violence.
In the reward camp, Collier and Hoeffler claim that GDP per capita mirrors the economic capacity to compete directly against rebel recruitment by gaining support though the provision of inducements such as public services and ethnic accommodation.
Originally conceptualized by Carr as “propaganda power” and akin to what Lukes termed as the “third dimension” of power, Nye and Raven suggest that political leaders could transpose their values, beliefs and interests through carefully scripted narratives in tune with traditional norms and practices that seek to influence the behavior of the collective populace.
Theoretical and Empirical Implications for the Study of Civil Conflict,” Journal of Peace Research 47, no. , 274; Timothy C Warren, “Not by the Sword Alone: Soft Power, Mass Media, and the Production of State Sovereignty,” International Organization 68, no. , 114.
This, in turn, could enhance the legitimacy of the authority and quash any uprising attempts at the onset.
Failure, on the other hand, could require the co-opting of “hard power” mechanisms to maintain control, and worst, reinvigorate the rebellion to rise and wrestle control of the populace from the state authority.
At its formative stage, the insurgents are confined by both the resources available — people, arms, money, information, etc.—and the accompanying operating space.
Resources will need to be replenished to fund the insurgent’s activities so as to lay the conditions for the insurgency to grow bigger and progress toward the advanced stage over time.
The growing success of one group against the state authority could motivate and trigger follow-on conflicts by other aggrieved groups in the near vicinity.
The efficient utilization of this information superiority over the state authority would not only ensure the survival and growth of the insurgent group but also erode the relative material strength of the state authority over time.
The earlier the authority can negate its information weakness, the lesser the cost of resource commitment to eliminate the insurgent group.
Hence, one would reach the conclusion that insurgent groups should communicate their intent covertly, while the state authority should invest resources into information and intelligence networks to foil the communication networks of potential insurgent groups, ideally during the latter’s formative stage before the onset of violence.
Separately, Leites and Wolf observe that the corresponding control effected by the authority could reduce the endogenous supply of resources funding the insurgent growth.
What is undiscussed, however, is how the potential influence by an external actor could upset the pre-exiting balance between the authority and the insurgent group, and tilt the balance in favor of the insurgent group.
Leveraging on their information superiority to conduct pre-emptive actions and aided by the forward deployment of Russian troops and equipment, pro-Russian separatists were able to take control of Crimea with minimal force in less than a month, leading to the annexation of Crimea by Russia on March 18, 2014.
Akin to Russian intervention in Transnistria in the 1990s, and Abkhazia and South Ossetia in 2008, the annexation of Crimea and the ongoing skirmishes in eastern Ukraine reflect how quickly the control authority can change with external support funding the growth of an internal uprising.
INFLUENCE OF NEW MEDIA Cultural and societal norms shape how the populace behaves and sees the world.
However, the advancement in information and communication technologies has threatened to upset the existing balance.
Societal stability within a country relies intimately upon the government’s capacity to assert and maintain its legitimacy over its designated political sphere.
Even despotic regimes with absolute control over the country could be susceptible to possible exploitation of new media by activist groups—already bonded locally by strong ties and shared norms—to polarize like-minded distant factions along social differences and instigate bigotry through brokerage via selected social platforms.
Perceived aggression by the state authority against one or more activist “out-groups” may elevate its importance and salience, triggering other like-minded distant activist groups that identify themselves as part of the larger “collective in-group identity” to adopt more polarizing and extreme views, potentially leading to the plotting and execution of violent activities in defense of the imagined group identity.
Upon the outbreak of the Arab Spring in 2011, the Arab world witnessed a massive surge of civil protests that led to violent confrontations within authoritarian states, thereby shifting the region’s political environment.
Social media platforms served an essential function during the turmoil, connecting foreign patrons intimately with indigenous plight through real-time digital uploads.
In an investigation conducted by Pierskalla and Hollenbach, they found a statistically substantiated relationship between the availability of mobile communication and level of organized violence.
They contend that the introduction of mobile communication into Africa alleviated organizational complications faced by activist groups, thus enhancing their ability to coordinate and carry out organized violence against the incumbent government.
This led them to conclude that the utility of new media, through the endemic spread and connectivity of modern mobile technology to promulgate information, eases the process of inciting communal conflict and exacerbating organized violence.
In addition, depending on how either side exploits the utility of mobile communications, it can potentially embolden activists to engage in more hostilities, or reinforce the government’s control over the population through pre-emptive surveillance and intervention of potential political threats.
Pierskalla and Hollenbach argue that the increasing availability of affordable and widespread communication in an underdeveloped Africa enable people to spontaneously promulgate their sentiments, even within repressive regimes, which engenders mutual trust and heightens awareness amongst group members, fulfilling the prerequisites to rapidly garner mass support for a common cause, and easing coordination efforts for collective violence across multiple locations.
The Power of the People is Greater than the People in Power: A Memoir , 63.
Therefore, developing countries necessitate their political authorities to be more cognizant of social media penetration, because it increases the populace’s susceptibility to engage in violent activism when they are incapable of providing a uniform distribution of government services and influence throughout the entire region due to the lack of modern communication infrastructure.
Whether new media incites divisions between groups of people with differing beliefs—by establishing segregated avenues where people reinforce their convictions through the selective promulgation of bigoted narratives—or that its effect is inconsequential to the larger political agenda is debatable.
The Blogs and Bullets report investigates the contrasting opinions on the significance of new media in recent conflicts.
One faction credits new media for advocating democracy and capitalism, exemplified by Twitter’s efficacy during the Iranian Green Movement in 2009, while the opposing faction condemns new media for aggravating violence in countries such as Kenya, Uganda, and 31 Warren, ""Explosive Connections,” 298.
MEASURING SENTIMENTS VIA NEW MEDIA The immense accumulation of internet data and increasing capability of big data analytics present an unprecedented opportunity to analyze the available data and reveal obscured networks and unexpected relationships through social profiles and patterns.
Warren asserts that before the fruition of organized violence can occur, the antagonistic political narratives have to first be promulgated effectively in order to garner popular support from the masses.
This alludes to the prospect of foreseeing potential outbreaks of political violence by detecting rising trends of vindictive propaganda through social communication platforms.
Idioms of Authority and Radicalization in Nigeria Social Communication,” in Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, 2016, 3.
In their research, Bourret, Wines, and Mendes geo-referenced massive amounts of Twitter data to obtain approximate locations of relevant feeds in Yemen, before compiling an archive of lexicons to measure the intensity of sentiments represented by each related post.
Subsequently, Bourret, Wines, and Mendes framed their algorithms to develop data sets that quantify the level of support for the government versus that for the violent activists.
Further studies conducted recently on new media focuses on developing a predictive algorithm to detect prevalent dissent, in the absence of credible physical intelligence, through data analytics in order to provide early warning for the political authority.
Frost, Evans, and Hodges Jr. utilized native Arabic lexicons extracted from local social media platforms to anticipate violence within Iraq so as to enhance the government’s situational awareness.
The set of identified lexicons were then systematically assigned values across a scale to quantify the strength of the sentiment it exudes.
Subsequently, the dataset was overlaid onto a geospatial archive of violent activities across a parallel time frame in order to ascertain its relationship with negative sentiments broadcasted on social media.
Previous studies in this novel field have gathered great insights by analyzing a wide array of social, political, and technological variables, in an attempt to reveal the enigmatic influence new media has on modern society, and to determine the latent conditions within a country that serve as catalysts to incite collective violence through the dissemination of negative sentiments.
Our thesis endeavors to augment earlier studies by taking an innovative approach to analyze a different set of variables and determine its correlation with the manifestation of collective violence in an alternative region.
Ukraine and Russia share an enduring, but contentious history, resulting in a constant and fierce struggle for political power in their border territories.
The resentment between polarized local ethnic groups culminated in the outbreak of the Euromaidan Revolution in 2013 and 2014.
In order to quantify the significance of social media in this predicament, we systematically examined the exonyms, unique terms which are conceived by an individual ethnic group in their local dialect to reference other groups explicitly, and cross-examined them with publications on new media channels as well as historical symbols, myths and norms.
We then sorted the list of search terms under either proor anti-Euromaidan movement categories.
Notably, only terms that qualify exclusively as exonyms during the duration of the Euromaidan movement were filtered out.
Subsequently, in order to substantiate our research, we conducted a series of data analytics on the Twitter archive using the consolidated list of search terms to analyze the significance of negative tweets in rousing violence across different periods of administration in Ukraine.
Lastly, we revised the selection of control variables to incorporate not only the traditional components of “hard power” such as GDP, but more importantly, elements of “soft power” encompassing the degree of ethnic polarization to generate a more robust and significant statistical model for our thesis.
UKRAINE The Arab Spring seemed to take the world by storm in 2011 illustrated the influence of new media in galvanizing disparate groups to revolt against state authorities.
General Gerasimov opines that these events represent how mainstream warfare would be contested going forward, and that the military has to consider the use of non-military means, including foreign intervention through the use of information, to advance national interests and attain strategic goals.
In his address to Russian ambassadors recalled to Moscow in attendance of a meeting to review Russian foreign policy priorities in July 2004, President Putin suggested the establishment of information and cultural centers as a means to protect the interests and rights of ethnic Russians residing in the Commonwealth of Independent States—former Soviet Republics and neighboring states—and Baltic countries.
Reinforced with Russia’s belief that it is constantly under siege from subversive acts from non-aligned opponents, Russia invests all instruments of power to enhance its security and interests.
The Russian identity narrative and its accompanying hopes of securing Ukraine’s participation in the Eurasian Customs Union were under threat.
These two main ethnic groups often delineate themselves by differing political ideologies, leading to much contention within the country.
Therefore, it was not surprising to observe a spike in violent events within regions with high ethnic polarity during the peak of the Euromaidan Revolution.
The government of Ukraine and ethnic Ukrainians living in Ukraine, however, remain divided over this issue, leading to the impasse today.
The Soviet military is alleged to have researched the practice of reflexive control, a form of psychological ""programming""—defined by Thomas as “a means of conveying to a partner or an opponent specially prepared information to incline him to voluntarily make the predetermined decision desired by the initiator of the action”—since the 1960s, with 53 State Statistics Committee of Ukraine, All Ukraine Census 2001; Minnesota Population Center.
Besides the diplomatic, economic and military maneuvers adopted by Russia, a study of Russia and pro-Russian separatists’ usage of lexicons on social media platforms as part of its information campaign to orchestrate civil unrest in Ukraine during the Euromaidan movement in 2013-2014 could glean useful lessons for states weary of external influence.
Specifically, the development of a predictive methodology and its accompanying coded algorithms could detect and measure prevalent networks circulating dissent against state authority through data analytics of new media, which in turn could facilitate the adoption of effective early actions by the state authority to neutralize both internal and external influence of the populace to incite violence.
New media, such as social platforms like Twitter, present a potential communication channel that could be exploited by activist groups for both internal and external communication.
While Twitter is not the most pervasive social media platform globally, we hypothesized that the distinctive attributes that Twitter offers enhances its propensity to solicit instantaneous, concise and true sentiments from its users, thereby enabling us to conduct a more accurate analysis through the tracking of hashtags and online trends.
Populated by billions of tweets posted by users world-wide, the intended meaning of trending messages could be erroneously interpreted through the use of lexicons, and eventually distorted as it disseminates from one user to another.
This underlines the importance for the state authority to invest resources in gaining a foothold in communication channels, such as social media platforms, that can be utilized by activists to coordinate and incite violence.
Once the baseline predictive methodology and algorithm are developed, it could be scaled and adapted accordingly to any communication channel to measure sentiments for and against the state authority, including influence from external state and non-state actors.
This thesis aims to reveal potential plots against the state authority, and glean useful lessons on the utility of social media in predicting violence, with or without foreign intervention, through the analysis of sentiments found in social media data exchanges relating to the Euromaidan movement in Ukraine from 2013 to 2014.
RESEARCH METHODS Making sense of new media’s ability to provoke and manipulate social behavior entails a quantitative approach that sifts through vast amounts of open source data available online to identify networks that produce civil unrest within a specified region.
Such studies, especially analytics adopted to measure sentiments, are still in a nascent stage and have been applied almost exclusively to less developed countries in Africa and the Middle East.
An extension and adaptation of earlier methodologies to measure sentiments incited from both exogenous and endogenous sources in Ukraine could reveal further evidence of the utility of social media in generating collective violence and lend weight to the hypothesis that the analysis of new media could predict the onset of civil violence.
HYPOTHESIS We hypothesize that the analysis of sentiments through social media data exchanges relating to the Euromaidan movement in Ukraine from 2013 to 2014 could reveal potential plots against the Ukrainian state authority.
To validate the claim, predictive algorithms are coded to detect and measure prevalent dissent against the Ukrainian government in native lexicons extracted from Twitter data and overlaid with a geospatial archive of violent events in Ukraine across a parallel time frame in to ascertain its relationship with negative sentiments broadcasted on Twitter.
The Euromaidan movement in Ukraine from 2013 to 2014 saw the change of state administration from pro-Russian—under the helm of then-President Yanukovych till February 21, 2014—to one that is pro-West—under the leadership of President Poroshenko effective May 25, 2014 till the time of this writing—with an interim government leaning towards the West in power between the two periods.
We hypothesize that anti-Euromaidan sentiments incite violence while pro-Euromaidan sentiments reduce violence during the window of analysis under the interim government which is pro-West, while only antiEuromaidan sentiments will continue to trigger conflict under President Poroshenko's administration.
We came to this deduction because we believe that both factions had a vested interest in jostling for political power during the interim administrative period as 21 the exodus of President Yanukovych inadvertently created a power vacuum in Ukraine.
Subsequently, after President Poroshenko took office and enacted pro-West policies, it is comprehensible that the pro-Russian faction would raise the ante in an attempt to regain their influence.
Lastly, we intentionally omitted the data analysis during President Yanukovych's regime as there were insufficient violent events during this period to generate adequate tests of our hypotheses.
DATA AND METHODS Collecting the relevant data for our research was a complicated process due to various obstacles.
Not only were there regulated access to digital information on social media platforms, it was also challenging to ascertain the veracity of digital information.
More importantly, our limited linguistic proficiency, as well as the lack of local context, may potentially distort our understanding of the lexicons used.
Nonetheless, we made our best effort to consolidate the relevant data sets and designed appropriate analytical methods for our research.
In order to distill the extensive data and confine it to Ukraine and Russia, we utilized the geographical coordinates of each user’s self-proclaimed hometown in their public user profile.
A more accurate calibration, employing the GPS coordinates tagged to each Tweet, was not implemented for our quantitative analysis because of the insignificant population of Twitter users who have given permission for Twitter to track and record their physical location.
Consequently, we traded a tolerable diminution in geographical precision for a significant increase in volume of Twitter data.
Despite the diverse array of social media platforms that are relevant to this study, such as Facebook, which undisputedly has the largest user population globally and hosts innumerably higher data traffic, we chose Twitter for its more pertinent attributes.
Twitter’s facile and unrestricted user interface not only encourages its users to promulgate their genuine sentiments instantaneously in response to a specific stimulus, but more 22 importantly, allows unacquainted users to affiliate with others who share similar opinions through the application of hashtags.
Last but not least, a unique attribute that distinguishes Twitter apart from other social media platforms is the availability of information on its users' geographic metadata through their home profile, thus enabling us to geospatially determine the location of the tweets and correlate them with the occurrence of violent events.
Dissent Lexicon People commonly disregard formal writing conventions, favoring their own native jargons, dialect or even emoticons, when conveying their sentiments via social media.
The crux of our research hinges on the ability to decipher these foreign linguistic variants in order to establish their true intent.
These Russian lexicon terms are derived from the SME’s knowledge of the Russian language, her familiarity on the issues of social-cultural and lingual identities and language policies during Euromaidan and ongoing Russian-Ukrainian conflicts, and crossreferencing with reports from both traditional and new media.
Tanya Clark, also a SME faculty member from the DLI, provided the requisite Ukrainian lexicon terms.
However, an unintended constraint of our analysis is that it only captures a particular social stratum within the entire population.
The demographics of social media users consist primarily of affluent and younger city dwellers.
Nevertheless, we aspire to derive a comprehensive algorithm that is capable of measuring dissent that extends indiscriminately across all ages and regions.
Another concern we had was the potential of incorporating false positives into our regression results with our rudimentary data scraping technique that primarily detects specific lexicons within a predefined dictionary, with limited capacity to distinguish the varying semantics in which they were delivered.
Nevertheless, our team’s extensive research suggests that the lexicons identified were contextually consistent across all forms of digital media propagation, indicating that the occurrence of such cases would be too rare to appreciably impact the veracity of our results.
REGRESSION ANALYSIS In order to develop the thesis, it was imperative to trawl through relevant databases and tabulate an accurate count of the number of violent events and Euromaidan-related tweets.
Consequently, we conducted a geospatial analysis on both variables to determine the correlation between them.
The detailed methodology of our regression analysis is illustrated below.
Regression Model A Poisson regression model was designated for the statistical analysis so as to compute the most precise assessment between August 2013 to July 2014.
Specifically, the unit of analysis for the regression model was set at the Grid-Cell level, with a grid-cell width of approximately 20 kilometers, cumulating to 2041 cells in total.
This method of analysis divides Ukraine's entire territory into regular grid squares, with each side aligning to 0.2° of the earth's longitude and latitude, equating to an approximately 14 x 14 miles for each cell.
This level of resolution offers a balance between providing adequate fidelity in 24 delineating Ukraine’s border, while being comprehensive enough to capture sufficient observations for our regression model analysis.
Last but not least, we also controlled for the ethnic distribution of the populace as an overwhelming presence of a particular ethnic group within a region may plausibly affect how they interact with provocative propaganda on social media, thus skewing the prospect of violence.
A set of predictive algorithms were coded to detect and measure prevalent dissent against the Ukrainian government in native Russian lexicons extracted from Twitter data and overlaid with a geospatial archive of violent events in Ukraine across a parallel time frame in to ascertain its relationship with negative sentiments broadcasted on Twitter.
The Euromaidan movement in Ukraine from 2013 to 2014 saw the change of state administration from pro-Russian—under the helm of then-President Yanukovych till February 21, 2014—to one that is pro-West—under the leadership of President Poroshenko effective May 25, 2014 till the point of writing—with an interim government leaning towards the West in power in between.
We built our regression models to examine the latter 2 time frames in order to evaluate social media's correlation with violent events in each distinctive political climate.
The UCDP GED dataset tracks 143,617 violent events where either government forces or another organized entity, strike against another organized actor or civilians, causing at least one fatality at a specific time and place, and between January 1, 1989 and December 31, 2017.
This enables us to identify regions of interest for our research that may impact our hypothesis testing.
We observed no significant organized violence recorded in Crimea despite its annexation by Russia.
Instead, the majority of the deadly events occurred within the Donbass region, while the rest of Ukraine largely remained peaceful during the turbulent periods of the Euromaidan Revolution.
However, the models generated do not incorporate an analysis on the escalation of violence preceding the deadly event as the datasets do not include instances of protests or confrontations without an associated report on fatal casualties.
Independent Variable We decided to utilize Twitter feeds in both the Russian and Ukrainian languages stored within the NPS Twitter Archive, between the time period of August 1, 2013 to July 31, 2014, as the independent variable for our thesis.
The archive holds a massive 40 terabyte collation of a 10% random sample of all tweets posted during this time frame.
Applying the library of both Russian and Ukrainian lexicons, which were catalogued under either proor anti-Euromaidan classifications depending on the context of the message which they were sourced from, we trawled through the Twitter archive in the attempt to measure the level of public dissent in Ukraine.
This corroborates the analysis between the populace’s sentiments in relation to the occurrence of violent events.
Through the illustrations generated , we were able to establish that the highest concentration of tweets transmitted in Ukraine centered around Kyiv.
This is possibly due to the large aggregation of politically savvy population situated in the capital of the country.
The other focal point which accounts for a high density of Twitter feeds is the Donbass region where the conflict is most intense near the border between Ukraine and Russia.
Lastly, we observed a sporadic distribution of Twitter volume across municipalities around the country despite the lack of organized violence.
This may imply that the influence of social media is not limited by geographical proximity and can impact the propensity for violence in a distant region by propagating grievances through tweets.
However, by further taking into account population density, we are able to evaluate GDP Per Capita across all regions in Ukraine to have a better understanding of the relationship between the distribution of wealth and the people’s susceptibility to violence.
The assumption is that regions with high GDP Per Capita are more peaceful as people are leading better quality lives, and thus have less motivation to manifest their grievances while areas of low GDP Per Capita have insufficient resources to placate the needs of the people, thus leading to an increased desire to change the status quo.
We chose GDP Per Capita as one of our experiment’s control variable in order to counteract any impact of “hard power” on the people.
From the diagrams generated, we can observe that the northern regions of Ukraine are more affluent than the rest of the nation.
Despite the southern and western districts being more impoverished, there is an absence of deadly events in those corresponding areas.
On the contrary, the moderately prosperous Donbass region witnessed the highest density of fatal events.
However, this phenomenon was not replicated in the other affluent regions.
Therefore, the inverse relationship between economic conditions and propensity for violence is seemingly ambiguous in Ukraine.
It accounts for 48. million people situated over 24 administrative regions and 2 special status cities.
Specifically, we focused on the documentation of the various nationalities and ethnic groups residing within Ukraine, and the aggregate proportion of people adopting Ukrainian, Russian, or other mother tongues.
After compiling the latest census data conducted by the Ukrainian government in 2001, we were able to observe the population distribution of ethnic Russians and Ukrainians across the country.
We probed further to appreciate the interaction between both ethnic groups within Ukraine by using the equation derived by Reynal-Querol to quantify the extent of a country's ethnic polarization.
A country experiences ethnic polarization when its population fragments into smaller bands that differentiate themselves based on distinct traits from other groups.
We applied Reynal-Querol's formula to measure the ethnic divide between three major ethnic clusters, namely the native Ukrainians, ethnic Russians and all others within each Ukrainian city.
Superimposing the demographic data with events in the same time frame, such as the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014, and the sporadic organized violence and fatalities occurring in the Donbass region, this seem to indicate that ethnic polarization may have a significant correlation with deadly events occurring in the same area.
Therefore, we chose ethnic polarization level as another control variable to offset its effect and better focus our experiment to reveal the true effect of social media.
We had hypothesized that anti-Euromaidan sentiments would incite violence while pro-Euromaidan sentiments would reduce violence under the interim government between February 21, 2014 and May 25, 2014, while only anti-Euromaidan sentiments will continue to trigger conflict under the pro-West administration under President Poroshenko effective May 25, 2014.
In addition, six control variables—total volume of tweets, GDP, population density, percentage of ethnic Ukrainians, percentage of ethnic Russians, and degree of ethnic polarization—are applied for all models.
Comparison of AIC Scores 39 The results of the models produced three noteworthy findings.
First, models with Twitter-derived sentiment metrics improved the prediction of violent events across Ukraine as reflected by the lower Akaike Information Criterion scores.
This reinforces our belief that the selection of exonyms in native languages as search terms on Twitter contributed significantly to the derivation of a metric reflective of the dissents against the Ukrainian government.
Second, there is statistical evidence to suggest a significant correlation between violent events and Twitter-derived sentiment metrics against the Ukrainian government across different periods of administration.
This is consistent with our claims that anti-Euromaidan tweets should incite violence under both the interim and pro-West authorities, while pro-Euromaidan tweets could reduce violence under the Westleaning interim authorities.
There is statistical evidence to suggest a significant correlation between violent events and degree of ethnic polarization.
TWITTER-DERIVED METRICS IMPROVES PREDICTION OF VIOLENT EVENTS Twitter-derived sentiment metrics improves the prediction of violent events in Ukraine from August 1, 2013 to July 31, 2014.
Accounting for total number of tweets , the regression continues to return a significant correlation between violent events in Ukraine and all variables, including total number of tweets at a lower AIC score.
With the incorporation of Twitterderived sentiments metrics , the regression model returns an even lower AIC score.
Certain lexicons may have been misinterpreted or omitted due to our lack of local context.
Alternatively, negative sentiments toward the Ukrainian government may not always lead to violent events.
Peaceful demonstrations or protest could have been incited by the negative sentiments circulated on Twitter, or crashes between groups and the state authorities may not have resulted in death, and are thereby not captured by our dataset.
THERE IS A SIGNIFICANT CORRELATION BETWEEN TWITTER-DERIVED SENTIMENT METRICS AND VIOLENT EVENTS IN UKRAINE Twitter-derived sentiment metrics improves the prediction of violent events in Ukraine across different periods of administration in Ukraine.
Consistent with our hypothesis, anti-Euromaidan tweets should incite violence under the interim and pro-West authorities, while pro-Euromaidan tweets could reduce violence under the West-leaning interim authorities.
The choice of search terms impacts the authenticity and usefulness of the Twitter-derived sentiment metrics.
To quantify the significance of social media in inciting violence during the Euromaidan movement in Ukraine, we systematically examined terms used exclusively by the in-group against the out-group—sorted exclusively under proor anti-Euromaidan movement categories—and cross-examined them with publications on new media channels as well as historical symbols, myths and norms.
We limited the terms to be exclusively in the Russian and Ukrainian language to match the unique demographics in Ukraine.
We believe this contributed significantly to the usefulness of the accompanying Twitter-derived sentiment metrics, further improving the prediction of violent events in Ukraine across different periods of administration in Ukraine.
Regression Plots 42 The visualizations of the regression plots reflect the statistical significance of each independent variable on the dependent variable while holding all other variables in the model constant at their mean values.
Through the visualization, we are able to isolate the independent variables and understand its predicted effect on the rise of violent events in Ukraine.
The y-axis on each graph is the predicted outcome in terms of number of violent events in a grid cell, while the x-axis shows the shift in each independent variable from its minimum to maximum value.
The respective prediction lines—black for total volume of tweets, blue for volume of pro-Euromaidan tweets, and red for volume of antiEuromaidan tweets—show how the expected number of Violent Events change as a function of the independent variables, with the slope of the line demonstrating either a positive or a negative relationship of the independent variables in relation to Violent Events.
The shaded portions around the prediction lines represent the 95% confidence interval of the prediction.
Given the statistical significance between the number of violent events and Twitter-derived sentiment metrics against the Ukrainian government across different periods of administration, coupled with low standard errors, we can conclude with confidence that there is a strong positive correlation between number of violent events in Ukraine and Twitter-derived sentiments metrics.
However, we observe that both a positive correlation between violent events and the presence of both high percentages of ethnic Ukrainians and ethnic Russians.
Comparison of AIC Scores (Ethnic Polarization, Ukrainian Lexicons) 45 While the statistical evidence suggests that the correlation between violent events in Ukraine from August 1, 2013 to July 31, 2014 and both the presence of high percentages of ethnic Russians and ethnic Ukrainians remain statistically significant, the incorporation of the Reynal-Querol equation as a control reveals that the correlation between violent events and degree of ethnic polarization is also statistically significant, with a better AIC score.
To substantiate our claims, we generated a regression plot to visualize the correlation between violent events in Ukraine and the degree of ethnic polarization.
The slope of line demonstrates a positive relationship of Ethnic Polarization Score in relation to Violent Events.
The shaded portions around the prediction line represents the 95% confidence interval of the prediction.
As such, we can conclude with confidence that there is a strong positive correlation between number of violent events in Ukraine and the degree of ethnic polarization.
CONCLUSION Our thesis began with our curiosity about social media’s influence over social behavior, especially in regions burdened by perennial contentions within the population.
We committed ourselves to pursue this analysis because this specific area of research is still in a nascent stage, and focused predominantly on selected countries of critical political interest.
We attempted to venture beyond the boundaries of earlier studies by approaching our thesis from a different perspective by stressing on the degree of ethnic polarization, as well as the interaction between groups through unique exonyms conceived on social media.
We hypothesized that through social media data analysis, we would be able to draw a correlation between the virtual propagation of public sentiments and the physical manifestation of violent predispositions, and thus generate a credible prediction model for the onset of civil violence.
Divisive propaganda disseminated on social media platforms have increasingly become more effective in establishing new social norms and inducing organized collective action to achieve a desired outcome by the promulgators.
The unique challenge of our analysis was to determine a fitting method to precisely locate and measure true sentiments found on social media in both foreign Russian and Ukrainian languages to be factored into the algorithm.
In order to increase the robustness of our models, we further controlled the experiment for both “hard power” and “soft power” variables such as Ukraine's GDP Per Capita level captured by the G-Econ Project, and its ethnic polarization index, derived through data from the All-Ukrainian Population Census.
Firstly, statistical evidence suggests that Twitter-derived metrics improves the prediction of violent events against the Ukrainian government across different periods of administration.
Secondly, there is statistical evidence to suggest a significant correlation between violent events and Twitter-derived sentiment metrics against the Ukrainian government across different periods of administration.
Last but not least, there is statistical evidence to suggest a significant correlation between violent events and degree of ethnic polarization, given the presence of negative dissent against the Ukrainian government.
The findings support our initial hypothesis, thus reinforcing our belief that the selection of exonyms in native languages as search terms on Twitter contributed significantly to the derivation of a metric reflective of the dissents against the Ukrainian government.
RECOMMENDATIONS The intent for our thesis is not only to illustrate social media's capacity to be exploited for inciting collective violence, but more importantly, to provide a framework that accentuates the utility of “soft power” in sound governance.
Through the results of our models, we find that ethnic polarization is a significant variable that enhances the correlation between negative social media sentiments and violence.
It may be beneficial for state authorities to track settlement patterns of major ethnic groups within the country, and incentivize greater assimilation and movement within the population in order to disperse concentrations of ethnic groups within a specific region.
In addition, state administrations that are confronted with budding social unrest in their country, can harness the power of social media data analysis to obtain early warning, and potentially adopt preemptive actions to mitigate the consequences.
In light of the increasing role that social media plays in modern political activism, governments should invest in a national cyber information and strategic communication task force that has the capacity to undertake three critical missions.
First, they must be able to closely monitor the pulse of the populace’s sentiments through various forms of social media channels.
Next, they must be able to design a cyber-trawling algorithmic tool to make sense of the data collated to detect early indicators of potential violent outbreaks in specific locations.
ADDITIONAL RESEARCH During the course of our research, we have identified some areas of interest that future studies could delve into.
First and foremost, our thesis only took into account violent events consolidated by the UCDP database, which only tracks conflicts that result in one or more death between government forces and organized entities.
This data set does not include all other cases of conflict such as peaceful demonstrations or violent protests that do not result in any fatalities.
By incorporating these events, the number of observations significantly increases over the designated time frame, therefore reinforcing the data analysis to derive a stronger correlation between the independent and dependent variables.
Another limitation that our thesis faced was the inadequate access to the wide spectrum of social media databases due to proprietary issues.
We relied primarily on the Twitter archive licensed by NPS to collate our independent variable.
Other theses should explore the prospect of trawling data from other open source social media platforms, such as Facebook, to establish a linkage with a more extensive user population when conducting similar analysis consequently.
Moreover, due to our linguistic deficiency in both Russian and Ukrainian language, we had to seek assistance from SME faculty members at the DLI to create the library of lexicons.
Despite their linguistic proficiency and the extensive effort devoted to the scholastic research, certain lexicons may be misinterpreted or omitted due to the lack of local context.
A more comprehensive and accurate library of lexicons could be built with the consultation of local activists and government officials.
In addition, future studies can also attempt to dissect the independent variable further by applying the library of both Russian and Ukrainian lexicons under the various sub-categories instead of just the binary proand anti-Euromaidan classifications we used for our analysis.
By doing so, they can better pinpoint the determinant category of lexicons that incite violence within the larger classifications.
Furthermore, other forms of social 49 demographic data, such as education level and age group, can be included as control variables in order to create a more robust statistical model.
Furthermore, with recent cyber advancement, it is increasingly challenging to discern between tweets originating from humans and computer bots.
It is evident that some political entities have invested heavily in cyber technology that can masquerade as passionate human activists fighting for, or against, social issues of the agent's predisposition.
Consequently, we faced the challenge of discerning between true human tweets and those promulgated by computer bots.
Future research could design a more astute code to flag out the false tweets from the data set and incorporate a social network analysis to ascertain the central actors that the tweets originate from.
Last but not least, it is essential to see whether the results of our thesis can be replicated in other countries.
Future research should shift their attention onto other regions around the world that are undergoing parallel social conflicts.
By applying a similar data analysis, we would be able to compare and contrast the results, thus revealing if our model only works on a specific region and event, or that it has a more versatile utility that can aid other state administrations to better exercise “soft power” for sound governancethis page intentionally left blank 50 APPENDIX A LIST OF RUSSIAN LEXICONS A PRO-EUROMAIDAN TERMS 1.
This term may be used by 17 Urkaina Уркаин anti-Maidan/anti-Ukrainian movement at the present time as well Slightly altered Ukrainian for ""We have achieved/done/accomplished"" 18 Mizdobuli Миздобули; МиЗдобули to refer to fake claims of accomplishments by the regime 2.
Key Terms Explanation 37 Berkutnya Беркутн Pejorative form of ""Berkut"" ""Berkut"" chicks , sounds minimizing and 38 Berkutyata Беркутят condescending 39 Ptentsy Птенц ""Chicks, little birdies"", condescending reference to ""Berkut"" ""Poultry factory"", reducing eagles to poultry, another condescending 40 Poultryfactory Птицефабрик reference to Berkut or a place where they congregate 5.
Genitive and Instrumental case forms could not included for the same reason (they coincide with various forms of this word) *Some other neologisms that can be mistaken for common Russian words were not listed but this particular one is a common nickname of Putin so it appears beneficial to include at least 66 Putya Путя some of its forms that do not overlap with other ones.
Poklonskaya who is considered a traitor of the Ukraine after she started serving Russian authorities.
Key Terms Explanation Verb formed using ""maidan"" as its root, typically meaning to protest, rebel, be unruly, etc.
Key Terms Explanation This and other verbs listed here are formed by adding common verbal prefixes which can express a variety of meanings that are best 14 Izmajdanit измайдани understood in the specific context in which they appear 2.
Key Terms Explanation 31 Majdabajda майдабайда Blending of ""Maidan"" and ""nonsense"" Incident in which Maidan journalists were ""deservedly"" beaten by 32 Majdafottrabakh майдафоттрабах police 33 Majdan_slogan майдафраз Maidan slogan Blending of Maidan and revolution in a way that also sounds like an 34 Majdan_revolution майдануци obscene form and suggests failure 3.
Key Terms Explanation 44 Ukro_pitek Укропитек Another blending of ""Ukrop"" and a vulgarism 45 Ukro_cattle Укробыдл blending of ""Ukrop"" and a derogatory word invoking cattle 46 Natio_cattle нациобыдл Blending of nation/national/nationalism and same derogatory word 47 Ukrop_army укропарми ""dill army"", pejorative reference to the Ukrainian military 48 Ukro_fascist Укрофашист Blending of Ukr and ""fascist"" 49 Fashik фашик Pejorative/diminutive form of ""fascist"" 50 Khokhol хохол Pejorative exonym Version of same as above but with the fleeting vowel (ref.
Key Terms Explanation Supporter of Mazepa, controversial Cossack leader of 17/18th century; other words are possible with this stem,g., ""mazepinka"", 76 Mazepa_fan мазепи adjective ""mazepinskij"", etc.
Key Terms Explanation 81 Bender_log бендерлог Same as above, different spelling 82 Bander_trop бандертрол Also a pejorative reference to a supporter of Bandera 83 Bender_trop бендертрол Same as above, different spelling 84 Judo_Bander жидобандер Blending of a derogatory term for ""Jew"" and ""Bandera"" 85 Judo_Bender жидобендер Same as above, different spelling Supporter of Petlyura, controversial leader during the time of civil war after the October Revolution of 1917; other words possible,g., 86 Petlyura_fan петлюров adjective ""petlyurovskij"", etc.
Key Terms Explanation 98 varvarska варварська Barbarian 99 kat кат Executioner, hangman 4.
Key Terms Explanation 1 pribatsanyy прибацаний Slang for stupid, muttonhead 2 povstansti повстанці Rebels 3 ukhilyanti ухилянти Draft dodgers 4 ukhilniki ухильники Draft dodgers 2.
Key Terms Explanation 13 Novorosiya Новоросія Putin’s campaign name to annex Eastern Ukraine 14 zapadentsi западенці Westerners 15 Malorosiya Малороссія Russia sees Ukraine as ""Little Russia"" What Russians call Ukrainians ; a khokhol is the 16 khokhli хохлі Cossack hairstyle 17 hadiv гадів Snakes 3.
Key Terms Explanation 18 plebistsit плебісцит Referendum, from Latin, plebiscit 19 Benderivtsi Бендерівці Putin & Yanukovych's’ deliberate misspelling, on a ""bender"" 20 Banderivtsi Бандерівці Reference to those who follow Stepan Bandera, nationalist figure 21 Banderlohi Бандерлоги Variant of Bandera-inspired actors 22 papyeryedniki папєрєднікі Azarov’s horrible pronunciation of predecessors 4.
Key Terms Explanation 23 khunta хунта Junta, interim power in Kyiv leadership 5.
Key Terms Explanation 28 slaboviki слабовики Weak-willed fighters 29 Maidowni майдауни Maidan supporters 30 Maidanuti майдануті Maidan supporters 31 separatizm сепаратизм Separatism, the efforts to divide Ukraine; means of hybrid war 32 Mobilizatsiya vbivaye Мобілізація вбиває ""Mobilization kills,"" RU propaganda not to join the Ukrainian forces 7.
Key Terms Explanation 33 prostitushki простітушки Anyone paid to protest for current govt 8.
Key Terms Explanation 34 Fashistskakhunta Фашистська хунта Fascist junta 35 banditi бандити ""Bandits"" Russia’s reference to any armed opposition forces Ex-PM Azarov’s erroneous use of ‘I’ when calling police to report a 36 bimba бімба “bimb” on Kyiv’s metro 37 krovosis кровосісь Ex-PM Azarov mispronounced krovosos 38 bimba бімба Ex-PM Azarov mispronounced bomb, now part of lexicon as ""bimb"" 9.
Key Terms Explanation 42 berkutushki беркутушки Combination Titushka and Berkut actor 81 THIS PAGE INTANTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 82 LIST OF REFERENCES Aday, Sean, Henry Farrell, Marc Lynch, John Sides and Deen Freelon.
Aday, Sean, Henry Farrell, Marc Lynch, John Sides, John Kelly and Ethan Zuckerman.
Mislove, Alan, Sune Lehmann, Yong-Yeol Ahn, Jukka-Pekka Onnela and J Neils Rosenquist.
In Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media 11, no.
Molchanov, Mikhail A Political Culture and National Identity in Russian-Ukrainian Relations.
State Statistics Committee of Ukraine, All Ukraine Census 2001 Database.
In Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, 2016, 1-41.
