United States ""disappointed"" by Poland's enactment of law criminalizing attribution of Nazi crimes to Polish state.
Dodon threatens to punish the measures that have signed the declaration on association with Romania.
Employees of the Federal Security Service of Russia are involved in the shooting at Maidan.
This was announced by former head of the Security Service of Ukraine Valentyn Nalyvaichenko during a questioning at the Obolonsky court in Kiev.
Nalyvaichenko also told that FSB officers of Russia had arrived in Ukraine three times in the period from December 2013 to January 2014.
The judge then noted that the judges agreed with the prosecution that the lawyers violated the reasonable time frame for the criminal proceedings.
Earlier, the case of Yanukovych's treason was questioned by former head of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Andriy Deshchytsia, Speaker of the Council Andriy Parubiya, as well as Interior Minister Arsen Avakov and former Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk.
Also, Yanukovych's court questioned the four guards of the ex-president.
In December last year, the court ruled to challenge President Petro Poroshenko and other high-ranking officials as witnesses in the state-run case of former President Viktor Yanukovych.
Investigators found that a resident of the Odessa region in June 2014, a group of 20 mercenaries was trained in one of the military training ground in the Rostov region of Russia.
In July 2014, he fought against the forces of the ATU on the advanced positions of terrorists in the Mining District of Donetsk Oblast.
He received a task to return to the Odessa region and collect information about the situation in the region, in particular, near Transnistria.
The spy also had to work out illegal channels of penetration into Ukraine from the Transnistrian region of Moldova.
The government of a great coalition in Germany intends to continue to support Ukraine on the path of reform and seek to restore its territorial integrity.
The future government of Germany simultaneously warns that it will provide financial assistance under harsh conditions.
With regard to the arrangements itself, Berlin, together with Paris, intends to continue to actively promote their implementation and seek to resolve the conflict.
It is in the case of the implementation of the Minsk agreements that the German government will ""be ready to abolish anti-Russian sanctions"" and talk about it with its European partners, says the treaty.
It also reminds that Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea and ""interference"" in the east of Ukraine violated European peaceful order.
At the heart of this is compliance with the truce in eastern Ukraine and the withdrawal of all heavy weapons.
Ukraine and Russia have to fulfill their obligations under the Minsk Agreements.
The United States is disappointed by the intention of the Polish President Andrzej Duda to sign the amendments to the draft law on the Institute of National Remembrance banning any claims that the Polish people or Polish state were responsible or complicit in the Nazis' crimes, crimes against humanity or war crimes thus criminalizing allegations of the Polish nation's complicity in the Holocaust.
Censor.NET reports citing a statement by United States Secretary of State Rex Tillerson.
We understand this law will be referred to Poland""s Constitutional Tribunal.
Enactment of this law adversely affects freedom of speech and academic inquiry.
Such historical inaccuracies affect Poland, our strong ally, and must be combatted in ways that protect fundamental freedoms.
On Jan., the Polish Sejm adopted the bill submitted by the Kukiz'15 party setting a ban on promoting the so-called ""Bandera ideology,"" with its historic roots stemming from Ukraine.
The Israeli Foreign Ministry, in turn, called Deputy Ambassador of Poland in Tel Aviv for explanations in connection with the amendments in the draft law on the Institute of National Remembrance.
In particular, it bans any claims that the Polish people or Polish state were responsible or complicit in the Nazis' crimes, crimes against humanity or war crimes thus criminalizing allegations of the Polish nation's complicity in the Holocaust.
The bill was backed by 57 senators without amendments, while 23 were against it, and two more senators abstained.
The heads of at least 10 Moldovan villages have recently signed a symbolic document to the centenary of the unification of most modern territories of Moldova with Romania at the end of the First World War.
Dodon condemned the declaration and criticized the intelligence service of Moldova, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the prosecutor's office for not taking measures against the mayor-signers, although they knew that the mayors violated the existing laws.
The president also said that the mayors of 53 other settlements signed another statement against the association with Romania and for the maintenance of the state of Moldova.
Earlier, Dodon said that the idea of ​​uniting Moldova and Romania could lead to a civil war.
On 3 February, the Mayor of Saysin, Calarash district, and the local advisers in Moldova, adopted a symbolic declaration on association with Romania.
In Russia, the deputy health minister of Tatarstan Elena Shishmarev, who was suspected of stealing budget funds, was found dead.
It is specified that on February 3, the Soviet District Court of Kazan sent her under house arrest for two months.
If they refused to do so, she did not sign documents to allocate the necessary funds to the medical institutions.
Shishmariev took place in the case as a suspect and did not admit his guilt.
On Wednesday, February 7, passengers of the flight Krasnoyarsk-Moscow kept for two hours in a plane with an open door at a temperature of -16c degrees due to President Vladimir Putin.
At the same time, the passengers of ""Boeing 737"" airlines ""Victory"", flying to Moscow flight 418, were not released from the plane, because at this time in the airport was supposed to sit on the presidential board.
In addition to the passengers did not look at the president, the man entered the salon of the aircraft and silently closed all curtains and portholes from one of the parties.
According to information from Krasnoyarsk Yemelyanov airport, on the morning of February 7 an hour or more was delayed departure of 15 flights.
Everyone who had transplants, the airline promised to compensate for the costs.
