These protests continued for months and their scope widened, with calls for the resignation of Yanukovych and the Azarov Government.
Protesters opposed what they saw as widespread government corruption and abuse of power, the influence of oligarchs, police brutality, and violation of human rights in Ukraine.Repressive anti-protest laws fuelled further anger.
Following this, protesters occupied government buildings throughout the country.
Thousands of protesters advanced towards parliament, led by activists with shields and helmets, and were fired on by police snipers.
On 21 February, an agreement between President Yanukovych and the leaders of the parliamentary opposition was signed that called for the formation of an interim unity government, constitutional reforms and early elections.
The following day, police withdrew from central Kyiv, which came under effective control of the protesters.
Yanukovych said that this vote was illegal and possibly coerced, and asked Russia for help.
Russia considered the overthrow of Yanukovych to be an illegal coup, and did not recognize the interim government.
Widespread protests, both for and against the revolution, occurred in eastern and southern Ukraine, where Yanukovych previously received strong support in the 2010 presidential election.
These protests escalated, resulting in a Russian military intervention, the annexation of Crimea by Russia, and the creation of the self-proclaimed breakaway states in Donetsk and Luhansk.
This sparked the Donbas War, and culminated with Russia initiating a full-scale invasion of the country in 2022.
The interim government, led by Arseniy Yatsenyuk, signed the EU association agreement and disbanded the Berkut.
The new government restored the 2004 amendments to the Ukrainian constitution that had been controversially repealed as unconstitutional in 2010, and initiated a large-scale purge of civil servants associated with the overthrown regime.
Sports 4.10 Public opinion 4.11 Signing of the European Union–Ukraine Association Agreement 4.12 Suicides of former officials 5 Casualties 5.
The government of president Viktor Yanukovych had been negotiating an association agreement with the European Union since 2012.
Such comprehensive trade agreement with the EU would have impacted Ukraine's trade agreements with Russia, the latter being Ukraine's biggest trade partner at the time.
Yanukovych believed that the complications could be addressed, and he said that he intended to enter the agreement, but continued to postpone.
This was interpreted as an attempt to back out of signing this agreement, and led to a wave of protests which came to be known as the ""Euromaidan"" movement.
Prime Minister Mykola Azarov had asked for €20 billion in loans and aid.
The EU was willing to offer €610 million in loans, but Russia was willing to offer $15 billion, as well as cheaper gas prices.
In addition, the EU demanded major changes to Ukraine's regulations and laws, but Russia did not stipulate regulatory or legal adjustment of such nature or scale.
Russia also applied economic pressure on Ukraine and launched a propaganda campaign against the EU deal.Yanukovych was widely disliked in Ukraine's west but had some support in the east, where his native Russian is much more spoken, and in the south.
The rallies were initially peaceful but became violent in January 2014 after parliament, dominated by Yanukovych's supporters, passed laws intended to repress the protests.
The European Union and the United States urged Yanukovych to negotiate a peaceful end to the conflict and said they would impose sanctions on government officials if they were found responsible for violence.In the lead-up to the February revolution an amnesty agreement was made with protesters wherein they would be spared criminal charges in exchange for leaving occupied buildings.
The demonstrators vacated all occupied Regional State Administration buildings, and activists in Kyiv left the Hrushevskoho Street standoff; Kyiv's City Hall was also released back to government control on 16 February.
A period of relative calm in the anti-government demonstrations in Kyiv ended abruptly on 18 February 2014, when protesters and police clashed.
At least 82 people were killed over the next few days, including 13 policemen; more than 1,100 people were injured.
On 18 February, some 20,000 Euromaidan protesters advanced on the Verkhovna Rada in support of restoring the Constitution of Ukraine to its 2004 form, which had been repealed by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine shortly after Yanukovych was elected president in 2010.
The confrontation turned violent; the BBC, citing correspondents, reported that each side blamed the other.
The police fired guns with both rubber bullets and, later, live ammunition , while also using tear gas and flash grenades in an attempt to repel thousands of demonstrators.
Police officers stormed the main protest camp on Maidan Nezalezhnosti and overran parts of the square.
The Trade Unions Building, which served as the Euromaidan headquarters, was burned down.
Political commentators suggested that Ukraine was on the brink of a civil war.
Some areas, including Lviv Oblast, declared themselves politically independent of the central government.
On 19 February, the authorities instituted police checkpoints, restrictions on public transportation, and school closures in Kyiv, which the media referred to as a de facto state of emergency.On 20 February, Internal Affairs Minister Vitaliy Zakharchenko announced that he had signed a decree authorising the use of live ammunition against protesters.
Central Kyiv saw the worst violence yet, and the death toll in 48 hours of clashes rose to at least 77.
In response, the chairman of the Ukrainian parliament , Volodymyr Rybak, announced the next day that he had signed a parliamentary decree condemning the use of force and urging all institutions to cease immediately all military actions against protesters.
On 21 February, President Yanukovych signed a compromise deal with opposition leaders.
It promised constitutional changes to restore certain powers to parliament and called for early elections to be held by December.
On 21 February, a bill to remove Yanukovych was introduced in parliament.
On the same day, Yanukovych left for Kharkiv.On 22 February, the protesters were reported to be in control of Kyiv, and Yanukovych was said to have fled the capital for eastern Ukraine.
A warrant for the arrest of Yanukovych was issued by the new government on 24 February.
Over the next few days, Russian nationalist politicians and activists organised rallies in Crimea and urged Russia to help defend the region from advancing ""fascists"" from the rest of Ukraine.
Timeline of the Euromaidan 18 February On 18 February at 16:00, the Kyiv Metro stopped all service because of a terrorist threat.
Initial clashes Protesters building a barricade Trucks that had been carrying troops were burned in Kyiv's city center on 18 February.
Protesters throwing bricks and Molotov cocktails at police officers behind a burning barricade The night before the clashes, Right Sector called on all of its members to ready themselves for a ""peace offensive"" on 18 February.
The Maidan People's Union also urged all concerned citizens to take part in the ""peace offensive"", which student unions had agreed to join as well.
The Maidan Union reported on the morning of 18 February that columns of protesters would begin a march on parliament at 08:30.
That morning, around 20,000 demonstrators marched on the parliament building as that body was set to consider opposition demands for a new constitution and government.
Around 09:45, the demonstrators broke through the police barricade of several personnel-transport trucks near the building of the Central Officers' Club of Ukraine and pushed the cordon of police aside.
The clashes started after some two dozen demonstrators moved a police vehicle blocking their path to parliament.
At 10:00, a member of parliament representing Batkivshchyna, Lesya Orobets, reported that police armed with Fort-500T shotguns had begun to attack with flash and stun grenades from Shovkovychna Street and Lypska Street.As the column neared the parliament building at 10:08, it met resistance from another cordon of police officers.
There were reports that the number of protesters had swelled to 50,000.
At 10:18, according to other reports, explosions and smoke were seen on Instytutska Street as people started to tear up roadway paving blocks.
Protesters started to throw the pavement blocks at the police, while officers defending themselves with shields tried to subdue the crowd with stun grenades.
Protesters who had barricaded themselves near the Dynamo Stadium colonnade began setting fire to tires.
At about 10:30, parliament was set to vote on whether to restore the 2004 constitution.
However, it did not happen as Chairman Rybak did not register the bill.
At 10:33, the street fights between protesters and the police shifted to Shovkovychna Street.
Protesters started to wave ₴200 banknotes in the face of some of Yanukovych's police forces—saying that they were mercenaries—in Mariinskyi Park.
An activist, Oleksandr Aronets, reported that snipers were targeting civilians.
By 11:00, protesters had sustained serious wounds.Molotov cocktails were thrown by the protesters, and on Shovkovnycha Street, a barricade of dump trucks was set on fire.
A barricade burning outside the headquarters of the internal defence forces in Lviv, caused by mass protests.
At 11:30, protesters—including the journalist Tetyana Chornovol—sacked and set fire to the building.
Two persons died as a result, including a programmer who worked at the headquarters.
At 12:12, Minister of Healthcare Raisa Bohatyriova was attacked by protesters as she left Mariinskyi Park, but she escaped unharmed.
One protester with a head wound told the Kyiv Post that charging police officers had ""smashed everybody"" in their path.
Around 13:30, four officers on Instytutska Street were stationed atop a building, lobbing stun grenades at the crowd and shooting, when protesters stormed the building and set part of it on fire.
The protesters forced their way to the roof, forcing the police to retreat.
The building on Instytutska Street was described as the scene of the day's most violent clashes.
Berkut and Internal Troops servicemen opened a full-scale assault, firing directly into the crowd.
By mid-afternoon, police officers using tear gas drove as many as 10,000 protesters from Mariinskyi Park, where barricades had been built earlier in the day.
Other anti-government activists tried to keep the pro-government and anti-government forces apart.Multiple news outlets published photographs showing the police armed with AK-74 assault rifles.
Former Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs Hennadiy Moskal speculated that they were Alpha Group units.
A Berkut leader, Vladimir Krashevsky, said the armed police officers in black with yellow armbands were part of a Berkut unit that had been deployed to help evacuate the interior troops.Protesters re-occupied City Hall.
At 15:45, hundreds of riot police officers advanced toward parliament, attacking protesters.
At the October Palace, visible from Independence Square, riot police threw bricks down the hill at protesters from a bridge along Instytutska Street.
Breach of Hrushevskogo Street Barricade Throughout the day of 18 February 2014, protesters lit tires, threw and launched Molotov cocktails, bars of steel and other projectiles at lines of Berkut police.
At 17:04, armed Berkut untied the wire at the Mykhaila Hrushevskogo Street barricade gate near Dynamo Stadium and penetrated with some surprise.
EuroMaidan protesters were watching a drone hovering from the opposite direction, with their backs turned to the police.
Hundreds of Berkut began throwing grenades, two of which injured United States photographer Mark Estabrook and countless others while discharging their pistols and shotguns.
Euromaidan protesters and civilians began a mass retreat toward the next gate in a barricade on Khreschatyk Street.
There were many injuries and several deaths.At 20:00, Pro-Russian sources had reported that 50 unknown or presumably Pro-Russian assailants were trying to break into the Canadian embassy.
In 2015, it was revealed that the embassy had deliberately opened its gates after spotting a Canadian passport-wielding EuroMaidan protester being chased by Berkut.
Upon entry of the unknown passport-wielding EuroMaidan protester, a deluge of EuroMaidan protesters stormed the embassy and occupied the main lobby, using the embassy as a safe haven from Berkut.
The embassy was used to treat the wounded during the evening of February 18.
EuroMaidan protesters later left the embassy voluntarily, leaving flowers.
Unnamed European allies later asserted, that given the prolonged occupation and lack of resistance by Canadian foreign service officers, Canada played an intentional and deliberate role in enabling EuroMaidan protesters.
Contemporary media sources argue that Prime Minister Stephen Harper never acknowledged the true extent of the security breach.
Attack on Maidan Following the warning, the police advanced on thousands of protesters on Maidan Nezalezhnosti with guns, a water cannon, and an armored personnel carrier.
Protesters on the square stacked tires and other burning debris to create a wall of fire between themselves and security forces.The TV channel 5 Kanal's broadcast was shut down countrywide but remained available via satellite and a live feed on YouTube.
Kyiv's Trade Unions building, used as Euromaidan headquarters, on fire after a police raid.
At approximately 22:00, it was reported that the police had broken through the protesters' barricades on the eastern side of the square.
At 01:35 the next morning, street lights were switched off around the square.
The activists believed that this heralded the beginning of a decisive assault.
Opposition leaders meeting with President Yanukovych Emerging from a meeting with President Yanukovych, opposition leader Vitali Klitschko told Hromadske TV that the talks had not been successful.
Klitschko said that opposition leaders had listened for more than an hour to Yanukovych's claims that they were to blame for the 20 deaths on 18 February.
The president also demanded that the opposition force the protesters to leave Maidan Nezalezhnosti.
He reportedly threatened opposition leaders with criminal prosecution.In a message on Ukrainian television, Yanukovych told the opposition leaders, ""Separate yourself from the radical elements that seek bloodshed and conflict with law enforcement agencies,"" and said that if they did not do so, he would ""talk differently"" with them.
By this point, the death toll had risen to 26 on both sides, including 10 police.The Security Service of Ukraine launched an ""anti-terrorist"" operation, while the intelligence services began investigating unnamed politicians over what was described as an illegal attempt to seize power.
In the early morning, Olena Lukash announced that the opposition had refused to sign a declaration disapproving of radical measures.
President Yanukovych demanded that the opposition stop occupying buildings and seizing arms; the opposition, however, would not concede.
The acting minister of defence, Pavlo Lebedyev, acknowledged that he had sent some airborne troops from Dnipropetrovsk to Kyiv.
Ciphered telegrams were discovered in which Yuriy Ilyin, the newly appointed chief of the general staff of the Ukrainian Armed Forces, gave direct orders to deploy military units.Also on 19 February, a military An-26 made a secret flight from Kyiv to Russia to pick up a large batch of anti-riot weapons and ammunition; this only became known in 2015.
By 14:50, about 5,000 remained on the square.Right Sector occupied the Kyiv Central Post Office and the State Committee for Television and Radio, with the post office serving as a new headquarters.
Protesters burning tires near Kyiv Conservatory to obscure snipers' visibility.
President Yanukovych fired the chief of the general staff of the Ukrainian Armed Forces, Volodymyr Zamana, and replaced him with Ilyin, who was previously the commander of the Ukrainian Navy.
The Ministry of Defence announced that it was redeploying units around the country to guard military facilities.
Following a meeting between government and opposition leaders late at night, both sides declared a truce and agreed to start negotiations.
According to opposition politician Yatsenyuk, the truce included a pledge from Yanukovych not to launch a police assault that night.Right Sector did not agree to the truce.
At 00:35, Interfax reported that Yanukovych had declared 20 February a day of mourning for those killed in the clashes.Around 03:50, activists claimed that they had torn a shoulder patch from the uniform of a Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs soldier during the clashes, brandishing the patch as alleged proof of Russian involvement.
Protesters at Independence Square continued to hear gunshots, despite the ceasefire agreement.
Around 04:20, five buses carrying protesters from Ivano-Frankivsk arrived.Each side blamed the other for igniting the deadly conflict.Yakymenko blamed Ukraine's current Euromaidan government, claiming they were responsible for hiring snipers on 20 February.
Protesters accused the police of starting the conflict by throwing Molotov cocktails and improvised explosive devices.
At 09:25, protesters pushed the Berkut back to the October Palace after security forces tried to set fire to Kyiv Conservatory, which was being used as a field hospital for wounded protesters.
Euromaidan protesters marched on the police with shields and Molotov cocktails and forced them to retreat, thus regaining control of Independence Square and capturing up to 67 police officers.
Around 10:49, law enforcement personnel were captured while sleeping in the Ukrainian House and during clashes on barricades near the October Palace.
Many of the men were only 18 or 19 years old, were not trained, and were armed only with rubber truncheons.
The captured police were from Crimea, the central-eastern cities Dnipropetrovsk and Kryvyi Rih, and eastern Luhansk.
According to a UNIAN correspondent, there were more than 30,000 people on Independence Square.
At 10:55, the chief of the presidential administration, Andriy Klyuev, announced that the president was prepared to sign a treaty with the opposition on the demanded changes to the Constitution of Ukraine, and that the ongoing clashes should compel politicians to find a quick consensus.
At 10:00, Euromaidan's activists picketed the main office at the Kyiv Metro station Politekhnichnyi Instytut, demanding that the system be reopened.
A former head of the Kyiv City State Administration, Ivan Saliy, also called for the reopening of the metro.
At 16:00 that day, the Titushky were transported by metro from the Pozniaky station to the Pecherska station, Lvivska Gazeta reported.
Trains between Kyiv and Lviv, one of the protesters' strongholds, were temporarily suspended; a railway spokeswoman said this was because of damage to the lines.
By 15:00, the metro was still not running, and ground-based transport in the city was scarce.
The metro was partly reopened in the early evening, but interchange stations remained closed.The Embassy of the United Kingdom in Kyiv was temporarily closed.Radio Liberty published video footage of police special forces shooting protesters with Kalashnikov and sniper rifles.
The ministry further stated that a sniper had injured 20 of its police officers.Interfax-Ukraine reported that at 15:00, ""a group of unknown individuals"" headed to the Presidential Administration Building, and shots and explosions were heard.
The Euromaidan self-defense force had repeatedly urged protesters not to go outside the square's perimeter.
Diplomatic efforts The above-mentioned clashes erupted shortly before three visiting EU foreign ministers—Radosław Sikorski of Poland, Laurent Fabius of France, and Frank-Walter Steinmeier of Germany—were due to meet with President Yanukovych to push for a compromise with the Ukrainian opposition.
The European Union introduced a visa ban and a financial asset freeze against those responsible for the violence in Ukraine, and a ban on export to Ukraine of equipment that could be used for repression.
Lawmakers barred chiefs and commanders of the Interior Troops, the Armed Forces of Ukraine, the SBU, and other government agencies from carrying out any counter-terrorism operations because they violated the Constitution of Ukraine.
They were also ordered to stop blocking roads and bridges, squares and streets in Kyiv and other cities and towns.
Several scholars discussed the possibility of Russian intervention in Crimea specifically, because of its unique geopolitical nature and demographics.
The Armed Forces' deputy chief of staff, Lieutenant-General Yuri Dumansky, resigned because he disagreed with the involvement of the army in the conflict.
At around midnight, journalist Artem Shevchenko, referring to his sources in the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, announced that 10 BTRs had departed from Kozachia Bay, where the Black Sea Fleet of Russia is based, escorted by DAI vehicles.
Meanwhile, the entire police force of Radekhiv joined the protesters in Kyiv.The Security Service of Ukraine officially ended its ""preparations for antiterrorist operation"" introduced on 19 February.
Agreement on settlement of political crisis in Ukraine A compromise deal was agreed to on 21 February after hours of negotiations led by the European Union mediators and Foreign Ministers Radosław Sikorski of Poland, Laurent Fabius of France, and Frank-Walter Steinmeier of Germany.
Another bill made changes to the Criminal Code, allowing for the release of Yulia Tymoshenko.
Parliament also adopted a resolution late that evening that ordered all Interior Ministry troops and police officers to return to their barracks.
Agreement aftermath Right Sector activists stand in front of a Belarusian opposition movement flag.
He called for the ""people's revolution"" to continue until power had been completely removed from the governing authorities.
Euromaidan leader Andriy Parubiy insisted that elections be held as soon as possible and reiterated that one of the main demands of protesters had been the resignation of President Yanukovych.AutoMaidan also announced that it would not accept anything short of Yanukovych's resignation.Vitali Klitschko apologised to the crowd on Independence Square after shaking hands with Yanukovych.
Outside of Kyiv, it was later discovered that the summer home of pro-Russian politician Viktor Medvedchuk had been set on fire.By late afternoon, hundreds of riot police officers guarding the presidential compound and nearby government buildings had vanished.Radosław Sikorski, the Polish foreign minister, described the withdrawal of forces as ""astonishing"", noting that it was not part of the agreement.
The riot police had begun withdrawing early in the morning because they feared that Yanukovych's government would pin the responsibility for the violence on them, and because they feared being attacked after protesters stole around 1,200 pistols and Kalashnikov rifles from the police on 18 February during the occupation of government buildings in Lviv.
Deputy Interior Minister Viktor Dubovik ordered the riot police to leave the city, but it is unclear where this order originated.
Opposition member Serhiy Pashynsky arranged escorts out of the city for more than 5,000 officers, Interior Ministry forces, and other special forces.
Parliament Chairman Volodymyr Rybak submitted his resignation in parliament on 22 February, citing illness.
Lawmakers then elected opposition leader Oleksandr Turchynov to be the chairman of Parliament, acting president and prime minister of Ukraine; this decision also violated the Constitution, according to which the impeached President was to be succeeded by the Prime Minister Serhiy Arbuzov.Turchynov claimed that Yanukovych had agreed to resign as president, but after consulting with advisers, he disavowed that and even pre-recorded a resignation statement.
Disappearance and prosecution Following the parliamentary procedures to transfer power to the new provisional government, General Prosecutor Pshonka and Minister of Revenues and Duties Oleksandr Klymenko were stopped at the Russian border while trying to flee the country.
According to the State Border Service, Yanukovych also tried to flee via a charter flight from Donetsk, but was stopped by border guards.
Yanukovych then left by armored car, and his subsequent whereabouts were unknown.
Former Interior Minister Zakharchenko also tried to fly out of Donetsk and was similarly turned back.On 23 February, parliament deputy Oleh Lyashko claimed that Yanukovych had been seen at the Russian naval base in Sevastopol, preparing to flee the country on board a Russian military vessel.
Journalist Tetyana Chornovol speculated that he was actually trying to flee on his private yacht, also in Sevastopol.
On the same day, Yanukovych and Zakharchenko were declared internationally wanted.
Criminal proceedings were launched in 20 February killings of Euromaidan demonstrators.
Yanukovych; the former head of the presidential administration, Andriy Kliuyev; former Prosecutor General Pshonka; former Interior Minister Zakharchenko; former SBU head Yakymenko; the commander of the Interior Troops, Stanislav Shuliak; and a number of others were declared suspects in the case.
First Yatsenyuk Government and Second Azarov government § Fall On 22 February, Yulia Tymoshenko was released from prison and addressed more than 100,000 people on Independence Square.
The same day, parliament appointed Arsen Avakov as acting interior minister.
Lawmakers also ousted Viktor Pshonka as general prosecutor of Ukraine in a no-confidence vote.On 23 February, the second day of national mourning, parliament voted to abolish the law on language policies that had given the Russian, Romanian, and Hungarian languages the official status of regional languages in some areas.
However, this measure was later vetoed by the acting president, who said he would not sign the bill until new legislation protecting minority languages was developed.
The same day, parliament dismissed Foreign Minister Leonid Kozhara, Health Minister Raisa Bogatyrova, and Education Minister Dmytro Tabachnyk and nationalised Yanukovych's private estate Mezhyhirya.
Warrants were issued for former Incomes Minister Oleksandr Klymenko and former Prosecutor General Pshonka.
Parliament also passed amendments restoring its power to appoint and dismiss judges, which had belonged to the Supreme Council of Justice.Kyiv Metro became fully operational again, including the reopening of the Maidan Nezalezhnosti station, on 24 February.On 24 February, parliament dismissed Social Policies Minister Natalia Korolevska and Culture Minister Leonid Novokhatko; it also dismissed Ihor Sorkin as governor of the National Bank of Ukraine and replaced him with Stepan Kubiv.
The same day, it appointed Valentyn Nalyvaichenko as head of the Security Service of Ukraine after dismissing Oleksandr Yakymenko from the post.
Seventy-seven of its MPs had left the faction over the past few days.On Tuesday, 25 February, acting President Turchynov called for the formation of a national unity government by Thursday.
The cabinet was formed as a coalition of the parties Batkivschyna, UDAR and Svoboda and the parliamentary factions Economic Development and Sovereign European Ukraine and other independent MPs.
Juridical developments On 24 February, parliament decided to release all political prisoners, including the father and son in the Pavlichenko criminal case, and terminated the powers of five judges of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine, appointed from parliament's quota, for violating their oath.
Lawmakers also offered to dismiss, for the same reason, two judges appointed by the president of Ukraine, and called on the Council of Judges of Ukraine to convene an extraordinary congress within three days to consider dismissing five Constitutional Court judges appointed by the council.
In the same resolution, parliament assigned the prosecutor general of Ukraine to begin criminal proceedings against all judges who, in the opinion of the People's Deputies of Ukraine, were guilty of adopting on 30 September 2010 a decision of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine on the procedure of introducing constitutional amendments.
On 27 February, judges of the Constitutional Court sent a letter to European organizations, international organizations, and human rights institutions questioning the constitutionality of the parliamentary resolution.On 27 February, Yanukovych was accused of having stolen $70 billion from the state budget.The Security Service of Ukraine arrested the former chief of its counterintelligence service, Volodymyr Byk.
On 3 July 2014, former Prime Minister Mykola Azarov was placed on the international wanted list for alleged abuse of power.
Russia–Ukraine relations and Media portrayal of the Ukrainian crisis On 28 February, Yanukovych attended a press conference in southern Russia and answered questions from mostly Russian reporters.
Censorship On 11 March 2014 the Ukrainian National Council for TV and Radio Broadcasting instructed all cable operators to stop transmitting a number of Russian channels, including the international versions of the main state-controlled stations—Rossiya 1, Channel One, and NTV—as well as Rossiya 24.
Lustration in Ukraine On 26 February, Ehor Sobolev was nominated to lead the Committee on Lustration in the new Yatsenyuk government.
The law on lustration, which excluded from government most officials who had worked in the Yanukovych administration, affected up to a million people.
Volodymyr Yavorsky of the Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group called it ""unreasonable"" and a ""serious, systematic violations of human rights""—among other reasons, because it meant too many people would lose their jobs, including officials who could not be easily replaced.
Berkut dissolved On 25 February, acting Interior Minister Avakov signed a decree dissolving the Berkut.
In March, Russia announced that the Crimean Berkut unit would preserve its name as it was incorporated into the Russian Interior Ministry.
The pro-Russian Ukrainian Front organisation held a meeting on 22 February with representatives from southern and eastern Ukraine.
Andriy Kluyev, an organiser of the event, said the group intended to discuss the federalisation of the country into semi-autonomous regions.
Following the agreement with the opposition and measures passed by parliament, Yanukovych flew from Kyiv to Kharkiv to attend the Ukrainian Front congress; sources indicated that Berkut forces had gathered in Kharkiv in anticipation of the event.
As Yuriy Lutsenko reported, past midnight on 22 February, the SBU opened criminal proceedings against Governor Mikhail Dobkin of Kharkiv and Mayor Hennadiy Kernes for advocating separatism.At the Congress of the Southern and Eastern regions in Kharkiv on 22 February, the deputies passed a resolution declaring that they were ready to take responsibility for protecting constitutional order in their territory.
They stated that the recent events in Kyiv had paralyzed the central government and destabilised the country.
The Interior Ministry reported that Governor Dobkin and Mayor Kernes then fled to Russia.On 23 February, parliament adopted a bill to repeal the country's law on minority languages.
Acting President Turchynov vetoed the bill on 28 February.Also on 23 February, clashes erupted in Kharkiv between thousands of equally sized proand anti-government rallies, and Mayor Kernes was blocked from entering the City Council building.
Pro-Russian protesters stood guard over the statue of Vladimir Lenin in the city center, but the deputy head of the Regional State Administration announced that the city would dismantle the statue regardless on 25 February.On 24 February, acting Interior Minister Avakov announced that a criminal case had been launched against Yevhen Zhylin, leader of the Kharkiv-based anti-Euromaidan organisation Oplot.On 1 March, thousands of people in Kharkiv, Donetsk, Simferopol, Odessa, Luhansk, Melitopol, Yevpatoria, Kerch, and Mariupol protested against the new government.
Public surveys in April revealed that most people in Ukraine's eastern regions considered all levels of the government illegitimate.
Roughly half held the same opinion about the central government led by Prime Minister Yatsenyuk.
However, nearly 70% agreed that Yanukovych was also not the legal president of the country.
On the same day, Putin requested and received authorization from the Russian parliament to deploy troops to Ukraine in response to the crisis.
Russian troops accordingly mobilized throughout Crimea and the southeast of Ukraine.
Decommunization in Ukraine The monument to the Russian field marshal Mikhail Kutuzov was demolished in the city of Brody in western Ukraine.
The militant group Right Sector was blamed for much of the destruction.
In addition, a statue honouring Soviet soldiers was removed from the western Ukrainian city of Stryi.
In early December 2013, unknown activists partially painted in red and black a statue honouring the workers of the Arsenal factory in Kyiv who died in 1918.
On 28 February, a monument dedicated to Soviet forces who fought in World War II and one dedicated to Soviet soldiers who fought in Afghanistan, both in the city of Dnipropetrovsk, were vandalized and painted with nationalistic slogans.
On its English-language Twitter account, the Russian Foreign Ministry described the targeting of Russianand Soviet-built monuments as ""Russophobic vandalism"" and an ""outrage"", and demanded that it be stopped.
Economic In May 2014, the International Monetary Fund disbursed US$3.2 billion to stabilise Ukraine.
The European Union required Ukraine to secure this aid package from the IMF in order to obtain about 1.6 billion euros pledged under the recently signed Ukraine-EU Association Agreement.
Sports On 19 February 2014, UEFA announced that it had decided to change the venue of the 2013–14 UEFA Europa League Round of 32 match between Dynamo Kyiv and Valencia from Olympic Stadium in Kyiv to GSP Stadium, in Nicosia, Cyprus, because of the riots in Kyiv.Dynamo Kyiv and the other clubs competing in the Round of 32 held a minute of silence for the victims in Kyiv before the match, and the athletes played wearing mourning armbands.On 25 February, subsequent games of the 2013–14 Ukrainian Basketball SuperLeague were postponed.
On 26 February, the second part of the 2013–14 Ukrainian Premier League was suspended because of the situation in the country.On 3 March, a scheduled friendly match between the United States and Ukraine in Kharkiv was moved to Nicosia because of safety concerns regarding potential instability in Kharkiv Oblast.Three HC Donbass home KHL playoff games were moved from Donetsk's Druzhba Arena to Slovnaft Arena in Bratislava, Slovakia.
After playing Game 7 of their first-round series against Dinamo Riga and Games 3 and 4 in the second round against Lev Praha in Bratislava, the Slovak capital, the team returned to Donetsk for the sixth game of the series against Lev.
European Union–Ukraine Association Agreement The First Yatsenyuk Government signed on 21 March 2014 the European Union–Ukraine Association Agreement with the DCFTA to be signed after the presidential election in May 2014.
When Newsweek in summer 2015 approached the General Prosecutor's Office about the deaths, the office initially replied that all information about them was a state secret.
The prosecutor's office later said that four of the deaths were being investigated as murders; a suspect was also charged with murder in a fifth case, the death of prosecutor Sergei Melnychuk.
List of people killed during the 2014 Ukrainian revolution A memorial in Kyiv.
Those hospitalised included three minors, five journalists, and 79 police officers.
In the early afternoon, Kyiv Post journalists reported a further eight bodies on Khreshchatyk Street.
Meanwhile, the Kyiv City State Administration reported 67 deaths based on the number of bodies delivered to forensics.
The Ministry of Healthcare reported 75 deaths since the start of the conflict.
Speculation on snipers CNN reported that officials had intercepted a telephone call between Foreign Minister Urmas Paet of Estonia and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Ashton in which Paet relayed a doctor's testimony that the sniper killings of protesters and Berkut troops had been committed by the same people.
He further suggested that the current minister of internal affairs, Avakov, and the chairman of the SBU, Nalivaichenko, were protecting the personnel who actually planned and carried out the killings, in order to prevent backlash against the ministry and to avoid a loss of prestige.
Avakov said that the conflict had been provoked by a ""non-Ukrainian"" third party and that an investigation was ongoing.On 31 March 2014, The Daily Beast published photos and videos showing that the snipers were members of the SBU's ""anti-terrorist"" Alpha unit who had been trained in Russia.
The media suggested that it was not the Ukrainian riot police who fired on the protesters, as previously believed, although the members of the Alpha team are Ukrainian citizens.
Russia–Ukraine relations The perception that Yanukovych was trying to establish closer ties with Russia played a major role in the protests.
Yanukovych accepted ""bail-out"" money—$2 billion out of a $15 billion package—from Russia, and this was interpreted as a sign that he would seek close ties with Putin.
Russian officials had been pressuring the Ukrainian administration to take decisive action to crush the protests, and the police assault on Euromaidan protesters was ordered hours after the $2 billion from Russia was transferred.
Several government ministers from across Europe blamed Russia for exacerbating the violence.In an interview on 20 February, a retired colonel of the Main Intelligence Directorate of Russia , Aleksandr Musienko, said that the conflict could only be solved by force, and that Ukraine had proven it could not exist as an independent, sovereign state.
According to government documents released by Ukrainian former Deputy Interior Minister Hennadiy Moskal, Russian officials served as advisers to the operations against protesters.
Code-named ""Wave"" and ""Boomerang"", the operations involved the use of snipers to disperse crowds and capture the protesters' headquarters in the House of Trade Unions.
Before some police officers defected, the plans included the deployment of 22,000 combined security troops in Kyiv.
According to the documents, the former first deputy of the Russian GRU stayed at the Kyiv Hotel, played a major role in the preparations, and was paid by the Security Services of Ukraine.
According to Reuters, the authenticity of the documents could not be confirmed.
In response, Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev of Russia said that Yanukovych needed to stop behaving like a ""doormat"", and that further loan installments would be withheld.
On 24 February, Russia's Foreign Ministry issued a statement urging Ukrainians to ""crack down on the extremists who are trying to get established in power"", and Medvedev refused to recognise Ukraine's provisional government as legitimate.During a press conference on 3 April 2014, Ukraine's new interior minister, chief prosecutor, and top security chief implicated more than 30 Russian Federal Security Service agents in the crackdown on protesters, saying that, in addition to taking part in the planning, the agents had flown shipments of large quantities of explosives into an airport near Kyiv.
Valentyn Nalyvaichenko, the interim head of the Security Service of Ukraine , said the agents had been stationed in Kyiv throughout the Euromaidan protests, had been provided with ""state telecommunications"" while residing at an SBU compound, and had kept in regular contact with Ukrainian security officials.
Investigators, he added, had established that Yanukovych's SBU chief, Oleksandr Yakymenko, who later fled the country, had received reports from FSB agents stationed in Ukraine, and that Yakymenko had held several briefings with the agents.
The FSB rejected these claims as ""groundless accusations"" and otherwise refused to comment.
Ukraine will make Europe better and Europe will make Ukraine better, we are here to support your just cause, the sovereign right of Ukraine to determine its own destiny freely and independently.
What we're trying to do is try to bring about a peaceful transition here, that would stop the violence and give the Ukrainian people what they unfortunately have not had, with different revolutions that have taken place – a real society.
This is a grassroots revolution here – it's been peaceful except when the government tried to crack down on them, and the government hasn't tried that since.
I'm praising their ability and their desire to demonstrate peacefully for change that I think they deserve.
These people love the United States of America, they love freedom – and I don't think you could view this as anything other than our traditional support for people who want free and democratic society.
I just think Klitsch going in… he's going to be at that level working for Yatseniuk, it's just not going to work.
Nuland was also recorded in the same conversation saying, ""Fuck the EU,"" dismissively referring to slow-moving European efforts to address political paralysis and a looming fiscal crisis in Ukraine.
February 2014 ^ Last Chief of Staff of Yanukovych ordered separate army units to suppress Maidan.
Retrieved 2 February 2014., Interfax-Ukraine ^ Crimean speaker in Moscow threatens annexation of the Crimea to Russia Archived 13 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
February 2014 ^ Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea ready for separation of peninsula in the case of the collapse of Ukraine Archived 13 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine.
They moved in hours after Moscow gave Ukraine $2 billion in aid which it had been holding back to demand decisive action to crush the protests.
The Globe and Mail. the Kremlin unsubtly pushing Mr Yanukovych to use force to clear the fortified tent city on Independence Square shortly before the fighting began, Moscow announced it would pay the next $2-billion tranche.
We are here to support your just cause"" The Guardian, 14 Dec.13 ^ ""Amid US-Russia tussle over Ukraine, a leaked tape of Victoria Nuland"" Christian Science Monitor, 6 Feb.14 ^ Gearan, Anne.
In recording of United States diplomat, blunt talk on Ukraine, The Washington Post, 6 February 2014.
