This study seeks to explain Russian behaviour Crimea; Donbas in these two cases.
Because of the recent nature of events, there is so far not an abundance of reliable sources.
Thus, some of the ﬁndings in this study should be seen as suggestive rather than conclusive.
It is argued that dominating Russian axioms about Russians and Ukrainian being one people; the West using popular uprisings as a means of war against unwanted regimes; and Western exploitation of Russian weakness for 20 years; all constitute necessary preconditions for the Russian behaviour.
However, the explanation is not complete without considerations on the dominant position of people with background from the Federalnaia Sluzhba Bezopasnosti in the inner decision-making circle, and on Putin’s risk-taking, improvisation and emotions.
This study aims to explain why Russia decided to use military force against Ukraine in 2014.
The study is premature in the sense that more reliable information on motives and processes of decision-making may be available at a later stage when archives may be open.
However, the chances are also great that by then the study will have only historical and academic interest.
Academically, the study falls within the ﬁeld of foreign policy decision-making.
It is, furthermore, a theoretically informed case study, where the purpose is to explain actual decisions, not to make general statements about foreign policy decision-making.
The two decisions to use force described above are the dependent variables.
The aim is, to the extent currently possible; to reconstruct what may have been the processes and thinking taking place in the Russian leadership that led to the use of military force.
Dominating axioms are here understood as discourse rather than belief system.
It means that not all members of the Russian political elite have to genuinely believe in the dominating ‘truth’ about Russia, Ukraine and the West, but that certain axioms exist that it is personally risky to challenge.
The identiﬁcation of the most important of these axioms is a task for this study.
The procedure of foreign policy-making concerns among other things questions of bureaucratic politics and group-think.
Bureaucratic politics refers to the idea that political outcomes are the results of bargains among institutions at the sub-state level.
These institutions may have both their own and the national interest at hart.
Group-think refers to mechanisms that tend to reduce alternative views and information among decisionmakers.
Finally, Putin’s personality concerns all aspects relating to the Russian president himself that may contribute to the explanation for the use of force.
In addition to personality, a discussion is also included on to what extent Putin has a wish to continue to stay in power and whether this may be part of the explanation for the use of force against Ukraine.
Dominating axioms There are in particular three dominating axioms that may contribute to an explanation of why Russia used force in Ukraine.
Second, that the West, with a mixture of economic, political and military means, is using popular uprisings against regimes it dislikes to wage war on them.
Third, that Russia has been wronged by the West for the last 20 years, and that after Euromaidan the time had ﬁnally come to put the foot down.
The Russian acceptance of Ukrainian independence was in the post-Soviet period always qualiﬁed.
Russia did not necessarily have an argument with the independent status of Ukraine as such.
The Russians for a long time thought that there was little to worry about when the Ukrainians talked about a future in Europe.
After the Orange revolution in 2004–2005, though, that illusion was broken.
The new Russian narrative became that Ukraine still wanted to be ‘with Russia’, but that an evil alliance of Western imperialists and minority Ukrainian nationalists were trying to prevent this.
True, opinion polls in Ukraine had long shown that a majority of Ukrainians combined positive attitudes towards Russia with a pro-European prospect for their own country, but this fact may have been little recognized in Russia.
The concern over developments in Ukraine increased substantially after Putin returned to the presidency in 2012.
By then, it was clear that even the return of Victor Yanukovych as president was no guarantee for Ukraine remaining with Russia rather than with the West.
Putin had put serious efforts into helping Yanukovych win the presidential election in 2004.
When the Orange revolution instead led Victor Yushchenko to the presidency, this was explained solely as a result of Western interference.
Yanukovych’s return to the presidency after relatively free and fair elections in 2010, on the other hand, was seen in the Kremlin as a restoration of the natural order of things.
Nevertheless, Yanukovych, after some initial pro-Russian steps, also began to pursue a more pro-Western and especially pro-European course.
Thus, many in the Kremlin probably concluded that the power of Western meddling had not been negated by Yanukovych’s presidency.
Why there is such a strong desire in Russia to keep Ukraine close is a question of both ideology and interests.
The difference between ideologically and interest-based motivation may sometimes be hard to identify.
This study uses the understanding of the two concepts suggested by Jennifer Hochschild.
Ideology is in her account about the realms of morality, identity and causation/interpretation.
This means that it concerns questions about what the actor considers right or wrong; who the actor sees himself to be and how he is related to others; and in which way he interprets phenomena and processes.
Interest is about material or physical desires .6 The ﬁrst axiom, that Russians and Ukrainians are the same people, is, by using Hochschilds deﬁnition, a purely ideological notion.
Such endeavours can only be the result of the efforts of third parties and Ukrainian dissenters, and they can only succeed if these actors are able to force or trick the Ukrainians into anti-Russian positions.
There was no reference to any grievances against the Yanukovych regime that the Ukrainian people may have had.
To give but one example, former Ukrainian president Leonid Kuchma in 2003 published a book simply called Ukraine is not Russia.
Kuchma, similar to Yanukovych, was a representative of the Eastern Ukrainian business elite.
It would be especially disappointing to Moscow that such a title was produced by somebody from that part of the Ukrainian elite, long seen as a potential Kremlin ally.
The axiom about Russians and Ukrainians being one and the same is seldom contradicted in the Russian elite.
It has adherents, not only in the pro270 T BUKKVOLL regime camp, but also among the opposition.
In the wider population, however, fewer and fewer seem to think this is the case.
The independent polling and sociological research institute Levada centre has asked Russian public opinion about this topic since 2004.
In 2005, 81% of respondents thought Russians and Ukrainians were the same people.
This means that a signiﬁcant number of Russians are likely to say in opinion polls what they think the authorities would like them to say rather than what they actually think.
Thus, in the current case some respondents may have answered that they thought Russians and Ukrainians are the same people because they know the political leadership thinks this, not because it is their own opinion.
If that is the case, the rift between elite discourse and public opinion may be even bigger that the September 2015 survey suggests.
This point may be relevant also for the other survey results quoted in this study.
We do not have empirical data on how widespread the belief that Russians and Ukrainians are the same people is within the elite.
It may be that the axiom, while seldom contradicted, also has only partial elite support.
This, nevertheless, does not necessarily diminish its explanatory power.
As discussed in the introduction, if the axioms are understood as discourse, then the degree of genuine individual belief is of limited relevance for the explanatory power of the axiom.
The dominating discourse, that Russians and Ukrainians are one people, is established by those who have the power to do so, and to contradict this statement may leave an individual outside the group or even open up for sanctions against that individual.
This is not to dismiss that expressed believes may be genuine, just that it is very hard to know.
The second axiom, that the West is using popular uprisings to gain geopolitical advantage at the cost of Russia, is both an ideologically and interest-based notion.
Ideologically, it is about why a popular uprising took place in Ukraine and about the ‘slyness’ of the methods used to bring it about.
In terms of interests, it is about Russia losing advantage to the West in term of economics and security.
The causation/interpretation element was vividly demonstrated to the author of this study when he was present at a conference on international security hosted by the Russian ministry of defence in 2014.
The ﬁrst conference panel included presentations by Minister of Defence Sergei Shoigu, Chief of the General Staff Valerii Gerasimov, Chief of the Main Operational Directorate of the General Staff, Vladimir Zarudniskyi and others.
The main message from all of them was that ‘colour revolutions’ is the new Western way of waging war on Russia.
First, some Russians will say that international politics has always been a ﬁerce battle without rules.
Second, many Russian politicians have probably reached the conclusion that if the West is waging war in this way, then Russia can do the same.
Russia will of course still ofﬁcially claim that both the incorporation of Crimea into Russia and the rebellion in the Donbas were the results of genuine popular uprisings against Kiev.
Privately, nonetheless, they of course know their own role in those events.
Thus, to the extent that they continue to be morally outraged by what they see as the Western instrumental use of popular uprisings, this should probably be seen more as part of the international battle for the narrative than as genuine moral indignation.
Compared to the ‘one people’ axiom, the ‘Western use of popular uprisings’ axiom has a slightly broader support in the population.
In a November 2015 Levada opinion poll, respondents were asked why they thought the current Ukrainian leadership is striving for closer relations with Europe and more independence from Russia.
Thus, despite what Putin and other Russian leaders say, and despite the massive Russian propaganda, there are almost as many Russians who think Ukraine’s pro-European policy is a result of indigenous views as those who think the Ukrainians have just been manipulated by the West.
The interest-based part of the second axiom is that Russia will lose economically and geo-strategically by Ukraine going west.
Russian leaders have mostly spoken of what Ukraine rather than Russia would lose economically by the former going west, but a leaked Kremlin policy paper from February 2014 suggests that the Russian motivation for holding on to Ukraine is not necessarily limited to ideology.
This policy paper warns in particular that Russia could lose Ukraine as a customer for oil and gas and completely lose control over the Ukrainian pipeline system.
Additionally, if Russia one way or another gets control over a number of Ukraine’s eastern provinces, Russia would get access to substantial and well-qualiﬁed labour resources.
Furthermore, it would control signiﬁcant parts of the Ukrainian military-industrial complex.
The authenticity of this document has not been recognized by anyone close to the Kremlin, but if genuine, it does at least indicate that interest-based motives may have been part of the internal deliberations.
Of course, the way the conﬂict developed it is now likely that the costs for Russia of the Donbas war have already far exceeded any economic gain.
However, that does not mean things did not look more optimistic at the time when the decision to intervene was taken.
It is entirely possible that many in the Kremlin expected to get control over more proﬁtable parts of Ukrainian industry than the largely derelict coalmines they currently control, for example, much of the industry around Kharkiv.
Also, they may have expected much weaker Ukrainian military responses and feebler and shorter lasting Western economic sanctions.
This mainly relates to the fear of Ukrainian NATO membership if the country manages to distance itself from Russia.
The third axiom, to repeat, is that Russia has been wronged by the West for the last 20 years, and that after Euromaidan the time had come for the country to put the foot down.
Yet, the West instead of being grateful reacted by creating new walls around Russia.
That statement, although creating a lot of stir at the time, is nevertheless a polite version of how others in the Russian leadership interpret the post-cold war developments.
Glazev is a Kremlin radical, and many in the Kremlin will probably disagree with the most outrageous of these allegations, but his radicalism has so far not cost him his position.
In fact, as will be shown later, he is at times given considerable political authority.
This interpretation of recent history is an important part of the explanation why Russia saw its intervention in Ukraine as a way of striking back.
Furthermore, as pointed out by Frolov , striking back over Ukraine should not only be seen as a reactive policy.
Up until the Crimea intervention, although to a decreasing degree, maintaining the illusions of joint values with the West had at times been a straightjacket for the Russian leadership.
On this third axiom, the Russian popular support is stronger than at the previous two.
Thus, the Russian population largely seems to buy the leadership’s interpretation of postSoviet history, and they think Russia is strong enough to take the chance of standing up to the West.
A ﬁnal point, one which has surfaced in much of the Western commentary on Crimea and Donbas, is how Russia could attack Ukraine when it had signed several international treaties that guaranteed Ukrainian territorial integrity.
One possible explanation may be that Russians tend to give priority to what they see as just over what they see as legal.
Berman suggested as far back as 1950 that in the Russian legal and political tradition, justice outranks the letter of the law.
In the case of Ukraine, Russian journalist Konstantin Ranks has noticed that when discussing with, for example, Balts and the Finns, these will always refer to the agreements Russia has signed.
Russians, on the other hand, will tend to emphasize what they see as fair and just.
Thus, this legal and cultural tradition may also be part of the explanation for the use of force.
The procedure of foreign policy-making The procedure of foreign policy-making concerns both the questions of who and how.
The ‘who’ is a question of individuals and groups and their relative strength within the political leadership.
The ‘how’ concerns in which way decisions are made, such as the size of the decision-making body, the role of the president and whether there are distinct rules or institutionalized procedures for how to make decisions.
The ‘how’ additionally includes such questions as how long the decision took and whether it was one major or several smaller decisions.
Based on the empirical information detailed below, two conclusions seem justiﬁed regarding the ‘who’ question.
This, however, did not necessarily, as expected by theories of group-think, prevent signiﬁcant difference of opinion.
Second, although information so far on this point is limited, Federalnaia Sluzhba Bezopasnosti dominance within the political leadership may be one part of the explanation for the decision to use military force.
In the Russian regime’s 2015 celebratory ﬁlm about their annexation of Crimea, Putin himself states that very few individuals were involved in the decision.
According to him, the decision on Crimea was taken by a small group on the eve of the ending of the Sochi Olympics.
Thus, already on Crimea there probably were differences of opinion when it came to the use of force.
According to former Kremlin insider, Gleb Pavloskii, this became even more the case in decision-making on the Donbas.
While in the case of Crimea, the old system of compact and military-like decision making was still dominant, from about May 2014 everything changed.
Among them were Ukrainian and Russian business men attached to different parts of the Kremlin apparatus and to different individuals within Putin’s closest circle.
Even the governors of certain southern Russian counties tried to weigh in.
Since the group that made the decision on Crimea was so small, one may question whether considerations of bureaucratic politics can have any explanatory power.
Still, it is possible to argue that since the decisive group consisted of four former Komitet Gosudarstvennoi Bezopasnosti /FSB ofﬁcers and only one individual not with a KGB/FSB past, the dominance of the FSB may be seen as one of the reasons for the use of force.
Trigger-happy chekisty dismissing the arguments of risk averse and reluctant military would be nothing new in Kremlin decision-making on issues of war and peace.
As pointed out by Roger Braithwait, it was head of the KGB, Yurii Andropov, who in 1979 won the ﬁght against Chief of the General Staff, Nikolay Ogarkov, on the decision on whether or not to send troops into Afghanistan.
Andropov, supported by Minister of Defence Dmitrii Ustinov,9 was certain of a quick military victory.
The military, under Ogarkov, thought this assessment wildly optimistic.
Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, judging by the sources of this study, does not seem to have been party to any of the major decisions on Ukraine.
Given the dominance of individuals with background from the security services at the strategic level of decision-making, one would expect a signiﬁcant danger of group-think.
Russian observers, on the other hand, paint a more nuanced picture of Kremlin decision-making.
Aleksei Venediktov, for example, insists that there are often radically differing views within Putin’s close circle.
Thus, even if the small group that took the decision to use force against Ukraine may have been very homogenous, if Venediktov is right, they were not necessarily very isolated or all in agreement.
You know, I was once allowed to be present at some of the closed meetings, and also to read the minutes afterwards.
Thus, if Venediktov’s observations are representative, it may be more the political weight of the FSB than the absence of alternative views that led to the decision to use force in Ukraine – bureaucratic politics rather than group-think and group polarization.
Former Kremlin insider Pavlovskii claims that Putin during his presidency has become more and more the latter.
According to him, Putin has created ‘a room for himself’ above the decision-making structures where no one else is allowed.
That decision-making style may in particular have been the case when it came to policy towards Ukraine.
This does not suggest a president who actively engages in heavy discussion and collective decision-making, but instead one who mostly listens to the arguments of others and then makes the decision in solitude.
Yet, it is not clear whether this mechanism is more or less likely than the alternative to increase the chances of radical or risky decisions.
Here, there seems to be a signiﬁcant difference between the decision-making on Crimea and Donbas.
Although the Ukrainian Maidan was not foreseen, and the Kremlin did not become ﬁnally convinced that Yanukovych would fall until 20 February 2014, Putin and his closest advisers still had a relatively long time to ponder what to do if Yanukovych fell.
Zygar reports that ‘krym nash’ became a daily topic in the Kremlin already in the autumn of 2013.
In terms of Crimea there appears to have been enough time to prepare both what political and what military actions to take.
Decision-making on Donbas seems to have followed an altogether different trajectory.
Although Putin, as earlier stated, had mentioned Crimea and the East together in Bucharest in 2008 as unacceptable to become NATO territory, current available sources paint a more blurred picture of Kremlin thinking when it came to what Russia should do in relation to the East.
The full details of Russia’s role in the eastern uprising are still not available.
One interpretation, based on current evidence, is that both the uprisings in Donetsk and Luhansk were largely local initiatives, whereas the one in Slaviansk was not.
Furthermore, the ones in Luhansk and Donetsk would probably have been solved peacefully if the ‘little green men’ had not arrived there from Slaviansk to persuade the local protesters to continue.
An indication of the latter, is that the independent Ukrainian journalist Inna Zolotukhina claims to have seen in-service GRU operatives in Slaviansk at the time of the rebellion.
Zygar writes that Strelkov coordinated his activities in Slaviansk with Sergei Glazev, the former mentioned Putin economics adviser.
If that is true, the Kremlin was directly party to the Slaviansk rebellion from the beginning.
Moreover, after Strelkov had turned Donetsk into a city at war, the Kremlin became even more active.
Thus, one overall interpretation of this early stage of the rebellion in Donbas is that substantial initiative was local, but that operators from the Kremlin quickly got involved, and that they were given a degree of freedom of manoeuvre by Putin in order to see what they could achieve.
The Donbas policy should be seen against the background that the use of force in Crimea had been such a success.
If that is the case, then developments until July 2014 may have been seen to vindicate this assumption.
The rebels took over more and more territory, and the initial Ukrainian response was not very potent.
In late July, on the other hand, the Ukrainian counter-offensive became much more efﬁcient.
By mid-August the possibility of a Ukrainian military victory over the rebels had become a reality.
However, by then considerable resources had already been invested, and Kremlin political appetites had probably also grown.
Furthermore, investigative journalists in the Russian newspaper Novaia Gazeta claim, based on anonymous interviews, that the time factor played a signiﬁcant role in the Russian decision not to back down.
Based on this, admittedly scant, evidence, we may speculate that Crimea was a relatively calculated decision based on enough time to evaluate potential consequences and conduct both military and political contingency planning.
The decision to use force in Donbas, on the other hand, may have been more of the ‘mission creep’ type.
A mixture of trial and error led to a situation where one suddenly, under great time pressure, had to decide on whether to give it all up or escalate.
Putin’s personality Given what is written above about decision-making and about the president’s crucial role within it, an analysis of the reasons why Russia used force in Ukraine would be incomplete without an attempt to examine Putin as a decision-maker.
The inferences made, however, should be read as potential causes for action and not as ﬁrm research ﬁndings.
However, some qualiﬁed interpretation is still possible, based on what Putin has said and done and what others with access to him have revealed.
Putin’s desire to stay in power; Putin as a risk-taker; and Putin as an emotional and improvisatorial decision-maker.
One caveat is that the section will not deal speciﬁcally with Putin’s general world view.
Putin may of course hold his own personal varieties of the three axioms presented there, but most of what he has said and done since he became president suggests that his world view is not signiﬁcantly different.
This is especially true in autocratic regimes, such as the one in Russia.
An important reason is that the legal protection of leaders who leave positions of power is so weak.
Thus, politicians who leave ofﬁce risk the loss of both freedom and property when no longer in ofﬁce.
Furthermore, Putin has himself expressed fear of what might happen to him when he at some point leaves power.
The 1993 standoff between parliament and president in Russia had a strong impact on Putin.
The question here is whether Putin’s decision to use force against Ukraine also can be explained by a desire to remain in ofﬁce.
This is the claim of among others the Russian opposition leader Aleksandr Navalny and also some Western analysts (see,g.
What can be established is that Putin’s popularity in the Russian population was falling steadily until Crimea.
This fact, however, is not by itself evidence enough that fear of losing power was one of the reasons for the use of force.
After all, 61% approval rating is still pretty good by international standards.
We seem to be talking about a phenomenon that is more a correlation of variables than a casual explanation at the moment.
The staying in power hypotheses makes sense logically, but so far it cannot be satisfactorily conﬁrmed by empirical data.
Apparently, Putin did not believe in Western economic sanctions if he decided to take Crimea.
There was a real chance that Ukraine would ﬁght back, and nobody knew for sure how the West would react.
The concern here is both with Putin’s personality in terms of taking risk, and with the risk-taking in this particular situation.
This probably has more to do with intimidating opponents than it has to do with introspection.
Aleksei Venediktov, for example, to the contrary has an impression of Putin as a very careful man.
The bottom line is that the fact of risk-taking as a particular trait of Putin’s personality is too uncertain to be used as an explanation for the decision to use force against Ukraine.
Even if this indeed was a trait of the young Putin’s personality, it may be different in the now 63 years old Putin.
In addition, the personality trait of risk acceptance is almost impossible to distinguish from the potential use of the image of risk acceptance for instrumental purposes.
Despite questions about Putin being a particularly risk-acceptant individual, it may have been the case that particular aspects of the incident at hand released a heightened willingness to take risk.
A fact that has only recently become known is that the geopolitical loss Putin and Russia suffered from Euromaidan may have been bigger than at ﬁrst assumed.
When Yanukovych refused to sign the association agreement with the EU in Vilnius in November 2013, he ofﬁcially stated that this was only a postponement.
It should in no way be seen as a major change of Ukrainian foreign policy.
The gathered oligarchs could not believe their own ears, and the oligarch Ihor Kolomoiskiy took Yanukovych aside to check whether he had actually meant what he said.
Thus, it is possible that Putin, after relentless pressure and daily conversations with Yanukovych over a long period of time , thought he had secured one of the most important geopolitical victories of his career.
He may have thought that he had been able to stop the westward drift of Ukraine – a concern of his since he came to power in 2000.
According prospect theory, ﬁrst developed by Kahneman and Tversky , people tend to be more risk acceptant when faced with the prospects loss than gain.
In the case of Ukraine, Putin had gained something extremely valuable, only to be faced with the likely rapid loss of it all because of Maidan.
This would, according to prospect theory, have increased Putin’s risk acceptance and, therefore, become part of the reason why he decided to use force.
This is the impression of former United States ambassador to Moscow, William Burns.
Especially the above analysed decision-making regarding the Donbas seems to support such a conclusion.
A clear vision of the end-state is a precondition for rational decision-making.
Another non-rationalistic explanation for the use of force is emotions.
A desire for revenge is an emotion, and when the West seems to drive even further the disintegration of the former Soviet world with attempts to ‘snitch’ Ukraine, that may have triggered this emotion even stronger.
Thus, the annexation of Crimea may also partly be explained as an angry emotional reaction by Putin.
Conclusions The three axioms of one nation, popular uprisings as a weapon used by the West, and 20 years of humiliation of Russia, form the ideological and interest-based background for the decision to use force against Ukraine.
Without the strength of these convictions, in the Russian leadership if not to the same extent in the Russian population, military force against Ukraine would not have been used.
As argued in the ﬁrst part of this analysis, as long as the axioms constitute the dominating discourse, they will have explanatory power whether they are genuinely believed or not.
They are the established truth, and dissent may have serious consequences for those who express it.
The status of the axioms as causes, however, does not preclude them from also being used instrumentally.
The Russian leadership probably sees that insisting on these axioms is useful both in order to intimidate the West , and in order to conceal additional utility-based motives.
In terms of using ideology to conceal interests, the leaked Kremlin policy document presented earlier suggest that a utilitarian agenda was also present.
Control over human and industrial resources in Eastern Ukraine and geostrategic military advantages, may have been additional motives for the use of force.
However, such arguments would not necessarily serve the Russian case if voiced in public.
Still, even with strong ideological and interest-based motives for not tolerating Euromaidan and its possible consequences, using military force against Ukraine would not have been an automatic decision.
There were considerable risks, even if some of them, such as economic sanctions from the West, may have been underestimated.
Based on the evidence discussed in this study, three to four factors in particular seem to have made the difference in the choice between military action or not.
First, the dominance in decision-making circles of people from the FSB is important.
As the sources consulted here describe, alternative opinions were most likely present in the deliberations.
Bureaucratic politics, on the other hand, with its focus on the relative strength of different sub-national actors for policy output, may be more relevant.
This is eerily reminiscent of the deliberations before the 1979 Soviet decision to invade Afghanistan.
Putin could have thought that he had secured one of the biggest geopolitical triumphs of his career by ﬁnally halting Ukraine’s drift to the West.
Then, just as he was starting to enjoy the victory, it all suddenly looked like it would be lost because of the Yanukovych overthrow.
Prospect theory suggests that people get more risk acceptant when facing loss then when facing gain.
There is also the issue of Putin himself being a particularly risk-acceptant person, but as discussed above, this assumption can be questioned.
The sources of these emotions are of course the axioms presented above, but an emotionally cooler president than Putin could have been less swayed by them.
It is conceivable that emotions played a larger role in the case of Crimea than in the case of Donbas.
Finally, Putin’s desire to thwart the downward trend of his popular approval rating may also have played a role.
This argument is consistent with the timing of events, and it involves the substantial issue of the content of the Russian social contract.
Nevertheless, ﬁrm evidence in support of this argument demands an insight into Putin’s thinking not yet available.
The argument is logically convincing, but so far not sufﬁciently empirically supported.
This is a case study of the decisions to use military force to annex Crimea and to be involved in a popular rebellion against Kiev in Donbas.
As such, there are limits to what other countries in Russia’s neighbourhood can learn from the experience.
Still, the speciﬁcities of Russian geopolitical ideology and interest-based calculations, procedure of decision-making and leadership characteristics presented in this study are relevant for more countries than Ukraine.
Adapted to the individualities of other regional contexts, they may help interpreting Russian policy elsewhere.
Stated at the Moscow Conference on International Security 2014 by both Minister of Defence Sergei Shoigu, Chief of the General Staff Valreiy Gerasimov and Chief of the Main Operational Directorate of the General Staff, Vladimir Zarudniskyi.
Ustinov, although he also had a military background, was a representative of the defence industry rather than the Soviet military.
This was an important distinction in terms of political outlook in the Soviet Union.
Tor Bukkvoll is Senior Research Fellow at the Norwegian Defence Research Establishment.
He is a specialist on Russia and Ukraine, particularly in the areas of defence and security policy.
Vol., Special issues 3–4, “Status and Emotions in Russian Foreign Policy”, edited by Regina Heller, Tuomas Forsberg and Reinhard Wolf.
Navalny wouldn’t return Crimea, considers immigration bigger issue than Ukraine.
