You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate.
Media portrayals of the Ukrainian crisis, including skirmishes in eastern Donbas and the 2014 Ukrainian revolution after the Euromaidan protests, the subsequent 2014 annexation of Crimea, incursions into Donbas, and the full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, have differed widely between Ukrainian, Western and Russian media.
Russian, Ukrainian, and Western media have all, to various degrees, been accused of propagandizing, and of waging an information war.While Russian and Ukrainian media narratives of the ongoing conflict between the two counties differ considerably, due in part to the extent of government control, their media ecosystems are both dominated by the reliance of much of their populations on television for much of their news.
According to Levada Centre, two-thirds of Russians relied on state television for their news in 2021.
Russian channels have repeatedly used misleading images, false narratives, misrepresentation, suppression, and fabricated news stories, such as 2014's fictional child's crucifixion and fictional death of a fictional 10-year-old in a shelling.
A regular theme in the Russian media has been that the Ukrainian army, which has many Russian-speaking members, commits ""genocide"" against Russian speakers who strongly desire Russia to ""protect"" them from Kyiv.
Yet a Gallup poll showed that fewer than 8% of eastern residents ""definitely"" wanted Russian protection.
They believed Russia's denials of involvement in the Crimean crisis, until Vladimir Putin boasted about the key role of Russian soldiers, and continue denying its involvement in the war in the Donbas region of Ukraine, despite evidence that Russia has regularly shelled across the border.
Reactions 4 Terminology 5 Public reactions and social media 6 Assaults, intimidation, and restrictions on press freedom 6.
Russia 7 See also 8 References Media in Russia Russian state media This section may be too long to read and navigate comfortably.
Please consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings.
Media freedom in Russia is highly restricted, and Russian state media presents the official viewpoint of the Russian government.
Russian state media frequently reported stories that were completely invented, or distorted statements by Ukrainian and Western politicians.
News presented as actual events is frequently hearsay, from anonymous blogs, intentionally staged videos, and selectively quoted materials, omitting anything critical of Russia.
Writing for Sobesednik , Dmitry Bykov said ""the language of today's propaganda has become full of artificial connections.
Maria Alekhina from Pussy Riot and Max Skibinsky also criticized the Russian media's reporting.
Edward Lucas and Peter Pomerantsev noted that Russia's portrayal borrowed from Soviet narratives and terminology.
Rossiya 2 aired a short simulation of a Topol-M rocket hitting London while channel 5 simulated a conventional invasion of Warsaw, Berlin and the Baltic states.
Maksim Trudolyubov, writing in Vedomosti, said ""Today's state-run media in Russia is a continuation of the KGB but much smarter than previous incarnations.
Euromaidan State Russian media consistently portray the fighting in Ukraine as instigated by successive Ukrainian governments following the 2014 ouster of Viktor Yanukovych, the fourth president of Ukraine, during the pro-European Euromaidan protest movement.
Euromaidan, described as controlled by ""ultranationalist"", “fascist"", ""neo-Nazi"", and ""anti-Semitic"" elements, and the Right Sector, described as a “far-right nationalist group” commonly featured in Russian media.
The revolution has been depicted as a violent ""coup d'etat"" fomented by the West to overthrow the elected government of Ukraine.
At the same time, reporting on a Euromaidan protest attended by over a hundred thousand people,Channel One Russia said that the protests were ""dying out"" with ""only a few hundred"" attending.Police brutality against Euromaidan supporters wasn’t mentioned in Russian media.
Russian state media claimed that Western countries, particularly the United States, orchestrated events in Ukraine to harm Russia.The European Union–Ukraine Association Agreement was depicted as a weapon against the Kremlin, protesters as paid stooges of the United States, and the Vilnius summit as akin to the Munich Agreement.Descriptions of the Ukrainian government as ""illegitimate"" or ""self-appointed"" and the country as ""fascist"" were common in Russian reports during much of the conflict, but had declined sharply by the end of 2015.
Ukraine was often portrayed as ""irreparably dysfunctional"", ""artificial"", ""deeply divided"", or a failed state.Russian state media claimed that Kyiv authorities had allowed total anarchy to take root in Ukraine and that the country was under the control of ""banderovtsy"", followers of Ukrainian nationalist Stepan Bandera.
Eastern Ukrainians were portrayed as seeking Russia's intervention and protection, despite a Gallup poll showing that less than 20% of residents agreed.
The Ukrainian government was accused by Russian media of ""genocide"" and ""pogroms"" against the large Russian-speaking population in eastern and southern Ukraine.
Channel One presented footage from a Shehyni border crossing between Ukraine and Poland, as Ukrainians escaping to Russia.
Russian state channels depicted Donbass civilians as under attack by Ukrainian forces and made no mention of insurgents firing from residential areas.
A group of Russian nationalists prepared an international exhibition Material Evidence, presented with highly anti-Western and pro-Russian bias.
Russian media claimed that western media ignored the apparent ""violence"", and that demonstrators in Crimea were protesting for democratic rights.
Russian sources consistently refer to the events as the ""Russian Spring"", harking back to pro-democracy movements like the Prague Spring and Arab Spring.
We have no idea what is going on at the others"" During the Crimean crisis, Russian media echoed the Russian government's assertions that Russian troops were not involved, and that Ukrainian nationalists from western Ukraine and Kyiv were assaulting and killing Russians in Crimea.
They claimed that a bus in Simferopol carried members of Right Sector who attacked Crimean residents, although footage showed a bus with Crimean license plates transporting men armed with Russian weapons, after roads to Crimea had been blocked by Russian soldiers.Russia 24 used footage of the Maidan square in Kyiv to support its claims of chaos in Simferopol, Crimea.
Claims of violence and suppression against Russian-speakers in Ukraine were used to justify for the Russian military intervention in Crimea.
In an interview with the Institute for War and Peace Reporting, Peter Pomerantsev said, ""The Kremlin has reinvented the conflict in Ukraine as a genocide against Russians.
Russian media focused particularly on Right Sector, portraying the group as powerful, fascist, and neo-Nazi and saying that it was persecuting Russian-speakers and Jews.
Writing for Foreign Policy, Hanna Kozlowska stated that Russian propaganda tried to demonize the Ukraine government and build a case for the annexation of Crimea by depicting Right Sector as a powerful neo-Nazi group that might take control of Ukraine.
During the first half of 2014, Right Sector was the second-most mentioned political group in online Russian mass media.
The Associated Press and other international news organizations found no evidence that the group had committed hate crimes.
Right Sector and other far-right candidates had poor results in both the 2014 Ukrainian presidential election and parliamentary elections.
In March 2014, historian Timothy D Snyder rejected the claims of a ""fascist coup"", stating ""Although one can certainly debate the constitutional nuances, this process was not a coup.
Some observers were critical of the Russian media's heavy focus on radical and right-wing groups during Euromaidan, finding that the protests were broad-based.
The Kyiv Post's Oleg Sukhov and BBC News' Stephen Ennis accused Russian media of ""demonization"" of Ukrainians.
Russia-1 state television said ""Kyiv threatened the citizens of Donetsk with psychological attacks from the air.
In July 2014, ITAR-TASS, RIA Novosti, and LifeNews reported that pro-Russian separatists had shot down a Ukrainian military plane over Torez.
When news emerged about the MH17 crash, Russian channels suggested Ukraine was responsible, and that the crash was part of a United States conspiracy against Russia.In August 2015 Komsomolskaya Pravda published a purported wiretap transcript of two named CIA operatives planning an attack on MH17.
Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 In March 2015, TASS published a false report that the Carpatho-Rusyns had held a congress in which they decided to seek autonomy.
Russian state media were also criticized for their reporting on Odessa Oblast, particularly their claims of riots and persecution of ethnic minorities.
Russia-1 presented Poroshenko's statement that Ukrainian would remain the only state language as a violation of the right to speak Russian freely, although a survey found that even Donbass and eastern oblasts preferred Russian to have the status of a second official language in particular regions over ""state language"" status.
In May 2015, Izvestiya ""disclosed"" a letter allegedly from the United States Embassy to LGBT activists in Russia, written in such error-ridden English that the United States Department of State republished it with the errors marked in red and a dedication in Russian, suggesting that the authors ask for help when writing such letters next time.Potupchik reported to her supervisors about alleged irregularities in Alexei Navalny's passport application form, attaching its scans to the email.
As noted by The Insider, she had no legal way to obtain these forms, as they are considered sensitive documents, and a few days later LifeNews reported exactly these irregularities as part of campaign against Navalny.
As Russian independent media shortly found out, this phrase wasn’t made by Albright, but instead by a former Russian security services officer, Boris Ratnikov, who in 2006 gave examples of what kind of ""secret"" information he was able to extract from Western leaders using experimental ""remote mind control"" research.
Even though the origins of this statement had been traced in 2007, Russian leaders continued to repeat it as truth.
In the same interview Bastrykin also accused Arseniy Yatsenyuk of taking part in the First Chechen War which, due to its surreal character was widely ridiculed in Ukrainian and Russian media, including a number of memes portraying Yatseniuk as a Chechen warlord.
These accusations were based on testimony from Mykola Karpyuk and Stanislav Klykh, Ukrainian citizens held, tortured and extorted in Russia since 2014.
Another Ukrainian citizen, Serhiy Litvinov, is also held in Russia and his forced statements were used by Russian media as 'proof' of 'genocide of Russian nationals' as Litvinov was also charged with murdering twenty 'unidentified people' and a rape.
By the end of 2014, most of the charges against him were dropped, leaving one robbery charge.
According to Alexander Cherkasov, the prosecution statement in Karpyuk and Klykh contains errors and inconsistencies suggesting that it was written based on the Russian Wikipedia article on Salman Raduyev rather than any actual evidence.
Beyond risks to Russia's territorial integrity, some theories outline support for ethnic and/or religious separatist movements in and around Russia.
Russian state television has described the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 and the Prague Spring of 1968, both stopped by Soviet-led invasions, as orchestrated by the United States and Western European countries.
Russian TV presented the invasion of Czechoslovakia ""as brotherly help aimed to prevent an invasion by NATO and fascism"", provoking outrage in the Czech Republic and Slovakia.
Social Media Social media are used in a coordinated way to influence public opinion in Russia and elsewhere.
Web brigades and Trolls from Olgino Leaked emails of Kristina Potupchik, a former Nashi spokeswoman, and later an employee of the Putin administration, revealed wide-scale monitoring of any critical articles in Russia opposition media, paid commenting and trolling by web brigades, coordinated by Potupchik.
According to earlier leaks she had been involved in similar activities at least since 2012.
Critical reactions in Russia Russian mass media played a significant role in starting the war in Donbass, according to war reporter and veteran of the First Chechen War Arkadiy Babchenko.
Writing in March 2014 for Gazeta.ru, Yekaterina Bolotovskaya said the Russian media presented an ""apocalyptic"" image of Ukraine.
After a Russian channel claimed Ukrainians had crucified a child in Slovyansk, the former chief editor of Lenta.ru, Galina Timchenko, said, ""This is an egregious violation of professional ethics.
Boris Nemtsov stated that Vladimir Putin and the directors of Channel One Russia and Rossiya Segodnya employed ""Goebbels-style propaganda.
If we are talking about the responsibility for spilling both Russian and Ukrainian blood, it lies not only with Putin, but also with such gentlemen as Konstantin Ernst or Dmitry Kiselyov.
Russian hacker group Shaltay Boltay published v Kremlin documents telling journalists to justify the Crimean annexation, praise Vladimir Putin's development plans, and depict Ukraine as swarming with fascists.Delovoi Petersburg and a journalist interviewed by Der Spiegel reported that several ""Ukrainian"" news sites, such as the Kharkov News Agency, were based in Russia.
On 5 April 2022, Russia's opposition politician Alexei Navalny said the ""monstrosity of lies"" in the Russian state media ""is unimaginable.
He tweeted that ""warmongers"" among Russian state media personalities ""should be treated as war criminals.
Freedom of the press in Russia Roskomnadzor issued a warning to Ekho Moskvy after two journalists, Sergei Loiko and Timur Olevskiy, discussed the battle for Donetsk Airport.
Vitaliy Portnikov, writing in Grani.ru, mocked justifications of Russia's seizures of land.
Alexander Podrabinek wrote that Putin had a history of using wars to increase and maintain his power and was now using a war with Ukraine to deflect opposition in Russia.
In 2014, Boris Nemtsov wrote that the Kremlin demonstrated hypocrisy by advocating federalism for Ukraine, stating ""Russia itself has not had any sort of federal state for a long time, since 2004"", and said Putin sought to ""punish"" Ukraine to discourage a revolution against corruption from taking place in Russia.
In October 2014, Russian economic expert Stepan Demura criticized the Russian invasion of Ukraine and 2014 Crimean crisis, saying they would harm the Russian economy.
Russian media have widely reported that and, as result, RT and TASS agencies who worked with Saponkov previously both publicly condemned his comments.Novaya Gazeta, Slon.ru, Grani.ru and Ekho Moskvy published criticism of Russia's policy in Crimea and then Donbass.
Journalists who wrote commentary critical of the Russian government's actions usually experienced ostracism and were accused of treachery or fascism by mainstream media.
In March 2014, Vedomosti published an article by a Moscow university professor, Andrey Zubov, who was subsequently fired, comparing Russia's military intervention in Crimea with Nazi Germany's Anschluss.
Russian historians Alexandr Skobov and Andrey Piontkovski commented on the ideology of the self-declared Federal State of Novorossiya and concluded that its basic features bore strong similarities to 20th century fascist movements.
On 28 July, Skobov was assaulted by unknown perpetrators and received several stab wounds in St.
In Russia, opponents of the war frequently face discrimination and coordinated hate campaigns.
The most extreme example was the assassination of Boris Nemtsov, which his daughter Zhanna Nemtsova blamed on Putin and Russian media.
She said that Putin's ""information machine"" ""employs criminal propaganda techniques to sow hatred, which in turn spawns violence and terror.
In June 2015 Alexandr Byvshev, a poet whose anti-war works were banned as ""extremist"" earlier, was added to an official ""list of terrorists and extremists"" maintained by the Federal Service for Financial Monitoring and a ""spontaneous collective condemnation"" campaign, described as Soviet-style by independent media, began in his village.
According to Luc Maffre and Peter Pomerantsev, Russia's narrative has roots in Soviet dezinformatsiya and active measures.
Some commentators believed that Russian state-controlled media attempted to sow confusion.
Unsubstantiated atrocity claims Western and Ukrainian media have accused Russian media of fabrications.
The Kyiv Post reported that a journalist from the same channel, Yevgeni Poddubny , was involved in a plot to frame the Ukrainian army for the death of a Red Cross worker.
Russian media also presented images from military conflicts in Georgia, South Ossetia, and Syria as being from Ukraine.
In April 2014, Russia-1 presented a man by the name of Andrei Petkov as a pro-Russia activist who had been attacked by Ukrainians while NTV called the same man Andrei Petkhov and said he was funding pro-Ukrainian extremists.
Maria Tsypko appeared in various roles on Russian channels during the 2014 crisis.
Telekrytyka said that an analysis of Russia-1's video of a gun battle in Crimea indicated it was staged.
The same channel falsely presented a construction site as a ""concentration camp"" and a man critical of Euromaidan as a Ukrainian former diplomat, Andriy Veselovsky.Multiple Russian news outlets have been criticized for producing unsubstantiated reports of atrocities.
In June 2014, LifeNews aired footage which it said was evidence of Ukrainian forces using white phosphorus to attack a village named Semenyovka, near Sloviansk.
Human Rights Watch analysts rejected the claim, saying that the footage was inconsistent with white phosphorus or an incendiary weapon.
Other Russian news organizations aired footage of white phosphorus in Iraq to support their allegations against Ukraine.
In July 2014, Channel One Russia stated that Ukrainian soldiers had crucified a three-year-old boy in Lenin Square in Sloviansk, although there is no such square in Sloviansk and the only witness to the alleged atrocity falsely claimed that she was a refugee from the town.
The same channel used a 1995 photo of a mass grave in Chechnya to depict Ukraine.
In August 2014, Russia's Zvezda channel was accused of editing footage of a failed rocket launch in Baikonur, Kazakhstan to use in a report claiming Ukraine attacked civilians in Makiivka.
In September 2014, the BBC reported that REN TV had used images of MH17 plane crash victims to support its claims of atrocities by Ukrainian soldiers in eastern Ukraine.
NTV 's documentary 13 Friends of the Junta , which described anti-war activists and critics of Russia's policies in Ukraine as ""traitors"" and supporters of ""fascists"", also received criticism.
Russian media claimed in late September that ""hundreds of unmarked graves of civilians executed by Ukrainian army"" had been found and verified by OSCE monitors, a claim debunked by both the OSCE and DPR officials.
The Moscow Times reported that footage of Andrei Makarevich's concert in Sviatohirsk ""was merged with images of fighting that he supposedly endorsed.
Ukrayina aired a documentary demonstrating how an NTV movie attributed actions of Russia-backed separatists to Ukrainian armed forces and used numerous other manipulations.
StopFake.org reported that Rossiya Segodnya's Ukraina.ru mixed in images of the 2004 Beslan massacre, in southern Russia, into their documentary on Ukrainian children.
BBC News found that Russian TV coverage of the 2 May 2014 Odessa clashes was misleading, noting that it ""either completely ignored or seriously misrepresented the street clashes that preceded the fatal fire, thus giving the impression that the attack by pro-Ukraine activists on Trade Union House was completely unprovoked"", made it seem that all the victims were pro-Russian, used manipulated or questionable evidence to support claims that several people had been murdered, and failed to mention that some pro-Ukrainian activists had attempted to help dying people.
In April 2015, Russian media widely reported a 10-year-old girl killed by Ukrainian artillery, but Russian reporters on the site interviewed by the BBC admitted that ""the girl never existed"" and they were reporting this fake story because they ""were instructed"" to do so.
Further fake news in Russian media included alleged ""fascist attacks"" on the Greek population in Crimea and ""four American soldiers"" raping two underage girls in Ukraine.RTEnglish-language television channel RT, owned by the Russian government, has been called the ""primary hub of Russian propaganda in the West"", accused of distortions and omissions, aligning its coverage to suit the Russian government, and fueling paranoia.
A presenter for the channel, Liz Wahl, resigned on air after saying that she disagreed with the channel's ""whitewashing"" of the Russian government's actions during the 2014 Crimean crisis.
Genocide in Eastern Ukraine, which it later removed after heavy criticism.
RT reporter Sara Firth resigned in protest against the network's coverage of the crash, which she said was heavily biased.
The Interpretermag.com said that some Russian reporters were involved in serious violations of journalism ethics.
Some Russian media have been accused of employing whataboutism as a response to criticism of Russia's actions in Ukraine.
Rossiya Segodnya published an interview with Igor Girkin after removing his statements on working for Russia's Federal Security Service and chaos among pro-Russian militants.
Blaming everyone except for the Russian government"" while Daniel Drezner noted how the Russian media narrative of the Malaysian airline shoot-down was a ""grab bag of conspiracy theories"" and suggested that Putin could become trapped by the nationalist rhetoric created over the incident.
The Associated Press reported that the theories presented by Russian broadcasters and newspapers ""vary wildly in content"" but ""all point the finger at Ukraine.
In October 2014, Taras Kuzio wrote in the Financial Times that ""the world view created by Putin's state controlled media has never corresponded to reality.
Putin always mixed up ""Russian speakers"" with ""Russians"" in Ukraine, believing they were one and the same.
The Russian media's depiction of the mainly Russophone city of Kharkiv as eager to join Russia was called ""wishful thinking"" by Katya Soldak of Forbes, who said that events in the city and a survey conducted by Alexei Navalny did not support the portrayal.
Pierre Vaux, writing in Left Foot Forward, criticized ""the efforts of Kremlin propagandists to portray the Ukrainian government as waging a war on Russian speakers"", stating that ""large swathes of the government are Russian speakers.
In addition to Russophones from Ukraine, about a hundred Russian citizens joined pro-Ukrainian forces, "" incessant Kremlin propaganda that Russian speakers are being persecuted in Ukraine"", according to the Kyiv Post.
NATOAssertions that the West had broken an agreement against NATO enlargement were criticized by some commentators.
In 2014 interviews with Russia Beyond the Headlines and Germany's ZDF, Mikhail Gorbachev also dismissed claims of a non-expansion pledge and said the idea that the West had deceived him was ""a myth.
According to Ben Nimmo of the Central European Policy Institute, the Russian media was ""distorting Western perceptions of the conflict.
Accused of trying to ""encircle"" Russia and deepening divisions by accepting new members, NATO said that the statement ""ignores the facts of geography.
The Road to the Homeland, which aired in March 2015, was criticized for distorting a March 2014 incident in which a man named Oleg Gorshkov attempted to stop a truck from breaking through a Crimean checkpoint, for unsupported claims of an anti-Crimean ""pogrom"" in Korsun-Shevchenkivskyi, and for a ""sycophantic"" Putin interview.
In April 2015, Lithuania's Radio and Television Commission banned RTR-Planeta for three months, stating that it had violated the law against ""war propaganda, hatred and inciting discord"" and ignored repeated warnings.
In 2015 European Union External Action started a periodic publication called ""Disinformation Review"" documenting such articles by Russian media accompanied by debunking information.
In Left Foot Forward, Pierre Vaux described Milne's article as ""the distorted apologia of a Kremlin advocate, one who performs front-of-house PR duties with the president himself"" and questioned The Guardian's decision to publish it despite its own editorial criticizing moral relativism and disinformation.
Some writers for western newspapers, including Stephen F Cohen of The Nation and columnists for The Guardian and The Daily Telegraph, were accused of apologism for Russia—justifying its actions.
According to Isaac Chotiner of the New Republic, Cohen's writing implied that ""some sort of control over Ukraine is a requirement of Russian greatness.
Some critics said pro-Russian western media used whataboutism and focused disproportionately on the minority of Euromaidan protestors who belonged to the far-right.
Historian Timothy D Snyder found that both far-right and far-left publications echoed the positions of the Kremlin and Yanukovych.
In an interview with New Eastern Europe, Andrew Wilson said, ""The way that the left talks about Russia's ""legitimate interests"" in Ukraine is bizarre.
John Mearsheimer's article for Foreign Affairs was criticized by Anders Åslund of the Peterson Institute, Mariana Budjeryn of World Affairs, and Alexander J Motyl of World Affairs.
Laas Leivat of Estonian Life also found that Western media were ""internalizing"" Russia's portrayal of Ukraine as an ""irreparably dysfunctional"" and ""deeply divided"" country.Interpretermag.com's Catherine A Fitzpatrick said mainstream media ignored allegations that Russian reporters had committed serious violations of journalism ethics.
Newsweek was criticized for articles by Damien Sharkov and Felicity Capon.
Sharkov and the executive director of Human Rights Watch, Kenneth Roth, falsely claimed that Ukrainian lawmakers had passed a motion allowing deserters to be shot.
Yuri M Zhukov said that ""ethnocentric"" western and Russian portrayals of the war in Donbass,e. focusing on language and ethnicity, were not supported by data on the violence, which showed a stronger connection with local economic factors.
Western media outlets have described Ukrainian victims of the invasion as ""white"", ""Christian"", ""middle class"", ""blonde"", ""civilized"", ""European"" and ""blue eyed."", while Middle Eastern victims of war have not been described in such favourable terms.
Western media outlets have also been criticized for their lack of coverage of conflicts in other parts of the world compared to the Ukraine invasion.
Russian state-controlled media systematically downplays both civilian and military losses, denouncing reports of attacks on civilians as ""fake"" or blaming Ukrainian forces.
Roskomnadzor investigated several independent Russian media outlets for publishing information about the war or civilian casualties.
The regulator threatened to block access in Russia to the Russian Wikipedia, and fine Wikipedia up to four million rubles , for its article on the invasion, which reflects casualties among Ukrainian civilians and Russian military personnel.Pro-Kremlin TV pundits like Vladimir Solovyov and state-controlled media outlets such as Russia-24,Russia-1, and Channel One mostly follow the government narrative on the war.
Independent Russian Media in 2022 Russian authorities blocked access to Echo of Moscow and Dozhd , Russia's last independent TV station, claiming that they were spreading false information on the Russian military and calling for violence.Novaya Gazeta, an independent newspaper critical of the Russian government, suspended publication after it received warnings from Roskomnadzor.
Media in Ukraine Ukrainian media have stated that the unrest in Ukraine was manufactured by Russia.
They have consistently accused Russia of being a provocateur, and of controlling anti-government groups behind the scenes.
The Ukrainian media published some fake news stories and false reports, including a dead rebel photograph with a Photoshop-painted tattoo which allegedly indicated that he belonged to Russian Special Forces and the threat of a Russian nuclear attack against the Ukrainian troops.Halya Coynash of the Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group criticized Russia for calling for ""federalization"" of Ukraine while quickly suppressing autonomy initiatives within Russia.
Volodymyr Zelenskyy has used social media to post statements, videos and photos to counter Russian disinformation about him during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Reactions In April 2014, historian Timothy D Snyder stated that ""Ukraine is now the site of the largest and most important free media in the Russian language, since all important media in Ukraine appear in Russian, and since freedom of speech prevails.
Likewise, Mikhail A Molchanov, professor and former chair of the Department of Political Science at St.
Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych's accumulation of wealth received coverage.
Media mostly saw the Euromaidan protests as an anti-corruption and pro-democracy movement, with a minority presence of far-right groups, though some observers suggested that these groups played a decisive role in armed confrontations.
Moscow's claims of fascism and western conspiracies were often included for balance.Russian president Vladimir Putin was described variously as a ""bully"", ""imperialist"", and a ""brilliant"" and skilled leader.
A few days after the OSCE's Observer Mission wrote that it ""continued to observe high numbers of dumper trucks transporting coal from the Luhansk region to the Russian Federation,""Reuters reported Russia's offer to sell coal to Ukraine, saying ""months of fighting a pro-Russian uprising has disrupted coal supplies"" but didn’t mention the OSCE observations.
A number of U.K. and United States commentators reflected the Russian state media's portrayal of the Ukrainian crisis.
Seumas Milne, John Pilger, John Mearsheimer, Stephen Cohen, and others blamed ""neo-Nazis"" in Ukraine and ""NATO expansion"", expressed understanding for Putin whom the West had ""provoked"", and presented Ukraine as a pawn which Russia was entitled to treat as its sphere of influence.Some Western sources did ascribe the 2014 fighting to the Russian government and Russian special forces.
Some outlets proclaimed a ""new cold war"", seeing similarities to Adolf Hitler's annexation of countries with German-language speakers, such as Austria and the Sudetenland, and called the annexation of Crimea Russia's Anschluss.
Foreign Policy stated ""The West has dithered under the assumption that providing lethal aid to Ukraine would escalate the conflict.
But a sanctions-dominant approach clearly has not prevented escalation.
Jan C Behrends of Zeitgeschichte-online wrote, ""To hold on to Ostpolitik, Berlin has over the past 20 years ignored warning signs from Chechnya to Georgia and the authoritarian restructuring of the Russian state.
In his article for Die Zeit, Boris Schumatsky said, ""Putin triumphs when other world leaders allow the lies to go unchallenged.
Of course Putin knows that at least some politicians are wise to his ways.
Volodymyr Valkov said EU and NATO policies ""cannot be considered as ""provocative policies"" against Russia to excuse Russian annexation of Crimea and occupation of Ukraine's eastern regions.
Many former Soviet republics and Warsaw pact countries have chosen democracy and joined the alliances that best represent their interests and aspirations.
Reactions In an article published in February 2014 by RFERL, Glenn Kates said some media's maps, such as one presented by Al Jazeera, oversimplified the divisions in Ukraine.
He reported a ""heavy lean towards pro-Russia guests,"" with many having ""economic ties to Russia,"" and found that of the 27 guests who were journalists, none were from Ukraine, compared to eight from Russia, while most of the German journalists were experts on Russia rather than Ukraine.
By January 2015, media coverage of events in Ukraine had decreased significantly.
The former Prime Minister of Sweden Carl Bildt said, ""It's striking how most media just avoid the battles in eastern Ukraine.
In the Polish New Eastern Europe, Sławomir Budziak stated that new pro-Russian media outlets had appeared in the Czech Republic, publishing ""far-fetched claims, speculations, conspiracy-mongering, lies, defamation and propaganda"" which fostered ""a state of doubt"" and ""mistrust"" in readers.
This support was due to affection for Putin's strongman leadership, as well as anti-US and anti-Western political alignments.
Many Indonesians disliked Zelenskyy due to seeing him as a weak leader and a ""comedian"" not worthy to rule a country.
Additionally, many supported Russia due to positive reports of Ramzan Kadyrov and claims that the Azov Battalion covering their bullets with lard to be used against Chechen troops in the invasion.
The same event also appeared in Malaysia which the Russian embassies in Malaysia was publishing video on facebook featuring a russian male wearing Malay outfit and explain a situation with malay language clearly.Russian propaganda has been repeated by the state-controlled outlets of other countries such as Serbia and Iran.
In Iran, the state media criticised the British embassy in Tehran after it raised the Ukrainian flag in support of Ukraine.
Reports from Sputnik have been actively republished by Iran's pro-regime media.
In Latin America, RT Actualidad is a popular channel that has spread disinformation about the war.
Authorities in Vietnam have instructed reporters not to use the word ""invasion"" and to minimize coverage of the war.
In South Africa, the governing African National Congress published an article in its weekly newsletter ANC Today endorsing the notion that Russia had invaded Ukraine to denazify it.
The blunt reality is that in many parts of the world, antipathy for the West is deep and sympathy for Russia is real,” warned a social media researcher who found apparently orchestrated Twitter amplification of pro-invasion themes stressing Europe’s history of colonialism and Russian assistance to liberation movements, especially in Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa.
The fact that we don’t see information warfare doesn’t mean it isn’t happening, and it doesn’t mean we’ve won.
The word ""invasion"" was usually avoided, a choice criticized by Garry Kasparov, Ian Birrell of The Independent, and Trudy Rubin of The Philadelphia Inquirer.
Peter Dickinson stated that the Western media was ""enabling"" Russian aggression against Ukraine.
Russia's actions were described as terrorism by Alexander J Motyl of World Affairs, Marius Laurinavičius writing for Lithuanian Delfi, and Taras Kuzio in New Eastern Europe.
He also avoids the term ""rebel"", finding it ""too gentle"", and ""civil war"", saying ""This conflict simply would not be happening if it were not instigated by Russia.
Criticizing the term's use in German media, Reichelt wrote that it ""comes straight out of Putin's propaganda machine, which frames the war as a national issue rather than an act of aggression.
After a survey conducted from 5–13 September 2014, the International Foundation for Electoral Systems reported 5% of Ukrainians had a ""great deal"" or ""fair amount"" of confidence in the Russian media, 42% in the Western media, and 67% in media based in Ukraine.The Russian media had more influence in parts of Donbass.
Besides a few stock phrases about a ""referendum"" and ""the illegitimate Kyiv junta,"" I also got no answers as to their motivations.
Poland's governmental computer emergency response team later confirmed that pro-Russia commentary had ""flooded"" Polish internet portals at the start of the Ukrainian crisis.
Dubbed a ""troll factory/house/farm"" by the media, it operates out of a building on Savushkin Street in Saint Petersburg, following a move from the outskirts of the city.
Paid commenters may earn 45,000 roubles a month or 65,000 if they know a foreign language.
Their tasks included presenting Ukraine as a tool to weaken Russia, the Ukrainian government as fascist, Vladimir Putin as superior to leaders of other countries, and Western countries as depraved.
The Kremlin is also active on Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, LiveJournal, VK.com, and Odnoklassniki.A poll conducted in December 2014 found that 63% of Germans have ""little or no trust"" in the coverage by German media of the Ukrainian conflict.
This is compared to 53% for the coverage of the Islamic State and 40% for coverage about the recent strike of German locomotive drivers.
Real time information about the invasion has been spread by online activists, journalists, politicians, and members of the general population, both in and out of Ukraine.Messages, photos, video and audio shared on social media and news sites, and among friends and families of Ukrainians and Russians, have included both authentic first-hand portrayals, and depictions of past events or other misinformation, sometimes deliberate.In China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Africa, the Arab world, and Latin America, some social media users trended towards showing sympathy for Russian narratives.
On 26 February, Facebook announced that it would ban Russian state media from advertising and monetising content on the platform.
List of journalists killed during the Russo-Ukrainian War Ukraine During the 2014 Euromaidan protests, some journalists were physically assaulted or intimidated by the police of the Russian-backed regime.
Tetiana Chornovol, a journalist and one of the leaders of the Euromaidan protests, was severely beaten and sustained a concussion in December 2013 in Boryspil.
Also during Euromaidan, Ihor Lutsenko was attacked by unknown assailants, and RFERL journalists were injured by riot police.
According to Reporters Without Borders, Vyacheslav Veremyi died after he was pulled from his taxi and shot by unknown assailants and 27 other journalists were injured in Kyiv on 18 and 19 February in attacks, mostly by Berkut and other unknown assailants.
Oleksandr Yaroshenko , an Odessa journalist who was critical of Vladimir Putin, was beaten on three occasions in the first half of 2014 and his apartment was set on fire.Journalists were particularly vulnerable in eastern Ukraine.
In April 2014, staff of Provintsiya, the local newspaper in Kostiantynivka, Donetsk Oblast, were threatened for reporting critically on the Donetsk People's Republic and the newsroom was burned down.
In May 2014, The Daily Beast reported that pro-Russian militants were conducting ""systematic abductions"" of journalists.
Irma Krat was held by insurgents from April to July 2014, accused of beheading Berkut members, and injected with a drug before being interrogated.
After Oleksiy Matsuka reported on links between pro-Russian separatists and Moscow, his car was set on fire and leaflets calling him a traitor were circulated in his hometown, Donetsk.Pro Gorod, a pro-Ukraine newspaper in Torez, was attacked in April 2014.
Scholl was soon released and Kanygin was also released, after the abductors were paid.
Serhiy Lefter, a Ukrainian journalist for Poland's Open Dialogue Foundation, was kidnapped and held for three weeks by insurgents in Sloviansk.
Sergey Zakharov, an artist from Donetsk whose work satirized pro-Russian fighters, was held for six weeks and tortured.Other journalists who disappeared in militant-controlled areas included Roman Cheremsky, Valery Makeyev, Yehor Vorobyov, Yury Lelyavsky, Dmitry Potekhin, and Oleksandr Bilokobylsky.
Taken prisoner by LPR militants on 9 January 2015, Luhansk journalist Maria Varfolomeyeva was accused in March of spying for the Ukrainian military in late January, although she was in captivity at the time.
In August 2014, when militants of the Donetsk People's Republic were unable to find Donetsk journalist Viktoria Ishchenko, who had moved to Kyiv, they took her parents.
The same month, militants from the Luhansk People's Republic seized Luhansk journalist Serhiy Sakadynsky, holding him until January 2015, and his wife, Mariya Havak, holding her for two months.
The Institute for Mass Information and the Independent Media Union of Ukraine – which began holding annual Enemies of the Press awards in 2007 – reported in June 2015 that the DPR and LPR were the most dangerous places in Ukraine for the media, citing 64 cases of abducted journalists, 21 cases in which journalists were beaten, and 35 attacks on media offices which refused to cooperate with militants.Some journalists and media workers died during the war in eastern Ukraine.
On 24 May 2014, an exchange of mortar fire near Sloviansk resulted in the deaths of Italian photojournalist Andrea Rocchelli and his interpreter, Andrey Mironov, and leg wounds to French photographer William Roguelon.
Rossiya 24 journalist Igor Kornelyuk and sound engineer Anton Voloshin died on 17 June 2014 during mortar fire near Luhansk.
Anatoliy Klyan of Channel One Russia died on 29 June 2014 in Donetsk Oblast when his bus came under fire while approaching a Ukrainian military unit in the middle of the night.
Serhiy Nikolayev, a photojournalist for Segodnya, died on 28 February 2015 from wounds sustained during shelling in Pisky, Donetsk Oblast.Ukrainian television journalist Ruslan Kotsaba was arrested by Ukrainian authorities on suspicion of treason for posting a video on YouTube urging people to dodge the new military draft.
After the list’s publication, a number of these journalists received death threats in emails and phone calls.
The Institute for Mass Information and the Independent Media Union of Ukraine noted 32 cases of censorship, 13 abductions or illegal detentions of journalists, and 11 attacks on editorial offices.
Media were threatened with denial of registration if they criticized the annexation or described the situation as an ""annexation"" or ""occupation"" of Crimea.
They were prevented from taking photographs or recording video of pro-Ukrainian gatherings.
Alexandr Skobov was stabbed in July 2014 after writing an article for Grani.ru criticising the ideology of the self-declared Federal State of Novorossiya.
In August 2014, Arseniy Vesnin sustained a concussion in an attack while he was reporting for Ekho Moskvy on demonstrators supporting Ukraine in Saint Petersburg.Lev Shlosberg was beaten unconscious in August 2014 in Pskov while investigating the alleged deaths of Russian paratroopers in eastern Ukraine.
A BBC crew was attacked in September 2014 in Astrakhan, also while investigating Russian soldiers' deaths.
Ksenia Batanova, a journalist and producer for Dozhd, a channel which reported extensively on the deaths, was attacked the same month in central Moscow, sustaining a fractured skull and concussion.Timur Kuashev, a journalist for Dosh magazine and human rights activist, openly criticized the invasion of Eastern Ukraine as well as abuses by security services in southern Russia.
On 1 August 2014 he was kidnapped in Nalchik and killed by unknown perpetrators.On 4 March 2022, Russian President Putin signed into law a bill introducing prison sentences of up to 15 years for those who publish ""knowingly false information"" about the Russian military and its operations, leading to some media outlets in Russia to stop reporting on Ukraine or shutting their media outlet.
How propaganda is being used in two very different ways, Ashleigh Stewart.
Global News March 29, 2022 ^ ""In a first, internet bypasses TV as main news source for Ukrainians"". www.unian.info.
Ukrainians, according to the prosecution, trained in ""Raduyev camp"" from Spring 1999 till May 2000.
The obscenity of Russian state TV news, as it conceals war crimes for Putin"". inews.co.uk.
It's striking how most media just avoid the battles in eastern Ukraine.
The fact that Western analysts don’t see information warfare doesn’t mean it isn’t happening, and it doesn’t mean the West has won, Carl Miller.
German media have been complaining for months about their news sites being bombarded with pro-Russian comments.
German security sources say they are part of an organized offensive steered from the Kremlin.
