While deployed to Asia, Lt Col Crouch served as the Director of Operations for the 52nd Expeditionary Intelligence Squadron, where she was responsible for leading joint and coalition airborne ISR operators at multiple operating bases.
In 2016, Russia unquestionably interfered in the 2016 United States presidential election by employing the first and second phases of NGW primarily through the manipulation of information.
Why Russia has and is conducting NGW operations is not well understood.
NGW and the critical role information plays in its success is also poorly understood.
A history of invasions, violent Russian revolutions, and geographic challenges fuel this belief.
This sense of vulnerability contributes to President Vladimir Putin’s continued fear of a U.S.-sponsored regime change in Russia.
He has devised a comprehensive strategic defensive plan based on this belief.
Putin believes returning Russia to great power status and becoming a pole in a multipolar world will ensure regime survival.
None of the strategies are new—what is new is the focus on information and how it is used in the first and second phases of NGW to influence its target population.
The latter phases of NGW employ the use of military assets, but NGW’s ultimate success is defined by not reaching the level of direct, overt military intervention.
Presidential election, and continues the first two phases in the Baltic States today.
Those cases are described in this paper and highlight how information was the key enabler in making NGW successful.
To counter Russian NGW in the future, the United States government will need to work with civil society and the private sector on a robust plan to counter Russia’s disinformation campaigns.
To counter Russia’s attempts to fracture the NATO alliance and its pushback against NATO encroachment, the United States government and its NATO partners will need to take action to deter Russia while simultaneously reassuring Russian leaders that the United States does not desire regime change.
President Putin does not seek to conquer the world or to see the United States crumble (although he would hardly shed a tear), but he does desire stability and security and his goal to attain great power status and become a pole in a multipolar world is the defining factor of his strategic defensive campaign.
What appears on the surface to be offensive operations, such as annexing Crimea or interfering in the United States elections, are actually part of an overall defensive campaign and are operations designed to work toward attaining his interim goals. iv Introduction In July 2014, Russian President Vladimir Putin stated, “The greatest criminals in our history were those weaklings who threw power on the floor-Tsar Nicholas II and Mikhail Gorbachev—who allowed the power to be picked up by the hysterics and the madmen.
The Russian elite has a historical fear of regime change and for good reason.
Russia’s geographic curse, its history of invasions, and its record of violent revolution contribute heavily to Russia’s sense of insecurity.
Additionally, the United States has a long history of sponsoring regime change in countries in which it desired a government more compatible with Western thinking, or during the Cold War, was at least not pro-Communist.
Coupled with what Russia perceives as an overly aggressive United States intent on both Russian containment and maintaining its unipolar position in global affairs, Russia has rationalized its millennium-long fears of being under attack and has coined a new type of warfare whose foundation is based on weaponizing information.
This type of warfare was on display in Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014, the United States Presidential election in 2016, and its ongoing efforts in the Baltics.
Russia values information as the key enabler and incorporated it into NGW as part of an ongoing comprehensive strategic defensive plan to ensure regime survival because the Kremlin leadership fears U.S.-led regime change in Moscow.
Russia values information as the key enabler and incorporated it into NGW as part of an ongoing comprehensive strategic defensive plan to ensure regime survival because Kremlin leadership fears the United States will attempt to conduct a regime change in Russia.
Additionally, Russia has historically had limited access to the open ocean, limiting its ability to project power globally.
With those vulnerabilities in mind today, the current regime has developed a fortress-like mentality.
Size Russia is immense, its geographic expanse at times seeming almost infinite.
It is nearly double the size of the United States, and it stretches continuously from east to west for over five thousand miles and eleven time zones.
On Russia’s east is the Pacific Ocean and the Seas of Japan and Okhotsk.
On its west, Russia shares a border with Ukraine, Belarus, Poland, Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia.
The Trans-Siberian and Baikal-Amur Mainline are the only two rail networks that run west to east while north to south routes are also sparse.
Russia’s lack of manpower and an underdeveloped transportation network in Siberia make it exceptionally difficult for Moscow to project power east of the Urals to protect its own borders.
Ports along Russia’s northern coast are frozen much of the year as are those on Russia’s east coast.
In addition, some ports on the east coast open into the Sea of Japan, which is dominated by the Japanese.
With its frozen ports and lack of independent access to the open ocean, Russia is limited in its ability to project power globally.
Northern European Plain / Russian Plain The Northern European Plain begins in France, north of the Alps, and spills eastward into Russia to the Ural Mountains.
It is a vast, flat piece of land over which invading armies can and have easily traversed.
The plain is at its narrowest in Poland, where it is only three hundred miles wide.
This narrow strip would be the place for Russia to stop an enemy invasion from the west before the enemy reaches the country’s heartland.
The former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics bordered Poland and that, combined with Moscow’s control of the former Warsaw Pact countries, created a Soviet-controlled buffer zone far to the west of Moscow.
With Ukraine, Belarus, and Lithuania all today sovereign nations and Poland as a NATO partner, Russia is farther from the entry point of a potential mass invasion.
However, its western border is closer to Moscow now than when Tsar Peter the Great died in 1725.
Such an invasion would require long supply lines that would be difficult if not impossible to sustain, but that did not stop Russia’s enemies from making multiple attempts to invade the country over the Northern European Plain.
History of Invasions Russia has seen no shortage of invasions in its long history.
These invasions have shaped modern Russians and their view of their homeland relative to foreign powers.
As early as the 1200s, East Slavic tribes living under the Kievan Rus, centered in what is today the Ukraine, were continuously attacked by Mongols from the south and east.
The Kievan Rus, recognized as the earliest Slavic state in what will become Russia, was destroyed by the Mongols, and the center of Slavic Rus’ power moved northeast to Moscow.
The move to Moscow created the same problem that has haunted Russia for the last thousand years and continues to haunt them today.
There are no mountains, deserts, and few rivers in the west, making Moscow, and the Russian heartland, challenging to defend.
From 1812 forward and including the Crimean War of 1853, the Russians were defending their own territory in the North European Plain on average once every thirty-three years.
Russia’s history of invasions from the west contributes to the vulnerability Russians feel about security, as does their history of revolutions.
History of Revolutions 5 Russian Revolutions Russia has suffered three revolutions and the collapse of both the Tsarist Empire and of the Soviet Union in the twentieth century.
In 1905, Tsar Nicholas II was forced to acquiesce to a Russian population weary of food shortages and labor exploitation by granting civil liberties and forming a parliament.
In the midst of World War I, the February 1917 Revolution forced Tsar Nicholas II to abdicate in favor of a Provisional Government due to his inept leadership and a war-weary population.
Three years of civil war and a terrible famine transpired before the Bolsheviks consolidated power and founded the USSR, largely within the borders of the former Tsarist empire.
Soviet Revolution The USSR under Joseph Stalin was a brutal dictatorship.
The USSR’s economic problems culminated in the early 1980s with an economy that was only expanding between a half percent and two percent annually.
The multiethnic and cultural differences of the USSR also began to bubble to the surface with Baltic States lobbying the United States to pressure Moscow, Georgians marching in protest at the potential loss of their native tongue as the state language, and declining birth rates in Slavic nationalities.
Economic stagnation, corruption, and domestic problems led to a demand for change from all but 6 the most hard-liner Communists.
The plan resulted in unintended effects—the hard-liner conservatives roared back to life,18 and the Soviet people, now less afraid of the regime, began demanding ethnic and national freedom.
The coup failed after democratic resisters, led by Boris Yeltsin, freshly elected as Russia’s first freely elected president, rallied both the people and military and peacefully quashed the attempted coup.
After the coup, power shifted from Gorbachev, who many Soviet citizens considered weak and indecisive, to Yeltsin, who was still basking in a hero’s glory.
Yeltsin emboldened the non-Russian republics to “assert their sovereignty”,21 and one by one, they began applying for and receiving international recognition.
Gorbachev resigned on 25 December 1991, and six days later, the Soviet Union officially dissolved.
Even in the twenty-first century, Russia continues to face the geographic challenges that have haunted the country and its rulers for a millennium.
In the mind of many Russians, the Northern European Plain is still an inviting path for would-be invaders.
Russia still does not have sovereign, year-round direct access to any ocean, making it unable to truly project and sustain power globally.
These geographic challenges, in addition to Russia’s history of invasion and revolutions, are continuously in the back of Russians’ minds, leading to a Russian elite that is 7 wholly insecure and more than a bit paranoid.
These factors heavily contribute to the Russian mindset of existing under a constant state of siege.
Fears of United States Sponsored Regime Change Mindful of the speed with which both the Tsarist and Soviet empires collapsed in the 20th century, Vladimir Putin believes the United States is laying the foundation for regime change in Russia.
The United States has a colorful history of successful attempted regime changes; the United States will stop at nothing to maintain its unipolar position in global affairs; and NATO’s continued encroachment toward Russia’s borders.
United States history of attempted regime After World War II, Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin worked tirelessly to install pro-Soviet regimes in Eastern Europe.
He was attempting to prevent future invasions by ensuring an enemy’s march to Moscow was not enabled by anti-Soviet governments.
The U.S., on the other hand, worked to contain the Soviets spread of influence and covertly rollback Moscow’s gains and counter the spread of communism.
In fact, between 1947 and 1989, the United States has attempted regime change sixty six times, in numerous countries and across all administrations, often continuing from one president to the next .24 Truman and Eisenhower sponsored the majority of regime change attempts in order to rid Eastern Europe of pro-Soviet regimes and preclude the victory of communist or socialist movements in Western European elections.
The second regime change movement occurred as Kennedy and Johnson aimed to prevent pro-Soviet regimes from arising in post-colonial Middle East, Africa, and Southeast Asia.
In all, the U.S. attempted twenty-five offensive operations aimed at replacing a pro-Soviet government with a pro-western government,25 of which only three were successful.
It also launched twenty-five preventative operations aimed at countries that were not yet allies of the USSR, of which thirteen were successful;26 and twenty-one hegemonic regime changes aimed at maintaining hierarchical regional order, of which thirteen were successful.
If the United States did not have such a remarkable history of attempting regime change specifically aimed at the USSR, there would be little basis for Russia’s paranoia.
The United States was only successful at directly overthrowing pro-Soviet governments during the Cold War in three of twenty-five cases but Russia is fully aware of the United States sponsorship in all three of those cases 28 and that knowledge, plus their belief in continued U.S-sponsored regime change post-Cold War in Kosovo, Iraq, Libya, Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan29 has inevitably led to their concerns about a future U.S.-sponsored regime change aimed at Russia.
According to Maj Gen Aleksandr Vladimirov, the president of Russia’s Board of Military Experts, the United States must maintain its global hegemony in order to ensure the United States dollar continues its dominance as the world’s reserve currency, which permits massive deficit spending and thus, huge defense budgets.
The Russian elite believes the United States has used its influence to impose economic sanctions against Russia following its annexation of Crimea in order to limit Russia’s military growth.
Putin likely views this as a form of economic warfare and not merely an instrument of national power the United States proclaims.
In 2014, after annexing Crimea, Putin stated, “The USA prefers to follow the rule of the strongest and not by the international law.
Thank God, this situation of a unipolar world, of a monopoly, is coming to an end.
Moving away from a unipolar world toward a multipolar or polycentric world is a piece of Russia’s overall strategic defense plan, and Russia will continue to take actions that empower Russia as an influencer in the world while diminishing the global role of the United States and its allies.
NATO Encroachment on Russia’s Borders Today, Vladimir Putin faces the same challenges as Ivan the Terrible and Josef Stalin in defending Russia’s western border.
According to Mikhail Gorbachev, “The agreement on the final settlement with Germany stated that no additional NATO troops would be deployed on the territory of the former GDR, and neither would weapons of mass destruction.
That meant that NATO’s military infrastructure would not move eastward.
As Russia looks forward, it must protect its western border as NATO and the EU push closer toward the Russian heartland.
Estonia and Latvia both border Russia in the northwest, and the only remaining buffer between Russia and the rest of NATO today is Ukraine and Belarus.
Putin will likely do everything in his power to keep Ukraine from joining NATO and ensure Belarus remains an obedient ally.
Russia’s Overall Strategic Plan It is no secret Vladimir Putin longs for Russia to inspire the same fear and respect around the globe as the former Soviet Union.
Russia has operationalized NGW as the primary weapon to execute the plan.
The next section will describe NGW, the role information plays as a sub-component of NGW, and how NGW is being used to execute components of Russia’s strategic defensive plan.
New Generation Warfare Sergey Chekinov, Doctor of Technical Sciences and Sergey Bogdanov, Doctor of Military Sciences, are retired Russian military officers and recognized military academics who describe information superiority in future wars as a requirement in order to meet strategic goals.
In fact, they believe nonmilitary tools, including the use of information, could become the primary factor in determining outcomes with future adversaries.
Chekinov and Bogdanov coined the phrase “New Generation Warfare” to describe a type of warfare that reflects their interpretation of the evolution of military art.
Asymmetric Warfare Asymmetric Warfare is “both systemic and comprehensive, simultaneously employing political, diplomatic, informational, economic, military and other indirect forms.
In Asymmetric Warfare, through information, Russia strives to create an alternate reality as part of its military strategy and then uses this alternate reality to legitimize conflict and avoid direct military confrontation or overt meddling in another country.
Information operations are critical to creating this alternate reality.
Low-Intensity Conflict Low-Intensity Conflict occurs as competition between groups or nations below the level of conventional war but above the level of peaceful competition, and ranges from subversion to the use of armed force.
Change, discontent, poverty, violence, and instability are what make LIC possible.
Operations begin under a crisis meant to destabilize the geopolitical situation.
Next, they progress to degrading, impoverishing, or disintegrating the nation to make it a failed state.
Finally, the attacker finishes it by swooping in as the “savior” of the affected country.
Information is a primary component of LIC and is used to promote the political and 14 ideological values of the aggressing country in order to destroy the target country’s social and ideological system.
Intelligence, psychological operations, and information warfare are all key subunits of the autonomous information unit, which is used to adversely impact the decision-making of the opponent, thereby enabling attacking forces.
Sixth-Generation Warfare Sixth-Generation Warfare is a method of modern warfare that makes or attempts to make the massing of large forces for a conventional war obsolete.
It uses non-contact warfare and conventional systems so precisely that the physical effects approach the nuclear threshold of 15 destruction.
The main goal is to destroy the enemy’s means of retaliation, attempting to effect the downfall of the political system, then using the local population as the instrument to triumph over the opponent.
Reflexive Control In Reflexive Control, the tactic is to provide information to the opponent that induces him to take a specific action desired by the controller.
The information can be used constructively, where the desired action is favorable to the controller, or destructively, where the desired action is to paralyze the opponent’s decision-making ability.
Phases of NGW In an article called “The Nature and Content of a New Generation War”, experts in military strategy Chekinov and Bogadanov, describe NGW and its eight phases.
The first four phases are generally non-kinetic and variations of LIC, with the fifth phase beginning some conventional military operations.
First Phase: non-military asymmetric warfare encompassing information, moral, psychological, ideological, diplomatic, and economic measures as part of a plan to establish a favorable political, economic, and military setup.
All types, forms, methods, and forces, including special operations forces, space, Russian radio broadcasts, electronic, diplomatic, and secret service intelligence, and industrial espionage.
The phases of NGW may take place sequentially or simultaneously and not all of them may be employed.
In fact, the ultimate goal is success without resorting to overt military actions—phases one through four—and that enabler is information.
Russia’s NGW is a long17 term play, and information operations used in phases one through three could take place over years.
The key to Russian NGW strategy is influence, which involves exploiting all aspects of information using skillful internal communications, deception operations, psychological operations, and well-constructed external communications.
It takes time to acquire influence, and Russia is playing the long game.
NGW in Strategic Defensive Campaigning The first tsar of Russia, Ivan the Terrible, first executed the concept of attack as a defense by attempting to expand Russia’s territory.
He was able to secure territory east through Siberia and south to the Caspian Sea, creating a buffer zone between Moscow and would-be invaders.
Putin’s tactics today are different only in execution, but the strategy is still the same—attack as a defense.
Instead of employing large, invading forces, Putin has mastered NGW, in particular the information dimension, and employs it in a deliberate manner in order to achieve his ultimate defensive goal—to return to great power status.
The next sections will illustrate Russia’s use of NGW, and demonstrate that it is robust enough to cover a range of desired effects designed to help Russia accomplish its interim goals of diminishing United States reputation, fracturing Western alliances such as NATO and the EU, enhancing Russia’s power projection, and pushing back against NATO encroachment.
Annexation of Crimea in 2014; interference in the 2016 United States Presidential Election; and current influence operations in the Baltic Sea Region.
Crimea 2014 Information / NGW Crimea 2014 18 Russia employed subversive methods of Low-Intensity Conflict, a component of NGW, against Ukraine from 2004 to 2014 with it culminating in the latter phases of NGW when Russia annexed Crimea in 2014.
LIC began during the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election, with Russia attempting to influence the election of pro-Russian Viktor Yanukovych over the pro-Western candidate, Viktor Yushchenko.
Once Russian involvement was discovered, the results were discarded and a new election took place, with the pro-Western Yushchenko declared the winner.
Russia ramped up efforts in 2008 against Ukraine as it was contemplating membership in NATO by making political statements verbally questioning Ukraine’s sovereignty, issuing passports to Crimean residents, pushing propaganda delegitimizing the Ukrainian government, and touting the common heritage among the Ukrainians and Russians.
His election was a result of both his “orange” coalition’s inability to govern60 as well as the successful Russian influence operations that occurred between presidential 2004 and 2010 Presidential elections.
In 2013, during the Euromaiden uprising, Russia employed information operations during early NGW phases by using propaganda and disinformation to influence local, regional, and global audiences.
Russia used a mix of Russian-language TV, online media, and social networks to employ several propaganda strategies in order to influence the Ukrainian and Crimean population.
Propaganda included discrediting Ukraine’s EU Association Agreement integration efforts, calling pro-Western forces “fascists”, producing fake reports indicating a mass refugee influx from Ukraine to Russia,63 promoting altered images of Ukrainian tanks and flags with Nazi symbols, promoting Russia’s “protection” of Russian speakers in Crimea, denying the presence of Russian forces in Ukraine, and blaming the United States for information operations against Russia.
The regime change from a pro-Russian to a pro-Western government meant that Russia had lost its influence in one of its critical border nations in the west—a nation with which it shares language, culture, history, and vast business ties with Russia.
The disinformation and denial and deception strategies employed in the latter stages of NGW during the physical takeover of Crimea caused confusion among global leaders, and by the time anyone could determine what was accurate and what was disinformation, Russia had already successfully annexed Crimea.
By securing Crimea, Russia once again controlled Sevastopol naval base, not by an agreement with the Ukraine but by physical domination.
Full ownership over Sevastopol made Russia once again a Balkan power, giving them a year-round warm water port and enhancing Russia’s power projection in the Black Sea Region, southern Europe, and Asia Minor.
Seizing Crimea and attempts at securing Eastern Ukraine also satisfy another of Putin’s interim goals—pushing back against NATO expansion into border countries of Russia.
Though Ukraine is not a NATO member, a pro-western government could decide to apply for membership in either or both NATO and the EU, moves Russia would abhor.
The actions Russia took immediately to annex Crimea and stir unrest in Eastern Ukraine ensure the Ukrainian 20 population understands that a dalliance with NATO or the EU will have painful consequences for them.
In this effort, Putin ensures Ukraine stays “gray”—at a minimum does not join NATO or the EU—while he continues to attempt to influence the Ukrainian population to eventually take a more pro-Russian stance and hopefully elect a pro-Russian government.
Operations in Ukraine are designed to create a Russian-influenced buffer zone and to increase the space between the nearest NATO member and Russia.
United States Elections 2016 Information / NGW in the United States 2016 Presidential Elections Russia’s NGW is not limited to nations or areas in which it plans to use military force.
What makes NGW so effective is its multi-layered approach to increasing turmoil in locations in order to create the conditions in which it knows it can be effective.
For some situations, military force may be used whereas with others, such as the U.S., the first few phases of NGW create the environment Kremlin leadership desires, which is precisely what occurred during the 2016 United States presidential election.
Multiple United States federal agencies concluded Russia interfered in the election in a deliberate and extensive manner with two main objectives.
Social Media Campaign The earliest Russian involvement in the targeted 2016 elections began through the Internet Research Agency as early as 2014.
The IRA is a Russian company funded by Russian oligarch Yevgeniy Viktorovich, who has known ties to Vladimir Putin.
Posing as United States activists, they took the photos and information and used them to set up social media profiles aimed at attracting large U.S. audiences and addressing divisive political and social issues.
IRA specialists created social media accounts through Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Tumblr, and Instagram.
The IRAcontrolled accounts initially posed as individual persons but by 2015, the IRA-controlled accounts began posing as larger groups or public groups.
By 2016, the IRA’s focus changed from sowing general political discord in the United States to deliberate measures to support the Trump Campaign and disparage the Clinton Campaign.
The pages were used to criticize Hillary Clinton and continued throughout 2016.76 The IRA also purchased Facebook advertisements to promote Trump and disparage Clinton.
Many tweets were re-tweeted by members linked to the Trump campaign as well as high-profile U.S. citizens including former Ambassador to Russia Michael McFaul, Roger Stone, Sean Hannity, and Michael Flynn, Jr.
The IRA also managed to convince unwitting Twitter followers to stage political rallies on behalf of the Trump campaign.
The IRA used all of the popular social media platforms to impact the United States election by vigorously promoting Trump and simultaneously disparaging Clinton.
The IRA’s tactics were so effective, members of the Trump campaign unwittingly interacted with IRA members to provide assistance and coordinate on Trump rallies.
Cyber unit 26165 predominantly hacked into the organizations and then turned those materials over to cyber unit 74455 to disseminate them through various methods with the intent to embarrass and disparage the Clinton Campaign.
The GRU’s 26165 hacking efforts began in March 2016, while 74455’s began disseminating the hacked materials as early as April 2016.82 GRU unit 26165 used spear-phishing emails on multiple members of the Clinton Campaign, DNC, and DCCC, targeting both work and personal email addresses.
Unit 26165 was exceptionally effective and gained email access to John Podesta, Clinton’s campaign manager, other members of the Clinton Campaign, and a DNC member.
GRU hackers were successful and gained not only tens of thousands of documents related to the Clinton Campaign, they gained stolen credentials, which gave them access to the DCCC network.
Once on the DCCC network, they were able to use a virtual private network to gain access to the DNC’s network.
On both the DCCC and DNC networks, unit 26165 used malicious software to harvest any data needed for its anti-Clinton operation including, stolen credentials, operating system information, logged keystrokes, screenshots, and the ability to compress and compile data for exfiltration.
Successful GRU 26165 spear-phishing tactics against the DNC, DCCC, and Clinton Campaign members resulted in the GRU’s acquisition of tens of thousands of emails between members of the Clinton Campaign and internal strategy documents, fundraising data, and opposition research 24 retrieved from DNC and DCCC networks.
After retrieving the data, the GRU’s next move was to get the information out to the American people.
Members of 26165 and 74455 created fictitious online personas “DCLeaks” and “Guccifer 2.0” in order to disseminate the stolen information.
Through the DCLeaks Facebook page and DCLeaks Twitter handle, the GRU released personal and financial information of Clinton Campaign members and a DNC member as well as internal Clinton Campaign correspondence.
The GRU even created a DCLeaks Gmail account to correspond privately with reporters and other United States persons in order to give them early access to the content prior to it being released to the public.
After the DNC realized it had been compromised, the GRU set up a Guccifer 2.0 Wordpress blog where it subsequently published its first post, attributing the DNC intrusion to a lone Romanian hacker.
Wordpress blog, the GRU also published thousands of stolen DNC and DCCC documents, including opposition research conducted by the DNC, internal policy documents, analyses of congressional races, and fundraising.
Releases were timed and related to states considered competitive such as Florida and Pennsylvania.
In addition to using DCLeaks and Guccifer 2.0, the GRU also forged a relationship with Wikileaks in order to amplify its effect on the United States population.
Wikileaks’ previous release of stolen documents related to Hillary Clinton when she served as Secretary of State made Wikileaks a perfect partner for the GRU’s operations against her.
Wikileaks’ founder, Julian Assange, believed if he received information from DCLeaks and Guccifer 2.0, in addition to the thirty thousand Clinton emails he had already acquired through the Freedom of Information Act, 25 that Wikileaks could be seen as the de facto repository for data disparaging or embarrassing to Candidate Clinton.
Between October 2016 and November 2016, Wikileaks released 33 installments of the GRU’s stolen emails, including fifty thousand emails from John Podesta’s personal email account.
Additional GRU Operations While the Trump Campaign was cleared from knowingly communicating with Russia, the GRU certainly took advice from Candidate Trump to help him persevere over Candidate Clinton.
Within five hours of his famous, “Russia, if you’re listening, I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing” speech, GRU cyber unit 26165 created and sent spearphishing emails to the domain that housed Clinton’s personal server.
Up until this point, there had been no previous targeting of that domain.
It targeted state boards of elections, secretaries of state, and county governments as well as private companies involved in the hardware and software of electronic polling stations and voter registration.
First, it demonstrated to the world that Russia has 26 the willingness and capability to affect a superpower.
To reach Russia’s ultimate goal—to be a great power again with its own sphere of influence—Russia must demonstrate it actually has great power.
Putin demonstrated the impact that NGW, and in particular disinformation, can have when applied effectively.
Interfering in the United States election was Putin’s chance to flex his muscles for the rest of the world and demonstrate just how powerful he is.After all, Kremlin leaders believe that the United States is involved in Russian politics, so they should therefore, similarly have the right to intervene in United States politics.
By interfering in the United States 2016 election, President Putin made progress on one his interim goals within the overall strategic defensive campaign—to diminish the reputation of the United States By interfering in the elections, he undermined the United States political process.
With a democratic political system in doubt, the United States population loses trust in that system.
By interfering in the United States election, Russia placed doubt in the political process and caused a deep divide among Americans.
By Russia’s logic, a chaotic democracy does not instill a sense of 27 security; therefore, the U.S., democracy’s biggest advocate, should not be the global hegemon.
Putin is essentially chipping away at the U.S.’s reputation little by little.
As the U.S.’s reputation trends downward globally, the opportunity arises for another to rise and take its place— not as a global hegemon, but in areas where it seeks to influence, such as Eastern Europe and the Baltics.
Baltic States Today Information / NGW in the Baltic States The Baltic States of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania are home to a significant number of Russian speakers, most of whom are ethnic Russians.
As of 2011 data, Russian speakers in Estonia comprise thirty percent of the population, twenty-five percent of which are ethnic Russians.
Latvia hosts thirty-five and twenty-seven percent respectively, and Lithuania eight and six percent, respectively.
Policies during the Soviet era were responsible for relocating Russians to the Baltic States to dilute the ethnic population and to instill the Soviet culture.
However, much of the Russian population in the Baltic States has limited rights due to their Russian ethnicity, fostered by anti-Russian regulation.
President Putin has capitalized on their feeling of second-class status and feeds Russian media and anti-Western propaganda into the Baltics, which poses a threat to the Baltic States.
Unhappy Russians in the Baltics give President Putin the opportunity to incite discord in the population and to influence government in those states through the political process, with the ultimate aim to bring the Baltics under the influence of Russia.
Russia has used trolls extensively to aid in pro-Russian propaganda as well as to disparage the West by spreading disinformation and propagating fake news.
Russian propaganda is a mix of lies and truth, meant to confuse and influence its audience.
Using the themes of human rights violations against Russian speaking minorities, anti-NATO messaging, and fear of refugees, Russia exploits human vulnerabilities by using memes, caricatures, videos, and images to evoke an emotional response.
Russia uses Russian television such as Russia Today and Sputnik News,100 radio broadcasts, newspapers, books, magazines, songs, movies, the internet, and bots and trolls on social media in the Baltic States to reach Russian speakers in those states.1 In Lithuania, Russia propagated a false narrative depicting a NATO soldier raping a Lithuanian girl102 in an effort to besmirch NATO troops and highlight NATO’s threat to Russia.
Lithuanian police investigated and found no evidence to support the claim.
In another instance, Russian social media accounts depicted NATO soldiers as drunkards pursuing fights with the locals.4 President Putin’s propaganda, which highlights the poor treatment of the Baltic States’ Russian-speaking population, not only sows discord and divides society, but could give Putin the justification for intervening there—the same justification Russia used to annex Crimea with regard to Russian-speaking Ukrainians.
Russia’s propaganda also blames Western-backed fascists as the cause of Ukraine’s crisis.
Evidence from a study with multiple Russian-speaking Estonians illustrates that the rhetoric is having the desired effect.
During several interviews, Russian-speaking Estonians acknowledged their belief in Russia’s fascist propaganda regarding Ukraine.6 29 Russia also uses social media in the Baltic States to attack Western ways of life— specifically attacking the gay population and the Western view on abortion—promoting what Russia perceives as its higher moral standards.
Facebook hosts Russian-friendly online communities that talk of Putin’s greatness and his embrace of traditional values.
Though the Baltic States are part of NATO, Putin has an interest in gaining influence with the governments and people of those countries.
If successful, at a minimum, it could result in pro-Russian policies at one end of the spectrum or on the other end of the spectrum, with Baltic State governments demanding the removal of NATO troops from those countries or even more dangerous—leaving the alliance altogether.
One of Putin’s interim goals in his drive to great power status is his desire to fracture NATO and make it irrelevant.
Not only does Putin desire to be the hegemon in the Baltic States region, but by becoming a greater influence, the United States becomes less of an influence and Putin’s desire to move to a multipolar world gains traction.
In the end, Putin’s long-term goal is to demonstrate that NATO cannot respond to military situations below the level of armed conflict.
He desires the world to know that “Russian aggression will always result in an unchallenged fait accompli,”112 which is exactly what happened in Crimea.
Russia will more likely employ NGW to make progress toward its long-term goal of regaining great power status.
The first and second phases of NGW are information and psychologically based, so the key to identifying where and when Russia will next employ NGW revolves around understanding what motivates Russian leadership.
Russia’s ultimate goal of becoming a great power requires interim goals of diminishing United States reputation, fracturing western alliances, enhancing Russia’s power projection, and pushing back against NATO encroachment.
By identifying the countries and organizations that can help Putin reach these goals, one can assume Russia is or will be executing NGW operations.
Generally speaking, Russia desires to harm those nations, organizations, or individuals promoting Western ideologies and would like to promote pro-Putin and pro-Russian propaganda in those countries along its periphery or that share similar ideals.
The list of countries, organizations, and individuals upon which President Putin would like to create an effect is long and is outside the scope of this paper; however, a couple of examples are in order.
Both the United States and Poland are holding presidential elections in 2020, and both countries should expect widespread Russian interference.
Russia would like to continue to sow doubt in the democratic process, and the United States and Poland are long-time adversaries.
In addition, Belarus is holding a presidential election in 2020, but President Putin and Belarus’s president, Alexander Lukashenko, have had strained relations recently over the price of oil.
The United States attempted to take advantage of their strained relations recently by pulling Belarus out of Russia’s sphere, at least partially, by offering to provide oil to Belarus.
It is all but certain Russian leadership is already conducting first and second phase NGW in Belarus in an attempt to promote Russian 31 ideals and President Putin.
With Belarus as one of the top contenders on a short-list of countries Russia might consider at some point advancing into the military stages of NGW, Belarus could find itself in a precarious position if the current spat over oil prices is reignited and strained relations between the Russian and Belarussian president continue.
Secondly, whether or not the United States desires regime change in Russia is moot—Russia believes it to be the case.
The thesis argues Russia’s entire strategy is based on regime survival and that the regime will continue to conduct NGW until it no longer feels it is under threat.
The United States must find a way to deter Russia while simultaneously reassuring Russians they are not under attack from the West.
Without these two recommendations being implemented, Russian leadership will continue to employ first and second phase NGW at will, where it may eventually find enough success to truly wreak havoc in the United States internally, or fracture NATO and EU relationships.
Countering Information in NGW Countering Russia’s disinformation and propaganda strategy must be at the forefront of any attempt to gain the upper hand against Russia’s meddling.
Alina Polyakova and Ambassador Daniel Fried authored an article entitled, “Democratic Defense Against Disinformation” and made a series of recommendations for democratic governments to fight Russian disinformation and propaganda campaigns.
While none of these sectors by itself is enough to stop disinformation, collectively, they may reduce the impact of disinformation.
Recommendations are grouped at the strategic level and operational/tactical level.
Strategic Relations and Messaging The United States should label foreign state propaganda organs for what they are.
The U.S. government needs to loudly identify Russian networks, such as RT and Sputnik, as vehicles for propaganda.
The United States government should also actively monitor overt foreign propaganda narratives and inform the public on their content.
The State Department’s Global Engagement Center , created after the 2016 elections to counter state-sponsored propaganda, should be adequately funded to support counter-information initiatives abroad.
The GEC should be the point of contact for European Stratcom teams and to be the coordinator for United States civilsociety and academic endeavors.
This information coordination office would share information with the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, the Department of Homeland Security , the GEC, and appropriate Congressional oversight committees.
The United States government should regulate and apply legislation to political and issue ads generated by Russia and other authoritarian sources.
The Honest Ads Act, a bipartisan measure, 33 would extend disclosure requirements for political and issue ads to social media, matching standards for other media.
Though political ads require disclosure, issue ads do not, and this loophole has permitted Russians to use social-media ads for disinformation purposes.
The Act would require social-media companies to make reasonable efforts to prevent foreign persons from engaging in campaign-related communications activities, including ads.
Social media companies should clearly identify the sponsors and funders of all content.
Operational and Tactical The United States government should establish a high-level interagency fusion cell, modeled after the National Counterterrorism Center, perhaps called the National Counter-Disinformation Center, which would be the operations-based cell and include liaisons from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, the information coordination office discussed in number three above, the Department of Defense, the GEC, and other relevant agencies.
This office should be funded and empowered to implement operational activities based on inputs from the information coordination office.
The United States government and social media companies should fund tech-savvy civil-society groups.
StopFake, the Atlantic Council’s DFR Lab, the Alliance for Securing Democracy’s Hamilton, and Baltic Elves.
They have shown an ability to identify prominent Russian troll/bot/cyborgs and to expose campaigns run by them.
They are also often faster at and more effective than the government at identifying, countering, and discrediting Russian propaganda.
In addition, civil society and academia should develop opensource standards for sharing information on malicious actors and their activities.
This effort would enable the tech-savvy groups to share information faster with social media companies and 34 limit exposure to avoid amplifying disinformation tweets or posts.
Those groups would be required to share information with social media companies and the DHS information coordination office.
Print, television, radio outlets, and civil-society groups should educate editors and reporters on how to quickly identify suspected disinformation.
Traditional media and highimpact online “influencers” are often the target of disinformation campaigns.
Spotting disinformation would ensure exposure is limited to the large United States audiences who consume the mainstream media.
Traditional media companies should then be able to identify content originating from propaganda organs such as RT and Sputnik and treat their output as suspect.
This would prevent content from populating newsfeeds or influencing trending topics.
In addition, social media companies should also experiment with labeling automated and fake accounts.
They should experiment with algorithms used to better identify credible versus weak content.
Companies would use a set of transparent metrics, including user feedback, site longevity, and third-party independent reference points to help identify credible content.
Social media companies should also revise advertising policies to ban ads from known propaganda outlets.
Free speech does not require allowing commercial relations with foreign propaganda organs.
The alternative is to make sure the ads are prominently labeled with their originators’ companies.
Lastly, social media companies should limit the dissemination of social media content by bots and cyborgs.
Media and digital literacy courses are a great tool to teach consumers how to think critically about online and social-media content.
Russian disinformation is not a new practice and will continue long into the future.
Mandating a digital literacy course as part of the public education curriculum would ensure United States citizens learn from an early age how to spot disinformation.
Finland is one story showing promise in fighting disinformation campaigns.
It has used education and a strong government acknowledgment and interaction to limit the effect of disinformation on the Finnish people.
Italy has also introduced digital literacy to its public school curriculum in its attempt to teach teens how to be critical media consumers in order to combat disinformation.5 Deterrence, Reassurance, and Policies Russia uses all of the national instruments of power (diplomatic, information, military, economic) against its adversaries while the United States has predominantly engaged Russia with the economic tool.
The United States will need to use the other non-military instruments of power to respond effectively to Russian NGW in the twenty-first century.
The United States must look at Russia’s overall goal—returning to great power status and becoming a pole in multipolar world—as well as its interim goals in order to mount an effective response.
Russia is executing NGW operations to achieve the first interim goal—to diminish the reputation of the U.S.— by promoting disinformation and propaganda in the United States to sow discord and fracture the democratic system.
However, there are other steps the U.S. could take besides a counter-disinformation campaign to show strength and unity within NATO without further antagonizing Russia.
Russia will not stop its campaign to try to fracture those alliances or to push back against NATO encroachment, but the United States and other NATO members can take the following steps to ensure their strength.
The following statements and breakout of options is taken entirely from Dr.
First, the United States and other countries need to deter Russia from threatening or undermining any members of the alliance.
Secondly, the United States needs to assure President Putin that NATO is for defensive purposes only and does not threaten Russian territory.
Third, United States policy decisions should be based on law, including international law, to deflect Russian accusations of hypocrisy.7 Deterrence Measures To deter Russia in the European theater, NATO should rely on its comprehensive capabilities, not just conventional military forces.
In other words, NATO should not post a large conventional buildup in the Baltics, as doing so could appear to be aggression—not deterrence.
The alliance should think creatively about cross-domain deterrence as part of its comprehensive capability toolkit.
Efforts might include creating a “cyber incubator” policy to encourage partnership between the United States government and private sector whereby private sector members serve a one-two year term in United States Cyber Command; encouraging the establishment of NATOcountry cyber embassies on foreign soil to enhance deterrence through denial; preparing a broad 37 menu of graduated sanctions as a cross-domain deterrence tool; and encouraging the resolution of ethnic political tensions in Estonia and Latvia.
The United States government should encourage NATO in its planning scenarios to include consideration of how the alliance would react to potential new Russian land grabs beyond NATO borders.
Russian aggression in Ukraine and Georgia or other states in the future might be designed in part to break NATO by sowing confusion about how to respond.
The United States should encourage NATO to incorporate these scenarios into planning to map out possible joint responses.
This might deter Russia from believing that aggression in non-NATO areas could cause the alliance to collapse.
Reassurance Measures The United States can take several measures to reassure Russia that NATO does not pose a threat to Russia, beginning with treating Russian leaders and the Russian state with respect.
By treating the Russian leadership with professional and unemotional communication, the United States is likely to achieve more toward its aims, or at the very least, not causing the leaders to lose face in Russia, which only inflames matters.
Secondly, the United States government should formally reaffirm that the United States does not seek to impose regime change in Russia.
Simultaneously, the United States should emphasize cyber operations against civilians is unacceptable.
Economic sanctions should stand and be expanded if Russia does not back off its first and second phase NGW operations against the United States and other European nations.
NRFA is an agreement, not a treaty, but the United States should remind Russia it has a voice with 38 NATO, and the agreement is the cornerstone of NATO-Russia relations.
For example, at the 2016 Warsaw Summit, NATO’s called its new deployments “rotating” battalions instead of the long-term deployments that they are, even though they are consistent with the NRFA pledge.
Using transparent language is a step toward boosting the credibility of the alliance and combatting Russian claims of NATO aggression.
The United States government should support new conventional military deployments in Europe only up to the limit of NATO’s internal understanding of the 1999 adapted conventional forces in Europe treaty requirements, unless Russia invades or seriously damages a NATO member state.
Russia has repeatedly requested that NATO be limited to what was agreed upon in the unratified A/CFE treaty in 1999, which is significantly lower than the approximately twentythousand NATO troops deployed worldwide.8 Lastly, the United States government should publicly state that the United States believes Ukraine does not currently meet NATO membership standards and has a long way to go.
Russian officials have stated the prospect of NATO membership was a driving factor in Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
Ukraine is far from meeting the requirements for NATO membership, and discussion of Ukraine in NATO is premature and puts NATO in a somewhat precarious position.
A public statement from the United States government stating that Ukraine is far from meeting NATO requirements would reassure Russia and encourage Ukrainians to move the country on a more stable path to free and fair elections.
The United States government should encourage new bi-lateral and multilateral agreements on limiting dangerous military incidents between NATO and other European states and Russia, especially in the Baltic and Nordic regions.
The United States government should also work with NATO allies to eventually reestablish regional arms control negotiations on both conventional and nuclear weapons.
By implementing these measures, NATO shows unity and strength and will deter Russia from threatening NATO countries without further antagonizing them.
To prevent Russia from gaining too much power, the U.S., European Union, and NATO should take the steps outlined above in countering disinformation, deterrence and reassurance measures, as well as utilizing diplomatic and economic national instruments of power to keep Russia at bay.
Conclusion The Russian Federation and its predecessors have a long and stormy history of invasions, violent revolutions, and geography problems that have led to a large sense of vulnerability and insecurity.
This sense of vulnerability has led President Putin to enact his entire strategic plan around defense.
He believes the way to secure his regime is to become a great power again and become a pole in a multipolar world.
To get there, he is attempting to diminish the reputation of 40 the U.S., fracture Western alliances, enhance Russia’s power projection, and push back against NATO encroachment.
Russia has taken multiple types of warfare and combined it into what it calls New Generation Warfare, which has been executed successfully in multiple areas.
The key to NGW is information or disinformation and its use in propaganda and psychological operations.
It is during the first two phases of NGW that information and psychological operations are employed.
Total success in NGW means that military employment is never reached—discord among the target population and internal strife created the effect Putin was looking for.
On the surface, this appears to be offensive in nature, and if one is only looking at the operation, not his overall strategy, those operations are offensive; however, Russia’s entire strategy is based on regime survival, and offensive measures are taken to ensure the regime lives to see another day.
The U.S., its NATO partners, and the EU can all take steps to mitigate Russia’s actions.
The first step is to counter Russia’s first and second phase NGW—the disinformation and psychological campaigns in target countries.
The recommendation section list multiple options available to democracies in Russia’s crosshairs.
The United States and NATO can take additional steps to deter Putin while simultaneously reassuring him that his regime is not under attack.
If carefully and masterfully played, the United States and Russia could find themselves able to work together on some initiatives, or at least not let tensions rise to the level of armed conflict.
The measures outlined in this paper will deter Putin from further aggression and reassure him that the United States is not his enemy.
Failure to incorporate any or some of these actions will result in continued disinformation campaigns aimed at Western democracies.
Russia’s tactics will only evolve, and if the United States does not get a handle on how to counter Russia’s disinformation campaign, it could result in such 41 internal strife in the United States that the democratic institution as a whole is called in to question.
The United States does not need to crumble for Putin to get the effect he is looking for.
He is looking to sow enough doubt into our democratic institution that the world begins to have doubts about the stability of the United States This would result in the United States losing its global hegemon status and provide the opportunity for other nations, like Russia, to rise in its place.
Russia is playing the long game, and although his strategy is ultimately a defensive campaign, the United States needs to engage in its own defensive campaign in order to keep Russia in check.
Michael Kofman, Katya Migacheva, Brian Nichiporuk, Andrew Radin, Olesya Tkacheva, and Jenny Oberholtzer.
Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, 2017, 19.
Report on the Investigation into Russian Interference in the 2016 Presidential Election, 1.
