Kazakhstan Will Not Be Next by Zhulduz Baizakova and Roger McDermott1 Kazakhstan is the only state in Central Asia bordering Russia.
The border between the two countries is the longest in the world (about 7,590 The Research Division of the NATO Dekm) and is still in the process of being demarcated.
Moreover, ethnic fense College provides NATO’s senior leaders with sound and timely analyses and recommendations Russians make up about 21% of the Kazakh population, mostly living on current issues of particular concern for the Alin the northern regions of the country close to the border. liance.
They conduct research on topics which are of interest to case, and that Kazakhstan is indeed at risk of suffering from Russian agthe political and military decision-making bodies of the Alliance and its member states. gression.
However, Kazakhstan has actually shown over the years that it The opinions expressed are those of the authors is fully able to protect its interests in complicated geopolitical scenarios and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization or the NATO involving its neighbours .3 Defense College.
Given Russia’s security operations in North ISSN 2076 – 0949 Caucasus, and its ongoing operations in Ukraine, it is far beyond the ISSN 2076 – 0957 Research Division 1 Dr.
Roger Via Giorgio Pelosi, 1 McDermott is a Senior Fellow in Eurasian Military Studies, Jamestown Foundation, Washington, DC; 00143 Rome – Italy Senior International Fellow, FMSO, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas; and an Affiliated Senior Analyst, Danish Institute for International Studies, Copenhagen.
The Research Diviputins-next-targets-eastern-ukraine-and-northern-kazakhstan; R Lourie, Kazakhstan May Be the Next sion would appreciate a courtesy copy of reprints.
This is especially the case in Central Asia, since generally passive, with most Central Asian governMoscow has real security concerns shared by its partments remaining ultimately non-committal on events ners in the region, concerning potential instability as in Crimea, each capital has shown its own distinct a result of transnational or regionwide threats emaapproach.
In order to better underis between the official Kazakh and Uzbek positions, stand the possible repercussions of the Ukraine crisis though there is no evidence that either sees its large in Central Asia, this study traces the response of the Russian-speaking population as indicative of any poCentral Asian republics to the events in Ukraine, and tential threat to its sovereignty and national security examines the trends that emerge from this analysis from Russia. in relation to Russian security perspectives on CenUzbekistan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs and parliatral Asia.
However, as exterinto account that the two countries are allies in terms nal observers have noted since the questionable 16 of foreign, defence and security policies.
Economic March 2014 referendum on Crimea, Tashkent has policy, integration initiatives and the vexed and senrefrained from direct criticism of Russia’s actions and sitive questions pertaining to ethnic relations in Kahas issued no statements on Southeastern Ukraine. zakhstan are also examined.
Currently Uzbekistan finds itself in the most difficult position, due to the impact on regional security of the ISAF drawdown from Afghanistan in 2014.
Tashkent openly expects trouble to erupt in the aftermath of the Central Asian Responses to the Ukraine ISAF exit.
Uzbek foreign policy before the drawdown Crisis linked the country’s assistance to ISAF, including The various Central Asian republics’ different responsavailability of the Northern Distribution Network, es to, and handling of, the aftermath of Russia’s seizure to future military and technical aid from the West. of Crimea and the ongoing crisis in Ukraine highThe unfolding crisis in Ukraine then made any sort of light their distinct approaches to foreign and secuUS-Russia or NATO-Russia cooperation unsustainrity policy.
In the context of the crisis in Ukraine, the able, at least for the near future.
Who could Tashkent potential effects on some Central Asian states could turn to, if tensions along the Afghan-Uzbek border be particularly heavy.
It is important to look at the situabekistan are all highly dependent upon remittances tion from an Uzbek perspective, since it is currently from migrant workers in Russia.
Economic sanctions the only country in Central Asia to conduct a particuagainst Russia have led to a steady decrease in these larly active information campaign about Afghanistan’s remittances, which in 2013 accounted for 46.2% of instability and unfriendliness.
In a recent meeting of GDP in Tajikistan, 13.9% in Uzbekistan and 29.5% the Shanghai Cooperation Organization dein Kyrgyzstan.
Tashkent is one of the drivno evidence that these countries consider Russia to be ing forces behind this idea.
President Islam Karimov a threat, yet their complex and differing responses to requires security assistance as well as guarantees that, if the crisis reveal a spectrum of interests and pressures the situation in Afghanistan deteriorates, either Russia which has resulted in less than clear support for Rusor NATO will step in.
The various positions adopted by all the onstrated his manoeuvrability by skilfully switching Central Asian countries are unlikely to change even sides, especially when his country’s national security if the crisis in Ukraine deepens, unless states like Kais at stake. zakhstan and Uzbekistan experience problems with energy and transportation routes because of Western On 20 March 2014, the Kyrgyz Ministry of Foreign sanctions, or as an indirect result of Russia’s denying Affairs issued the clearest statement of support for overland access to Ukraine.
For all the Central Asian Russia, recognizing the so-called Crimean referendum states, geographic proximity to Russia and a close hisand equating the expression of the “will of the people” torical association with the Russian Federation (as the to its own experience of revolution in 2010.
Bishkek’s successor to the Soviet Union) are inescapable facts. offer of unwavering support to Moscow reflects both its economic weakness and considerable Russian leverage within the country.
With the United States airbase at Manas now closed as part of the ISAF drawdown from Afghanistan, the only foreign power with basing rights Kazakhstan’s Position on the Ukraine Criin the small state is Russia.
Keeping Everything in Limbo and Tajikistan were among the absentees during the Kazakhstan’s response to the crisis has consistently re27 March 2014 UN General Assembly vote on the flected a perception that there are no security implicaterritorial integrity of Ukraine within “internationally tions for the state: the various factors which triggered recognized borders:” Uzbekistan abstained. the conflict between Moscow and Kyiv are absent in Kazakhstan.
No Kazakh official or international reTajikistan and Turkmenistan issued no official statelations expert considers Russia to have any potential ment regarding the crisis; their silence is revealing, tanclaim on the territory of Kazakhstan.
The crisis has, tamount to a declaration of neutrality allowing them therefore, not been accompanied by more frequent to preserve relations with both Russia and Ukraine. meetings of Kazakhstan’s Security Council, or by othAround 47 percent of Tajikistan’s GDP comes from er signs of anxiety concerning a potential threat.
The remittances earned in Russia, and Dushanbe has destatement on the Ukraine crisis by the Kazakh Minisveloped other financial and economic dependencies try of Foreign Affairs offered support for the referenover the years. dum in Crimea, but stopped short of fully supportFor the duration of the crisis and in the coming years, ing Russian policy; the abstention from the 27 March Central Asia may present an undeclared battlespace 2014 UN General Assembly vote was consistent with for influence between Russia and the West.
He praised Nazarbayev’s leadership of the tral Asian counterparts failed to offer their congratucountry, attributed the idea of the EEU to him, addlations to Poroshenko.
In several position towards the new Ukrainian leadership is the areas of his overall response, he repeatedly acknowlmost balanced and constructive within the region. edged Kazakhstan’s modern-day statehood.
Putin was effectively in Ukraine in 2014, a curious controresponding to the question by saying Kazakhstan is versy arose surrounding Vladimir Putin’s response to not Ukraine. a question about Kazakhstan during the 2014 Seliger National Youth Forum.
One particular commentary, blending the and the West because of the Ukraine crisis.
If such an interpretation was warranted, In one of his interviews, President Nursultan Nazit is surprising that Astana failed to react.
Let arbayev said that he saw the entire Ukraine crisis as us examine the question asked on that occasion, and stemming from the fact that, since independence, it the precise context of Putin’s response.
Dismissing any supposed conflict of interest, would like to join this work, if possible.
There is little main faithful to its multi-vector foreign policy ‒ but doubt that, should Ukraine indeed be further dismost importantly, paraphrasing Lord Palmerston, to membered and new entities appear on the map, exits national interests. actly the same policy will be applied.
A few Russian nationalists, including Vladimir Zhirinovsky, have commented negatively on Kazakhstan and its politics in the context of the unraveling The Russian Minority in Kazakhstan Ukraine crisis.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, ethnic no territorial or any other claims regarding KazakhRussians found themselves in an alien country with stan, its soil and its citizens, but they also reaffirmed no knowledge of the Kazakh language or its history the solid strategic partnership and friendship between and culture, as was the case of Russian minorities in the two countries. other emerging post-Soviet countries.
They had difficulties in identifying with their new home country, Since gaining its independence, Kazakhstan has reand in establishing their own identities.
At the same mained open-minded in its foreign policy, looking time, they assumed that standards of living in Russia both East and West and freely entering into partnerwould be much higher and were concerned that an ships for the purpose of constructive cooperation and independent Kazakhstan might no longer treat them for a “win-win” scenario of mutual benefits.
The explanation for this difference is to be found in Most importantly, Astana understands the current social and economic factors, rather than ethnicity. situation and is always ready to discuss it with its According to many analysts, the massive ethnic Rusregional and global partners, in the hope that the sian emigration from Kazakhstan since independence Ukraine crisis might soon be resolved.
Areas containing the largWith Kazakhstan adopting no new legislation conest Russian ethnic population include the Northern cerning its ethnic Russian minorities, the main quesKazakhstan , Kostanai and Easttion is whether this could conceivably provide a preern Kazakhstan districts.
Prohibiting all landialogue with the Kazakh authorities Moscow agreed guages other than Kazakh would be a sure recipe for to offer assistance, such as funding the construction replicating what Ukraine experienced in the aftermath of the Russian House, the community’s official headof the Maidan protests, and the government in Astana quarters.
Nazarbayev is determined zakhstan are treated better than in the Baltic States, to avoid this mistake at all costs.
Similarly, Kazakhstan considers itself a refunding and, most importantly, relevant textbooks sponsible member of the United Nations, the Comand dictionaries are not to be found.
Ethnic Russians in Kazakhstan have the same the Eurasian Economic Union as the tool to rights and privileges as any other ethnic/national miachieve wider Eurasian economic integration.
Impornority; these rights and privileges are secured by the tantly, the EEU is seen as a purely economic alliance. constitution and other relevant legislation, as well as A number of Kazakhstan’s foreign policy initiatives by the wise foreign and domestic policy of Kazakhsince the start of the Ukraine crisis have been little stan’s leadership. noticed by the wider international public and even by expert communities.
Despite its seemingly closer integration with Russia, Astana still practices its multivector foreign policy.
On June 22 2015 Kazakhstan Kazakhstan’s Active 360° Foreign Policy had finally concluded the accession negotiations with Approach World Trade Organization and is about to become the 162nd member of the organization; up to Kazakhstan launched its new Foreign Policy Concept date 90% of Kazakhstan’s bilateral trade is with the for 2014-2020 on 21 January 2014, one month beWTO members.
This may potentially undermine fore former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych the efficiency of the EEU across many areas.
This is important, because Kazakhally, Kazakhstan’s recently introduced 15-day visa-free stan had until that time been applying the Concept regime for the nationals of ten developed countries both regionally and globally.
In October 2014, Kazakhstan also became the first Central Asian member of the “Asia-Europe” Meeting , which gives 51 countries in East Asia and Europe35 an informal platform for cooperaEurasian Economic Union tion and dialogue across various sectors.
It is too early to make any serious forecasts about the future of the EEU, officially created on 1 JanuThe importance of the Protocol to the Central Asian ary 2015.
Importantly, five major nuclear powers had effectively guaranteed nowhere in the Concept does Kazakhstan speak of eithat the Central Asian region will never face a serither the CU or the EEU as concerned with anything ous threat of nuclear attack from any of them.
This is other than economic matters and trade. particularly important in the context of the ongoing Ukraine crisis.
On 24 August 2014, Nazarbayev reassured the population that the EEU presents certain advantages for One of the most labour-intensive tasks for Kazakhthe country, like making delivery of goods among stan’s foreign policy has been its candidacy for a EEU members cheaper and thus making items pronon-permanent seat on the UN Security Council for duced in Kazakhstan more competitive for world 2017-2018.
Since Russia in turn has banned peacekeeping exercises to boost its peace support casome Western imports, Kazakhstan has actually inpabilities by raising its peacekeeping brigade (KAZcreased its export of agricultural products, including BRIG) to NATO standards.
Originating as a trilateral vegetables, fruit and meat. exercise in 2003, with the United States and UK, this now includes other countries.
Nonetheless, Kazakhstan’s defence and security cooperation is mainly with Russia, notably in highly sensitive areas, and will likely remain so for the foreseeable future.
This facilitates higher and security ties internationally to include closer colevels of cooperation and interoperability between the operation with NATO through the PfP and related two countries48 than Kazakhstan experiences with any programmes.
Russia’s influence on Kazakhstan’s ofupon this, nor has it damaged Astana’s close relations ficer corps, as well as its security and intelligence perwith Moscow.
In recent years Astana further diversisonnel, is reflected in levels of participation in foreign fied its international military cooperation to include defence and security courses.
Since 2010, the counsend personnel to courses run by NATO members, try has hosted a biennial arms show to faincluding those at the Marshall Center, significantly cilitate the growth of its fledgling defence industry. higher numbers go to Russia.
From Prague to Istanbul, Brussels, Speech at Defense Ministers Session of EAPC, December 2, 2003.
Multiple documents that legally bind our mutual aspiration to eternal friendship and partnership regulate all areas of cooperation, including in the military sphere.
Lieutenant-General A Tasbulatov, “Towards Establishing Military Security,” Krasnaya Zvezda, May 28, 2009.
There is dational bilateral defence treaty signed in 1994, that particularly close intelligence cooperation between same treaty includes a clause prohibiting either counKazakhstan and Russia. try from engaging in military intelligence activities against the other.
Russia attaches premium value to Among the multilateral organizations in which both its security ties to Kazakhstan; especially to its role in countries further deepen their defence and security sensitive strategic areas, no more so than in air defence relationship are the SCO and the Collective Security and ballistic missile defence.
The bulk of the KSOR is tem, which has proved more problematic to impleprovided by Russia and Kazakhstan.
Russia’s elite Airment within the CIS, but its upgrade to a fully inteborne Forces grated air defence system.
In addition to technology provides the 98th VDV Division and the 31st Air transfers and purchases of Russian air defence assets Assault Brigade and Special Forces, while Kain recent years, this drive to integrate the air defence zakhstan’s contribution, the largest from Central Asia, systems of the two states was exemplified by Moscow includes the 37th AAB, Special Forces and a coastal taking the unusual step of including Kazakhstan in defence unit.
Through its close interaction with Rusits unified system of state identification, used by its sia in the CSTO, Kazakhstan not only confirms its Armed Forces and security structures.
Military cooperation by CIS countries,” Centralasia.ru, February 10, 2006.
The YeGRLO is the Russian equivalent of fence agreement with Russia, binding both countries the Mk XII Identification, Friend or Foe system to cooperate more closely in this sensitive security area used by the United States and NATO.57 while utilizing the mechanism to create a future regional system.
Nevertheless, by 22 May (while the third Balkhash Radar Station (also known as Sary Shagan biennial military expo was being hosted in Astana), radar node and Balkhash-9) is the location for two KADEX 2014, an air defence deal, was signed with generations of Soviet and Russian early warning rathe French defence company Thales to supply GM dars.
Despite western and central China, India, Pakistan and poscloser defence integration with Moscow, Kazakhstan sible submarine missile launches from the Bay of Benretains considerable scope to pursue international gal.
This facility also forms a key part of Russia’s plans security partnership arrangements to suit its own into develop a unified space system for the detection of terests. ballistic missile launches far beyond its borders.
Russia is currently upgrading Balkash radar node in Russia’s nuclear security, a bilatthe radar facility in Balkhash, due to complete work eral military exercise in June 2011 held in eastern and on the experimental Neman-P radar by 2016.
Acsoutheastern Kazakhstan witnessed the first rehearsed cording to sources in the Strategic Rocket Forces, the use of joint air defence structures to repel a cruise Neman-P will monitor the air-space situation and aid missile attack.
During Shygys 2011, Kazakhstan’s Air the flight parameters and targeting of the A-135 antiForce scrambled MiG-31 aircraft to intercept cruise ballistic missile defence system protecting Moscow. missiles in the country’s airspace; L-39 training aircraft were used for simulation purposes.
Moscow’s efforts to promote political and economic integration projects with its CIS neighbours has inSince the fear of a possible surprise missile attack on cluded Kazakhstan in such initiatives and building the Russian Federation features very high among the a joint air defence system perfectly illustrates such priorities of the Russian Military Doctrine, it is abuntrends.
While this offers the prospect of deeper intedantly obvious that Moscow also attaches great imgration with Moscow and may imply that the govportance to uninterrupted access to strategic facilities ernment in Kazakhstan has made a strategic choice in Kazakhstan such as the Balkhash radar node.
The in tying the country’s future defence development to risks to Russian security resulting from a decision by Russia, there are also conflicting signals.
The potential operational environment in these areas is also particularly demanding in terms of topography, ranging from the mountainous areas of Kyrgyzstan or Tajikistan, to practical issues of over-land military transit rights to transfer Russian forces to future crisis Kazakhstan and Central Asia as a Potential zones in the region.
Theatre of Russian Military Operations Assessing any modern military operational environOne of the critical lessons, based upon analyses of Rusment also requires that domestic religious and cultural sian military actions in Crimea and Donbas, is that Rusdifferences be taken into account.
In Central Asia, unsia’s Armed Forces were used in distinctive ways and their like Ukraine, the Muslim religion is well represented. force-mix and deployments were shaped by the uniqueThere are also regional political factors that serve to ness of the local operational environment.
At the outlimit Russia’s scope to intervene as it did in Ukraine. set, therefore, it is necessary to establish that Central Asia According to discussions the author has had with Uzmore broadly, and Kazakhstan in particular, differs greatbek and Russian specialists, for instance, Tashkent’s ly from the operational environment in both Ukrainian objections to the possible deployment of Russian theatres.
These distinctions relate to language, ethnicity, “peacekeeping” forces to southern Kyrgyzstan durhistory, culture, socio-economic factors, religion, politics, ing the Osh crisis in June 2010 were a major factor geography and topography.
Two critical distinctions must in eliminating this from the Kremlin’s options.
Kazakhstan, unlike Ukraine, is a Eurasian country the Fergana Valley; without Uzbekistan’s approval for with a viable and growing economy, while the former has Russian actions, the logistics, transfer and support of chosen a Eurasian economic integration path with the Russian troops and military hardware would be probeconomies of Russia and Belarus. lematic at best.
Some examples suffice to underscore some of the rudiSimilarly, in terms of Russian forces being deployed, mentary differences.
The linguistic mixture in Central together with heavy equipment, into a security crisis Asia is much broader than in Ukraine, with the presarising in the Central Asian states bordering Afghanience of growing numbers of local citizens speaking their stan , Russian strategic own Turkic languages.
The so-called “green men” would mobility remains heavily tied to railway infrastrucfind such areas exponentially more challenging than in ture.
Challenges and Constraints,” in Fault lines of Conflict in Central Asian and the South Caucasus.
It tainly lighter armed Russian Airborne Forces also occurred in the context of a weak government could deploy rapidly in the early phases of such future in Kyiv struggling to establish its legitimacy; in stark combat operations.
However, reinforcement and locontrast to most of the well-established governments gistical supply, as well as moving heavy equipment, in Central Asia.
Russian analysts have argued that would demand access to military transit through Katacit support from the local population in Crimea exzakhstan’s railway system.
These background facts and plains why Ukrainian military personnel did not open defence planning realities are reflected in numerous fire on Russian troops, though other factors were at bilateral and multilateral military exercises, with the play.
Asserting that large enough military base to covertly deploy forces Russia poses a possible security threat to Central Asia, or transfer reinforcements, and cannot reply upon the therefore, is to entirely misread regional dynamics. support of the local population.
There are other operational factors at play for Russia Equally, although Russia has access to a number of in the Central Asian context, such as military basing military facilities in Kazakhstan, including the vital or the scope for action depending on the specifics of radar node in Balkhash, the operational environment a local security crisis.
Russia maintains an airbase at in the vast country is potentially even more problemKant, near Bishkek under the umbrella of the CSTO atic.
In a hypothetical bilateral crisis prompting Mosand its former 201st Motorized Rifle Division now cow to contemplate an intervention, Russia has very forms its base in Tajikistan headquartered in Dushanlittle existing military footprint within Kazakhstan. be, with force elements in Kulyab and Kurgan-Tyube.
There are additional factors which serve to further reHowever, these force sizes in Russia’s Central Asian duce the chances of such an operation occurring or bases are comparatively modest; Kant hosts approxisucceeding, even if the motive existed.
Moreover, a large portion to sever Moscow’s defence relations with Kazakhstan of the military personnel in the latter are conscripts, and de facto terminate its overland transit rights, Rusand prior to conducting joint or CSTO/SCO military sian decision-makers would need to take account of exercises Russia frequently boosts the contract persona still greater level of sensitivity.
If discussion about nel element by moving contractors from its bases in intervening in southern Kyrgyzstan at the request of the Central Military District.
The possible disruption to energy decision to relinquish the inherited Soviet nuclear flows would certainly shake investor confidence and weapons on the territory of Kazakhstan was facilitatcause concern for numerous state actors and stakeed by a series of security guarantees from the leading holders.
This is not to mention that such an intervennuclear powers, including China.
Indeed, this secution would be a radical departure from the Kremlin’s rity development arguably formed the foundation for policy of seeking stability in Central Asia, rather than Kazakhstan’s “multi-vector” foreign policy, to avoid upheaval and disunity.
The knock-on impact within preferring any one power over another in its foreign the region would be unpredictable and damage Mosrelations.
Beijing Indeed, security perspectives in Kazakhstan have reaffirmed this pledge publicly on 5 April 1995, and long reflected this sense of close relations with Rusin June 1996 Jiang Zemin addressed the parliament sia.
In February 2008, Bulat Sultanov, the director of in Kazakhstan, again repeating China’s assurances.
Sultanov stated that Kazakhstan protects consequences ‒ standing in the path of any hypothetiRussia from challenges and sub-state threats emanatcal Russian intervention in Kazakhstan.
Even if a set ing from Central Asia, while providing a link among of unpredictable events occurred and Moscow were Asian countries in favour of Russia.
Since Vladimir to consider some type of punitive measures infringPutin’s presidency, according to Sultanov, relations being Kazakhstan’s sovereignty, there are major hurdles tween Russia and Kazakhstan have evolved to reach in the way.
At the very least the ment to the CSTO, the pattern in recent years points 69 Various reports in Remin Ribao, 9 February, 10 February, 6 April 1995; Remin Ribao, 6 December 1997.
While some may argue that this leaves KazakhKSOR shows that Moscow does not envisage acting stan unprepared in the event of a Russian attack, it is alone in any Central Asian theatre. equally clear that Astana is not contingency planning for such a theoretical risk of an assault by a close ally.
This closeness and level of trust between Astana and Moscow is also confirmed in the current disposition of Kazakhstan’s Ground Forces.
Far from seeing Russia as a al Commands there is only one Artillery Brigade possible threat to their sovereignty, these governments located in Aktobe ; in Astana Command have been more concerned about the possible knockthere is no military infrastructure close to the border on impact on their economies stemming from the with Russia, while in East Command there is one sanctions regime against Russia; this is especially the Multiple Rocket Launcher Brigade, one Gun Artilcase in Kazakhstan.
However, a number of factors at lery Brigade, one Antitank Artillery Brigade and one play in Central Asia act as inhibitors to the emergence Motorized Rifle Brigade .73 East Regional of a “Russia threat” to the territorial integrity of these Command appears to mainly act as a strategic reserve states. for the other commands.
In this context it is impossible · Despite Russia’s military activities and behavto envisage the circumstances in which Moscow iour in Ukraine, it lacks the strategic mobility would act alone in Central Asia, let alone attack and military capacity to replicate such ventures one of the Central Asian states; within Central Asia.
In effect, this would damage As already noted, relations between Kazakhstan and Russia’s security as well as lowering its standing in Russia form the bedrock of Russia’s foreign and sethe region; curity policy in the region.
Western policy-makers among NATO members could benefit from a deep· Russia and Kazakhstan are bound by treaty as er understanding of why the relationship between defence and security allies, with policy closely coAstana and Moscow is so strong; possibly unlocking ordinated through the CSTO, as well as mutual the potential future role of Kazakhstan as a bridge to economic interests within the EEU; aggressive ease tensions and defuse possible risks of confrontaaction against Kazakhstan would jeopardize Mostion and escalation.
