Hugo Spaulding BACKGROUNDER February 3, 2015 PUTIN’S NEXT OBJECTIVES IN THE UKRAINE CRISIS Russia’s campaign in eastern Ukraine has reached an inflection point.
Five months after signing a ceasefire agreement, Russian and separatist forces have moved from a preparation phase to a maneuver offensive launched by the separatist victory at the Donetsk airport on January 21, 2015.
This new phase of the conflict presents a fresh set of operational decision points for the governments in Moscow and Kyiv.
These decisions, much like the decision to seize the airport, will shed light on Moscow’s strategic objectives in Ukraine and Kyiv’s capacity to withstand them.
They will also shape the evolution and quite possibly the outcome of this war.
RUSSIAN OBJECTIVES IN KYIV Russia’s strategic interest in controlling Ukrainian political may well be reluctant to undertake it.
Unless he can either affairs reflects Russian President Vladimir Putin’s belief in achieve his goals by means short of conquest or be persuaded the need to maintain a buffer between NATO, the European to accept lesser objectives, he is likely to be planning for and Union, and Russia.
The collapse of former President Viktor considering the prospect of a conventional attack to destroy the Yanukovych’s pro-Russian regime in February 2014 forced current Ukrainian government.
Current Russian and separatist Putin to re-evaluate his strategy for controlling Ukraine, operations in eastern Ukraine appear to show that Putin has particularly as it became clear that Ukraine’s new government not yet decided to accept any moderate or negotiated outcome was likely to be pro-Western and eager to join the EU and even to this conflict.
Unable to rely on a proxy government any longer, Putin replaced his policy of economic coercion with one incorporating military coercion through successive operations.
PHASES OF RUSSIAN STRATEGY Both approaches pursued the same strategic goal of dominating Putin’s first response to the rise of a potentially pro-Western Ukraine’s internal and foreign affairs. government in Kyiv was to seize the Crimean Peninsula by force.
Limited military escalation brought Kyiv’s West-leaning This invasion, justified as a defensive action, was meant to put administration to the negotiating table on several occasions pressure on Kyiv as well as to secure Russia’s most immediate throughout the conflict, serving most notably as the catalyst security interest in Ukraine — the permanent retention of the for the September 2014 ceasefire agreement.
On the contrary, Russian intervention and separatist success has generally driven Kyiv Putin then turned his attention to the east, by promoting the closer to alignment with the West.
Putin has made it clear that he apparent political legitimacy of separatists in Donetsk and regards a Western-aligned Ukraine as unacceptable and that he Luhansk Oblasts and building their military power to combat is willing to use force to prevent such a situation from occurring.
Putin has largely If his attempts to manipulate Kyiv’s foreign and domestic policy succeeded in establishing the separatists as the de facto political in this direction fail, he may change his strategy from economic leadership in much of Donetsk and Luhansk by supporting and military coercion to military conquest.
An effort to consolidate disparate separatist and Luhansk Oblasts in the southeast of the country.
Russia Minsk Protocol required both Ukraine and the Russia-backed preserved the integrity and combat power of the separatist separatists to withdraw heavy weaponry 15 kilometers from territories by providing humanitarian and likely military aid in this demarcation line in order to create a demilitarized buffer a series of supply convoys.
The establishment of this line, as well as the fact of the government services to the separatist-held regions in November separatists’ participation in its negotiation, provided partial 2014, this Russian assistance proved crucial to the survival of legitimacy to the separatists, a key Russian objective during this the separatist administrations. phase.
The use of rapid successive operations to push Kyiv into a peace deal with the separatists that facilitated preparations for Putin has also deployed Russian military forces to support the current offensive shows the continuity of Russian strategic the separatists, particularly with high-end capabilities that planning since the summer of 2014. militias cannot hope to develop rapidly.
The limited Western discussions of this direct Russian intervention have generally Heavy separatist bombardment of the old terminal at the focused on the presence or absence of Russian tanks, aircraft, Donetsk airport in early December 2014 also drove Ukraine’s and other advanced weapons systems.
A careful examination of President Petro Poroshenko to announce a new “regime of the pattern of maneuver conducted by the combined Russiansilence,” under which he forbade the army to return fire unless separatist forces, however, suggests that the Russians have been under direct attack.
President Poroshenko said the move providing critical assistance in the development and execution allowed Ukraine to rearm and strengthen its line of defense, but of sophisticated operational-level campaign planning. the regime of silence reflected Ukraine’s inability to effectively target separatists firing from urban areas.
The separatists’ maneuvers bear some of the signatures of classic Russian and Soviet operational design, albeit on a smaller scale, and clearly show the Russian hand in formulating the campaign.
MANEUVERING PHASE The operations consist of preparatory phases to soften Ukrainian defenses (conducted with hybrid means including artillery, special The battle for the Donetsk Airport has assumed a significance out operations, and terrorism), a penetration battle,8 maneuvering of all proportion to the size of the forces engaged.
The airport is to force the adversary into a classic Kesselschlacht or “cauldronon the outskirts of Donetsk city, which the separatists have long battle” (the characteristic envelopment of enemy forces that controlled.
The limited pro-Kyiv forces there have not posed occurred on the Eastern Front in World War II, often precisely in any meaningful threat to rebel control of Donetsk, although this area of eastern Ukraine), maneuvering by armored columns their retention of the airfield could have been important if Kyiv along multiple axes to the next set of objectives, followed by had decided to try to send reinforcements by air to fight to retake taking sufficient terrain to begin to set new conditions for a Donetsk.
The airport itself was also designed by the Soviets to be subsequent offensive.
Pro-separatist LifeNews Novoazovsk on August 28, 2014 and a separatist envelopment filmed an interview with a DNR battalion commander from the at the railroad hub of Ilovaisk east of Donetsk on August 29. new terminal on January 16, 2015 to support this perception, The Russians began a new preparation phase for future combat although the “cyborgs” continued to hold positions in the new against Ukraine as this ceasefire began.
The ceasefire agreement, terminal until January 21, 2015.16 WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG 3 BACKGROUNDER | PUTIN’S NEX T OBJECTI V ES IN THE UKR A INE CRISIS | HUGO SPAULDING | FEBRUA RY 3, 2015 In response to the attack, the Ukrainian government deployed DONETSK tanks in what it called a “massive operation” to open up an evacuation corridor for its wounded soldiers and hold A dramatic escalation in hostilities followed Ukraine’s its remaining positions in the new terminal.
While the withdrawal from the ruins of the new terminal at Donetsk evacuation proved partially successful, separatists had trapped airport.
On January 22, 2015 an artillery or mortar shell hit the remaining Ukrainian forces in the new terminal from a bus full of civilians in the southern Leninskyi District of the floors above and below.
The attack, which left 13 news agency NewsFront shows pro-Russian militants from an dead and 20 wounded, prompted the DNR to shame publically upper floor dropping thermite grenades, a pyrotechnic weapon a group of POWs captured at the airport in front of an angry capable of burning down metal structures.
On January crowd, implying Ukrainian responsibility for the attack. 19, 2015 one of the floors of the new terminal collapsed on International observers from the Organization of Security Ukrainian forces below, injuring and killing as many as 50 and Cooperation in Europe assessed that the shells Ukrainian paratroopers.
The remaining Ukrainian troops were fired from the northwest, near the Ukrainian artillery withdrew or were captured after separatists destroyed the roof positions that supported the Donetsk airport defense.
The of the new terminal on January 21.21 Ukrainian Ministry of Defense, however, blamed the attack on the separatists.
Procurrent administration instead of former President Leonid Ukrainian forces remain in artillery range of the city from areas Kuchma.
Earlier, rebels had demanded Kyiv send probetween Avdiivka and Pisky , and also from Russian oligarch Viktor Medvedchuk in former President Marinka , however, so the loss of the new terminal at the Kuchma’s place.
Medvedchuk, whose daughter’s godfather Donetsk airport did not alter the front line of separatist advance is Vladimir Putin, has been a key figure in the Kremlin’s substantially.
While other flashpoints such as Debaltseve and plans to keep Ukraine within its sphere of influence since at Mariupol represent key maneuver objectives for Russia and the least 2013 and has served as a mediator in several instances DNR, the operations around Donetsk reflect consolidation for throughout the current conflict in particular over POW defensive purposes in the short-term.
Medvedchuk attended the Minsk meeting, runs through the outskirts of Donetsk city, the separatists will but the separatists still blamed Kuchma’s presence for the not be in a position to coordinate wider offensive operations collapse of negotiations.
The capacity to escalate fighting at from the city. short notice will continue to give Moscow an advantage over Kyiv in eastern Ukraine.
Such an approach will succeed until This offensive capacity is key to Russia’s creation of a Kyiv gains the capacity to defend itself through force. viable breakaway state within the preexisting Donetsk and Luhansk Oblast lines.
The creation of secure Russian Following the capture of the Donetsk airport, Donetsk proxy states in southeastern Ukraine will also extend People’s Republic head Aleksandr Zakharchenko said his army the Kremlin’s ability to influence Kyiv’s foreign policy was equipped to fight “in three directions simultaneously” outcomes.
As long as Russian proxy states exist within highlighting Russia’s intention to coordinate successive the internationally recognized borders of Ukraine, offensives before consolidating separatist-controlled NATO is unlikely accept Ukraine as a member.
WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG 4 BACKGROUNDER | PUTIN’S NEX T OBJECTI V ES IN THE UKR A INE CRISIS | HUGO SPAULDING | FEBRUA RY 3, 2015 DEBALTSEVE Security and Defense Council in Kyiv said Ukrainian forces had destroyed a “large amount of Russian equipment,” Debaltseve is a key rail and road hub between the separatist-held including tanks and artillery systems aiding the separatist cities of Donetsk and Luhansk.
The on three sides by separatist forces along the Minsk Protocol same day, separatists fired “Grad” multiple rocket launcher demarcation line.
As many as 8,000 Ukrainian soldiers and systems on the city council building, where civilians were volunteers are trapped in Debaltseve, according to separatist convening for evacuation.
Volunteer units such as the “Donbas” battalion, a head Aleksandr Zakharchenko’s claim that the separatists have mechanized battalion under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, are nearly “closed the cauldron” around 8,000 Ukrainian soldiers, operating there alongside formal Ukrainian forces represented despite reassurances from Kyiv. primarily by the 128th Mechanized Brigade.
It was on the verge of falling under separatist control as of February 2, 2015.
While Debaltseve has become the Russian and separatist main effort separatist elements from both the DNR and LNR have subjected since the Donetsk airport fell on January 21, 2015.
The two Russia-backed separatist territories declared used this maneuver in August 2014 to win the battle for a union in May 2014 under the name Novorossiya, a term Ilovaisk, another important rail hub, over largely volunteer translated literally as “New Russia” which refers to a historical forces.
Although it remains a stated goal, separatists have “Donbas” battalion, before ambushing them in an agreed-upon openly admitted the failure of the unification.
The hundreds of casualties and POWs of Debaltseve would create a direct rail and road connection that resulted from the defeat drove Kyiv to agree to a ceasefire between the separatist-held provincial capitals, allowing for just three days later.
Ukrainian forces at Debaltseve look to be further political integration and military coordination.
While facing a similar fate. this operational objective has long been surmised, DNR head Aleksandr Zakharchenko confirmed active unification efforts Despite reassurances from Kyiv that the “Debaltseve cauldron” on January 26, 2015.
On January 21, 2015 Russia announced its with the intent to allocate forces for further expansion. intention to withdraw its delegation from the Debaltseve-based Joint Center for Control and Coordination , a bilateral The collapse of the Ukrainian defense at Debaltseve will leave forum between Ukrainian and Russian military leaders, citing Russia in a stronger position to coordinate future offensives, the security concerns.
On January 28, Ukraine moved its civilian basis of its military strategy in Ukraine.
The unification of the checkpoint 50 kilometers northwest out of Debaltseve to the military or political structures of the two separatist territories city of Artemivsk, Donetsk Oblast.
On January 29, after a week does not in itself achieve this since the offensive capacity of the without electricity, heat and water, volunteers began evacuating separatists depends on their relationship with Russia.
On February 1, the National the capture of Debaltseve will open up a direct rail and highway WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG 5 BACKGROUNDER | PUTIN’S NEX T OBJECTI V ES IN THE UKR A INE CRISIS | HUGO SPAULDING | FEBRUA RY 3, 2015 connection between Russia and the front line around Donetsk, peninsula into its economic and security framework and prepare allowing Russia to launch future offensive phases more quickly. for a future offensive along the Black Sea littoral or north to the key city of Dnipropetrovsk.
Should the LNR capture MARIUPOL the remaining territory of Luhansk Oblast, Russia will face a parallel decision point.
It could extend the separatist incursion Mariupol itself faces the prospect of a “cauldron” offensive similar into Kharkiv Oblast, possibly through regular Russian troops to the maneuver around Debaltseve.
As January 2015 attacks by from the north, but this scenario is less likely than the extension separatists on the contested H20 highway and on Mariupol itself of Donetsk operations along the Azov coastline.
As Ukraine’s demonstrate, the city is vulnerable from the north and the east to biggest city after Kyiv, the capture of Kharkiv would represent a DNR bombardment, penetration, and expansion.
The shelling of a civilian bus on January 13 near a Ukrainian civilization, Kyiv. checkpoint on the highway served as a high-profile demonstration of this goal.
DNR leader Aleksandr Zakharchenko’s recent Kyiv faces a more difficult decision point following Russia’s statement that the DNR will target Sloviansk, a key source of fresh abandonment of the Minsk Protocol ceasefire.
The separatist water for the oblast, before seizing Mariupol underscores the scope maneuvers preceded the launch of Ukraine’s mobilization by of Russian ambitions. a matter of days.
While it plans to draft 50,000 new soldiers over the next eight months, Kyiv’s capacity to convert this The city has largely escaped hostilities since the September 5 mobilization into counter-offensive gains remains in doubt. ceasefire, but it has long represented a logical next target for Russia.
As National Security chief Oleksandr Turchynov has pointed As many observers have pointed out, the Ukrainian governmentout, Ukraine lacks the precision weaponry needed to combat the held city poses a discrete obstacle to a possible land corridor between separatists, who often fire from densely populated areas.
Facing southwestern Russia and the annexed Crimean peninsula or even military limitations, Kyiv must decide whether to seek a new less Moldova’s pro-Russian breakaway state of Transnistria farther west. favorable settlement, perhaps recognizing the authority of the Moscow has likely aimed to create a “land bridge” to Crimea since its DNR and LNR over their current domains, or to stand by the annexation in March 2014 in order to integrate the peninsula into Minsk agreement and raise international pressure on Russia.
As in Debaltseve, a is unlikely, however, that either decision will influence Russia’s Russian-backed separatist victory in Mariupol will put Moscow in a operational and strategic objectives in Ukraine. stronger position to launch a future offensive along the coastline.
Separatist expansion to Mariupol would potentially place Russian forces in a stronger offensive position relative to Ukrainian reinforcements from cities along the Dnieper line, depicted on the Following its overt rejection of the ceasefire, Russia is likely to graphic above, marking the boundary of Ukrainian core strength. facilitate a separatist offensive until the DNR and LNR control the entirety of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts.
Russia will likely DECISION POINTS pause to consolidate, resupply and reconstruct the territories, which inevitably will be ravaged and abandoned in the wake The ignition of a maneuver phase in the conflict poses new of imminent offensives.
Rather than annex the territories decision points to Russia and Ukraine.
By supporting maneuvers formally, as in Crimea, Russia will instead pursue a settlement on Donetsk, Debaltseve, and Mariupol, Russia has already made wherein Kyiv ends its Anti-Terror Operation , its name its decision to abandon the lines demarcated by the September for the counterinsurgency campaign, and recognizes the new 2014 ceasefire agreement.
As Zakharchenko suggested and the de-facto borders for the purposes of internal security and recent DNR offensives confirm, separatist will continue to attack political administration.
If it decides in Minsk ceasefire demarcation line, populated areas under favor of an extended campaign it will likely advance along the separatist control depend on infrastructure under Ukrainian Azov Sea coastline toward Crimea, possibly opening a new front control and vice versa.
A land corridor between southwestern the possibility of an extended consolidation phase because Russia and Crimea would allow Russia to integrate the annexed the separatists cannot govern a population that does not have WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG 6 BACKGROUNDER | PUTIN’S NEX T OBJECTI V ES IN THE UKR A INE CRISIS | HUGO SPAULDING | FEBRUA RY 3, 2015 access to water, heating, and electricity.
The continue to support separatist offensives until they secure announcement on February 2, 2015 that the DNR and LNR these infrastructure points, the cities that contain them, and will begin mobilizing 100,000 men under a unified army the roads between them.
Consolidation and strengthening of may shed light on the nature of this response.
A separatist, proxy territories does not preclude future Russian expansion and indeed Russian, mobilization looms. objectives; rather, they support it.
It also provides Russia with an opportunity to set political terms with Ukraine that favor Hugo Spaulding is a Ukraine Research Analyst at ISW Russian interests.
As in the past, com/world/2013/sep/22/ukraine-european-union-tradethe Kremlin will use the threat of a renewed incursion to apply russia. pressure on President Poroshenko’s government, which will 2.
The December bombardment of the old terminal forced a likely face a political crisis if it suffers such heavy losses.
It will continue to promote an international effort to htm; [“‘Regime of silence’ in ATO zone continued.
Ukrainian isolate the Russian economy to weaken the Kremlin’s capacity to soldiers are dying but are not opening return fire”], OstroV, support the separatists.
As the conflict has progressed, Ukraine has increasingly turned stability.
Rather than launching its own offensive, Kyiv will to the West for economic and, with little success, military support. likely continue its strategy of trying to cut Moscow’s fiscal and Ukraine’s repeal of its official “non-aligned status” in December 2014 and ambitions to join the EU and NATO also reflect this political capital in an effort to bring Putin to the negotiating foreign policy shift.
First, aljazeera.com/news/europe/2014/12/ukraine-drops-non-alignedseparatists are likely to capture the railroad hub of status-2014122915115570907.html; Sebastian Payne, “Ukrainian Debaltseve.
Russia sent 11 supply convoys to the separatists between August aeroportu-foto. 2014 and early January 2015.
WWW.UNDERSTANDINGWAR.ORG 9 BACKGROUNDER | PUTIN’S NEX T OBJECTI V ES IN THE UKR A INE CRISIS | HUGO SPAULDING | FEBRUA RY 3, 2015 44.
At least 42 civilians were killed in attacks on January 13 and January 24.
