A creeping process of occupation The Ukrainian cities of Donetsk and Luhansk are making global headlines.
Shelling near Luhansk a day after Russia recognized east Ukraine's breakaway republics The significance of the Kremlin's move should not be underestimated.
By recognizing the independence of eastern Ukraine's Donetsk and Luhansk separatist-held regions and, above all, by the deployment of Russian troops to these areas, Russia has drawn a line under what has been its policy for nearly eight years.
The self-proclaimed 'People's Republics' of Donetsk and Luhansk were formed in spring 2014, following Ukraine's pro-Western opposition protests and a change of leadership in Kyiv.
Today, these areas take in about a third of the Donbas region and the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk.
Both areas have been shaped by the coal and steel industries, but there are also stark differences between them.
While Luhansk was generally held to be Ukraine's poorest region, the city of Donetsk was relatively wealthy.
In 2012, it was one of the hosts of the Euro 2012 football championships.
Since the conflict broke out, millions of people have left the separatist areas.
A majority of the civilians fled to Ukraine, hundreds of thousands to Russia.
There were barely any signs of separatist strivings after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 until 2004.
Back then, the Orange Revolution overturned the presidential victory of Viktor Yanukovych, a pro-Russian politician and former governor of the Donetsk region, amid claims of vote rigging.
His final abrupt shift towards Moscow sparked opposition protests in the winter of 2013/2014, and he fled to Russia.
The Kremlin took advantage of the power vacuum in Kyiv to annex Crimea.
In eastern Ukraine, pro-Russian sentiment was not as strong as in Crimea.
However, skepticism about the new leaders in Kyiv was strongest in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Some in the Donbas region also perceived Yanukovych's flight to Moscow as a defeat.
According to a survey, some 20% of the inhabitants of Donetsk said they were prepared to welcome Russian troops as their liberators.
In spring 2014, the administrations of several urban centers were occupied and police stations were stormed to seize weapons.
Russian citizens with apparent links to the Russian secret services were the driving force.
The Ukrainian army managed to regain control over most areas by summer 2014.
But in August, the Ukrainian army suffered a defeat after being encircled in the battle of Ilovaisk, southeast of the city of Donetsk.
Since then, there has been a shaky ceasefire between the Ukrainian army and the Russian separatists.
It began with the introduction of Russian textbooks in schools and the Russian currency.
Russian advisors allegedly helped build up the separatists' forces, something that Moscow denies.
Industry in the region has suffered significantly as a result of the split with Kyiv.
Putin's move seals a long process of creeping Russian influence in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk In 2019, Russia began to distribute Russian passports to the area's inhabitants.
According to the latest reports, some 800,000 eastern Ukrainians are said to have Russian citizenship — an estimated 15 to 25% of the population, although exact figures are hard to obtain.
This is the central argument behind the Kremlin's recognition of the independence of the separatist regions.
Later, the Ukrainian parliament declared that Donetsk and Luhansk were occupied regions.
Russia has long criticized the Ukrainian government, saying it discriminated against Russian speakers.
The use of Ukrainian, as the country's only official language, has increased in the media and in written communication.
However, Russian is spoken primarily in the cities of eastern and southern Ukraine while Ukrainian or a mixture of the two languages is spoken outside those urban centers.
Two thirds of the inhabitants of the separatist regions say Russian is their mother tongue, according to a survey conducted by Berlin's Center for East European and International Studies in 2019.
About one in three people said they spoke both languages; only 3.5% said Ukrainian was their mother tongue.
The current mood among the population of the two regions can only be approximately gauged.
According to the ZOiS study, which is three years old, about a third of the inhabitants of Luhansk and Donetsk were keen to gain autonomy within Ukraine or Russia.
Almost 20% wanted to return to how things were before the split and just as many were in favor of becoming part of Russia without autonomous status.
EU agrees to Russia sanctions package EU leaders have ""unanimously agreed"" a list of measures against Russia over its recognition of Ukrainian separatist regions and deployment of troops.
Russian lawmakers greenlight Putin's troop deployment — live updates Russian lawmakers voted to allow President Vladimir Putin to use troops abroad after Moscow recognized two separatist regions in Ukraine as independent.
Germany's Russia policy dealt a blow by Kremlin's escalation Germany's historic Russia policy, which has been focused on ""special relationship"" diplomacy and economic ties rather than confrontation, has been struck a blow by Russia's escalation.
Date 23.02.2022 Author Roman Goncharenko Related Subjects Vladimir Putin, Dmitry Medvedev, Donetsk, Luhansk, Russia, Russia's invasion of Ukraine Keywords eastern Ukraine, separatists, Russia, people's republic, Donetsk, Luhansk, Donbas Send us your feedback.
