History witnessed that despite Herculean struggles while attaining independence in 1947, Pakistan slipped away from the clutches of the British crown as a determinant country.
Rolling through turns and turmoils, now it is a breathing reality to India and to the rest of the world that Pakistan is a non-collapsible state, and thus cannot be failed, frailed or fractured by the external flirtations of the black-eyed states.
Astoundingly, sincere efforts were made by a true statesman like Atal Behari Vajpayee — India’s former prime minister from the BJP — who wrote musings in the quest of better Pakistan-India relations at the dawn of this millennium.
However, hate mongers on both sides tuned up relations back to the old symphonies.
India needs to stop the wild goose chase while holding hostile, historic sentiments against Pakistan for today’s synchronised and moving relations.
Lately, Islamabad has gone extra miles to call for repeated dialogues which are no less than an embarrassment now.
For sanity to prevail, truth has to be given a nod to extricate from the current tailspin between both countries.
Pakistan has a je dure to consider Indian occupied Kashmir incumbent to move forward with the peace process, whereas India winks at the Kashmir issue, and instead tags terrorism as the real cause of halt in the dialogue process.
First things first, India must stop taking the mince out of Kashmiris, Pakistan did not start the recent uprising in Kashmir and cannot stop it either.
In the current insurgency, about 30,000 Kashmiris have been injured, maimed or bruised in the state-sponsored terrorism.
The more New Delhi grinds down the suppressed Kashmiris, the more azadi slogans will zap against Indian defiance.
Kashmiris appear to have voted with untiring throats, with eyes destroyed or deformed by pellets, and with bodies willing to fall to the ground for what the heart desires.
Subduing loK from the peace talks will not be a workable solution both for Pakistan and India.
Indian-occupied Kashmir must be accepted as a political problem by India in the first place, otherwise the South Asian gridlock would remain in a criss-cross.
India must remember that terrorism is an external conspiracy and not the cause of standstill between both countries.
In the 1970s, original sin was committed by India when terrorism was first entrenched to ignite the separatist movements against Pakistan.
Even today this monster is being fed by India to destabilise Balochistan and the rest of Pakistan, while supporting extremist organisations like the Tehreek-eTaliban-Pakistan , etc.
India should realise that no other state in the world like Pakistan is undergoing the test and trials against the horrible and horrendous acts of terrorism.
In fact, the Pakistani nation has epitomised that the callousness of extremists can only be curbed by standing against them with undying wills and valour.
Undoubtedly, these triumphs of uprooting terrorism/extremism on the part of Pakistan have already been widely acknowledged by the entire globe but India.
Islamabad does not shy away from talking about terrorism with New Delhi, but compromise on eroding loK and other core issues drag the current state at sixes and sevens.
Pakistan has garnered untold lessons from its mistakes of Islamic extremism and buried the concept of ‘strategic depth’ to anchor peace in the region.
Unfortunately, extremism and jingoism are frequently reflected in the Indian civil society, the media, military and political parties, etc. which are indeed undermining dangers for a secular India ahead.
Albeit, Afghanistan could have become a bridge of peace between both countries but India’s proxy with the former against Pakistan can turn the whole region into a terrible turmoil.
THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 Despite the prevailing grumpy situation between Pakistan and India, constructive cooperation in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor and the Bangladesh— China—India—Myanmar Economic Corridor can carry the seeds of immense potential to change their fortunes.
Economic trajectory of CPEC can certainly knit together South Asia, Central Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and Europe.
Afghanistan and lran are also dreaming to partake in CPEC and more interestingly the quiet rise of Bangladesh and Nepal will likely get a boost from this game changer project, too.
Historic opportunities are on offer for both countries, as economic transition is taking place from the west to the east.
It is high time to rid from hysteric world of Pak-India hostility as tri-Star economic chain of Pakistan, India, and China, can surely stoke tangible prosperity to South Asia and beyond.
Regional guild must harbour some sanity; India has been opposing Saarc which surely breeds more antagonism in the region.
For peace to make inroads between Pakistan and India, back-channel diplomacy must be restored.
Finally, the media, think tanks, and people-centric dialogues combined with reciprocal utilisation of prudence and political acumen can lead to a peaceful and welcome settlement of issues between Pakistan and India.
Recent positive developments in PakistanRussian relations are a reflection of the growing confidence in the country by major powers.
It is also a manifestation that India’s deliberate efforts at isolating us have not succeeded.
Today, China is Pakistan’s closest ally and the huge investment and involvement of it in China-Pakistan Economic Corridor is a demonstration of this unfolding reality.
Interestingly, it coincides with China’s expanding role in world affairs that owes largely to its fast growing economy and domestic political cohesion.
China’s confidence is reflected in its staunch support of globalisation and the flagship role it has undertaken in promoting a green economy.
This is in sharp contrast to Trump’s current policy of undercutting globalisation and thwarting measures to reduce global warming.
While facing trying regional and internal challenges, Turkey finds Pakistan its most reliable political ally.
The two are also working towards enhanced cooperation in defenceand securityrelated fields.
Notwithstanding that major differences in weapon systems stand as an impediment to closer cooperation.
Experience has also shown that, despite the best of political relations when it comes to joint production or development, countries find it difficult to collaborate.
The European Union is an exception because it is an economic and political union and is presently not facing any external threat.
Most European countries despite these advantages prefer to produce as much in the country to provide employment to their people.
In case of Pakistan and Turkey, serious efforts should be made to give an impetus to mutual trade and economic relations.
Pakistan needs larger investment in fields of infrastructure and industry and could benefit from Turkey’s vast experience in the manufacturing and construction sector.
Former army chief General Raheel Sharif's appointment to lead the 40-state strong Saudi-sponsored “Islamic military alliance to fight terrorism” is a reflection of the confidence reposed in Pakistan and its armed forces.
It is another matter that it has generated controversy due to its political and strategic overtones.
As referred earlier, a new chapter of better relations between Pakistan and Russia seems to be in the offing.
It is the most dramatic turnaround since the Cold War when Pakistan was closely aligned with the Americans against the Soviet Union.
THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 Several factors seem to have contributed to this encouraging development.
Russia has shown interest in joining CPEC and this provides an opportunity for China, Pakistan and Russia to enhance cooperation.
For some time now Russia has been showing interest in utilising the Gwadar port to which Pakistan has willingly agreed.
Pakistan expects to benefit from Russian investment and technical expertise in the development of the Gwadar port.
It is in mutual interest that Russia becomes an active partner in the CPEC project.
Astute observers of the Sino-Russian relations are of the view that Russia’s participation in CPEC and use of Gwadar port would enhance cooperation between the two countries.
Already, Russia and China are founding members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation and members of BRICs.
Pakistan, along with India, has recently become a full member of SCO and Russia’s membership of CPEC should facilitate in bringing these regional countries closer.
Russia which has been facing intense pressure from the United States and the West since its annexation of Crimea and break-up of relations with Ukraine, will find this cooperation a counter move against its isolation.
Moreover, Russia realises Pakistan’s pivotal role in the Pak-Afghan theatre and wants to revive its interest in the region.
The hosting of the third regional conference on Afghanistan in Moscow with supposedly 12-member countries as invitees is proof of its growing interest.
In a way it is challenging the hegemony of the United States in the region, especially with reference to Afghanistan.
It is a different matter that this would not be easy — considering the significant presence of United States troops and its defence assets in Afghanistan.
Moscow is seeking help from the Taliban to counter the emerging threat of Da’ish in Afghanistan and the Chechen Republic.
And like other regional countries, it is deeply interested in the end of civil war and return of stability in Afghanistan.
Last year in September Pakistan’s special forces and Russia held a joint military exercise in northern Pakistan.
Pakistan Army Aviation for many years has been using Russian helicopters and, with better understanding between the two countries, it is possible that we will see more induction of these weapons systems.
Russian sale of military equipment to India is on the decline as it switches to the United States and Western sources for its new acquisitions and ambitious modernisation programme.
India has widened its options and leaned heavily on the United States to maximise its economic and overall strategic capability to counter China, but maintain close relations with Russia.
In an ironic twist of history, Pakistan’s position that peace could return to Afghanistan only if there is political reconciliation between the Taliban and the Afghan government seems vindicated.
This shows that on Afghanistan convergence is emerging between Pakistan and United States thinking and not surprisingly the mantra of “Do more” is gradually subsiding.
A balanced and equitable political outcome of the Afghan conflict should contribute significantly in improving Pakistan-US and eventually Pakistan-Afghan relations.
Islamabad is gradually coming out of the woods and must maintain the momentum of building bridges with global and regional powers for internal stability and peaceful borders.
Ties between Islamabad and Kabul have never been smooth and there have always been issues in mutual relations mainly due to historical distrust between them.
The distrust is rooted in their respective national narrative, which has historically been dominated by their undemocratic and non-representative power elite.
Pakistani power elite is composed mostly of its civil-military bureaucracy and the agriculture and industrial classes.
The Afghan power elite have traditionally been composed of its civilmilitary-intelligence establishment and so-called politicians, mostly members of Communist groups, without having a political constituency plus certain pseudointellectuals.
In order to have legitimacy, the undemocratic power elite in Afghanistan supported by the national media networks and in pursuit of their vested commercial interests, have been fanning sentiments of hatred among Afghans against Pakistan.
Consequently, Afghanistan, without any legal ground, since Pakistan’s emergence in 1947, has been raising irridentist claims on large tracts of Pakistani territory.
Otherwise, before getting independence Muslims of areas comprising Pakistan had had a great reverence and emotional attachment with Afghans.
For instance, Chaudhry Rehmat Ali while proposing the name PAKISTAN included Afghania or Afghan as a main component in the terms or concept of Pakistan.
Consequently, since the early 1970s Pakistan, equally without any legal justification, has been trying to locate strategic depth in Afghanistan by making the state its virtual dependency.
However, one aspect of these relations is quite clear that it was Afghanistan which initiated issues between the two countries, thinking Pakistan as one of the successor states of British India would be weak.
In order to pursue their respective interests the power elite of Afghanistan and Pakistan have also been creating and supporting proxy militant and terrorist groups to create conditions for realisation of these objectives.
Therefore, Afghanistan started by hosting and cultivating Pakistani Pashtun separatists by forming a terrorist group ‘Zalmay Pashtun’ to carry our terrorist attacks in Pakistan in the 1970s to create conditions for secession of Pashtun areas of Pakistan and formation of a _ pro-Afghanistan, 12 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 Pashtunistan state besides hosting and nurturing Pakistani Baloch separatists.
Pakistan responded by hosting anti-government Afghan clerics in Pakistan and militants trained them to create trouble in Afghanistan followed by hosting, training and arming antiSoviet Afghan Mujahideen and the Taliban to capture state power in Afghanistan and thus to provide Islamabad strategic depth in Afghanistan vis-a-vis India.
Thus it has been the undemocratic and unrepresentative power elites of Pakistan and Afghanistan which have been formulating policies regarding the other state, which have been to the detriment of common Pakistanis and Afghans and thus regional peace and stability.
However, the realities of international politics also played a significant role in the relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan in which both states have been pursuing their perceived national interest rather than having friendly or good neighbourly ties with the other.
The Democratic Peace Theory of International Relations contends that two democratic states do not go to war and create conflict and try to resolve their disputes pacifically.
Whereas, the theory of liberal economic interdependence argues that trade between states creates economic interdependence and disincentives war and conflict between and among states.
Another theory Material Incentives as Drivers of Political Violence argues that groups resort to violence in order to get material incentives.
All these theories are quite relevant to the undemocratic power elite-dictated relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan.
To sort out the distrust between Pakistan and Afghanistan there is a need for continued democratic institutionalisation, which is possible in turn through enhanced participation of Pakistanis and Afghans in the democratic processes, which in turn is possible through informed public opinion to know the objectives of their power elite policies regarding each other’s state.
Moreover, that the trans-boundary water and energy projects in Pakistan and Afghanistan are mutually beneficial; therefore they must be supported.
Unfortunately, little development is taking place in Afghanistan regarding democratic institutionalization.
Moreover, while Pakistan has shunned its policy of locating strategic depth in Afghanistan as unequivocally announced by Adviser to Foreign Affairs Sartaj Aziz some months back, Kabul is still refusing to recognise the Durand Line as the permanent border between the two countries.
In essence, the Indian position is that dialogue on matters that concern Pakistan should be bilateral, but India welcomes international pressure on Pakistan to address India’s complaints of militancy and terrorism against Pakistan.
One-sided and self-serving as the Indian position is, it is compounded by the reality that India is not even willing to engage in bilateral dialogue currently.
Likely in response to intense complaints behind the scenes by India, the State Department has now reiterated that it desires “direct dialogue” between India and Pakistan.
According to Indian media reports, those early remarks by Mr Trump also drew a strong reaction from India.
Yet, India’s objections do not undermine the logic of the United States offer.
While India resists so-called hyphenation by the United States — approaching United States ties with India and Pakistan as interconnected — such an approach could have beneficial consequences for both countries and further the cause of peace in the region.
Moreover, given America’s longstanding concerns about militancy in Afghanistan and terrorism in India, it is difficult to argue that even the softest of United States mediation would undermine India’s stance against terrorism and militancy.
If anything, Pakistan could be encouraged to find a regional solution to the use of proxies and militants by all sides that has so destabilised the neighbourhood.
History has proved that there is an alternative, especially now that war has become unthinkable between the two countries.
The Pakistani military leadership has been clear it does not seek conflict, and the political leadership that it wants dialogue.
Surely, India must recognise the desirability and inevitability of dialogue soon.
In recent years, it has become more complicated both in dimension and intensity.
The energy crisis did not take us by surprise; from a surplus of power in 2001 to a deficiency in 2006, the period was long enough for us to have taken action.
Senior Wapda officials were raising the alarm as early as 2003, only to be snubbed by key decision-makers.
The Nandipur power project is a classic example, speaking volumes for how successive regimes since 2007, when the project that was set to become operational, have jeopardised it.
The energy crisis has cost the national economy dearly, not only the loss to GDP in terms of missing energy due to the demand-supply gap but also the loss to industrial and commercial activities due to loadshedding and flight of capital from the country.
Safe estimates suggest that it has cost the national economy over $100 billion.
In industrial cities such as Karachi, Lahore, Gujranwala and Faisalabad, thousands of factories have shut down or are operating at the bare minimum level, which has resulted in huge flight of capital as investments have shifted elsewhere.
What a shame that it was not just more advanced countries like Canada, Malaysia and UAE that saw a major influx of Pakistani investors, but countries such as Bangladesh and Sri Lanka too.
The crisis has heavily dented the socioeconomic fabric of society, reportedly resulting in the loss of thousands of jobs mainly due to skewed industrial and commercial activities.
With those affected often being the sole breadwinners of their households, the situation has led to dire socioeconomic implications for millions of people.
In the absence of any social welfare support, being pushed towards crime and other forms of moral corruption has been the unfortunate, inevitable outcome for many.
With vision and commitment, challenges can be turned into opportunities.
And opportunities have definitely arisen, but only for certain individuals rather than the masses or the country at large.
Many who have been observing closely argue that the energy crisis is another example of how crises are crafted to serve vested interests.
The entire energy sector, in terms of administration and functions, needed to be overhauled; malpractices and wrongdoings that caused the crisis to be corrected; and projects and deals transparently handled.
But the state of affairs shows that little has changed; in fact, strong efforts are needed to ensure transparency and merit.
It is unfortunate that powerful lobbies still appear to be dictating key energy decisions.
Various ministries, dep-artaments and cells still work haphazardly without any meaningful coordination.
Important iss-ues — an imbalance in the energy fuel mix, addressing our energy security by lowering the reliance on imports, and the lack of utilisation of cheap and indigenous hydropower and renewable resources — do not appear to be challenges that cause concern to the authorities.
Pakistan has the potential, capacity and opportunity to overcome this challenge.
Our existing power plants, currently underperforming for a wide range of administrative and technical reasons, need to run optimally.
Vast, untapped indigenous resources including hydropower, renewables and fossil fuels can help with energy security and affordability.
Energy conservation, the cornerstone of energy strategies across the world, has to be embedded in the national energy fabric, not just in letter but also in spirit.
What is really missing is the combination of vision, strategy and commitment on the part of policymakers.
A nuclear weapons ban reflects misplaced idealism and an_ underappreciation of fundamental strategic issues and concepts.
It addresses symptoms of a problem, not the underlying problems themselves.
This is not to say that a ban would not help alleviate states’ security concerns.
It may well, but it is seriously misguided to think that nuclear issues can be tackled separately and independently from broader military issues and conventional force imbalances.
Furthermore, a ban that doesn’t involve the states that possess nuclear weapons makes one question the effectiveness of such a ban.
Conventional arms imbalances generally, and United States conventional military superiority specifically, are as much a potential driver of nuclear proliferation and geostrategic instability as nuclear weapons.
As an example, American preponderance in power projection capabilities has in the past influenced some countries to acquire nuclear weapons as a deterrent against United States intervention.
A nuclear weapons ban addresses symptoms of a problem, not the underlying problems themselves.
Historically, Pakistan has been a strong proponent of nuclear disarmament.
This acquisition of nuclear capability was an internal balancing instrument against Indian conventional military preponderance and revisionist mindset.
Before nuclearising, after the 1974 Indian so-called PNE, Pakistan kept proposing a development of a Nuclear Weapon Free Zone in South Asia.
Finally, to develop the nuclear weapon, the threat perception was solely driven by India’s conventional superiority that had historically culminated in dismemberment of the eastern half of the country in the 1971 war with India.
This rationale is deeply rooted in the agreed framework that founded the basis of the First Special Session of Disarmament, ie, SSOD-I and which later led to the founding of the Conference of Disarmament.
The agreed framework of SSOD-I clearly stipulated the negotiations upon which nuclear disarmament should be carried out on balanced reductions of armed forces and conventional armaments based on the principle of undiminished security of all parties’ and with a view to promoting stability at lower levels.
Proponents of nuclear disarmament in Pakistan believe that unless the P-5 states fulfill their end of the bargain in the NPT , the efforts of states like the current ban would not be successful, especially as it fails to elicit the support of those states that are in possession of nuclear weapons or are under a security guarantee.
A ban that doesn’t involve the states in possession of nuclear weapons would carry no weight.
More recently, Pakistan has accused the United States and other countries of nuclear hypocrisy, with the Pakistani ambassador to the United Nations saying that a handful of nuclear weapon states advocate abstinence for others but are unwilling to give up their large inventories of nuclear weapons.
Indeed, from the Pakistani perspective, the international community does not give enough attention to the issue of vertical proliferation.
It should come as no surprise, indeed, that Pakistan continues to stress the importance of nuclear weapons in acting as a deterrent to perceived Indian conventional military superiority.
Pakistan in the past has made efforts at addressing issues of conventional force imbalances with India, but New Delhi has traditionally dismissed these efforts, instead focusing on its larger regional competitor, China.
But the issue speaks to a much larger problem, and that is multilateral conventional arms control.
If the India-Pakistan strategic situation offers any lesson, it is that weaker states may have to develop a “great equaliser” to offer the security that they cannot find through conventional means.
Indeed, then Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif stated that Pakistan would sign the CTBT if the Kashmir dispute was solved first.
Moreover, whilst morality has its place in strategy, moral absolutes do not.
Many proponents of nuclear disarmament have the “luxury” of sitting in a strategic vacuum and argue that states should simply learn to get on with one another.
Government leaders and military planners, however, do not have such a luxury, and have the responsibility of developing policies that are aimed at deterring conflict and minimising destruction if war comes.
Deterrence remains a fundamental part of how the international system works.
The two communities, instead of engaging in meaningful dialogue, seem to still be talking over each other.
For the process to ban nuclear weapons to be successful, it must address the motives that drive states to acquire them in the first place.
Not only do these motives include perceived threats from larger conventional or non-conventional forces, the existence of unresolved disputes but they also underline the discrimination in the application of international norms and laws.
Absent strong and reliable external security guarantees to states that face hostile adversaries with conventionally strong militaries, these weapons would remain to guarantee national security for weaker states.
Taking the case of Pakistan, while it was still developing nuclear weapons, it offered to sign the NPT, if India would, also proposing the creation of a regional nuclear weapons free zone.
Later it again linked the refusal to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, with demands for India to sign.
A successful nuclear ban, therefore, would be one that demonstrates a serious commitment by nuclear weapon states to disarm in a reasonable time frame and one whose ultimate objective is to establish a collective security system for states on an equitable basis while ensuring their security concerns that are the primary drivers for nuclear proliferation.
Faced with escalating violence in India-held Kashmir, the local government — a Coalition of the PDP and BJP — banned social media networking sites, including Facebook, Twitter and WhatsApp, for one month “or until further notice” in the valley.
Young boys armed with nothing more than stones being shot, beaten and kicked, and perhaps the most widely circulated video of all, that of Farooq Dar, a young shawlweaver tied to the hood of an army jeep as a human shield from stone-pelting locals while it patrolled Kashmiri villages on voting day.
India is using the oldest, and most feeble, pretext in the book — maintenance of public order — to suppress public dissent.
This is not how a country that markets itself as “the world’s biggest democracy” behaves.
This is how undemocratic states such as Saudi Arabia, China and Egypt wield control over their people.
As is the case in most rebellions, the protests roiling Kashmir are driven largely by the youth, the demographic that is most active on social media.
Burhan Wani, the young separatist leader whose assassination last year in July triggered the ongoing wave of unrest in the valley, also used such sites — an effective tool for organising mass uprisings and street agitation — to mobilise his fellow Kashmiris towards joining the resistance.
India has already done its utmost to prevent the issue from being internationalised by refusing the UN access to the area to investigate the excessive use of force by security personnel.
The rights violations have become so egregious that respected voices in India itself are speaking out against them.
As many other countries have discovered before, a people’s cry for justice cannot be silenced.
The general phenomenon upholding till date by our old and current generation is the issue of separatist movement going on in Balochistan.
If we meet common folks belonging to Punjab, Sindh or KPK, they would be complaining about Baloch’s inadequate and superfluous behaviour towards Pakistan’s government.
From Pakistan’s inception till date, this province hasn’t been given equal rights.
Lack of infrastructure and development led tribal lords to play their cards well.
People of Balochistan while remained ignorant of their due rights, have now become puppets in the hands of tribal lords and enemy states.
By getting the facts right, there is no denial that India played a central role in 1971 war in dividing Pakistan through propaganda and by accelerating and catalyzing anti-Pakistan movement in the erstwhile East Pakistan.
However, our government's imprudent policies to manage this insurgency in the 1970s are till date a stigma on the history of Pakistan.
The story in Baluchistan is taking shape, more or less, in a similar way to the East Pakistan.
However, a number of players had increased with the increase in their interests in Baluchistan.
Other than political goals, there are many strategic goals underlying for India to interfere in the matters of Balochistan.
Other than that Baluchistan’s rich mineral and gold resources have now become an open secret to the international community.
By losing Baluchistan, Pakistan would not only lose its part located at an important geopolitical location but also its natural resources.
Once | read somewhere that oil has become more a curse for the Middle East region than a blessing.
The argument in support of this statement derived from international scholars, signifying that the presence of major oil reserves in the Middle East attracted the United States and Europe to play their dirty politics in this region.
Today what we are witnessing in the Middle East is the result of an aim to capture its large amount of oil reserves.
However, a pursuit of democracy is used as an instrument to invade these states.
West believes that, monarchs and dictatorship in the states of Middle East has taken away the right of self determination from its people.
To restore this believe, they are intervening in these states to establish peace in the name of human intervention.
There are many human rights violations occurring in parts of the world.
States like the US, Russia and others invade only those states which are rich in resources.
Baluchistan has become an epicentre of international attention, fortunately or unfortunately due to its largest reserves of copper and gold.
Its instability is the greatest challenge which requires a systematic resolution.
A step by step systematic approach is needed to produce an environment of peace and stability in this region.
There is also need to develop relations with neighbouring states sharing borders with Baluchistan because stability could only be established, if its borders are well monitored and secured.
We cannot ignore the fact that Iran is a major stakeholder in our foreign policy, and it becomes more important when we know that future of many international pipelines is highly dependent on our good relations with Iran.
India is another border country and is taking advantage of the situation.
Pakistan needs to adopt prudent policies, not only to improve security situation in Baluchistan but also because it is the gateway to improve our unimpeded trade growth.
By improving relations with Iran, we can have multiple advantages at our end.
First, it will improve the security situation in Baluchistan and will help in its development.
Second, it will boost confidence building measures among Balochs and government of Pakistan and government of Pakistan can initiate its long promised pipelines through Iran.
Whereas India is concerned, India is also eyeing the benefits of TAPI and IPI to fill its thirst for energy resources.
While eyeing on its rich oil and gas resources, and an aim to destabilize and cripple Pakistan by separating Baluchistan from Pakistan, India has resumed many insurgent operations in Baluchistan.
The declaration of Indian spies of sabotaging Baluchistan through suicide bombing and facilitating small arms manoeuvring across the borders is now an open secret.
At this hour, government of Pakistan should move forward with a better narrative to bring improvement in Baluchistan.
The situation in Baluchistan needs a policy plan which brings amelioration economically, strategically and socially.
We should unite as a nation to safeguard our national interests in Baluchistan and abandon every possible interference from Indian or western side through strong plan of action.
For that government of Pakistan needs to develop its health and education department first.
It’s not important that mega projects should be launched, but rather small steps towards infrastructure development in health and 24 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 education department could lead us to cover miles of restoring confidence and trust upon each other.
A decision made in time saves nine. — The writer is freelance columnist based in Islamabad.
The American emissary communicated to his Pakistani counterparts to come clear and clean on all types of militants including the Haqqani Networks.
General McMaster had earlier expressed similar sentiments during his sojourn in neighbouring Afghanistan.
Given the chequered history of Pakistan-US relations and the recent shift in each other’s strategic outlook — where the United States has established strategic relations with India and Pakistan has fully embraced the Chinese, and is pursuing the Russians — this American visit is extremely critical for both the Islamabad and Pakistan.
The United States still is a superpower with its economic, military and epistemic superiority over China, Russia and Europe.
The Trump Administration, being conservative, is all clear on the question of militancy emanating from the Middle East, Africa and South Asia.
Little wonder, Trump-led USA attacked Syria, dropped the Mother of All Bombs on Afghanistan and its military might is encircling North Korea for a possible attack.
Significantly, China is walking cautiously and is unlikely to confront the United States on the North Korean issues.
Moreover, Pakistan-India relations are at an all-time low these days due to the Jadhav episode.
For the latter to happen, Pakistan ought to open up all channels of communication and diplomacy with the United States and work in tandem to eradicate extremism and terrorism.
Mashal Khan’s brutal murder and the confession of Noreen Laghari regarding her links to the Islamic State are only the tip of the iceberg.
The United States on it part should appreciate Pakistan’s stance on Kashmir and play a mediatory role to resolve this lingering conflict once and for all.
Finally, the arrival of United States national security advisor is probably the last opportunity for Pakistan.
If lost, it is the latter that will suffer economically and strategically for critical junctures are rare.
Despite onslaughts and intrigues this article has survived for 45 years.
Dictators, usurpers and their rogues have all done their best to manipulate this agreement between the rulers and the ruled.
When the people’s mandate was over ruled civil war started in the Eastern Wing and Quaid’s Pakistan was dismembered.
When it comes to Constitution making, Pakistan has a very checkered history mainly because of Establishment incursion in the democratic process.
Before its complete implementation it was abrogated in 1958 followed by martial law.
Suharwardy’s Awami League was now under the leadership of an ordinary worker Mujib-ur-Rehman, who wanted complete autonomy under a confederal arrangement.
The fall of the dictator paved the way for democracy and elections were held in 1970 on the basis of one man one vote.
A lot has been written about the break-up of Quaid’s Pakistan what was left of it needed a constitution.
In 1972 Yayha’s martial law was lifted to be replaced by an interim constitution.
As the establishment was beaten and bruised the comrades like Mahmood Ali Kasuri and Hafiz Pirzada had a free hand.
The right wing parties were not comfortable with some of the clauses and there was a deadlock.
By the time the students reached there, ZAB had left after arriving at a compromise.
Pakistan finally had a constitution that was agreed to by all the parties.
There was a concurrent list of departments that had to be devolved to the provinces in ten years.
Instead of the Martial Law and its Jungle Rule, the country was now under the constitutional rule of law in which the establishment was contained.
Beaming with confidence ZAB called for elections in 1977 one year ahead of schedule.
While he wanted to surprise the opposition by snaps polls the establishment had already laid a trap for him.
Considering his popularity ZAB allowed the political parties to contest against him as a joint opposition.
The electables who had managed to get PPP tickets indulged in their old tricks and the entire electoral exercise in 1977 was disputed by the mischief of the few.
ZAB was not only removed from power, he was physically eliminated through judicial murder on April 04, 1979.
The usurper openly expressed his disdain of the document saying, | can tear and trash it.
He introduced his own brand of religion through illegal and unwanted amendments.
It was the darkest period of history from which recovery has been very difficult.
The 1973 Constitution has saved the federation despite several unholy onslaughts by the Khaki dictators and their political rogues who ruled after them.
Today USA leads the world in technology and democracy and is the lone super power.
Pakistan is a constitutional democracy, largely due to the efforts of the truly elected assembly of 1970.
The Lawyers Movement in 2007 was supported by the civil society for the rule of law.
The 1973 document has to be restored to its original form, all martial amendments should be annulled to cleanse it.
April 10, 1973 produced a miracle for Pakistan, a Constitution that is democratic, 23 THECSSPOINT.COM APRIL 2017 global Point parliamentary and federal it is time to uphold, defend and follow it if progress is desired.
The rulers and the ruled have to work in unison under an agreed framework.
Constitutional rule of law is the way forward as envisioned by the Quaids.
As the sun blooms in all its splendour, daytime temperatures become unbearable and incessant outages of power cause life to be piping hot yet again.
In all honesty, the Sharifs don't give a fig about the emergent situation.
The ace politician has been too busy, of late, defending his money stashed at the May Fair, London.
However, excessive load shedding may knock the Sharifs off their perch.
The energy crisis was as threatening back then as it seems to have become now.
A lot of compulsive chatter, coupled with faithful acolytes, had yielded them a victory in the 2013 general elections.
However, if the present misery caused by incessant power tripping lingers on, they are sure to lose their way into another term in government in 2018.
Load shedding has once again infested Pakistan like a plague, devastating economic life across the country.
Demand for power in the country wobbles in the range of 18,000 20,000 MW during peak summer months.
The power sector remains as cash starved as it was in the beginning of the N-league tenure.
Pakistan's power distribution utilities periodically determine their tariffs.
Once a rational, cost reflective tariff has been determined, the NEPRA sends it for the government's approval.
The government, in violation of the NEPRA Act of 1998/99, frequently lowers the tariffs, and notifies uniform tariffs across all the utilities in the country.
The difference between a cost reflective tariff and one notified by the government is then paid by the Ministry of Finance as tariff differential subsidies.
This has serious ramifications for the government's already edgy fiscal purse.
In a country like Pakistan, with disappointingly low tax-to-GDP ratios and an ugly external debt profile, having circular debt on your books can be ravaging.
Not only is Pakistan's generation capacity below par, but its transmission and distribution infrastructure is in complete tatters and sorely in need of repairs.
The clamour about adding more general capacity to the national grid makes little sense, if concurrently, no capacity enhancements are made in the already bloated 30 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 transmission lines.
After all, what good is additional power, if it cannot be transmitted to the end user.
Solutions to our power crisis J Sadiq Given that Pakistan recurrently hauls back to frequent and unscheduled load shedding, | believe that the persons in charge of the situation have not had a good handle on the subject.
As successive governments over the years have made a hash of the national grid, there is clearly a strong case for off grid solutions to the country's power crisis.
Pakistan is located in a region exposed to considerable sunlight around the year.
Analysts well-versed in the engineering details of such a scheme have repeatedly harped on going off grid.
Load shedding, if not controlled, will continue to be a drag on the economy.
Economists and rational thinkers, endowed with brains far more superior than mine, estimate that the economic cost of load shedding runs into billions of dollars.
Senior United States and Pakistani officials met in Washington last week to review their relations, discussing both “difficult and less difficult” issues, as an observer said.
Speaking at a seminar on US-Pakistan relations at the Harvard Kennedy School on Thursday, two days after the White House meeting, Ambassador Chaudhary said that both sides showed a desire to strengthen their ties.
Islamabad hopes that new United States policy for Afghanistan will protect its interests in the region Pakistan’s relations with the United States began to strain in May 2011, when Americans discovered Osama bin Laden in a compound in Abbottabad, launched a commando operation and eliminated him without informing Islamabad.
Since then, the United States has regularly accused Pakistan of allowing terrorists to use its tribal belt to attack targets inside Afghanistan.
Pakistan rejects these charges as incorrect and says that it launched two major military offensives in the area, eliminating militants’ sanctuaries and killing hundreds of terrorists.
The United States acknowledges the success of those operations but says that some elements of the Haqqani Network are still operating from the Federally Administered Tribal Areas.
Pakistan expressed desire to reboot ties with the United States at a time when the Trump administration is reviewing its policy for the South Asian region.
But United States sources say the review process foc-uses on Afghanistan, not Pakistan or the greater South Asia.
The team making the new Afghan policy is expected to complete the task by mid-May.
A former Taliban spokesman, Ehsanullah Ehsan, confirmed Pakisstan’s concerns in a confessional statement earlier this week, stating how Indian and Afghan officials had sheltered Pakistani Taliban, who had fled after the launching of Operation Zarb-i-Azb, and were now encouraging them to attack targets inside Pakistan.
The United States concern, however, revolves around the militancy in Afghanistan as it wants enough stability in that country to allow a peaceful disengagement.
The Americans also want the set-up they established in Kabul to continue after their withdrawal.
Washington also notes with concern that their apparent failure to contain the Afghan insurgency, and continued terrorist attacks inside Pakistan, have encouraged two other international players — China and Russia — to claim a role in Afghanistan.
Diplomatic observers say that United States does not want Russia to re-enter Afgha-nistan after its disastrous withdrawal from there in 1989 and that’s why it’s suspicious of Islamabad’s growing ties with Moscow.
But it is more comfortable with China, particularly after President Donald Trump’s April 6-7 meeting with Chinese President Xi Jinping.
It is the need of the hour, while looking at the growing Indian aspirations of becoming a giant South Asian nuclear power.
It includes both the nuclear weapons development and the missile development.
The number of nuclear weapons, enough to maintain nuclear deterrence, has continued to trouble nuclear deterrence theorists, strategists and policymakers since the post-Cold War period.
Meanwhile, the world’s nuclear weapons stockpile is estimated to be at 16,000 approximately, and all states possessing nuclear weapons, in one way or another, are constantly modifying and modernizing their nuclear inventories.
No state will place a number or cap on what it considers to be a sufficient nuclear force for credible deterrence.
Both countries have committed policies of minimum nuclear deterrence and no-nuclear arms race.
While India seeks to maintain a nuclear force sufficient to deter mainly China and Pakistan, Islamabad maintains that it seeks a deterrent equilibrium vis-a-vis New Delhi and not nuclear parity.
Amb Akram, with a practical command on the subject, viewed that the threats were growing in the region due to large scale acquisition of military hardware by India, its public rejection of the policy of No First Use of nuclear weapons, determination to carry out disarming strikes against Pakistan, and its espousal of dangerous and destabilizing doctrines like the Cold Start Doctrine.
Ironically the revolving ongoing speculation on the transformation of NFU policy of Indian Nuclear doctrine is getting a lot of hype nowadays.
The strategy might be to keep all options open by putting ambiguity in its nuclear doctrine.
Diplomatically, the Indian doctrine is only to show the international community that New Delhi has maintained a responsible use of its nuclear weapons by declaring a written doctrine, which, paradoxically, was never credible enough.
Only due to the abovementioned espousing weaponry expansion and military enlargement, ‘this has required us to move towards Full Spectrum Deterrence for 35 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 responding to threats at the tactical level, the counter-force level, and the counter-value level.
It should be taken into account that the strategic stability in South Asia was not just about Pakistan and India, but also involves China and the United States in the sphere.
Referring to a recent statement by Massachusetts Institute of Technology scholar Vipin Narang, and assertions by former Indian National Security Adviser Shiv Shankar Menon in his book suggesting that India could shed its No-First Use doctrine and carryout disarming pre-emptive strikes against Pakistan, the former envoy said this did not come as a surprise because Pakistani security quarters never believed in an Indian declaratory statement of No-First Use, which could not be verified.
It is important to note here that India is the largest arms importer, and is engaged in several nuclear deals worldwide for which United States is the biggest helper.
An evidence estimated that for the United States it would be desirable if a friendly Asian power beat Communist China to the punch by detonating a nuclear device first for which the very likely country was no other than India.
So, the United States assisted by helping India acquire nuclear explosive, for balancing communist China that is evident from the recently declassified Sept 1961, top secret memorandum from State Dept official George McGhee to Secretary of State Dean Rusk.
There were various national and international factors behind the Indian nuclear program.
Nevertheless, posture of Credible Minimum Deterrence has remained a principle option of Pakistan’s nuclear policy.
This principle is based on the concept that Pakistan’s nuclear policy is driven by its perceived threat to its security from India and is therefore India-centric.
Deterrence is the sole aim and a small arsenal is considered adequate for satisfying it.
But ironically this is also a fact that with the introduction of Tactical Nuclear Weapons in the region or with the introduction of battlefield weapons is actually a modernized advancement in the inventories.
So, it could be concluded that it is only when states feel threatened they opt for defending their territory and sovereignty that actually compels them to maximize their security measures under the perceived threat of vulnerability.
But for maintaining a deterrent posture, according to my understanding, the quantitative number is not necessary, as the possession of a nuclear weapon is itself enough for crafting 36 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 deterrence.
Because even by possessing one nuke, the nuclear aggression from the other state can be discouraged.
So the question of numeric parity or nuclear sufficiency does not make sense.
Therefore, it would not be in correct to conclude that credible minimum deterrence is not the same as nuclear parity and nuclear supremacy.
This restraint was due to the deterrent effect of nuclear weapons that come along with the massive destructive capability of nuclear fission.
However, owing to the proximity between India and Pakistan, two unfortunate developments happened.
First, India discovered a threshold below nuclear level in the shape of Operation Parakaram wherein India aimed at extracting its adventurism at a conventional level.
Second, Cold Start Doctrine was realised to quench its historical enmity with Pakistan.
As a result, India kept on advancing its nuclear and conventional arsenals quantitatively as well as qualitatively.
Such is the case of recent Indian Defence budget 2017-18, presented on February 01, 2017 that witnessed a hike of 6 percent in Indian defence budget which translates into approximately Rs..74 laky core, including a massive amount of Rs.,488 core for modernisation and operational preparedness in future.
Interestingly, a report, entitled ‘Trends in world Military expenditure, 2016’ by Swedish think-tank Stockholm International Peace Research Institute , puts it in further perspective by stating that since 2009 to 2016 India has increased its defence spending so much that its moved from 7th to 5th position in international ranking.
On the contrary, Pakistan does not even being counted in the first fifteen defence spenders due to its belief on minimum credible deterrence; nevertheless, makes Pakistan more and more vulnerable on its Western front with the increase in Indian arsenals.
Defence analysts narrate that gap between arch rivals on military spending has widened to 1:7; that, India spends seven times more than Pakistan on its military.
It is hard for Pakistan to match India’s spending as later economy is comparatively much greater in size.
Therefore, Islamabad believes that India is disturbing balance of power in South Asia.
This unbridled spending in defence sector has augmented especially during the last three years.
Unfortunately, this blind drive for the arms accumulation and military modernisation unleashes an unending arms race in South Asia, which resulted in deterioration of prevalent strategic stability between India and Pakistan.
Western governmental and private arms manufacturing companies are rushing towards India with the hope of landing multi-billion dollars and New Delhi is aiming to leverage some of that buying power to get transfer of technology and end the overwhelming reliance on imports.
In this sense, India’s heavy military spending and acquisition of weapons threatens Pakistan and its efforts for regional peace.
In other words, India’s adventurism threatens security and survival of Pakistan and other small neighbours which feel insecure as India has substantive territorial and resource sharing issues with all its neighbours.
The two neighbouring countries, India and Pakistan, are nuclear armed and cannot live in an environment of hostility towards each other forever, especially when both are fighting terrorism on their soils.
The rational way forward is to sit on the seats of dialogue to talk about peace and find real solutions.
World powers might be cooperating with India on defence and nuclear weapons, but their discriminatory attitude against Pakistan must stop as it has already destabilised the strategic stability of South Asia.
What does need to be increased is the funds for the development of downtrodden.
Millions of Indians do not have access to safe drinking water and to washrooms.
It is not only a South Asian issue but also should be the concern of International community for peace and security of the region.
Consequently, what could be suggested is that India should start thinking rationally.
It should cut its booming military spending, educate its youth, feed its hungry, elevate its poor and cooperate with its neighbours for regional peace.
In this regard, economic activity between India and Pakistan with very strong relations is key to success for both, maybe more so for Pakistan than India.
Nevertheless, as it was advised by Mikhail Gorbachev, quote, “We could only solve our problems by cooperating with other countries.
The earlier LHC direction had come in the wake of a Supreme Court ruling in 2015 that called for having Urdu as the language for running the affairs of the state.
The latest order was passed last Wednesday on an appeal by the Federal Public Service Commission with the next hearing fixed for April 20.
In its arguments, the FPSC echoed the views that were widely expressed in the public domain after the court order to make Urdu the medium for the CSS examination.
Talk of Urdu as the language of power typically stirs up sensitivities.
Not least among them is the question of native tongues and the view held by so many that Urdu — as yet — doesn't quite have the capacity to cater to the state.
Indeed, it is commonly and controversially contended that a switch to Urdu will bring CSS standards down.
It is said that the language, because of a sheer absence of sufficient exposure to many modern subjects such as science at the highest level, lacks in certain essential expressions.
This often charged debate will continue as the LHC sits down to deliberate upon the matter.
It is an important case and the decision will be eagerly awaited by not only the aspiring CSS candidates but Pakistanis at large.
A salient point put forward so far is that there is no Urdu syllabus and no experts around who are trained to measure just how competent the CSS’s Urdu-medium candidates are.
This would entail, first, implementing Urdu as the medium of learning at all levels to enable both the language and the candidates required to take this high-efficiency test in Urdu.
Rather than an abrupt transition, there must be a gradual, phased approach towards the creation of a system where the candidate can choose from multiple language options.
BY OBED PASHA There is one way to ensure the country’s progress and viability — make the rich start paying taxes During Fiscal Year 2016, Pakistan celebrated a tax collection of over $31 billion.
Not only did the Federal Bureau of Revenue surpass its own target, but also managed to increase revenue collection by $7 billion when compared to previous year’s figure.
This is laudable, but only until we don’t consider the mechanisms of tax increment.
The brazenly unethical structure of our economy prevailed as always, and the tax burden was yet again shifted towards low income households.
The state continued to rely on intensifying tax collections through indirect means such as increasing sales taxes on petroleum products, which favoured the elite.
Last year, the country collected over 60 percent of its taxes through such unfair methods.
Although the government is working on increasing the share of direct taxes, the progress is painstakingly slow and remains biased towards the rich.
An overwhelming majority of direct taxes are collected through withholding taxes received from salaried individuals, whereas the elites contribute less than 5 percent to the revenue at a time when it controls over 44 percent of the wealth.
Wealthy businessmen have found inventive methods to dodge taxes, whereas most individuals engaged in property and construction businesses prefer to operate from outside the tax system.
As a result, Pakistan’s tax-toGDP ratio hovers around 10 percent, which is comparable to other countries such as Haiti and Gabon.
This ratio is much lower if we account for the 36 percent of our economy that remains undocumented.
According to Research and Advocacy for the Advancement of Allied Reforms , less than half a percent of our population pays taxes which is a mere 0. million out of 4 million potential taxpayers.
It is an open secret that Pakistan is in an abysmal fiscal state, which desperately needs to increase its tax base.
According to the Tax Reforms Commission report, RTOs collect a mere $68 million in taxes, whereas the cost incurred by the FBR to maintain these offices is $78 41 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 million.
In other words, the government would be in a better financial shape without them.
Countries around the world are moving towards a centralised structure based on the type of taxpayers, rather than the region they belong to.
Advancement in Information Technology has contributed to this move that allowed taxation departments to process data at centralised locations.
The Internal Revenue Services of the United States., for example, adopted such structure back in 1998 through four divisions.
These divisions operate through their national offices, dealing with taxpayers based on their specific needs.
Catering to specific customers means that each division is defter in handling and aware of the laws that govern them.
The needs and laws governing a selfemployed doctor, for example, would be different to that of a vegetable whole-seller.
Operating at scale and providing specialised services decreases the cost by streamlining the process while reducing direct contact with taxpayers.
Moreover, modern data management techniques have made it possible to easily detect tax evasion.
Adopting proper IT tools can help the FBR synthesise data from the National Database and Registration Authority with its own tax return database to identify non-filers.
Similarly, consolidating data from airline companies, private schools and banks can help generate algorithms to single out individuals for tax audit.
If properly implemented, such systems can substantially reduce, if not eliminate, corruption and illegal wealth accumulation.
This isn’t rocket science and is already being used by states around the world to combat such practices.
The question remains is whether the government has the political will to implement these reforms.
In recent years, Finance Minister Ishaq Dar has tried to institute some reforms such as introducing withholding taxes on banking transactions and new property taxes.
However, these reforms were met with tough opposition from traders and property dealers.
The government has no option but to take on their vested interests and ensure fair and effective tax collection.
Desperate monetary measures are required to provide services such as policing, education and healthcare that have deteriorated owing to lack of funds.
In addition, there are high chances of unrest should such matters aren’t resolved duly.
Pakistan is already under tremendous pressure from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank due to an annual fiscal account deficit of over 4 percent, which forces the state to continue accumulating loans.
If we are to ensure the progress 42 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 and viability of the country then we'll have to make sure that the rich and influential pay their due tax shares for there is no alternative.
An economist, most likely, will reply by pointing to macroeconomic indicators such as slow GDP growth, lower investment, higher fiscal deficit, a troubling balance of payment, lower tax collection, weak export competitiveness and higher public debt.
Some may highlight rampant corruption and microeconomic foundations of key economic and social sectors.
Often, the economic dialogue is narrowly confined to these indicators and sectoral reports.
Most of the economists cannot unearth the societal and cultural foundations that may be constraining economic growth and prosperity in the long run.
Since independence, Pakistan’s economy sporadically achieved GDP growth higher than 5% — especially during military governments in 1960s, 1980s and 2000s.
Pakistan achieved higher economic growth due to support by international players.
We have rarely made efforts to reform institutional architecture, strengthen state capacity, foster a culture of knowledge creation and diffusion and harness human resource potential.
However, in Pakistan, the chief executive of every public or private sector organisation considers themselves final authority in a range of issues.
Hence, there is generally no appreciation of diversity of opinions and ideas.
Cultural attributes such as openness to new ideas and honouring transaction-commitments feed into overall economic performance.
It is important to appreciate that these policy and cultural attributes cannot be transplanted in a vacuum.
Sometimes, visionary political leaders can influence societal and cultural changes to advance economic and social transformation agendas.
But little attention is paid to the fact that, more often than not, the transformation is organic in nature and requires a society-wide response.
The respect and influence that cultural entrepreneurs like Francis Bacon and Newton gained was perhaps unmatchable in any other society at that time.
The transnational and virtual community of intellectuals—The Republic of Letters— fostered competitive market for ideas in philosophy, physics, medicine, mathematics, and other fields.
Many of the ordinary technicians and workers turned themselves into inventors of technology by exploiting the existing knowledge and favourable patent structure.
And of course, the society was open to new ideas and knowledge coming from Islamic, Indian, and Chinese civilisations.
If we try to find such things in today’s Pakistan, we will certainly be disappointed.
Certainly, an increase in so-called GDP numbers will occur occasionally but it would be hard to create and sustain any economic transformation.
Bureaucratic structures are prevalent in universities, scientific organisations, research centres and business organisations.
Most business corporations have raised empires through an insidious nexus with the state.
Hence, the prevalence of “Seth Culture” and intergenerational businesses don’t promote creativity, innovation and competitiveness by employing a talented work force and giving space to new business ideas.
Instead of a rhetoric of security challenges and political instability, the answer to many of the above questions lies in the absence of market for talent, ideas, and knowledge.
The aforementioned weaknesses and constraints rarely attract the attention of policy makers and popular economic writers.
Without addressing these fundamental issues, Pakistan will continue to rely on “borrowed growth” with the change of one lender after another.
While there is an urgent need to fix pressing security challenges, more deep rooted reforms are required to develop and attract talent to serve in the public sector and businesses.
Instead of politicians, the community leaders, academics and intellectuals should have a greater role in societal transformation.
The writer is a public policy practitioner and researcher Published in The Express Tribune, April 10th, 2017.
Only days after his appointment, data shows that Pakistan’s trade deficit widened to a record high of $23.385 billion for the first nine months of the fiscal year.
Arresting this trend, and eventually reversing it, ought to fast become a crucial policy priority for the country, but the options are limited.
The justification offered by the government, and echoed by the State Bank, is that the trade deficit owes itself to the imports of machinery and infrastructure equipment, which will not only support future growth but will also help plug Pakistan’s energy shortages.
The argument is partially valid, but it is disingenuous to rely on it beyond a certain point.
Imports of oil and associated products are the largest share of the increase in imports.
Last year, oil imports declined by 35 per cent, while this year they grew by 10pc, in the first half of the fiscal year according to State Bank data.
Much of this reversal owes itself to the rising price of oil in international markets, although some amount of quantitative increase is also a factor.
The second reason why the machinery argument must be received with scepticism is because we have heard it before.
Once the boom years of the Musharraf regime reached their peak, around 2004-2005, the same situation materialised.
Widening imports led to a growing current account deficit, and the regime took to telling us that this was due to machinery imports which would boost exports once installed.
But the boost in exports could not keep pace with the import growth, leading to a blowout in the external account and the rapid depletion of reserves, ultimately forcing a return to the IMF in 2008.
The same story a second time round is necessarily going to meet with more scepticism.
Compounding the problem is a total absence of thinking on trade matters at the top levels of government.
Pakistan has a history of treating trade casually, or treating it as a part of our overall push to constantly seek ‘assistance’ from the world for one reason or another.
What our trade policy suffers from is too much strategic input, and not enough economic thinking.
The previous government tried to push through a normalisation of trade ties with India, but failed due to pressure from the military, which would prefer to keep our relationship to India wedded to territorial grievances.
The present government made a second attempt to push through that initiative, but failed for the same reason.
Most trade around the world is regional first and long distance second.
Neighbouring countries with long histories of animosity and outstanding border issues, whether territorial or maritime, have managed to keep their strategic and economic interests separate from each other.
A prime example is China and Japan, one of the largest economic relationships in the world, yet two countries with a depth of animosity towards each other that rivals, if not surpasses, that of India and Pakistan.
But Pakistan’s economic ties with three of its four neighbours are grossly underdeveloped, despite strong affinities.
Many imported products can be substituted for cheaper alternatives from India if trade can be normalised, although in the present climate this is difficult to imagine.
That window was open a few years ago, but shut at the moment. lran has massive energy surpluses and a food shortage; we are abundantly endowed with food yet suffer from energy shortages.
This natural affinity has not been tapped, partly due to the sanctions, but in equal measure, due to our place in the larger Middle Eastern rivalry between Iran and Saudi Arabia.
Likewise with Afghanistan, which provides us natural access to the markets of Central Asia.
This was seen with disdain in the years before CPEC, but now suddenly with the arrival of Chinese investment in our transport and communications infrastructure, access to the Central Asian markets is being presented as some sort of ‘game changer’ for the country.
Rivalry rather than cooperation with our neighbours is the primary lens through we view all regional relationships.
Where the rivalry is our own, such as with India, we are quick to subordinate economic issues to it.
Where we have no rivalry, such as with lran, we easily import it from the Middle East, whose disputes have little to nothing to do with us.
That policy envisioned providing some cash support to a few areas in a puny attempt to boost exports.
Its failure is evident in the fact that nobody in the exporting community even applied for the benefits on offer.
The new secretary commerce is not in a position to rectify this imbalance in our trade outlook.
But without addressing this imbalance in our policy priorities at the top, all successive commerce secretaries have been left with little more to do other than tinker at the margins — an incentive here, a rebate there — with no meaningful change in the larger picture, driving us inexorably deeper into the quicksand of growing deficits.
The secretary cannot change this by himself, but perhaps he can do something to sensitise the government and the military to the enormous price that Pakistan has always paid, and continues to pay today, for its failure to put trade on top of its external policy priorities.
This constant refrain, of a steadily growing economy with strong caveats hanging over it, is now becoming ubiquitous.
Almost every entity other than the government itself, is qualifying its assessment of the growing economy with the observation that the risks are growing alongside as well.
The World Bank has presented its assessment in a report titled South Asia Economic Focus, which takes a close look at the impact that a growing protectionist backlash in the advanced industrial democracies could have on South Asian economies, which have registered the highest growth rates in the world in recent years.
Pakistan tracks the rest of the region in its developments, but the risks it faces are unique to it.
The report notes South Asia may even stand to benefit from the backlash, due to fortuitous circumstances, but in the case of Pakistan, the approach of elections could cause the leadership to take its eye off the ball, resulting in the growth process losing momentum and any reforms fizzling out.
Likewise, the fiscal framework is also taking some pressure, with the deficit widening by 0. percentage points in the first half of the fiscal year compared to the same period last year.
With headwinds expected from the global economy depending on how Brexit works out, and how United States economic policy shapes up under the new administration, the World Bank says the risks facing the economy are significant.
It is worth noting that by now almost all institutional assessments of the economy, and its seemingly comfortable position, are in agreement on this point.
With high reserves and growth ramping up, perhaps the greatest risk facing the economy is complacency at the top.
In early February Fitch Ratings, a global agency which monitors the performance of economies around the world with a view to assess their growth potential and the future prospects, gave ‘B’ rating to Pakistan which denotes prosperity.
The report predicted a GDP growth rate of 5. % during the current financial year registering more than 2% raise since 2013.
The report issued by the agency on the basis of the review concluded that Pakistan would not face external liquidity problem in the coming years.
The agency attributes the strengthening of the economy to phenomenal raise in the foreign exchange reserves, reduction in the fiscal deficit, structural reform, soundness of the banking sector leading to fall in the non-performing loans, fiscal consolidation, boost in the revenues and reduction in general government budget.
This reality has also been acknowledged by a number of other rating agencies like Moody’s, MCI and global lending institutions including IMF, World Bank and ADB besides internationally renowned papers like The Economist and Wall Street Journal have also from time to time been acknowledging the turnaround in the Pakistan economy, triggered by sound management of the economy by the PML-N government.
In its latest assessment of Pakistan’s economy, Wall Street Journal said that poverty and terrorism in Pakistan were on the decline, foreign investments have increased, as have consumer spending leading to a burgeoning middle class.
The fact is that the Chinese investment in CPEC and the booming economy have given confidence to the foreign investors.
Reportedly a Dutch dairy company, Royal Friesland Campina recently paid $461 million to buy control of Engro Foods in Pakistan.
Last year China’s Shanghai Electric Power agreed to pay $ 1. billion for KESC shares.
Turkish Electric appliances company Arcelik paid $258 million for Pakistan appliance maker Dawlance acknowledging that Pakistan had an increasingly prosperous working and middle class.
Our pro-active finance minister Ishaq Dar deserves unqualified compliments for winching the economy out of the economic mess and putting it on the path of sustained economic growth.
Management of an economy, particularly a developing country like Pakistan is undoubtedly an arduous task due to international linkages, developments on the global level as well as internal economic, social and political situation.
Fiscal deficit stood at 8.8% and inflation was in double digits, foreign exchange reserves were at $ 6.008 billion.
The fiscal deficit has been reduced to 4. % and further squeeze is expected during the current year.
Foreign exchange reserves stand at $24.258 billion which represent almost four times increase since the present government took over.
What is remarkable is that the revival of the economy has been orchestrated in spite of heavy drain on resources due to the operation Zarb-e-Azb, rehabilitation of the displaced persons of North Waziristan and rebuilding of the destroyed infrastructure as well as heavy repayments of the loans obtained by the previous governments.
The energy crisis that was attributable to the negligence and criminal indifference of the previous governments to the growing energy needs of the country and was hampering progress in the industrial and agricultural sectors in addition to causing difficulties for millions of households across the country, has been checked in its tracks.
The power outages have been considerably reduced owing to the addition of 3000 MW of electricity to the national grid.
Under CPEC power projects with a cumulative production capacity of 10,640 MW have been set rolling and all of them are expected to come on stream by the end of 2018 which means that the energy crisis will not only have been overcome by then but the country would also have enough electricity for the new industrial projects.
The government also envisages addition of another 30000 MW by the year 2030.
The government has also concluded an agreement with Qatar for import of LNG and a similar agreement with Azerbaijan for import of LNG is in the offing.
The initiative to diversify the sources of import of LNG is a visionary move to avoid any disruption or crisis due to dependence on a single source.
The PML-N government very rightly has also been giving top priority to the development of infrastructure.
The fact is that all modern growth models invariably rely on development of infrastructure, which is considered as an indispensable ingredient of industrialisation and economic growth.
The phenomenal economic prosperity and industrial development in Asian countries such as China, South Korea, Singapore and Malaysia during the last three decades is a ranting testimony of this modern reality.
The establishment of Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank by China with the objective of 52 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 development of infrastructure in the Asian countries to spur economic growth is a pointer to that fundamental reality.
Unfortunately Pakistan has failed to achieve rapid industrialisation due to wrong approaches and policies of the successive governments, divorced from the emerging economic compulsions and variables.
However it is heartening to note that the PML-N government has adopted a pragmatic and visionary approach to economic development through building of necessary infrastructure.
Peshawar-Karachi motorway which is expected to be completed by 2019 and a network of roads being built across the country will surely act as catalyst to nudging economic growth and bringing about national integration.
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was right on money, when inaugurating the first phase of Karachi-Hyderabad motorway in February he said that people were witnessing the emergence of new Pakistan with improved infrastructure and communication network and the motor ways were life line of the economy.
The CPEC is also about building infrastructure, which holds the promise of enabling Pakistan not only to make up for the lost opportunities but also to become an economic power house within the next two decades.
And so instead this week’s spring meetings of the world’s finance chiefs in Washington have been brimming with an optimism worthy of the season.
The IMF’s confidence is fuelled by improving performance in most of the major world economies.
The fund has raised its forecast for global growth for the first time in six years based on a stronger China, which this week said its economy grew at an annual rate of 6. per cent in the first quarter, and improving economies in Japan and Europe.
For the IMF, which is predicting 3. per cent global growth in gross domestic product this year, the stronger outlook is the fruit of broad-based recoveries in manufacturing and trade.
In short, while politics in much of the western world is being overwhelmed by the builtup angst from a decade of low growth, the global economy is at its most robust since the financial crisis.
Which means, of course, that if the pattern of the post-crisis years holds it could all go horribly wrong, and quickly.
The early looming threat is this weekend’s first round of the French presidential election, where opinion polls have made even the IMF nervous.
Were the far-right leader Marine Le Pen to win the two-round election and deliver on her promises to exit the euro and the EU “it would certainly entail major disorder’, the normally wary Ms Lagarde told a television interviewer.
Even as Ms Lagarde was praising the new United States administration, Mr Trump was launching a national security investigation into steel imports, which appears likely to lead to new tariffs and what would be his first act of significant protectionism.
Although Mr Trump has given some signals economic nationalism is fading as a force in his administration, his instincts on trade and immigration still appear distinctly protectionist.
Just beneath the immediate optimism about the global economy, the existential questions about what the Trump administration and the broader wave of populism might mean for institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank have been much debated this week.
Steven Mnuchin, Mr Trump’s Treasury secretary, disputes that assessment.
Even in France the election of either Ms Le Pen or the far-left’s Jean-Luc Mélenchon would in all likelihood see them confronting a legislature with a hostile majority and struggling to deliver on promises.
Even Trump is likely to be able to do little, leaving North Korea aside,” he says.
China’s growing debt pile and the authorities’ inability to rein in credit growth still cause shivers among fund economists.
So too does the procession of corruption scandals in Brazil, where Latin America’s largest economy continues to struggle.
In Africa, where hopes for a new growth-fuelled reality were so prevalent just a few years ago, the two major economies of Nigeria and South Africa are languishing.
Maurice Obstfeld, the IMF’s chief economist, says the present optimism should be tempered by the lower potential growth in productivity that governments seem to have been too ready to accept since the crisis.
Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, is among those who points to a gap between so-called “soft” confidence data and “hard” economic results.
The National Federation of Independent Business’ survey of bosses’ optimism hit its highest reading since 2004 in January, and has edged only slightly lower since.
The Atlanta Federal Reserve’s “GDP Now’ tracker points to annualised GDP growth of just 0. per cent in the first three months of 2017.
Retail sales dropped 0. per cent in March, following a 0. per cent February decrease.
The significance of soggy first-quarter numbers should not be over-dramatised.
But heady predictions from the Trump administration that it can deliver sustained growth of 3 per cent or more still appear far-fetched.
And that will stay true if Mr Trump falls further behind in attempts to deliver his economic agenda.
Healthcare reform was meant to pave the way to significant tax reform, yet talks in Congress remain snarled on both fronts and Mr Mnuchin this week admitted that he will fail to meet his own August deadline for tax reform.
European officials insist that a region that has become a byword for high unemployment and persistent disappointment is on the mend.
John Rice, who as vice-chairman oversees GE’s international operations, argues that the last piece missing from a global recovery would be a bounce in commodity prices that would help many emerging economies.
The new United States administration, he argues, is just like any of the 20 to 30 new governments that GE deals with around the world in any given year.
The country is strategically located in the crossroads of Asia with China as its neighbour in the north, India in the east, and Iran and Afghanistan in the west.
The country lies in a region which has great political, economic and military importance.
Being in the same vicinity as two major powers, China and Russia, adds to its position.
Similarly, Pakistan has an access to the six Muslim central Asian states through Afghanistan.
These states are landlocked and Pakistan can provide a link between the Gulf States as well as African, European and Central Asian countries.
Its sea-route remains open throughout the year due to moderate temperatures.
Consequently, there are a series of Muslim countries from the Middle East to the African continent which are easily accessible from Pakistan.
Thus, it connects almost all the Muslim countries of the world from the Atlantic Ocean to the Arabian Sea.
However, this vast population is unevenly distributed, with almost a majority of the population living in rural areas.
Over the past few years, many rural residents have been migrating to cities in search of better paying jobs.
We have the potential to develop a transit economy on account of our strategic location.
Consider landlocked Afghanistan, it is currently under a phase of reconstruction and is linked to the outside world mainly through Pakistan.
China, with the fastest economy growth rate of 9%, is developing southern provinces because its own port is 4,500 kilometres away from Xinjiang, but Gwadar is only 2,500 kilometres away.
Moreover, Pakistan offers Central Asian regions the shortest route when compared with Iran’s 4,500 kilometres or Turkey’s 5,000 kilometres.
The Gwadar port, with its deep waters, attracts trade ships from China, Central Asian Regions and South East Asian countries.
Furthermore, the coastal belt of Balochistan can provide an outlet to China’s western provinces, in the sense that it will have access to Middle Eastern markets with the development of coastal highways and motorways.
China and Korea are both considering Pakistan for their respective economic ventures.
The South Korean company, Hyundai is entering in a joint venture with Nishat Mills to assemble cars in Pakistan.
Hyundai's return will boost the government's efforts to shake up the Japanese-dominated car market and loosen the grip of Toyota, Honda and Suzuki, who assemble cars in Pakistan with local partners.
The market structure of the automobile industry in Pakistan is concentrated.
In economic terms, we could say it’s an oligopoly which is characterised by the imperfect competition in which the industry is dominated by a small number of suppliers.
This is because the auto industry is highly capital-intensive and requires high investments, and the products are also expensive.
Hence, the barriers for entry are high, resulting in the presence of a limited number of suppliers.
Chinese companies are also interested in investing in the cement, steel, energy and textile sectors, the backbone of Pakistan’s $270 billion economy.
According to analysts, the interest shows that Chinese firms are using Beijing’s “One Belt, One Road” project — a global trade network which Pakistan is an integral part of — to help expand abroad at a time when growth has slowed down at home.
However, there are certain political entities that are adamant to challenge the political stability of the country, without realising the negative repercussions for the economy.
The reason, so it is argued with a degree of validity, is because the caveats continue even though the Fund is at great pains to emphasise that gains were made during the duration of the programme.
There are three outstanding and need one add extremely disturbing elements that steadily worsened during the EFF and continue to do so till today.
Exports have been steadily declining since 2014 and declined from 25 billion dollars in 2014 to 21. billion dollars in 2016 and have been declining each month since then.
The decline in value terms in imports of oil and products between the two years was a whopping 5.65 billion dollars.
Additionally, the rise in imports of power generating machinery would not lend a comfort level to the general public these days given the ongoing load shedding and the recent reports by government departments including National Transmission and Despatch Company , administratively under the control of the Water and Power Ministry that reflect continued poor performance of the sector.
The IMF, during the duration of the EFF when it had considerable 60 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 leverage, did make mention of the overvalued rupee and made some half hearted attempts to convince finance minister Ishaq Dar to allow the real effective exchange rate to prevail (which was critical if Pakistani exports were to be able to compete internationally especially given the depreciation of currencies of those countries with which our exporters compete), but to no avail.
Instead the Fund staff focused on a timebound reduction in the budget deficit, evidently unconcerned with the resulting escalating reliance on external borrowing, directly from multilaterals and/or issue of Eurobonds/sukuk at rates well above the market rate.
The mission leader though did acknowledge in a press conference that the country's rising foreign exchange reserves were largely from borrowing.
Secondly, the energy sector's performance has not improved and claims to the contrary are easily dismissed given the recent rise in unscheduled load shedding.
In this context the Fund during the three years of the EFF simply insisted on a do-more mantra which effectively implied raising the power tariff, though actual billing was less with the decline in the international price of oil.
The inordinate focus of the Fund staff and the government was on total revenue collections instead of on rendering the tax structure equitable, fair and nonanomalous which accounts for heavier taxes on existing tax payers’ a situation that the IMF together with the government must be held accountable for.
And additionally, as in the past the Finance Minister opted to reduce the development as opposed to current expenditure to meet the requirement of slashing the budget deficit at the cost of growth.
Perhaps this was one of the reasons that prompted the Finance Minister to overstate growth rate.
To conclude, the IMF's conditions and its monitoring of the EFF leave a lot to be desired and one would hope that next time around, a time that economists are agreed would be soon after the general elections 2018, a more informed team both from the IMF and the government side negotiates the terms of the deal.
A) The national domestic debt portfolio as part of the total public debt is much bigger than the external debt portfolio (net domestic debt constitutes 66% and external debt 34%) — Domestic debt does not carry a very high risk.
Further, it says that its debt management strategy clearly sets target ranges for currency, refinancing and interest rate risks, and though quite a few indicators are currently in red, they still fall within the limits prescribed in its Medium Term Debt Management Strategy 2016-19.
For example, NPV of our debt spending comes out to be much lower than that of European Debt spend.
Even for intangible assets our deficit/soending does not match results,g. support over the years to sectors like health, housing, utilities, education, social benefits, etc.
It can dramatically add to debt and contingent liabilities, if not allocated prudently and with clear surety on sustainability/feasibility of the projects under implementation.
Also, repercussions to domestic manufacturing pose some serious concerns.
Government has been on a borrowing binge, and in the process resorted to acquiring expensive foreign and domestic debt at commercial rates. While it has repeatedly claimed that it is increasing its credit only to the extent of the budget deficit requirements, the reality is quite different.
For example, the increase in federal government’s debt from July-September 2016, adds up to Rs858 billion, whereas, the budget deficit in the same period was only Rs450 billion about half. Domestic debt in one year, December 2015 to December 2016, grew to 14.54 trillion or by 10.3% further raising dependence on commercial banks and adding to “various” other financial sector risks. In its own report the finance ministry has conceded that Pakistan’s debt sustainability indicators have worsened over the last 18 months.
Now borrowing in itself is not essentially a bad thing as long as it can be spent ina productive manner.
Additional ‘latest’ borrowing of $4. billion in the last 7 months ($1. on commercial terms & used for project financing) + $1 from rather expensive Sukuk Bonds + $1. from foreign commercial banks + balance miscellaneous from the likes of World Bank, Asian Development Bank, Islamic Development Bank, UK Government , etc. Our External Debt returnable over the next 15 months: $6. billion. In the Budget 2016-17: Projected annual economic assistance $8 billion.
Given the importance of the civil service, | reviewed recent CSS written examinations and discovered serious issues of intellectual ineptitude and quality control.
Those mentioned below are faithfully reproduced without correcting for errors of spelling, capitalisation, punctuation or grammar which the alert reader would spot easily.
Commentary is avoided for lack of space leaving the reader to identify problems which range from the amusing to the highly problematic.
Some would merely confuse applicants while others might force them to dissemble or risk being failed.
Some questions reveal a sloppiness that comes in the way of a proper understanding of the question.
More problematic are questions that really allow only one answer to avoid putting a candidate’s chances at risk.
From the Islamic History and Culture paper: “The Spanish Muslims established the foundations of Knowledge which become the mile stone of progress in Europe.
And, “Muslim culture in Pakistan is being dominated by European and Hindu Culture.
The questions exhibit very poor command of the English language and manifest thinking in Urdu while transcribing in English.
It is ironic that applicants are asked to write their answers in a language over which examiners have such poor control.
Most importantly, there are questions with only one safe answer and where matters of faith are asked to be scientifically proved.
This kind of examination would surely rule out the wise in favour of the dull, the timid, and the clever — those who memorise appropriate answers, refrain from speaking their minds, and say what would curry favour.
A selection mechanism cannot identify selectees wiser than the selectors.
That might explain the dilemma of the civil service in which each cohort is weaker than the one it succeeds.
And consider that this is the state of the premier examination in the country.
What might be the fate of the testing of lesser mortals is best left unexplored.
The writer is a fellow at the Consortium for Development Policy Research.
It is the ultimate destination of many in pursuit of a knowledge upgrade.
In most developed countries the number of graduates who reach masters and then doctoral level of education is a direct indicator of a country’s progress and prosperity.
Universities, such as Harvard, Stanford and Oxford are brands that are associated with not only top class education but an opportunity to explore, discover, debate and share diverse ideas with a versatile mix of nationalities, experiences and ages to develop new thinking that leads to innovation.
The story of the deterioration of Pakistan’s economy is that of the country’s education system.
The condition of primary and secondary education in Pakistan has been a topic of serious debate, but little has been done to improve it.
Higher education never received the attention it should and the resultant damage has almost gone unnoticed.
The recent spate of violence on university campuses in Punjab and Mardan are evidence of the fact that how far spread and complex this desecration of learning has become.
The traditional perception of the poor and illiterate men in remote areas being easily brainwashed, is no longer the story.
This segment of young educated and exposed middleclass males and females, who ‘volunteer’ to join extremist organisations, is far more dangerous.
The socio-cultural influences traditionally were dominated by family and community interactions.
However, in this age of information, the influence of what you see, read, hear, debate, question and respond has a much greater impact on your thinking than just family and surroundings.
Amongst the educated youth the time spent online is between six to nine hours per day, and hardly one to three hours with family.
This is an indicator that the hardwiring of the brain is now based on a huge variety of uncontrollable sources.
This influence has given rise to what | call the MMRT generation, ie, Millennial Mobile Restless Tweens.
This is a generation born in a world where the globalisation’s goods and ills have been felt with equal velocity.
Cold wars turned to hot wars and capitalism lost its shine as a solution to world’s economy.
Their parents teach them the traditional values as a way of life, while they see the opposite all around them.
Their textbooks tell them about the glorious history and their Facebook tells them about the inglorious reality.
They read about the fall of communism and the rise of capitalism, and see the slide of capitalism and the rise of materialism.
This disconnect starts to bother them and neither universities nor families are able to bridge this disconnect.
They may become doctors, engineers or business graduates because that of their parents’ wishes or because it will pay their bills, but they find these jobs unfulfilling.
They have a lot of information about the outside world but little about the inside world within them, which causes restlessness and an intense desire to escape the normal routines.
They feel a lack of meaning and purpose in life and in this restive mindset start considering themselves as misfits.
They tend to change their education fields, jobs and hobbies in search for identity, purpose and direction.
Terrorist organisations, such as the ISIS are much more diverse than al Qaeda and have done their homework on this generation.
Their target is 18to 24-year-olds for whom they use the social media extensively.
They have an estimated 30,000 to 40,000 Twitter accounts and guides for discovering true meaning of life, carrying out jihad and how to join the Islamic State.
Thus somebody, like Noreen Laghari will receive videos on how unfair the West is to Syrians, and how she as a medical student is empowered to do whatever she can to Christians in Pakistan, in retaliation for what Christians are doing to Muslims in Syria.
These videos are based on clever facts and appeal to the restive nature of MMRTs to stand for a cause and have a unique identity.
Universities in Pakistan need a complete overhaul of curriculum, teaching methodology and student relations.
However, like most institutions in the country, Vice-Chancellor appointments in universities are now in political hands.
The National Accountability Bureau is already investigating the appointment of its VC and his subsequent illegal appointments on key posts.
Universities need to have psychologists, specialising in student therapy.
The incidence of drugs, depression and suicides even in the best private universities is alarming.
Colleges and universities need to have talent aptitude tests that can guide the MMRTs to find their passion and direct them to follow it.
Parents need to understand this social networked generation, discover ways of communicating with them rather than rejecting their desire to be pursuing different careers and help them to do more meaningful work.
Without these changes, we will be widening the gap between this young, smart but extremely disenfranchised generation and society.
We need to understand them better, communicate and connect differently, and create an enabling environment in their learning places to control the damage of this mass social disruption.
Any decision or changes being suggested in the process of evaluation or assessment will have long lasting effects on over all education in the country.
Hence it is imperative that the imposition of Board exams in the name of Assessment for Grade V should be discussed at length with all the stake holders and all aspects of the decision should be carefully studied in advance.
The haste in which this naively planned program is being imposed on private schools is questionable.
The Examination Boards in KPK have proposed that the students of Grade V will be required to appear in an ‘Assessment’ that will be summative in nature.
Further the ground realities indicate that the implementation of this exam will create unforeseen damage to the creativity and emotional well-being of the children.
The government of KPK is very easily neglecting important components of education like curricula, textbooks and teachers training.
A mere focus on changing the pattern of exams from Formative Assessment to Summative will hardly play any role in improving the standards of education, especially in Private Schools where very well planned Assessments of children is carried out.
After the 18th amendment in April 2010, the development of curriculum was made a provincial subject.
The National Curriculum made by the Federal Ministry of Education in 2006, has neither been upgraded by the Government of KP nor are there any plans underway to do so in near future.
Furthermore, the task of creating textbooks based on the curriculum of 2006 has not even been completed.
The curriculum suggests that lesson plans should be developed by the teachers on the basis of Student Learning Outcomes enlisted in the National Curriculum.
Ironically, neither the Government gave any importance to this idea of teachers’ training, nor encouraged Private sector to take any initiative.
With semi-trained teachers, there is a great possibility that introduction of Board Exams in Class V will emerge as an example of lack of consistency between the teaching and evaluation process.
In fact for too little learning, too much evaluation will take place in 72 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 the classroom which is tantamount to destroying the atmosphere conducive to acquisition of quality education.
The pressure from parents to succeed with high grades in Board exams will increase the anxiety in students.
The summer and winter breaks of young children will be devoted to preparation for board exams.
The concept of school being a happy place will slip away from our own hands.
Tuition academies, claiming top positions in board and 100% success rate will surface in every street.
Instead of exploring the playgrounds and parks, the children will be forced to join academies or have personal tutors at home in afternoons.
Who will be responsible for the further addition to the already alarming dropout rate of students from schools at Primary level? — The writer is an educationist based in Abbottabad.
The persistence of these issues is weakening not only the state but also the cultural values of the centuries-old social fabric — that had used to strengthen relations among diverse communities living in the territory.
Unfortunately, a weak political structure and inconsistency in public policies including foreign policy has left the state with little focus on the most important sector of public education.
These include state-run schools, religious seminaries, private schools following the Cambridge GCE/IGCSE system and private mushroom schools growing on a dailybasis in residential areas.
The standard National Education System is a continuation of the colonial-era British system.
Religious seminaries are regulated by the Wifaqul Madaris; schools preparing pupils for Ordinary-and Advanced-level are affiliated with the CIE and Cambridge Assessment Board.
The syllabus taught at mushroom schools is a blend of that taught at these schools, prepared keeping in consideration the need of that particular area or vicinity.
The first factor about these multiple systems of schooling is that they cater to different classes, and contribute to further stratification along class lines.
The second most important factor is that curricula taught at these multiple systems varies, and the third key factor is regarding human resources involved in these systems.
Being a living document, curriculum needs to be revised and updated every five years, as per international standards.
Our national curriculum has been in the process of reforms including those that may promote tolerance and cohesion.
Unfortunately, the core issue in this regard has remained provision of appropriate training for text book writers to ensure that their products reflect the required reforms.
Besides, critical thinking and inquisitiveness is 74 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 prohibited, intentionally or unintentionally, at all levels of education, ending up making machines out of pupils who’re taught rote learning and memorisation.
The content and scheme of studies imparted at seminaries is approved by the Wifaqul Madaris.
Pakistan Studies curriculum of respective education boards up till grade-VIll is taught at seminaries.
Since CIE emphasises conceptual learning and critical thinking, the students studying in this stream are far ahead in learning, and they get a totally neutral version of our history.
But it is also a fact that these students have to come back to compulsory subjects of Pakistan Studies and Islamiat if they opt for admissions in Pakistani colleges/universities.
The kind of trainings offered at times are insufficient and do not practically support the teaching staff in actual class room situation where they may need to deal with a large number of students.
Secondly, the teaching staff may transfer their personal biases and unauthentic information on faiths, sects, religions, norms, values and culture, to the students, resulting in situations where religious/regional/ethnic identities may become more important for students than a Pakistani identity.
Though most seminaries have proper criteria for selection of teaching staff, there are instances where those recruited as teachers have completed schooling only up till the primary-level or have dropped out of school.
These teachers uncritically promote among their pupil the school of thought they have been taught.
The facts about private schools mushrooming in residential areas are more serious.
We can very well understand what would be the quality of education given to students at these schools.
Once we look at the overall scenario, it’s evident that the state needs to take the most critical component of education more seriously to control growing intolerance and extremism in the society.
The current multiple systems of schooling are creating different socio-economic classes and pushing us towards a more segregated and frustrated society, rather than a cohesive and a tolerant one.
At provincial level, 75 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 governments are taking initiatives to cope up with the areas highlighted here yet we still need a comprehensive and focused plan along with a well-unified system including capacity building of text book writers and teachers.
The number of Pakistani children not attending school has dropped, over the last year, from 24 million to 22.6.
Rather, it makes a mockery of the country's supposed commitment to the UN Millennium Development Goals for Education, including primary universal education.
When the MDGs were drawn up back in 2000, Pakistan had just entered the Enlightened Moderation era, where progress was to be measured by the number of imported luxury car showrooms or else the export of our first malt whisky.
As the MDGs deadline approached some 15 years later, the UN painted a damning picture of the education crisis threatening Pakistan.
More than a quarter of students enrolled at the primary level, it noted, did not complete their education.
The unfortunate answer is that the state apparatus continues to demonstrate how very little it cares.
It cannot simply continue to outsource responsibility to institutions like the British Council, which insists on pedalling the O Level system, here in the developing world that it discarded at home from 1988 onwards.
Yet the Council had a point when, at the turn of this decade, it advised the then government to reverse its stipulations that English be the medium of instruction.
Better to adopt mother tongue teaching, it recommended, to boost functional literacy retention.
That international donors have little faith in governments of the day is underscored by the intermittent practice of calling on local beat reporters to track cash flows to sponsored schools.
Given the above — we must to look elsewhere to have the responsibility shouldered, at least in the short-term.
For he who holds the power in an unfair system ought to be duty bound to redress the balance somewhat.
Especially given that the education system is entirely dedicated to their wants, in terms of competing exam certificates — including the outdated O Level, GCSE and now the International Baccalaureate.
This might also mean no more pretending that going abroad to secure a foreign degree before returning to teach at elite private schools and universities maketh an education activist of one.
This message is especially 77 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 meant for the elite, foreign educated leaders of political parties supposedly representing Pakistan’s vast working class.
The development took place during a meeting of SUN Assistant Secretary General Gerda Verburg accompanied by the team of committee on nutrition along with the Executive Director of Higher Education Commission Dr Arshad Ali at the Commission Secretariat on Wednesday.
India sends back 50 Pakistani students after threats by activists While conversing on the event, HEC chairperson Dr Arshad Ali said that higher education commission had been promoting research based on solutions to social matters, adding that the nutrition and food security were very important regions that required to be focused on during research activities.
He guaranteed that the SUN team of full cooperation in advocacy as well as promotion of nutrition through the higher education zone.
He stressed on the requirement for coordination among academia as well as the private sector with respect to the awareness regarding importance of nutrition, especially for women and for children as well.
Arms control advocates have consistently pushed for adopting a treaty to ban all nuclear explosions.
To date, more than 2,000 nuclear tests have been carried out in 60 different locations across the globe.
As the existential threat posed by the existence of nuclear weapons has emerged once again — following the four nuclear tests conducted by North Korea in this century alone — a new momentum is gathering for a worldwide ban on nuclear testing.
The treaty bans nuclear explosions in all environments as a prerequisite to ban nuclear testing.
However, the treaty remains in limbo due to the political processes in some countries — which are complicated and lengthy — and the ‘after you’ policy adopted by some countries.
It has now been more than 20 years since the CTBT was opened for signature.
A deadlock exists because one of the treaty’s clauses — known as Article XIV — makes the ratification by 44 states with commercial or research nuclear reactors a necessary requirement for the treaty to become legally binding.
Of those 44 specified states, China, Egypt, India, Iran, Israel, North Korea, Pakistan and the United States have so far been reluctant to ratify.
Under the present circumstances, the chances of the CTBT being ratified by these unwilling countries appear to be slim.
With China linking its ratification process to that of the United States and Pakistan waiting for India to ratify the treaty first, bring the CTBT into force has been a daunting challenge.
After the CTBT was defeated by the United States Senate in 1999, the Bush administration made little effort to promote it even though United States ratification could have also spurred Egypt and Israel to sign and ratify the treaty.
In order to break this deadlock, many non-nuclear weapon states are considering the option of the ‘provisional application’ of the CTBT until the Article XIV conditions are met.
Without violating the provisions of Article XIV of the treaty, this approach is likely to increase pressure on other countries to accelerate their ratification processes.
After it has been applied provisionally by a large number of states, the CTBT will have an enhanced legal status and thereby increase the political costs of violation.
In this way, the treaty will provide a stronger legal basis for collective UN action against violators and there will also be a glimmer of hope to prevent failure of the ‘test-ban’ norm.
Even during the negotiations over entry-into-force requirements, the idea of provisional application was discussed by many states as a way to prevent a handful of other states from exercising a veto.
The CTBT could thus take legal effect for those who wish to abide by the agreement.
Though not binding on those who remain outside, the treaty in provisional application will be more likely to act as a brake on further ‘copycat’ testing.
A major criticism levelled against the provisional application of the CTBT is based on the apprehension that the United States — which contributes a fifth of the overall costs of the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organisation — may oppose this step and limit its funding to the organisation.
Such fears are exaggerated because any such decision to cut down funding to the CTBTO will be far more costly to Washington in terms of political influence against nuclear proliferation.
Since May 1998, successive governments in Pakistan have tied their stance on the CTBT to New Delhi's future course of action.
Pakistani analysts have frequently commented that in a nuclearised South Asia, the CTBT will have relevance only if both India and Pakistan are parties to the treaty.
In 1998, Pakistan responded to India’s nuclear tests by conducting its own underground explosions.
Pakistan fears that India even harbours plans to conduct additional nuclear tests in the future.
But Pakistan has repeatedly made it clear that it will not be the first to resume nuclear testing in the region.
Although it subsequently came under enormous pressure from the United States to accept the CTBT, the government in Pakistan maintained that its ratification depended on India’s future course of action.
Some people have argued that if Pakistan joins the CTBT, it will be able to access CTBT monitoring data.
In addition, signing the CTBT will be the perfect tool to promote 81 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 Pakistan’s position as a responsible nuclear state willing to accept real restraints — unlike India.
Pakistan’s willingness to join the CTBT might also prove to be instrumental in securing cooperation in civilian nuclear technology from the United States and other major powers.
The technological advancements in the global nuclear test monitoring system have already made it easier to detect underground nuclear tests with a yield of even less than one kilotonne.
The CTBT’s entry into force will also make on-site inspections possible.
Over the past few years, Russia and the United States have spent billions of dollars on modernising their nuclear forces.
The CTBT, after taking full legal effect, could be a major contribution to nonproliferation goals by restraining countries with nuclear weapons capabilities from further modernising their nuclear forces.
Now that the British government has formally notified the European Council of its intention to leave the European Union, the United Kingdom has passed the point of no return.
It could well turn out to be the biggest act of self-sabotage in modern political history.
Despite what British Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson has promised, the United Kingdom will not be able to have its cake and eat it, too.
The rest of the EU is determined to show that leaving the club has negative consequences.
And in that sense, by triggering Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty, the United Kingdom has chosen to relinquish significant control over its own economic future.
New trade deals are uncertain and the centrifugal forces of renewed jingoism are beginning to challenge the historic union between England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland.
As a result, the United Kingdom is bound to lose influence on the world stage.
And so, rather than “taking back control,” as Brexit supporters have argued, the United Kingdom will lose some autonomy in economic and financial affairs.
After all, the biggest barriers to a truly “global Britain” are not trade tariffs but non-tariff regulatory barriers, which require either harmonization across trade partners or, at the very least, mutual recognition.
From that point of view, the EU single market was the most ambitious free market experiment in economic history.
By leaving it, the United Kingdom is giving up its seat at the European table and will therefore no longer be able to influence future decision-making in its largest market, let alone shape future global regulatory standards.
And, by turning its back on the EU Customs Union, it is bound to introduce new barriers to trade.
By leaving the EU, meanwhile, the United Kingdom will also lose influence over European foreign policy and thereby see its global clout wane further.
Its so-called special relationship with the United States was sustained only by the illusion that the country served as a bridge between Washington and the rest of Europe.
The Brexiteers’ dream of the United Kingdom reclaiming its rightful place as leader of the Commonwealth or the English-speaking nations—what Officials of the country’s new Department of International Trade call, without any trace of irony, “Empire 2.0’—is delusional for the simple reason that there is absolutely no demand for it.
The United Kingdom will continue to try to punch above its weight in international affairs through an outsize role in NATO, but open hostility of United States President 83 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 Donald Trump and his administration toward the Atlantic alliance makes even that a rather precarious proposition.
Finally, by opting for a “hard” Brexit—meaning leaving both the EU Customs Union and the single market—against the explicit wishes of the people of Scotland and Northern Ireland, British voters have put a dark cloud over the immediate future of the United Kingdom itself.
Scottish independence is now more likely than in 2014, and the possible return of a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland has made the dream of a united Ireland—as envisioned by the Irish republican party Sinn Fein— less far-fetched than it once seemed.
Now Prime Minister Theresa May has an even more difficult task before her—healing a divided nation while seeking to steer the country out of the EU unscathed.
The idea that she will succeed where Cameron failed seems naive at best.
After the chemical attack in the Syrian town of Ghouta on August 21, 2013, the United States had anxiously waited for a similar attack in Syria to provide a legitimate cause for its direct military intervention against the Assad regime.
The recent chemical attack in Khan Sheikhoun in Idlip has provided a cover to the United States to employ firepower against the Assad regime in Syria.
All this is designed to outsmart Russia and foster the security of Israel in the oil-rich region.
Without any impartial investigation, the United States has made the Assad regime responsible for the deadly chemical attack.
According to Russia’s defence ministry, the Syrian warplanes pounded a large terrorist depot and a concentration of military hardware in the eastern outskirts of Knan Sheikhoun.
The attack dispersed the lethal chemicals in the air, suffocating a large number of people near the epicentre of the attack.
The United States launched 59 Tomahawk cruise missiles against the Al Shayrat air base in Homs from the destroyers — the USS Porter and the USS Ross, which are currently stationed in the eastern Mediterranean.
Some early reports indicate that the airfield’s planes and support infrastructure were severely damaged or destroyed.
What should not be forgotten is that the direct United States military intervention in Syria is not an attempt to protect the suffering Syrian people from the continued oppression of the brutal Assad regime and ragtag terrorist outfits.
Nor does the United States sincerely aspire to see democratic norms flourishing in Syria.
Washington’s main target is to dethrone Russian regional client — the Assad regime — and subsequently replace it with an American puppet.
The United States has a long list of military and economic objectives to maximise after ousting President Assad from the strategically important Syria.
First and foremost, due to the US’s stunning failure to end the simmering civil wars in Syria and Yemen, Washington’s major regional allies have slowly started tilting towards China and Russia.
The United States sells arms and warfare technology worth billions of dollars to some Arab monarchies.
More importantly, the Chinese display of military power in the South China Sea and the Russian application of modern aircraft in Syria and Crimea have attracted some Arab countries to purchase weapons from these two countries.
During his visit to 85 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 China, King Salman of Saudi Arabia signed a deal with Beijing to set up a factory in the kingdom to produce Chinese hunter-killer aerial drones.
The United States seems to have decided to employ firepower against the Assad regime so that Washington’s major regional arms importer will not fully jump on the Chinese and Russian bandwagon.
United States missile attacks against the Assad forces will not only advertise its modern weaponry, they will also assure Arab countries that Washington can militarily intervene in the Middle East to safeguard the core strategic interests of its regional allies.
The Assad regime has provided Russia the Tartus naval facility and the Khmeimin air base.
These bases have immensely helped Russia continue its annexation of Crimea and increase its naval presence in the eastern Mediterranean Sea.
The United States recourse to missile attacks stems from the fact that Western-funded rebels have proved ineffective to oust Assad from power.
Despite Turkey’s resistance, the United States has continued to provide military hardware to Kurdish fighters against Daesh in Syria.
The Turkish government is fearful that the United States will use the Kurds of Irag, Syria and Turkey to carve out an independent Kurdish state in the region in the future.
The hostile attitude of the United States towards Turkey has made the latter reset its fractured relations with Russia.
Both Russia and Turkey are currently sharing intelligence information and coordinating with each other against Daesh in Syria.
More importantly, Turkey has lately shown its interest in purchasing advanced S-400 air and missile defence systems from Russia.
Such Russian missile technology will help Turkey get rid of the Nato-deployed missiles on Turkish soil.
The United States is aware that Russia will capitalise on its partnership with Turkey to augment its naval and military presence in the Mediterranean Sea and Eastern Europe.
If Moscow succeeds in bringing Ankara under its regional fold, the United States will lose its most powerful Nato partner in the region.
To prevent Turkey from jumping into Russian bandwagon, the United States will find more pretexts to organise aerial attacks against the Assad regime.
Besides, Washington will slowly keep itself aloof from Kurdish fighters in Syria in a bid to appease Turkey.
The Trump administration is also concerned about the increasing support of Hamas, lran and Hezbollah to the embattled Assad regime.
If President Assad remains in power for a long time, this will probably help Iran forge a strong regional bloc with Hamas, Syria and Hezbollah against Israel.
Therefore, the Trump administration has decided to inhibit the unfolding lranian-sponsored alliance against Israel by further weakening the Assad regime in Syria.
The latest missile attacks were designed to strengthen the position of rebels against the Assad government in the raging civil war.
When the United States launched the missile attacks against Syria, President Trump was hosting Chinese President Xi Jinping at his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida.
China is the major diplomatic, military and economic supporter of the North Korean regime that has constantly threatened the United States and South Korea with nuclear attacks.
Through these missile attack against the Assad regime, the United States has presumably indicated to China that it can resort to limited attacks which are geared towards neutralising the nuclear threat posed by North Korea.
Since Syria is the only regional country hosting some Russian naval and military bases, Moscow will employ all possible means to militarily protect the Assad regime from the US and the ragtag rebels.
Russian military support to Assad is likely to further increase the divergences between Russia and the United States in terms of bringing a lasting end to the Syrian war.
The helpless Syrians will, therefore, continue to reel from the brutalities of the Assad regime and insurgent groups.
States were considered the most powerful actors in the international system by both neo-realists and neo-liberals.
While divergent in nature, both the liberal and realist schools of thought agreed that anarchy was inherent in the international system.
In addition, the lack of a central authority was keenly felt by both paradigms because it encouraged states to generate a self-help system and act unilaterally.
Anarchy — the central fact of the international system — is derived from the view that the absence of an overarching legitimate global authority in the Westphalian nation-state system leaves states with no option but to resort to war to resolve their mutual disputes.
As a result, scholars agreed that anarchy was the single most important characteristic underlying international politics and any understanding of global politics must flow from an understanding of the anarchic international structure.
However, in the early 1990s, the constructivist approach emerged as a challenge to the state-centric paradigms and resulted in an overwhelming focus on the material aspects of the structure of the international system.
Constructivist scholars, who emphasised the social construction of reality, argued that the world is not objective.
In their view, the variables of interest to IR scholars — such as military power, international institutions — are important not because they are objective facts, but because of their social meanings.
For example, the nuclear weapons of France and India are probably equally destructive, but have very different meanings for the outside world.
Constructivists contend that the intersubjectively shared ideas are as important as military capabilities in any empirical analysis.
Realists emphasise the role of the balance of power in global politics to minimise the possibility of future wars.
While the theoretical approach rests on the idea that security is enhanced with an equitable distribution of military capabilities among nations, the equilibrium of power among all major powers in the world is generally difficult to achieve.
Subsequently, states resort to employing different tactics to sustain the balance of power and achieve their desired strategic goals.
However, constructivist scholars argued that power and anarchy do not define whether the international system is peaceful or conflictual at a particular point in time.
Instead, it is a function of the shared culture created through discursive social practices.
This is very important because if constructivist scholars are correct, states do not have to worry about relative power and security dilemmas.
International politics should be guided by shared values and intersubjective norms held by both state and non-state actors.
The focus on the intersubjective dimensions of knowledge makes the structure of the international system look like a causal force because of the proposed role of values as an ideational structure determining the strategic behaviour of states.
In a socially constructed world, this ideational structure has both a constitutive and regulative effect on all actors in the international system because the evolved structure of the international system makes states redefine their identities and interests through a process of social interaction.
Unlike realist and liberal theorists, constructivists do not hold identities and interests as constants to understand how the ideational structure determines the way all actors identify their position and interests in the international system.
This leads to an interesting question about the ‘agent-structure problem’ in international relations theory.
Realist scholars define the international structure in terms of the observable attributes of states as primary actors and how the structure constrains the choices of state actors.
On the other hand, constructivists believe that both actors and structures co-determine and even constitute each other.
In their view, ideational structures constrain the behaviour of actors in terms of their identities and interests.
But these ideational structures are also created through the discursive practices of agents.
We cannot treat identity and interests as a given because they also keep changing with the passage of time.
As a result, state sovereignty should also be considered a social construct.
And there are no objective threats because they are always socially constructed.
Constructivists also highlight how the nature of global politics has changed because of the role that norms play in the equation.
Norms are collective beliefs that regulate the behaviour and identity of all actors on the world stage.
The structure of the international system is actually a human intellectual creation and it can be changed by introducing new norms.
Even powerful states follow norms and international obligations because they are concerned about their outlook.
Norms also strongly influence the way states think about their own security practices.
Countries acquire nuclear weapons not because they face 89 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 genuine security threats, but because building nuclear weapons is a means to gain prestige.
The constructivist approach explains the complex political socialisation process involved in redefining the identities and interests of actors.
However, some quantitative scholars argue that concepts like identities and interests cannot be studied through positivist approaches.
There is an element of subjectivity inherent in these concepts because they are relative to different states, institutions and communities.
Another critique is that norms exist but are often violated by major powers.
Despite this criticism, the idea of politics as a social construction continues to attract significant scholarly research in American academia.
Not just foreign policy, everything that America does is different or it does in a different way; or at least it appears different.
This is not an essay on the American society or an all-embracing review of the United States foreign policy that would be far beyond the scope of this article.
It is just a snapshot of the process of the making of United States foreign policy and the formative influences that impact its substance.
It is the foreign policy of a highly open society with a powerful media and advanced civil society that demands answers.
The government is thus having to explain its policies all the time, often informing but not revealing.
It is also the foreign policy of a highly complex and in many ways unique democracy under constant stress of domestic politics.
That means the government saying different things to different audiences, sending mixed fixed signals among the American public as well as people abroad.
Adding to the welter of confusion is the media’s approach to foreign affairs specially that of the 24/7 electronic media.
The way it plays on foreign policy issues has created its own distortions.
The social media which has made everybody an instant expert on foreign policy has made things worse — opinion is moving faster than knowledge.
The net result is that foreign affairs have become action drama and the traditionally uninformed American public has become grossly misinformed and behaves as if it has become a protagonist in a conflict.
And wants its voice to be heard which a politician cannot ignore because of its impact on his electoral prospects.
There are also multiple systemic issues in the United States foreign policy.
The administration has to satisfy, specially on issues of critical national importance or of high public interest or both, different centres of power and bureaucratic institutions, like Congress, the Pentagon, and the CIA and various lobbies and special interests.
In making a policy the president thus has to resolve the constant tussle between the electoral compulsions on the one hand and strategic imperatives on the other, and between America’s own interests that are global and those of its allies that are local and regional.
Of particular importance are the tensions between public interest and national interest.
The greater the public interest and its impact on politics harder it is to make 91 THECSSPOINT.COM global Point APRIL 2017 policy especially if there is no consensus.
Frankly, the consensus has broken down on many issues because of polarised politics and media’s influence.
Syria is a case in point where it has been difficult to align public opinion, politics and policy.
So you either end up with no action as by Obama or adhoc action by Trump.
These are indeed the challenges of making public policy in in an advanced democracy but more so in the complex American system.
Otherwise you will make the mistake of picking one fragment of a remark by an official or a politician, and start reading a huge meaning into it.
The United States does command an immense array of diplomatic, economic and political assets and military power.
To its credit, it has played a decisive role in international affairs specially in the last century maintaining some semblance of balance of power and international order and stability.
But there has been an obvious discrepancy between America’s claims of a moralist foreign policy and the practice of a policy whose substance is not markedly different from the traditional power politics of any great power.
There have been thus great success stories in United States foreign policy but failures as well.
America has done very well in purely economic and military challenges such as the two World Wars.
It has also done well in dealing with other big powers despite the fact that they all have now risen and become competing powers.
It is just that other powers have come up challenging America’s primacy in the world.
America generally fails here because the basic approach is mechanistic, practical and impatient.
It has had a varying degree of trouble either with the government or the people in two groups.
That has included authoritarian regimes mainly from resource-rich countries who have needed Washington’s help in staying in power.
Or, countries who needed economic and military assistance because of insecurity and poor governance.
It worked up to a point but is having problems as the elite-based system is under challenge now.
Populations whose political self-consciousness has risen because of the new global forces are discovering that it has been a bad bargain.
And this challenge is coming from two opposing forces — of democratisation and nationalism on the one hand and religious extremism on the other.
But people there wrongly rely on conspiracy theories to explain what has happened.
The plain truth is if American actions have caused them problems it is not due to any malice or some grand design to create chaos and instability.
America has had bad partners in these countries and has pursued flawed polices in which the complex policymaking process where politics, ideology and corporate interests, especially of the military-industrial complex often trump strategy, has made no small contribution.
Erodgan has always attracted a large, passionate following but now, 14 years after he first attained national power as prime minister, the strength of opposition to him is equally chargedup.
The referendum itself was portrayed outside Turkey as an attempt by Erdogan to make himself a dictator.
The current division of power in Turkey between the president and parliament was stifling and only empowered the bureaucracy.
Some reform was needed although it is unclear if moving to a presidential system, like that in the United States and France, was the best choice given recent authoritarian moves.
The referendum will allow Erdogan to appoint more judges and let him stay in power till 2029 should he continue to win elections.
But the instability caused by the closeness of the vote may end up weakening Erdogan.
The main opposition parties have denied the legitimacy of the referendum, claiming that votes on unstamped ballot papers were uncounted.
The general clampdown on dissent after the attempted coup last year has also cast a pall over the referendum and indeed any attempt by Erodgan to expand his powers.
Equally dangerous is Erdogan’s declaration after the referendum result was announced that he would now seek a referendum on bringing back the death penalty.
Not only would a ‘Yes’ vote on that issue put an end to any chance of Turkey joining the European Union, it is also being seen as a dangerous tool in the hands of any government in Turkey.
It is now Erdogan’s duty to respect the independence of the judiciary and recognise that he is the leader of a country that is deeply divided.
Unfortunately, his record of going after political opponents is not encouraging.
All these changes mean that — if reelected — Erdogan will return as a stronger president.
He will have the power to make appointments to the Turkish higher judiciary as well as the ability to issue decrees.
The hope is that the changes will result in a more stable Turkey which is able to maintain its commitment to basic democratic principles and human rights.
BY JEFFREY LEWIS The Trump administration has completed a policy review of how to manage the growing nuclear threat from North Korea.
The new policy — massive pressure and engagement — is a tepid serving of leftovers from the Barack Obama, George W Bush, and Bill Clinton administrations. | actually created a quiz of similar statements from all four administrations — and then when | looked at it a day later, | failed it.
As so often happens when reality disappoints, people turn to rumor and fantasy.
And so, disappointed with the reality that Donald Trump faces the same lousy options on North Korea that hamstrung all his predecessors, the new Washington bedtime story is that the United States is secretly hacking North Korean missile launches.
The root of this particular bedtime story was a bit of reporting by David Sanger and William Broad, asserting that the Obama administration had begun, about three years ago, to launch cyberattacks against North Korea analogous to those against Iran.
While the United States is undoubtedly interested in penetrating Iranian and North Korean computer networks, and is doing a bit of mischief, that’s a long way from the reality of some keyboard jockey in Utah taking command of a North Korean missile and piloting it into the drink.
Correlation is not causation, of course, and a simple review of North Korea’s missile launches suggests that if the United States is hacking North Korean missiles, it is doing a crap job of it.
Since 2014, about three-quarters of Pyongyang’s launches have succeeded.
My colleague Shea Cotton keeps a database of every North Korean missile launch.
Of the 66 missiles that North Korea launched during 2014 and after, 51 have succeeded.
If hacking is playing any role, it is defeating a trivial number of missiles.
Overall, North Korea’s Scud and Nodong missiles — the ones that it plans to use to nuke United States forces in South Korea and Japan — worked just ducky.
There is, after all, a reason that “rocket science” is popular as a metaphor for tasks that are complicated and difficult.
While the simple media narrative is to laugh at failed missile launches, the North Koreans learn from every flight, whether it works or not.
Experiencing and overcoming failure is a normal part of building a robust and reliable rocket program.
It was America’s first large rocket, good enough to put Alan Shepard into space.
So while we laughed every time a North Korean missile exploded at launch or dropped into the drink , Pyongyang’s finest were busy studying what went wrong and fixing the problems.
The last two North Korean space launches, in December 2012 and again in February 2016, were successful.
Look up and you can still see North Korea’s Kwangmyongsong-2 satellite in orbit.
North Korea’s missile launches aren't failing because we are hacking them; they are failing because Pyongyang is developing a wide array of new liquidand solid-fueled ballistic missiles.
Many of those systems — especially the new solid-fueled missiles — are working just fine.
And North Korean engineers will either figure the others out or learn from their mistakes and move on to more promising designs.
The two countries cooperate closely in missile development, so much so that it probably isn’t possible to hack one without hacking the other.
And, of course, it was lran’s nuclear program that was subject to the original high-profile cyberattack — the Stuxnet virus that crippled Iranian centrifuges.
Yes, it damaged a large number of centrifuges and slowed the Iranian enrichment program for a few months.
But, ultimately, Iran was installing thousands of centrifuges and developing new generations of the devices before the program was constrained by the 2015 Iran nuclear deal. | don’t mean to say that the United States isn’t attempting to get inside North Korea’s networks. | suspect that the United States is probably very interested in attacking the systems that control North Korea’s new generation of computer-controlled machine tools, which my colleagues and | believe have reduced Pyongyang’s dependence on imported components for its nuclear and missile programs.
But there just isn’t any reason to think cyberattacks are more than a nuisance.
The evidence suggests that the United States isn’t succeeding in this regard and that, at best, such efforts would be a nuisance to the North Koreans.
In fact, in the wake of Stuxnet, there were reports that a similar program against North Korea had failed.
Given the extensive missile cooperation between Tehran and Pyongyang, | would expect that they share cybersecurity tips.
It is hard to admit that political and coercive policies are not working.
And it’s especially hard to admit that we are approaching a point where we are going to have to accept something we have long said is unacceptable.
But for whatever reason, it is breaking into the popular consciousness now.
People feel powerless, and they expect their government to do something.
They just aren’t prepared to accept that this particular something is, well, nothing.
So there must be some secret government agency, one that doesn’t look like the post office, where people know what they are doing.
We live in a bizarre era where every issue becomes a referendum on Donald Trump.
While half of us are convinced he’s going to get us all killed, his fans desperately want to believe that he’s not just some grifter in hopelessly over his head.
And so when he says North Korea isn’t going to test a missile in one of his Twitter outbursts, and then a missile test fails, the Drudge Report and his troll army on Twitter attribute the stroke of luck to Cheeto Jesus.
The Trump administration plainly has no idea what it is doing, opting for a “new” strategy identical to the approach adopted by the Obama and Bush administrations.
The unifying feature of this approach has been desperate paralysis — sorry, patiently hoping for a strategic miracle.
It allows us to imagine that missile failures are not growing pains of an evolving and dangerous threat but evidence of our power, wisdom, and superior technology.
The idea that hacking can prevent North Korea’s missiles from working allows us to avoid coming to terms with the reality that our policies are failing.
For decades, political risk has been synonymous with developing countries and emerging markets in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
The rise of populism in the Western world redefines the notion of political risk and teaches that risk has no permanent address.
Mitigating the risk requires avoiding arrogance toward those embracing populism.
A dismissive response delegitimizes the phenomenon, leaving us unable to manage implications for democracy and all issues of economic development in poor countries, and the very idea of political risk itself.
Those who oppose populism must engage with it rationally in the political space with the force of their own ideas.
Political populism, characterized by a desire to assert domestic democratic sovereignty and rejection of the “cult of the expert,” owes its rise to increasing rejection of the conventional wisdom by citizens who feel left behind by globalization trends favoring the elite that gained ascendance over the past 30 years.
To the extent that the idea of a “borderless” world diminished the voices of local populations and amplified the powers of bureaucratic global elites in Brussels or Washington, there was bound to be a reckoning between local and global forces for the control of the destinies of nations.
These tensions, especially as they affect immigration, jobs and trade, have been long in the making, brought to the fore in an explosive manner by the Brexit referendum.
The British vote to leave the European Union confounded conventional wisdom and strengthened the hand of the anti-globalists.
The phenomenon of globalization, while not dead, is in decline in political and economic life, with China’s Xi Jinping left as its unlikely champion.
For globalization, whatever its virtues, was neither a benign phenomenon nor an agnostic one.
It's an agenda with global winners and losers, facing challenges from within industrialized countries, once prior champions, because large populations found themselves on the wrong side of globalization’s inescapable logic — the cost-benefit analyses of labor and supply chain costs and technologies that are the chief culprit in the death of the salaryman with lifelong job security.
Scholars such as Hedley Bull advanced the theory of international relations known as the “English School” in the 1970s.
In the international system, nations interacted in a formalistic manner, mainly through trade, military alliances and traditional diplomacy.
The international society emerged in the late 19th century as technology broke down geographic distances, and maintaining global stability, not through a balance of power but through multilateral cooperation, seemed a superior path.
Despite the rhetoric, competition and threats to global order continued among nations inside and outside these frameworks for cooperation — whether the Cold War or the “unipolar world” dominated by America after communism’s fall.
Aspirations to a cosmopolitan world society sought to limit sovereignty and create a “borderless” world, a civitas maxima prioritizing human rights over national interests.
Populism seeks to reverse the power of the international community by utilizing the democratic legitimacy of the majority to re-assert primacy of the national interest — seen by liberals as isolationism or “nativism” — in public policy.
Home-country multinationals that ship production — and jobs — abroad can anticipate a backlash.
Multinationals will no longer receive benign preferences and protections in populist countries if they cannot prove their value to local economies, especially by creating jobs.
Designing corporate initiatives to curry political favor erodes the free enterprise ethic.
Business decisions may no longer be taken on the basis of market efficiency, injecting a heavy dose of partisan political considerations into corporate organizations, as shareholders react and CEOs align with populist governments.
Such trends hasten the decline of the global corporation as a business model.
As The Economist recently noted, multinationals’ profits have dropped by 25 percent in the past five years, and 40 percent of such firms now make a return on equity of less than 10 percent.
Global corporations may have Trump to thank for providing cover for a retreat from the failing original logic of profits driving the ascendance of multinationals over the past half-century.
Trump’s populist movement focuses on global trade as functioning to the detriment of American interests, and this leaves the World Trade Organization squarely in the sights of populism.
Moreover, as United States Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross asserted, several European and Asian nations are also guilty of protectionist policies even as they proclaim the gospel of free trade.
Likewise, the EU, which challenged domestic sovereignty, will be hardest hit as populism rises in France, Italy and the Netherlands.
The EU is the most radical embodiment of the cosmopolitan world society worldview, a_ political project masquerading as an economic one but primarily formed to advance the great-power aspirations of France and Germany.
For developing nations, especially those in Africa, populism’s rise in the Western world may ultimately be beneficial, despite negative short-term impacts.
These countries will be forced to confront mistaken assumptions about development that relies on the “benevolence” of foreign aid.
They must reconsider unquestioning acceptance of the inevitability of globalization and their status as markets, not factory.
And they have already seen that efforts to model the African Union on the basis of the European Union, complete with common currency, may not be wise in light of challenges facing the EU over the past decade.
African nations must embrace an inside-out perspective on economic transformation rather than the exclusively outside-in model that, in reality, robbed them of opportunity to control their destiny.
Industrialized countries, aided by technological superiority which produced value-added goods at competitive prices and the WTO treaty regime, flooded the markets of developing countries, leaving them import-dependent.
Considering that more than 50 percent of world trade is based on manufactured goods and the rude awakening offered by populism’s rise in the West, these nations should pursue the idea of “smart protectionism” — by deploying the “special and differentiated” provisions of the WTO treaty that can apply to less developed nations to prevent the dumping of Chinese goods in their markets and create enabling environments for modest industrial growth and intra-African trade.
At 13 percent of its total global trade, Africa’s intraregional trade is the lowest in the world compared to North America, Europe and other regions.
First, attempts to substitute facts and empirical foundations with conviction as a basis for public policy create sub-optimal outcomes.
Electoral victories should not become mob rule or a tyranny of the majority.
Third, populism, based on its binary convictions about bad and good guys and nations, as well as possible weakening of institutional frameworks, runs the risk of promoting instability in a nuclear world in which several weaker and irrational states possess weapons of mass destruction.
But in some cases, autocratic corruption can be replaced with a similar weakening of institutions and the conflation of populist sentiment with competent public policy, not to soeak of new forms of corruption.
Populism will likely co-exist uncomfortably with globalization — perhaps a scaled-back version — colliding with realities of the world and public policy.
One of these is that experts matter, even if they are not always right.
He is the founder of Sogato Strategies, a global risk and strategy advisory firm, and a former deputy governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria.
Especially in this day and age, these categories alone don't tell the whole story.
Concerning numerous issues, a good number of folks on the left and right find some agreement that disagree with others on the left and right.
Regarding this particular, there are individuals on the left and right (along with some of those who aren’t as easy to categorize), who reasonably disagree with California Democratic Congresswoman Maxine Waters’ Russia related comments.
She’s known for making provocatively flippant remarks without much protest.
Refer to her not so distant “scumbags” remark on MSNBC, directed against some in Russia and the Trump administration.
When he was with Fox News, Bill O'Reilly felt compelled to apologize for his saying that she wears a James Brown wig.
Another double standard concerns the characterization of Russian Deputy UN Ambassador Vladimir Safronkov as a “thug, for his replies to the UK and United States ambassadors.
He’s reflecting the many Russians who don’t take kindly to seeing their country treated as a kind of punching bag.
The latter involves the possibility of a false flag operation, that jives with the Democrats’ desire to poke at Russia, which is supporting the Syrian government as the realistically best option in Syria.
At present, there hasn't been conclusive evidence provided on what led to the recent chemical incident in rebel held Syrian territory.
Instead, there’ve been unsubstantiated statements claiming proof of Syrian government culpability, which Anglo-American mass media hasn’t been keen to challenge.
On RT, a Syrian rebel representative claimed to have the name of the pilot who dropped the sarin gas as claimed.
CNN ran an unnamed source, claiming the existence of an intercepted communication of Syrian officials planning a chemical attack.
The release of the anonymously quoted intercept claim hasn’t been provided.
Meantime, some credible Americans cast serious doubt on Syrian government culpability in the recent chemical incident.
Among them are Lawrence Wilkerson, the retired United States Army Colonel and former Chief of Staff to United States Secretary of State Colin Powell and Theodore Postol, an MIT emeritus, who has experience in dealing with a matter like the recent chemical incident in Syria.
Postol and former United States President Barack Obama join some others in doubting the claim that the Syrian government used chemical weapons in 2013.
To the regret of some Donald Trump supporters and others, the United States president seems like he might’ve been conned into supporting the United States attack on the Syrian military position.
As has been noted, there’re several key individuals in his administration who contradict some of his earlier stated views, that have included the reluctance to go against the Syrian government.
In addition, Trump might've reasonably assumed that the strike would benefit his ratings.
A United States military attack on a humanitarian based claim, involving no United States casualties, can likely lead to an increase in popularity, as has happened in this instance.
In the aftermath of the United States strike in question, Trump tweeted about how US-Russian relations will improve.
Over the past weekend, his National Security Adviser HR McMaster took a hardline, by unfairly putting the blame on Russia, while suggesting that the US-Russian relationship can improve on the basis that it’s at such a low point.
In terms of overall improvement, setting the bar at a low point isn’t as good as seeking a higher standard from the get go.
McMaster probably wouldn’t like a scenario where the Russian government initiated a debatable humanitarian military action against a perceived United States ally, that included the Kremlin telling the White House to remove its personnel to avoid getting hit.
The United States strike on the Syrian base included the United States warning Russia to withdraw its personnel in the area, just prior to the attack.
It has been made less easier for Trump to improve US-Russian relations.
During the Cold War, United States President John Kennedy mistakenly believed the hawkish wing that advocated the Bay of Pigs operation.
The late Ronald Reagan, his immediate successor George HW Bush and Barack Obama, are among the past United States presidents, who took foreign policy stances that differed with some influential elements in their country.
The Syrian and Russian governments haven't been shy in seeking an investigation on the recent chemical incident.
Without counter-evidence, the false flag claimed by them isn’t so unbelievable.
Should this predicament remain, Trump has a good enough base to take the initiative on what he campaigned for.
One more shift on his part doesn’t necessarily rock the boat too much more than what has occurred.
Trump won the United States presidency, unlike Hillary Clinton, Lindsey Graham, John McCain and Marco Rubio.
The SCC captures the estimated costs of climate disruption from things like sealevel rise, storms, fires, crop failures and rising death rates.Before Trump’s order, federal agencies were required to consider these costs when designing relevant policies and programs.
While it is difficult to put an exact price tag on future costs from a disrupted climate, a federal court affirmed last August that the current SCC estimate ($36 per ton of CO2 emitted) is based on sound science.
Mr Trump’s executive order would effectively reduce that figure to close to zero.
This will hamstring United States efforts to protect future generations from climate disruption.
Let’s say that in 2018 scientists discover an asteroid as big as the one that killed off the dinosaurs — and it’s headed our way.
NASA says there is a 25% chance the asteroid will collide with the Earth in 30 years’ time.
If the United States waits to be sure that the asteroid will hit the Earth, it would be too late to nudge the asteroid from its path of destruction.
To decide what to do, government economists conduct a conventional cost/benefit analysis.
The cost side of the equation consists of developing and deploying the asteroid-deflecting spacecraft.
Benefits consist of estimated damages to human life, property, etc. that would be avoided if the project moves forward.
Economists count only benefits to the US, heavily discount them because they accrue far in the future, and adjust them for the 25% probability of impact.
Based on this analysis, politicians — who are always reluctant to pay for benefits that accrue after they leave office — decide not to act.
Today, we face a similar choice regarding global climatechange — another problem that requires near-term investments to prevent potentially unthinkable long-term costs.Cost/benefit analysis can be a useful tool, among others, for decision-making on climate policy.
But President Trump’s executive order calls for federal agencies to apply the same constricted approach used by government economists in the asteroid analogy.
Maintaining a robust SCC would help to ensure we do not discount the lives and well-being of future generations, who cannot argue the case themselves.
If they could, they would likely argue that even a low risk of unacceptable costs warrants action.This is the same logic that guides expenditures around other threats to our national security, such as international terrorism.
We do not know its exact trajectory, so we can’t be sure our interventions are needed to prevent disaster.
Future generations, looking back, may forgive us if it turns out we acted unnecessarily.If we instead fail to act when we should have, our children’s children will be less charitable in their assessment.
India has dismissed the renaming and ; Union Minister M Venkaiah Naidu said “every inch” of Arunachal Pradesh belongs to India and China has “no business” to name any Indian place.
The current spate of hard shouting between India and China appears to be a reaction of Dalai Lama’s visit to Arunachal Pradesh; however it must be appreciated and remembered that Sino-Indian tensions are a product of years of uneasy relations and an un-demarcated 4000 km border between both countries and the fact that Indo-China war of 1962 resulted in total humiliation of India, when her forces were smashed and retreated like jackals.
Indian media regularly sounds loud anti-China rhetoric from the Indian establishment, opposition and mainstream media, blaming the Chinese forces of infiltrating the Line of Actual Control in the Ladakh/Aksai Chin region.
Beijing on the other hand has remained cool and calm and has advised the Indian establishment to clear its position on the issue.
The Chinese media has shown patience, however deliberate attempts by India to frequently showcase Dalai Lama in the disputed areas like Chinese South Tibet are now testing the resolve of Chinese leadership Indian military preparations to deal with Chinese military might across the Himalayas is no secret.
As reported by Shashank Joshi in the Interpreter in 2014, Indian response to Chinese military preparations has been the raising of the new 17 Corps, Indian cabinet gave the go-ahead for the raising of the 90,000 strong China-facing Corps in 2014.
Its underlying purpose is to provide conventional deterrence against China, strengthening India’s hand in crises.
The new corps will have two high-altitude divisions (59 Div at Panagarh and 72 Div at Pathankot) with their integral units.
Indian frustration with CPEC is also one major factor affecting Sino-Indian ties and the Indian establishment is mulling to include seats of Pakistani Kashmir into Indian legislature, basically a move to taunt China and make CPEC controversial.
The Chinese media has been sensitive to the issue of CPEC as well as the Sino-Indian border.
Chinese Global Times commented on Dalai Lama’s visit in following words, “The Indian media have continuously created trouble for the Sino-Indian relationship.
The Indian policy toward China can be fickle, while China’s levers for balancing the relationship are much simpler and scarcer.
Unfortunately, India has maintained a very strange relationship with all of its neighbors.
Most of the time, this relationship has had been tailored to address the Indian anxiety derived from the past history of 2,000 years and, more recently, for building a false clout of its greatness.
Indian establishment and media have blamed India’s neighbours for most of the ills related to security and poor governance in the Union.
Some analysts have even blamed India for fomenting tensions in the Chinese state of Sinkiang and Tibet.
One must remember that the Indian establishment played a dirty game during the Beijing Olympics by involving the Tibetan dissidents when the Olympic torch passed through India.
On a historical note, the Indo-China conflict across the Himalayas dates back to British times when they arbitrarily demarcated the international border with China and vast swathes of bordering territory remained in dispute.
As reported by Global Times, the controversy regarding South Tibet started from 1914, when British India and local Tibetan representatives unilaterally signed the illegal “Simla Accord” and created the “McMahon Line,” a line the Chinese government has never accepted.
The illegal deal ceded some 90,000 square kilometers of Chinese territory in South Tibet to British India.
China has been making efforts to solve the territorial disputes with India, but over the past decades, India has not only increased migration to the disputed area and boosted its military construction there, but it also named “Arunachal Pradesh,” China’s South Tibet, as a formal state of India in 1987.
Pundit Nehru’s forward policy in the Himalayas was effectively checked and rolled back by the PLA when the Chinese forces not only destroyed the Indian military capability in Aksai Chin and NEFA (current Arunachal Pradesh), but also set the tone of future political discourse in this dispute.
Global Times states that putting the Dalai Lama into its toolbox against China is another trick played by New Delhi lately.
New Delhi would be too ingenuous to believe that the region belongs to India simply because the Dalai Lama says so.
It is time for India to do some serious thinking over why China announced the standardised names in South Tibet at this time.
If India wants to continue this petty game, it will only end up in paying dearly for it.
Our sincere advise to Indian establishment and head honchos of South block will be to stop interfering with their neighbors and solve their border disputes with China, Pakistan, Sikkim, Nepal, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and even Bhutan through peaceful diplomacy, a geographically Indo centric South Asia does not mean that India should be the source of headache for all of her neighbours.
Authoritarian-leaning leaders are on the rise, and liberal democracy itself seems under siege.
The post-World War Il order is fraying as fighting spills across borders and international institutions — built, at least in theory, to act as brakes on wanton slaughter — fail to provide solutions.
Populist movements on both sides of the Atlantic are not just riding anti-establishment anger, but stoking fears of a religious “other,” this time Muslims.
Now in its seventh year, this war allowed to rage for so long, killing 400,000 Syrians and plunging millions more into misery, has sent shock waves around the world.
Millions have fled to neighboring countries, some pushing on to Europe.
The notion that the postwar world would no longer let leaders indiscriminately kill their own citizens now seems in full retreat.
The Syrian government’s response to rebellion, continuing year after year, threatens to normalize levels of state brutality not seen in decades.
Even a United States missile strike on a Syrian military air base, ordered by President Trump in retaliation for a chemical attack on a rebel-held town, seems little more than a blip in the turmoil, the latest unilateral intervention in the war.
Two weeks later, the Syrian government, backed by Russia, continues its scorched-earth bombings.
There remains no consensus on what should have been or could still be done for Syria, or whether a more, or less, muscular international approach would have brought better results.
And Western leaders surmised that unlike the 1990s civil war in Bosnia, the Syrian conflict could burn in isolation from their countries.
Syrian security forces cracked down, and with Western support stronger in rhetoric than reality, some of Mr Assad’s opponents took up arms.
The government responded with mass detentions, torture, starvation sieges and bombing of rebel-held areas.
Extremist jihadists arose, with the Islamic State eventually declaring a caliphate and fomenting violence in Europe.
Hundreds of thousands joined a refugee trail across the Mediterranean Sea to Europe.
Images of crowds of desperate refugees — and of the extreme violence they had faced at home — were used by politicians to fuel fears of Islam, and of Muslims.
That lifted far-right European parties already riding on resentment of immigrants, from Finland to Hungary.
It heightened anxieties over identity and culture, feeding off economic insecurity and mistrust of governing elites that grew over decades with globalization and financial crises.
Suddenly European countries were erecting fences and internment camps to stop migrants.
While Germany welcomed refugees, other countries resisted sharing the burden.
On Sunday, the anti-immigrant, anti-Muslim candidate Marine Le Pen — who wants Mr Assad to stay in power — could win the first round of French elections.
The Syrian conflict exposed — and was worsened by — failures of the very systems the right rails against.
The European Union and the United Nations were set up in the past century, after devastating wars, to keep peace, prevent persecution, hold leaders accountable and provide aid to the most vulnerable.
The Geneva Conventions on protecting civilians in wartime — never consistently enforced — are now openly flouted.
Mr Saleh, the Syrian dissident, worries that “the Syrianization of the world” could get darker still.
He compares today’s populism and Islamophobia to the mix of fascism and anti-Semitism in World War Il.
In the United States, as in Europe, right-wing extremists are among those embracing authoritarian, indiscriminately violent responses to perceived Islamist threats.
White nationalists like Richard Spencer and David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader, post adoring pictures on social media of Mr Assad, who portrays himself as a bulwark against extremism.
Some in the West are pushing to normalize relations with Mr Assad, hoping that will help the fight against the Islamic State and get refugees to go home.
But without accountability or political reforms, those results are less likely.
In my decade of covering violence against civilians in the Middle East, mass murder by states has often seemed less gripping to Western audiences than far smaller numbers of theatrically staged killings — horrific as they are — by the Islamic State and its Qaeda predecessors.
It is hard to escape the sense that Western fears of Islamist terrorism have grown so intense that many are willing to tolerate any number of deaths of Arab or Muslim civilians, and any abuses of state power, in the name of fighting it.
Then, too, Syria’s war broke out when the global stage was set for division and ineffectiveness.
Russia was eager for a bigger role, the United States was retreating, Europe was consumed with internal problems.
Russia and the United States saw opposite interests in Syria, deadlocking the Security Council.
The crisis exposed the flaws of the United Nations system, which gives a Security Council veto to the World War Il victors and privileges sovereignty with no provision for states that kill their people.
The “responsibility to protect” doctrine, a legal justification for military action to stop states from massacring their citizens, was tried in Kosovo and Libya, with deeply disputed results, and died in Syria.
The “red line” incident in 2013 — the strikes threatened by President Obama but not carried out in response to a Syrian chemical attack that killed more than 1,400 people — added to the sense of impunity.
Mr Assad may not even have fulfilled his pledge to give up all chemical weapons.
The United Nations can do little but document war crimes as they become more routine.
Monzer Khalil, a health official in rebel-held Idlib, said a day after treating victims of the recent chemical attack.
BY S QAMAR A RIZVI CHINESE President Xi has recently visited the United States.
The first summit between the two leaders has been highly significant given the size and influence of the two nations at the global stage, and their growing competition over issues such as North Korean nuclear proliferation, East Asian maritime security disputes, bilateral trade and investment imbalances and the direction of the global economy.
The meeting arranged between the two heads of states does release the signals that a degree of candid pacification of disputes between Washington and Beijing might be dealt with mutual understanding and cooperation.
The Officials signalled that the trading relationship between the two countries and North Korea’s nuclear program were at the top of the agenda during the meetings, which took place at Trump’s Mar-a-Lago estate.
They agreed to increase cooperation and work with the international community to convince the [North Korea] to peacefully resolve the issue and abandon its illicit weapons programs.
As appeared that President Trump pressed for more economic punishment against North Korea for its expanding nuclear weapons program.
Trump showed his strong reservations over China against building artificial islands in the disputed South China Sea and also questioned the ‘One-China’policy relating to Taiwan.
The two countries’ common interests seem to have been expanding rather than shrinking, the joint statement said.
The highly anticipated US-China summit was upstaged by United States missile strikes against a Syrian air base from which Trump said a deadly chemical weapon attack had been launched.
It was the first direct United States assault on the Russian-backed government of Bashar al Assad in six years of civil war.
The swift action in Syria, particularly the timing is tantamount to conveying a message especially to defiant nuclear-armed North Korea and by extension, its ally China as well as other countries like Iran and Russia of Trump’s willingness to use military force if deemed necessary.
China is pragmatically sided with Russia at the United Nations in opposing condemnation of Assad’s government but has not become directly involved in the conflict.
As for the American experts, they also see a positive outcome of the latest Strategic and Economic Dialogue between the two sides.
Experts say China is not likely to shake its non-market economy status under the WTO’s rules.
But the move still flies in the face of campaign rhetoric that suggested United States trade policy would be trending in the opposite direction.
The expert view suggests military options against North Korea are much riskier than those against Syria.
Today, the maritime dispute between the United States and China has become the most driving issue in their complex relationship.
The larger conflict, however, revolves around China’s emergence as a major regional power and America’s insistence on policing the Pacific affiliated area.
Chinese President Xi Jinping has had repeatedly pointed out this system— evolved in the post WWII period— favours America and prevents Beijing from taking its rightful place as the dominant power in Asia.
And at a time when China’s economy is slowing, President Xi seems to be under increased pressure at home to find other ways to demonstrate China’s advances under his leadership.
However, the sinusoid ally growing US-China relationship shows some signs of global cooperation.
But the core future relationship scenario between Washington and Beijing largely depends on the accommodation the two sides offer regarding the handling of the key issues and the very possibility of endorsing the objectives and strategies of the two leading world powers in the region and world at large.
And not surprisingly, the United States Navy is expected to conduct sustained freedom of navigation operations to reassert its power vis-a-vis China’s claims in South China Sea.
Trump is likely to put strategic pressure on regional allies, particularly Japan and Australia, to contribute more to multilateral efforts aimed at countering China’s expanding maritime power.
As for the global community, there is no shrouded truth about China’s policy of peaceful coexistence richly reflected by Beijing’s praiseworthy role of expanding peaceful development.
At the global stage, China’s soft power doctrine is getting an encouraging pace by slowly leaving behind hard-power US’s role in global affairs. — The writer, an independent ‘IR’ researcher-cum-analyst based in Karachi, is a member of European Consortium for Political Research Standing Group on IR, Critical Peace & Conflict Studies.
The unfolding of recent events, including the US strategic bombing to ‘save’ human lives, is a classic Cold War era style of politics and continuation of proxy wars all over again.
We have seen this too many times before, during the Cold War in Afghanistan, Korea, Vietnam and Latin America.
What started as a movement for democracy in Syria back in 2011 became entangled into regional power politics between Saudi Arabia, Turkey and Israel on one end, against Iran, Assad regime and Hezbollah on the other.
Fast forward to 2017, the global superpowers, the US, Europe and Russia, are all densely involved in backing their proxies.
The problem is not defeating ISIS, the global powers are locked down into an impasse over post-ISIS power structure in the region, meanwhile allowing time to ISIS to gain momentum, conduct propaganda, recruit militants and attack Western cities.
The global power ‘politics’ or hypocrisy is such that under the label of ‘fighting’ ISIS, regional powers have been putting their own interests first.
Turkey, for instance, has been more inclined on bombing Kurdish forces instead of targeting ISIS fighters.
Saudis have been aiding ISIS indirectly to thwart off growing Iranian influence in the region.
Americans, on the other hand, are supposedly fighting against ISIS, yet supporting the Saudis at the same time.
The security emergency that the threat of ISIS has provided is helping both regional and global powers to reframe the post-ISIS power structure in their own favour.
The events in Syria reveal a lot about the global power structure and the international order.
First, they demonstrate that despite all the advancement and progress of human society, the global South continues to remain under the hegemony of the North.
Naturally, any movement for self-determination or against the foreign-sponsored rulers in those regions in the 21st century will be a direct threat to the ‘national security’ of such powers.
The war as we see in Syria is, thus, really the war of foreign ‘national interests’ colliding with one another.
Second, the continued crisis in Syria reveals that the priority of global powers isn’t to defeat the ISIS but to ensure that the ‘right’ power setup is arranged during the postISIS regional order.
The innocent taxpayers have little clue that it’s not their ‘security’ that is at risk but the security of ‘national interest’ somewhere in the rural Middle East that is under threat.
Third and very important is the obvious lesson that must be learnt, weakening down of institutions and governance setup through foreign occupation, bombing and destruction allows space to breed terrorist organisations.
Afghanistan, lrag, Libya, Sudan and now Syria all represent how the recklessness of superpowers have destroyed institutional structures, giving space for militant organisations, such as the ISIS to seize control.
As long as the crisis in Syria is not separated from thick Cold War politics, priorities not settled and ‘national interests’ of the foreign powers continue to dominate the strategy and discourse, Syria is going to tread the path of destruction, and on its way may even trigger a wider war that may not just be fought in the Middle East, but also on the streets of developed countries as we saw in Paris.
In fact, for all the confusion of his policies toward China, Europe, and the Middle East, Trump has enunciated a clear three-part position on Russia, which contrasts strongly with that of most of the United States political elite.
The last of these is an essentially realist position, and if coherently implemented could prove a tonic.
For 25 years, Republicans and Democrats have acted in ways that look much the same to Moscow.
Washington has pursued policies that have ignored Russian interests in order to encircle Moscow with military alliances and trade blocs conducive to United States interests.
The wonder is that the United States policy elite doesn’t get this, even as foreign-affairs neophyte Trump apparently does.
MEMORY LOSS Most Americans appreciate the weight of past grievances upon present-day politics, including that of the United States’ own interference in Iran in the 1950s, or in Latin America repeatedly from the 1960s through the 1980s.
Yet there is a blind spot when it comes to United States interference in Russian politics in the 1990s.
Many Americans remember former President Bill Clinton as a great benefactor to Russia as the country attempted to build a market democracy under then-President Boris Yeltsin.
But most Russians see the United States as having abetted a decade of degradation under Yeltsin’s scandalridden bumbling.
Washington, they believe, not only took advantage of Moscow’s weakness for geopolitical gain but also repeatedly interfered in Russia’s domestic politics to back the person—Yeltsin—who best suited United States interests.
Americans’ ignorance of this perception creates a highly distorted picture of Russia’s first postcommunist decade.
Russia’s misery during the 1990s is difficult for outsiders to comprehend.
After the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia’s economy entered a sharp slide that would continue for over eight years.
Compared with the Great Depression, Russia’s collapse of the 1990s was nearly twice as sharp, lasted three times as long, and caused far more severe health and mortality crises.
Faith in free markets, and admiration for the United States, fell sharply in Russia in the 1990s.
The failures of “shock therapy,” or the rapid transition to a market economy, made such alienation inevitable, as the rush toward privatization and slashing of the state led not to self-regulating growth and broad prosperity but to a pillaging of national wealth by rapacious oligarchs, who flourished under Yeltsin.
Worse, American talk of a Marshall Plan for Russia proved empty, and United States aid—particularly in the critical first years of transition—was a paltry $ 7 billion.
Much of that was in the form of credits that came attached with strings requiring the purchase of United States goods or the hiring of United States consultants.
Also hurting America’s image were much-publicized cases of corruption on the part of some Americans, involving insider trading, money laundering, and similar scandals.
In 1993, hyperinflation and poverty led to protests, and the Russian parliament passed legislation attempting to block Yeltsin’s reforms.
Yeltsin responded by deciding to close the legislature and redesign the political system to concentrate power in his hands.
This, however, was blatantly unconstitutional, and many deputies refused to disband.
The Clinton administration regretted the bloodshed but blamed it on the opposition, while ignoring the illegality of Yeltsin's power grab.
And the United States supported Yeltsin again two months later, when a referendum on a “super-presidential” constitution passed in a rigged vote.
The worst incident was the “loans for shares” scandal, a crooked privatization scheme in which Yeltsin sold Russia’s most valuable natural-resource firms to oligarchs by way of fraudulent auctions—a fraud that was matched by that of the 1996 election, when Yeltsin won his second term.
The United States was again tarred by complicity, by winking at such electoral violations as state media working to elect Yeltsin or the gross violations of campaign spending limits, and even by sending United States advisers to help Yeltsin's stumbling campaign.
George Kennan, author of the Cold War containment policy, warned that pushing NATO toward Russia’s borders was “a strategic blunder of potentially epic proportions,” which was likely to provoke an anti-Western backlash.
Other experts, such as intelligence veteran Fritz Ermarth, issued warnings at the time over the United States’ complicity in Russia’s domestic corruption.
ALTERNATIVE REALITY ABOUT RUSSIA Few Russians who endured this corruption and humiliation have much sympathy with United States anger over Russian meddling in the 2016 election.
Yet such perspective among Americans is rare, in part because the Western media often adopted the Clinton administration’s cheery narrative, downplaying negative phenomena as bumps in the road toward a democratic Russia.
But had Putin merely coasted on the policies of Yeltsin, there would have been little tax collected on the oligarchs’ profits to pay for pensions, rebuild infrastructure, and create reserve funds.
And there would have been no agricultural revival, because private land tenure would have remained illegal.
In his first few years in office, Putin passed tax and banking reform, bankruptcy laws, and other pro-market policies that Yeltsin hadn’t managed in a decade.
Thus as oil boomed, Russian agriculture, manufacturing, and services grew even faster.
In fact, the first half of this period coincides almost exactly with Yeltsin’s leadership, when male life expectancy fell by over six years— unprecedented for a modern country in peacetime.
Under Putin, both male and female life expectancy have made rapid gains, and their combined average recently reached 70 years for the first time in Russian history.
VLADIMIR THE TERRIBLE Distaste for many aspects of Putin’s harsh rule is understandable.
But demonization that veers into delusion by denying him credit for major progress (and blaming him for all problems) is foolish.
Foolish because it widens the gulf between United States and Russian perceptions of what is going on in their country, with Russians rating Putin highly because they value the stability and pride he has revived.
Foolish because it encourages the illusion that everything bad in Russia flows from Putin, so that if only Putin were removed then Russians would elect another liberal like Yeltsin.
And foolish simply because that is how American leaders look when they mock Russia’s prospects, as former United States President Barack Obama did when he said, “Russia doesn’t make anything.
In fact, Russia’s population has been growing since 2010, and the country has one of the higher birth rates in Europe.
Russia is the world’s third-largest immigrant destination in the world, behind only the United States and Germany.
And Russian products include the rockets that ferry United States astronauts into space.
Both Obama and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton were given to careless quips about Russia.
Both mocked Putin, and Clinton compared him to Adolf Hitler-—a comparison that would be laughable were they not so offensive to Russians, who lost 26 million countrymen in World War Il.
There is, of course, much to fault in Putin’s Russia, and both Obama and Clinton were subject to nastiness from Moscow.
The urge to answer taunts in kind cannot overpower regard for Russian public opinion, and so confirm the Russian media’s portrayal of America as ignorant and arrogant.
But apparently it didn’t resonate much with ordinary Americans, who elected Trump, and neither does the pettiness and demonization of Putin resonate with ordinary Russians.
These ordinary Russians are the forgotten people—the hard-working teachers, doctors, and mechanics whose savings, careers, even health were destroyed by the catastrophe of the 1990s.
They are the fledgling voters who saw their new democracy bought and sold by Yeltsin and his cronies, and the onetime admirers of the United States who longed for a leader to restore their pride in Russia after a decade of humiliation.
Claims that this was merely a defensive expansion were belied by NATO’s bombing of Serbia, a Russian ally, in 1999.
Bush, the United States further intimidated Russia by abrogating the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, imposing punitive tariffs, launching a reckless invasion of lrag, continuing to expand NATO, and further encircling Russia by cozying up to Georgia and Ukraine.
It is thus unsurprising that in 2008, Russia hit back, answering a Georgian strike in the disputed region of South Ossetia with a crushing counterblow.
For finally pushing back, Putin’s approval rating soared to nearly 85 percent—the highest it would reach until Crimea’s annexation in 2014.
They had seen Bill Clinton ally with a corrupt Yeltsin to make a mockery of their new democracy.
They had fumed as Vice President Dick Cheney faulted Russian democracy while praising that of Kazakhstan.
And they heard their country criticized for interfering in the affairs of weaker neighbors, even as NATO was expanding right up to Russia’s borders, and the United States was launching an invasion of Iraq in the name of democracy promotion that would set the Middle East aflame.
Not surprisingly, the Russian media ever more frequently paired the term “double standard” with America.
Thus it may have been unwise for the Obama administration to pursue democracy promotion as brashly as it did, criticizing Russian elections and encouraging Putin’s opposition.
Democracy promoters may draw a distinction between policies aimed at advancing NATO and those aimed at advancing political liberalization in Russia and other former Soviet states—emphasizing that Obama enacted the latter but not the former.
But Putin’s skepticism was easy to understand given the West's record of undermining Moscow’s allies, as in Serbia, Georgia, and Ukraine, and then seeking to anchor their new regimes in the Western political and military blocs.
As a senator, too, Obama was an early supporter of Ukraine joining NATO, and preparations for Ukraine’s integration with NATO continued throughout his presidency.
Hillary Clinton also advocated a NATO ""open door"" for Ukraine, and then incurred Putin’s wrath by pushing humanitarian intervention (which soon turned into regime change) in Libya.
So her demand for “a full investigation of all reports of fraud and intimidation” in Russia’s 2011 elections was most unwelcome.
Michael McFaul, an expert on democracy promotion and longtime critic of Putin, was a particularly provocative choice for new Obama’s ambassador to Russia in 2012.
Neither should righteous indignation at Putin’s post-election crackdown prevent rethinking of the targets as well as the tools of American public diplomacy.
Some fault the focus on Russia’s liberal opposition, a small number of Moscow-centered activists who best reflect United States values.
But even if they weren't stigmatized by Putin—or tarred by identification with the 1990s—they embody liberalcosmopolitan values alien to most conservative-nationalist Russians.
And while this makes them appealing to the West, it also makes them a poor bet as the focus of democracy-promotion.
Consider the case of Pussy Riot, the feminist-protest rock group, some of whose members were convicted of hooliganism in 2012 for staging a protest in Moscow’s Church of Christ the Savior—profanely mocking not only Putin but also the Russian Orthodox Church and its believers.
Both activists and state officials in the United States praised Pussy Riot and demanded their release.
Yet basic decency—and regard for the values and traditions of others—would suggest that hailing Pussy Riot as champions of free speech was disrespectful of Russia.
It was also insensible if the United States is interested in cultivating sympathy among Russians, some 70 percent of whom identify as Orthodox believers.
Russia is a conservative society that viewed the years of Yeltsin's rule, and its onslaught of pornography and promiscuity, with horror.
Surely the sensibilities of ordinary Russians deserve as much regard as those of a minority of cosmopolitan liberals.
And hectoring by the West will hardly ease traditional Russian homophobia.
Russians see a double standard in United States judgments about their country—a prosecutorial stance that criticizes Russia for behaviors that go unnoticed in other countries.
For example, The Washington Post has closely covered Russia’s anti-LGBT policies but has paid scant attention to the same in countries such as Lithuania, Georgia, and Ukraine, and when it has it has suggested that Russia is to blame for exporting its antigay beliefs.
Since 2014, the Western media has similarly reported on Moscow’s alleged propaganda onslaught, while largely ignoring the brazen purchase of positive publicity by countries such as Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine.
This is not the usual lobbying or public relations but the funding of ostensibly independent research on a country by that country itsel(—paying for upbeat election reports and other assessments by such groups as the Parliamentary Association of the Council of Europe.
Americans rarely hear of such activity, even as alarm over Moscow's subversion nears hysteria.
In fact, unlike the 2014 Maidan occupation in Ukraine, which was actively supported by some United States and EU officials, Russian diplomats carefully kept their distance from the 2011 Occupy Wall Street protests.
DEMOCRACY PROMOTION Another double standard, ignored by the United States media but noted overseas, was Obama’s denunciation in 2014 of the Crimea secession referendum that preceded the peninsula’s annexation by Russia.
Rejecting parallels between Crimea’s secession from Ukraine and Kosovo’s 2008 secession from Serbia—which the West supported but Russia, along with Serbia, rejected as illegitimate—Obama said that Kosovo only seceded “after a referendum was organized ... in careful cooperation with the United Nations and with Kosovo’s neighbors.
There was no referendum at all—just a vote by Kosovo’s Albanian-majority parliament.
It also highlights an illusion about the free, democratic choice facing countries in central and eastern Europe as they are tugged between Washington and Moscow.
In fact, the freedom of their choice belies the powerful political and economic levers employed to pry these countries away from Russia.
As noted above in the case of the Kosovo referendum, Kosovo’s neighbors were pressured by the United States and NATO to recognize the region’s secession from Serbia.
When eastern Europeans grew concerned about the higher than expected costs of joining the EU—or about the backlash that NATO expansion was provoking in Russia—accession was sweetened for political and business elites while the masses were sometimes sidestepped with popular referenda replaced by simple parliamentary votes.
Occasionally Brussels and Washington pulled in opposite directions, as with the International Criminal Court—backed by the EU but opposed by the Administration of George W Bush.
In this, as in other cases, the countries of central Europe exercised their supposedly free choice under enormous political and economic pressure.
The point is simply to grasp the legitimacy in Moscow’s perspective—that expansion of the Western blocs is not an organic, democratic process but, rather, one engineered by the United States and its allies, and motivated as much by power as by principle.
The West must also see the costs to the countries involved in a payoff-driven, elitecentered process that shortchanges the concerns of majorities and is in key ways undemocratic.
Long before the Syrian refugees crisis soured them even further, support for the EU in central Europe had already fallen because the costs were much higher than expected, whereas the benefits seemed mainly to reward a wealthy business elite.
As an example of this dynamic, consider the case of Moldova, where the EU has supported local pro-European parties to help this desperately poor country toward accession.
But just as in the cases of similar elections in Bulgaria and Montenegro, United States media focused on the struggle for influence with Moscow.
This is a country whose secession from Serbia the United States encouraged—for geopolitical goals, to weaken the Serbian leader Milosevic—by backing the epically corrupt boss Milo Djukanovic.
Now, a decade later, Djukanovic’s Democratic-Socialist party exploits similar geopolitical tensions to engineer Montenegro’s accession to NATO—a step of doubtful benefit to either the alliance or Montenegro, provocative to Russia, and one that buttresses a deeply corrupt, patronage-based regime.
Such alienation drives anti-EU sentiment in those countries and empowers demagogues like Hungary’s President Viktor Orban—not some nefarious influence from Vladimir Putin but deep economic inequality and the manifest failings of European integration.
Recall that the crisis erupted in 2013 when President Viktor Yanukovych balked at the EU’s harsh accession terms and opted instead to align with Russia.
No matter how corrupt his rule was, he was elected democratically and had acted constitutionally in making his decision.
But in 2014, as the protests in Ukraine grew, the United States decided to abandon a power-transition deal that it had agreed upon with Russia, and instead supported the protests calling for Yanukovych’s ouster, which essentially turned into a coup.
But this quickly boomeranged, as the Russians concluded that if the West could support an unconstitutional seizure of power in Kiev, then they could hold an unconstitutional referendum in Crimea or support an unconstitutional seizure of power in Donbas.
There was a compromise path, but treating Ukraine as something to be yanked from Russia’s orbit—which raised the specter of NATO again as well as loss of their centuries-old Crimean naval base—made Putin’s choice to hit back an easy one.
Of course this hardly justifies the savagery that Russia has abetted in fighting over the Donbas.
But United States and EU actions helped spark the conflict by treating Ukraine as a prize to be grabbed, rather than as a linguistically and ethnically divided country in which Russia has legitimate interests.
Western policies recklessly ignored these interests and needlessly raised the stakes.
Before the war, Ukraine had an annual income-per-capita of $4,000, on par with Albania and Kosovo, and in corruption surveys it ranked below Russia and on the same level as Nigeria.
Today, after an Association agreement, billions in aid, and three years of EU-mandated reforms, Ukraine is still a corrupt, bankrupt mess—highlighting how unprepared it was for EU accession, how heavily it depended on Russian trade and subsidies that are now lost, and how unwise it was for Western leaders to push an either-or choice on Kiev.
Scandals erupt daily, with an economic drain greater than the conflict in Donbas.
Ukraine’s pro-EU President Petro Poroshenko has a 17 percent approval rating, lower than the pro-Russian Yanukovych’s 28 percent on the eve of his ouster in 2014.
Ironically, this means that the pro-Russian Yanukovych was the most popular Ukrainian president of this century.
And in the latest poll finding, only 41 percent of Ukrainians still support the EU Association Agreement, the rejection of which sparked the Maidan revolution in the first place.
It is trends like these, along with a right-wing turn in Western European states that erodes their patience and generosity with troubled eastern neighbors, that should trouble EU leaders.
Instead, across the region, Europeans are on high alert for Russians spreading anti-Western news, supporting anti-Western politicians, and deploying an army of antiWestern internet trolls.
Or it could be Moldova, with the nationalist majority renewing a push to unite with their Romanian kin, thereby reviving conflict with the Russian minority.
Hungary could leave the EU, delivering a critical blow to European unity.
Yet Ukraine could also be where America and Russia begin repairing ties.
The Russian economy is weak—incomes are down a third since 2013—and relief from Western sanctions is sorely needed.
A deal between Russia and the West would build upon the stalled Minsk Accords.
Moscow would withdraw from the Donbass and restore Ukraine’s eastern border, and Kiev would grant local self-rule to this Russian-speaking region.
Russia would, in turn, get a commitment from NATO not to incorporate Ukraine, and Ukraine would get a treaty guaranteeing its territorial integrity as well as military aid.
Purists will call such a deal a betrayal, as it would be a de facto recognition of the Russian annexation of Crimea.
And by democratic rights, it shouldn’t—the fact is that a large majority of Crimeans want to remain with Russia.
Ukraine, moreover, would benefit from peace and investment, instead of diverting more resources into conflict.
Normal political and trade ties with Russia would also benefit Europe as a whole, helping to slow and maybe to reverse the current slide toward dissolution.
Such diplomacy would test the mettle of the Trump administration’s foreign-affairs neophytes, but the greater unknown is Putin.
A majority of the United States political elite believes that no deals are possible because Putin is irremediably hostile.
Whether they attribute that hostility to ideology or corruption (an illegitimate regime that needs a foreign enemy to distract its people from domestic woes), many American policymakers believe that Putin simply has no interest in peace with the West.
In their view, he is bent on expansion and will gladly endure sanctions as the price of fomenting discord in the West.
Another group of policymakers is also skeptical of Putin, but do not blame him alone for the deterioration of relations.
Many of these analysts opposed NATO expansion from the outset, for the same reasons that Kennan did—because it would become a selffulfilling prophecy.
These experts also criticize the United States’ misadventures in Iraq and Libya, failure to respect Russia’s red lines on expansion into Georgia and Ukraine, and petty demonization of Putin.
Yet they mainly stand with the first group now in believing that containment, not cooperation, is what the West must practice, because Putin’s recent actions threaten the postwar liberal order.
They wonder how some can admit the folly of NATO’s continual expansion and fault the many double standards in United States policy but not agree that America must meet Russia halfway.
Like realists such as Kennan or Hans Morgenthau, who early warned against the folly of Vietnam, they are sometimes derided as weak (or Putin apologists) for cautioning against inflating foreign threats while ignoring the United States’ domestic weaknesses.
And Obama, reset or no, continued efforts to expand the Western economic and military blocs that had started under Clinton in the 1990s.
In other words, for over two decades, whether motivated by residual Cold War mistrust or post-Cold War liberal hegemonism, America has steadily pushed Western military and political-economic power deeper into Russia’s backyard.
If history teaches anything it is that any great power will, when facing the continued advance of a rival, eventually push back.
And much as Obama-Clinton defenders dislike being reminded of it, any chance of America’s post-Cold War power being seen as uniquely benign ended in Serbia, Iraq, and Libya.
It may be that both sides are correct—that two decades of ignoring Russia’s interests have abetted Putin’s embrace of a deep-seated anti-Americanism and that a new détente is impossible.
The only thing not in doubt is that both America and Russia—indeed, Europe and the wider world—badly need that détente.
