Along with the other proceedings in furtherance of the inquiry, this interview is being led by the Intelligence Committee in exercise of its oversight and legislative jurisdiction and in coordination with the Committees on Foreign Affairs and Oversight and Reform.
Before we begin, I would just like to ask that we go around the room and that the staff members all introduce themselves and announce themselves for the record so that the court reporter knows who everybody is.
The stenographer cannot record nonverbal answers, such as shaking your head, so it is important that you answer each question with an audible, verbal answer.
We ask that you give complete replies to questions based on your best recollection.
Now, finally, you are reminded that it is unlawful to deliberately provide false information to Members of Congress or congressional staff.
In the countless number of transcribed interviews I have participated in before we have never seen the limitations placed on staff that you have done to the Oversight Committee and to the Foreign Affairs Committee.
And thank you very much for the opportunity to provide this testimony today.
Allow me to begin by stressing that you and the American people can be reassured and proud that the Department of State and the Department of Defense and the professionals working there, civil and Foreign Service and military, have conducted themselves with the highest degree of 25 13 1 professionalism, integrity, and dedication to the national 2 interest.
I did not edit or clear on these 8 messages but told the reporting officers just to report as 9 they normally would.
I felt that I would not be able to be effective as a 11 special representative going forward, and I thought it was 12 important that I be able to provide testimony as I have just 13 done.
A I believe I spoke with Marik String, who is the acting legal adviser, before I spoke with the Secretary.
A I had several conversations with a number of people -Marik String was not one of them -but with others over the course of May through August.
A I know that those of us who were part of the Presidential delegation all took part.
Q And what did you understand him, the President, to mean when he said he believed that Ukraine had a role in trying to.
Q Why did you single out those two specific allegations -Q -for the statement that President Zelensky was going to release -A Yes.
We're going to do portions of them that we'll mark separately as separate exhibits.
Q So I’d like to first turn to page 36, and we're going to mark, as exhibit 2, 36, 37, 38, and 39.
We want to work 22 with -that’s what the message should have been, and he just 23 didn't do it.
I think 11 correcting that perception that he has is important, because 12 to the extent that the President does hear from him, as he 13 would, you don't want this dissonant information reaching the 14 President.
A I don't know, Q Then what was the knock on Lutsenko, other than you had said earlier that he may not have been a reliable -A Well, the information about Lutsenko -and I'm not vouching for this; I'm telling you what was the rumor mill in Kyiv -that he himself was corrupt, that he was protecting President Poroshenko and friends of President Poroshenko in this, you know, how does prosecution work.
Give us time 81 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 to fix it.
Q And you assured them that -A I told them that is absolutely not the case.
A -there's more of a record on that, 25 Well, this where it was a matter of United States policy to investigate corruption in Ukraine, disappointment with him in not doing that, and then a push to remove him for those reasons.
A Yes. for a period of time, from -I had some initial contact when I heard that he was going to visit Ukraine in mid-May.
We saw in text messages that we discussed earlier, on July 10th, Giuliani apparently had been in touch with Lutsenko.
And so I could see we have a problem of this negative feed, coming possibly from Lutsenko through Rudy Giuliani, reinforcing a negative perception of the President, possibly.
And then another was, what they expressed -I put less credibility into this explanation -but they expressed a fear that the current prosecutor general would destroy any evidence that might exist from previous investigations.
A That's what I -we should check our timeline, but I believe that's when they texted me with this article with, you know, a -I don't remember exactly how it was phrased, but a question mark saying.
And Mr Giuliani suggested he was going to be in Madrid the following week, or in the May 1 to 5 timeframe, and Mr Yermak agreed to meet him there.
A No, to the best of my recollection it was purely just an introductory phone call.
May I 22 add also, I met with President Poroshenko, I don't know, a 23 dozen times, perhaps 10 times, 12 times, and I believe that 24 he did a very good job on introducing reforms in Ukraine but 25 not enough, that he would go so far but -and that was 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 because he had a very difficult, political environment in which to do things.
And I also believe that he took office after the Maidan, and it was an optimistic time in Ukraine about change after Yovanovitch, and very quickly became a wartime President as Russia attacked and took Crimea and took eastern Ukraine.
And he was forged by that, so he was really focused on, you know, fighting back, building the military, trying to stabilize the economy, really playing the role of a wartime President.
Q You know, if the President, President Trump believed that these ledgers were falsified like some allegations -A Uh-huh, there were allegations that they were.
In addition to coming out of nowhere to win the Presidential election, President Zelensky built a political party out of nowhere and won an absolute majority in the Parliament, and congratulating him on that and reestablishing a relationship is the heart of the call.
Q When we were speaking in our morning hour, you mentioned you got a readout from the Ukraine, you got a readout from the State Department, and you didn't hear anything about Joe Biden.
Q But he's mentioned at the top of page four, so I just wanted to make sure that I wasn't underselling that.
Could I also just draw your attention on the 27th of July, is a Saturday.
I don't know the answer to 2 that, but I have never heard that they are.
Ambassador, you said that it was not inappropriate for you to work with Mr Giuliani in the way that you did.
I think to Mr Perry, that it is not unusual for countries to have an investigation cooperation agreement, you know, as far as law enforcement goes, but you said it would be unusual to discuss specific investigations.
A A statement about Ukraine's commitment to fighting corruption and investigating things that happened in the past, and that was where we had this question that we discussed earlier about whether it would specifically mention Burisma and 2016 or not.
And then if you could skip down to August 10th, 2019, the same day, at 5:42m., what Mr Yermak wrote.
That is clearly what he heard from either Rudy or from Gordon, that those were important additions.
This is a version that inserted Burisma and 10 2016 United States elections into the text that Andriy had provided. 11 and it was meant to reflect the conversation with Rudy that 12 we had just talked about, so that he could see what it was 13 that we were talking about.
I think quite appropriately, that if they are responding to an official request, that's one thing.
One of the things that I said in that breakfast that I had with Mr Giuliani, the only time Vice President Biden was ever discussed with me, and he was repeating -he wasn't making an accusation and he wasn't seeking an investigation -but he was repeating all of the things that were in the media that we talked about earlier about, you know, firing the prosecutor general and his son being on the company and all that.
And I said to Rudy in that breakfast the first time we sat down to talk that it is simply not credible to me that Joe Biden would be influenced in his duties as Vice President by money or things for his son or anything like that.
On the other hand, whether Ukrainians may have sought to influence our elections or sought to buy influence, that's entirely plausible.
A In that conversation he had them -you know, he had the whole narrative that was in the media.
I'm separating the two, that there's one thing about the Bidens, there's another thing about Ukrainians trying to do bad things, and it’s appropriate to investigate the second.
And I explained that I thought that there is a negative narrative about Ukraine that is counteracting all the good things that he is doing, and that we are officially communicating back, and that this is being amplified by Rudy Giuliani.
A But anyway, you get the nature -Q Kolomoisky went back to Ukraine after Zelensky was elected.
And I think Danylyuk was becoming increasingly concerned that this is giving the appearance -also there's a photograph of Kolomoisky meeting Zelensky in Zelensky's office that was released by the presidential administration; transparent, but still a bad sign.
I suggested that he called 11 Secretary of Defense Esper, that he's a brand-new defense 12 minister.
Q ""and his stated commitment to reforms, and that there are still concerns at the highest level he needs to address proactively about Kolo"" -A Kolomoisky.
A I told him that he believes a lot of these negative narratives about Ukraine; that there may be people around Zelensky that are, as he said in his tweet -or in his press, enemies of the United States; and that he is continuing to put out a negative narrative, and that that is probably influencing President Trump's thinking.
So this is that discussion that I had on July 3rd with President Zelensky that we talked about earlier.
This text message is my conveying to Vadym Prystaiko, the diplomatic advisor, what I had told to President Zelensky the day before.
Q You don't want to know -well, did you -do you think it would be part of your duties to read a readout of President Zelensky related to a telephone call that he had with Donald Trump -A Yes.
Before I get to the next point, if we could go to 42, which I don't believe is an exhibit.
A But even my own understanding of this is back to the meeting I had in the Oval Office with the others and the President in May.
His views on Ukraine were so sharply negative, and reinforced in a negative understanding, that it makes more sense to me, it's more direct that this is happening independently; that he sees that we are about to launch a notification of millions of dollars to Ukraine.
Q Ambassador Volker, we understand that you are in a difficult position, and I don't think anyone here has any doubt that you were singularly focused on promoting the bilateral relationship between the United States and Ukraine and supporting Ukraine in their efforts to promote democracy and in their best interest, which I take it you understand is also in our best interest.
And part of the reason that we know that and that you know that sitting here is that both Rudy Giuliani and President Trump have admitted as much.
I was a little surprised that this was still 23 going, so I'm sure you're exhausted.
I don't know if that's an ambiguous statement or not, but, you know, reasonable people could equate very bad people -A Right.
To recap, we had the delegation that had been 20 the presidential delegation, Rick Perry, myself.
And then I believe it was about 2 days later it emerged that it was about Ukraine.
I have no reason to think that he would have been involved in that at all.
The password on the government phone always seemed to drop, and I couldn't get into it.
I happen to know better, and I think you probably know better, having served in the State Department for a long time.
Foreign aid is routinely held up while they're waiting for authorizing committees to be notified for weeks, months.
And so I think it's probably inaccurate to give credit to the administration that none of that was going on in the background.
Q So I said we weren't going to go back to texts, but I have some more questions on your texts.
A Yes, his two attempted phone calls, his texts to me, my conversation with Ulrich Brechbuhl, which had gotten to the Secretary.
