This waits to log LCP until the page's lifecycle state changes to hidden.
But Russia’s invasion of Ukraine was a massive escalation of a conflict that has been simmering since Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea.
At issue are two separatist states — Donetsk and Luhansk — that have been in open, if muted, conflict with Kyiv since 2014, as well as larger questions about Russia’s sphere of influence and Ukraine’s place in greater Europe.
A map detailing where Russian troops have struck around Ukraine.NY Post compositeUkraine — the second-largest country by area in Europe after Russia — was briefly independent in the early 20th century, before becoming part of the USSR in 1922.
Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, Ukrainians once again declared their independence in 1991.
As part of negotiations with the newly minted, post-Soviet Russian government, Ukraine returned Soviet-era nuclear weapons to Russia and allowed Russia to keep its Black Sea Fleet stationed in Crimea under a lease agreement.
The ongoing conflict in Ukraine is an escalation of Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea.Jeff J Mitchell/Getty ImagesPeople take shelter in a Kyiv subway station Thursday after Russian President Vladimir Putin authorized a military operation in eastern Ukraine.REUTERS/Viacheslav RatynskyiUkraine in the post-Soviet era then continued to develop its economic and diplomatic relationships with Western Europe.
In 2008, NATO hinted at future membership for Ukraine and its fellow former Soviet republic Georgia.
But the conflict as we know it began in 2013, when then-Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych backed out of an expected economic deal with the European Union, opting instead to strike a deal with Russia.
ZUMAPRESS.com In response, Russian President Vladimir Putin offered support to Russian-speaking separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk, which are part of the Donbas region in eastern Ukraine.
Putin simultaneously declared Crimea, which had been made a part of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic during the Soviet era, to be part of Russia — and invaded the peninsula in late February and March 2014.
Putin’s annexation of the Crimean peninsula, located along the northern coast of the Black Sea, was widely denounced by the international community, which still recognizes the territory as being part of Ukraine.
Then-President Viktor Yanukovych backed out of an expected economic deal with the European Union in 2013, opting instead to strike a deal with Russia.AP Photo/Sergei Karpukhin, Pool, fileThe fighting, which has continued sporadically despite a 2015 cease-fire agreement, has killed an estimated 14,000 people.
Fast-forward to 2022 and Putin formally recognized the two rebel-held enclaves, Donetsk and Luhansk, as independent states this week — and ordered Russian troops to enter the Donbas in a so-called “peacekeeping” capacity.
A car in Mariupol, Ukraine, is seen after shelling.AP Photo/Evgeniy Maloletka“Madness,” the strongman added.
As of Thursday, the Russian invasion of Ukraine had expanded well beyond the contested rebel-held regions, with Russian missiles raining down on at least 16 Ukrainian cities and attack helicopters seen over the capital of Kyiv.
Email check failed, please try again Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.
