But December 1, 2014, just might turn out to be the day the tide finally turned against him.
But this week marked something of an inflection point where whatever short-term asymmetrical advantages Moscow enjoyed are now being eclipsed by its long-term structural weaknesses.
The Russian currency -reeling from the combined effect of sanctions and falling energy prices -experienced its sharpest one-day drop since the August 1998 financial crisis on December 1, falling below the psychologically important level of 50 to the dollar for the first time.
The price of this backbone of the Russian economy has fallen 25 percent since the summer.
On December 1, following OPEC's decision not to cut production, the price of Brent Crude, the world benchmark, dipped below $70 a barrel, a five-year low.
After talks with Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Ankara on December 1, Putin announced that Russia will drop the South Stream natural-gas pipeline -a project the Kremlin once hoped would cement Moscow's dominance over Europe's energy market.
The move followed Brussels insistence that Gazprom abide by the EU's antimonopoly laws -which it had been flouting for years.
And we should expect to see more setbacks for the Kremlin in the coming months.
Because a key source of Russia's strength has long been its ability to reap the benefits of being integrated into the global economy and be treated as a respected member of the international community -while at the same time flouting their rules.
Prior to the Ukraine crisis, Putin's Russia had indeed found something of a sweet spot.
It was a respectable G8 member that was able to spread its influence by corrupting Western elites, stealthily buy up European energy infrastructure through shady shell companies, and flagrantly violate the EU's antimonopoly legislation.
It could even behave like a rogue occasionally, as in the August 2008 invasion of Georgia, and get off with barely a slap on the wrist.
And by manufacturing a pro-Moscow insurgency in Donbas, he effectively invaded Ukraine.
Once this happened -and particularly after pro-Moscow separatists downed Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 -it was no longer possible for Western leaders to continue to pretend that Russia is a respectable member of the international community.
It became untenable to carry on with the charade that Moscow was a partner with which they could work.
Western sanctions and the steady isolation of Russia from the world economy might not have been enough to contain Moscow in the short term.
But, with an assist from falling energy prices, they are more than enough to cripple it in the long run.
The Russian government on December 2 acknowledged what has long been obvious, that the economy would slide into recession in 2015.
Official projections say it will contract by 0. percent while other estimates say it could shrink as much a 2 percent.
Inflation this year is at 9 percent, and is projected to continue rising.
And on top of all that, Russian firms owe $700 billion to foreign banks and, due to sanctions, are largely blocked from any additional Western financing.
As 2013 drew to a close, Putin appeared to be running circles around his Western counterparts.
He managed to thwart United States air strikes against his ally, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.
He strong-armed Armenia -and temporarily, Ukraine -into abandoning plans for a free-trade pact with the European Union in favor of the Moscow-led Eurasian Union.
Typical boom/bust cycles and unpredicable volatility with a one-dimensional economy where a dictator by default rules with an iron fist.
Communism/socialism/fascism always lead to the exact opposite of their stated intent.
I think we have seen how, under Putin's bare-chested inspiration, Russian energy supply has become an enabler for Putin's dream.
I believe Russians are tired of seeing other countries, like the United States jockeying around the world stage and not really being held accountable for significant errors in foreign and economic policy.
Oil will continue to be weaponized until and unless Russia find a new way to be in the world, together.
But then there are the Several Trillions of pre-1948 Dollars Peking's predatory pack owe Americans and America.
The war against Serbia in 1999 was specifically for the purpose of changing a 500+ year old border.
Yanukovych's ouster, btw, was done while Putin was hosting the Olympics.
As Henry Kissinger has pointed out, one does not spend two weeks trying to show the world that he's a good leader and then blow the whole thing by invading another country.
Russian engineers have published an excellent analysis of the MH17 incident that shows quite convincingly that MH17 was shot down by Ukraine fighter jet and not a BUK missile.
Russia, under Putin, as a far better record on peace than the USG, whose foreign policy is controlled by neo 'conservative' butchers.
And he has nobody to blame but himself for his countries economic ruin and his fall from grace.
And I pay taxes for the most expensive and invasive surveillance state in history, but we get Youtube and Twitter as ""proof"" and that within minutes of the event taking place.
This was not a news piece as much as a propaganda piece, bereft of objectivity.
PUtin ain't no good guy, but he is no worse than our leadership...and has WAY fewer civilian kills to his credit.
