Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin ; born 7 October 1952) is a Russian politician and former intelligence officer serving as President of Russia since 2012, previously holding the position from 2000 until 2008.
In between his presidential terms he was also the Prime Minister of Russia under his close associate Dmitry Medvedev.
He was one of a few in the class of approximately 45 pupils who was not yet a member of the Young Pioneer organization.
He wished to emulate the intelligence officers portrayed in Soviet cinema.
In June 1996 Sobchak lost his bid for reelection in Saint Petersburg, so Putin moved to Moscow and was appointed as Deputy Chief of the Presidential Property Management Department headed by Pavel Borodin.
In 2014 Russia made several military incursions into Ukrainian territory.
After the Euromaidan protests and the fall of Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych, Russian soldiers without insignias took control of strategic positions and infrastructure within the Ukrainian territory of Crimea.
Russia then annexed Crimea after a disputed referendum in which Crimeans voted to join the Russian Federation, according to official results.
Subsequently, demonstrations by pro-Russian groups in the Donbass area of Ukraine escalated into an armed conflict between the Ukrainian government and the Russia-backed separatist forces of the self-declared Donetsk and Lugansk People's Republics.
In August Russian military vehicles crossed the border in several locations of Donetsk Oblast.
The incursion by the Russian military was seen as responsible for the defeat of Ukrainian forces in early September.
Many members of the international community assumed that Putin's annexation of Crimea had initiated a completely new kind of Russian foreign policy.
They took the annexation of Crimea to mean that his foreign policy had shifted ""from state-driven foreign policy"" to taking an offensive stance to re-create the Soviet Union.
However, this policy shift can be understood as Putin trying to defend nations in Russia's sphere of influence from encroaching western power.
While the act to annex the Crimea was bold and drastic, his ""new"" foreign policy may have more similarities to his older policies.
As president and prime-minister, Putin has lived in numerous official residences throughout the country.
A massive Italianate-style mansion costing an alleged US$1 billion and dubbed ""Putin's Palace"" is under construction near the Black Sea village of Praskoveevka.
The mansion, built on government land and sporting 3 helipads, and a private road paid for from state funds and guarded by officials wearing uniforms of the official Kremlin guard service, is said to have been built for Putin's private use.
In 2012 Sergei Kolesnikov, a former business associate of Putin's, told the BBC's Newsnight programme that he had been ordered by Deputy Prime Minister Igor Sechin to oversee the building of the palace.
It is intended to be a formal alliance between the ruling party and numerous Russian nongovernmental organizations.
George Hall of the Grand Kremlin Palace in the Moscow Kremlin.In the same place, Putin delivered another speech on December 4, 2014 that also picked out the Crimea as a central theme.
Electoral history of Vladimir Putin , second and fourth President of Russia and 33rd Prime Minister of Russia.
The Munich speech of Vladimir Putin was a speech by Russian leader Vladimir Putin given in Germany on 10 February 2007 at Munich Security Conference.
Putin used the speech to express significant points of the future direction of politics as it would be directed in Russia by himself.
Opposition to President Vladimir Putin in Russia can be divided between the parliamentary opposition parties in the State Duma and the various non-systemic opposition organizations.
While the former are largely viewed as being more or less loyal to the government and Putin, the latter oppose the government and are mostly unrepresented in government bodies.
Their supporters vary in political ideology, ranging from liberals and socialists to nationalists and monarchists as well as apolitical individuals.
They are mainly unified by their opposition to President Putin and corruption in the government.
Leading members of the opposition have become targets of violence, including assassinations and harassment, which they allege can be attributed to the government of Vladimir Putin.
Opposition figures also claim that a number of laws have been passed and other measures taken by President Putin's government to prevent them from having any electoral success.
The public image of Vladimir Putin concerns the image of Vladimir Putin, current President of Russia, among residents of Russia and worldwide.
The slogan originated in Ukraine in 2014 having grown from a football chant first performed by FC Metalist Kharkiv ultras in March 2014 on the onset of the Russian annexation of Crimea and military intervention in Ukraine.
The phrase has become very widespread throughout Ukraine among supporters of the Ukrainian government and more generally those who do not like Vladimir Putin in both Russian-speaking and Ukrainian-speaking areas of Ukraine.
Vladimir Putin has served three terms and is currently in a fourth as President of Russia and was Acting President from 1999 to 2000, succeeding Boris Yeltsin after Yeltsin's resignation.
Putin was also Prime Minister for three months in 1999 and served a full term from 2008 to 2012.
During Putin's presidency, he has been a member of the Unity party and the United Russia party.
He is also affiliated with the People’s Front, a group of supporters that Putin organized in 2011 to help improve the public's perception of United Russia.
Putin has enjoyed very high domestic approval ratings and in 2007 was Time magazine's Person of the Year.
The Russian economy and standard of living grew rapidly during the early period of Putin's regime, fueled largely by a boom in the oil industry.
However, lower oil prices and sanctions for Russia's annexation of Crimea led to recession and stagnation in 2015 that has persisted into the present day.
Political freedoms have been sharply curtailed, leading to widespread condemnation from human rights groups.
The second inauguration of Vladimir Putin as the President of Russia took place on Friday, May 7, 2004.
The third inauguration of Vladimir Putin as the President of Russia took place on Monday, May 7, 2012, in the Grand Kremlin Palace.The ceremony was attended by about three thousand people, including ministers, governors, deputies, senators, foreign ambassadors and religious leaders, as well as Russian scientists and artists.
The 2000 presidential campaign of Vladimir Putin, Prime Minister of Russia, was announced on 13 January 2000, during his during his trip to Saint Petersburg.
The 2004 presidential campaign of Vladimir Putin was the first reelection campaign of Russian president Vladimir Putin.
The 2012 presidential campaign of Vladimir Putin, 2nd and 4th President of Russia, was announced on 24 September 2011, at the United Russia party convention for the legislative election.
The 2018 presidential campaign of Vladimir Putin was announced on 6 December 2017, during Putin's speech at the GAZ automobile plant.
He is the 4th and incumbent President of Russia; previously he was the 33rd Prime Minister of Russia, 2nd President of Russia and 4th Federal Security Service Director.
Prior to this he successfully participated in elections in 2000, 2004 and 2012.
Vladimir Putin had consistently scored higher than 40% in opinion polls since the last presidential election.
According to opinion poll conducted in December 2017 by Gallup International, if Putin was not to be on the ballot 46% wouldn't have known for whom to vote and 19% would have made the ballot paper invalid.
Putin was re-elected as the President of the Russian Federation on 18 March 2018.
Vladimir Putin Peak is a mountain of the Tian Shan mountain range in Kyrgyzstan.
It was named in 2011 after the second president of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin.
