The only relatively simple, legal, and realistic way to end the war in Ukraine quickly, while maintaining self-determination and dignity for all parties Maidan Square in Kyiv in February 2014 in the midst of the U.S.-backed coup.
So-called “Peaceful Ukraine,” was anything but peaceful in that region, because the citizenry did not accept the American appointed presidents following the American orchestrated coup of former President Viktor Yanukovych.
This is unlikely to happen due to censorship in western nations for more pervasive than anything in China, the unlimited greed of western capitalists, and unlimited corruption in Euro-American politics, however this is the only way to secure peace with self-determination and dignity for all in the region and world.
Big bad Russia, motivated by an expansionist policy, or just plain evil, decided to invade, smash and destroy much smaller, virtuous, and peaceful Ukraine.
A closer examination of the facts leading to this current escalated state of violent conflict in Ukraine reveals an altogether different set circumstance involving a degree of United States duplicitous treachery most people with a moral mind would find nearly impossible to believe.
America’s Deadliest Export: Democracy, and Killing Hope: United States Military and CIA Interventions Since World War Il, reveals an altogether different face of American foreign policy based on Machiavellian style friendships wherein “help” is offered only to be betrayed in astonishingly deadly and self-serving ways.
Thiis time the United States moved in as a friend to Ukraine, and then worked very hard to pick a fight between Ukraine and Russia launched by a coup against Ukraine’s former president Viktor Yanukovych.
And thus, to describe the role of the United States in the current escalated military violence in Ukraine as “duplicitous treachery” is not an overstatement at all, but rather about the shortest, simplest and most accurate description possible.
In the case of Ukraine, greatly expanding that biological research had the added perk of really annoying, even terrifying the Russians who really didn’t want large quantities of the world’s deadliest pathogens right across its border in Ukraine.
Interestingly “Undersecretary of State Victoria Nuland said Tuesday (Washington DC March 8, 2022) that there are “biological research facilities” in Ukraine the United States is concerned Russian forces might seize.
The Russian military claims to have identified 30 such facilities, and that does seem like rather a lot one must admit.
With that as an introduction to the horrific bloody conflict in Ukraine, the reader is invited to read the rest of this document and appreciate the cleverness, deadliness and ultimate selfishness of United States foreign policy, without being suckered into the grandiose illusions it presents.
An international moratorium on weapons shipments to Ukraine is the only way to end the war by giving President Zelensky a face-saving excuse to negotiate peace with Russia, save lives on all sides, secure self-determination and national security for all parties on a level playing field, and significantly reduce the probability of thermonuclear war.
But, alas, this will probably never happen because war is so profitable for the United States and western Europe’s ultra-rich corporate capitalists and the politicians they can afford to put in office.
Given that moratorium will not happen until a few million Ukrainians are dead, it might be more expedient if United States and relevant international prosecutors start the process to prosecute the real progenitors of this war, NATO, Former President Obama, President Biden, and other politicians that vote to prolong the war by adding fuel to the fire, specifically encouraging Ukrainians to fight to the bitter end.
The invasion of Iraq was neither in self-defense against armed attack nor sanctioned by UN Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force by member states and thus constituted the crime of war of aggression, according to the International Commission of Jurists in Geneva.
Biden himself had enormous influence as chair and argued strongly in favor of the 2002 resolution granting President Bush the authority to invade Iraq.
Please read the link provided on 2) above in full before continuing to read this document.
Donbass was formed as an industrial region and its cities and factories often flow into one another, even today.
Ukrainian Rebels Claim Huge Victory in Self-Rule Referendum By David Stout May 12, 2014 Separatists in eastern Ukraine say people there have voted overwhelmingly to secede from the state, following a Sunday referendum that Kiev and its Western supporters decried as illegitimate.
Solicitation can be a serious criminal offense Solicitation, in criminal law, the request, encouragement, or direction of one person by another to commit a serious criminal offense.
Media consolidation, monopolies and American public support for United States interference in the domestic affairs in Ukraine via sending military trainers, weapons and money 48.
According to the Hunger Hotspots Report from the World Food Programme and Food and Agriculture Organization , Ethiopia, Nigeria, South Sudan and Yemen remain the countries of highest concern.
USS7. billion e United States: $6.32 billion e Canada: $6. billion e France: $4. billion e Ukraine: $3. billion e Australia: $2. billion e Argentina: $2.12 billion e Germany: $2. billion e Kazakhstan: $1. billion e Poland: $1 billion Ukraine only comes in at 5"" place with less than half of the wheat exports of Russia but its usually listed first for some odd reason these days.
True, there is no doubt a million or more Ukrainians will happily take a United States visa to find what think will be a better life in the US, and are willing, ready and able to tell all manner of wild lies and exaggerations about Russian “atrocities” to obtain that visa and elicit teary-eyed sympathy, but that will not change events leading up to, and consequent from the realities on the ground in Ukraine.
IN SUM Based on substantial well-researched and verified public information it appears President Biden, due to his, his son’s, and his top cabinet members’ corruption, have brought the US and Russia to the brink of WWIII and thermonuclear Armageddon.
Contrary to the almost universally accepted images created by western think tanks (like the Atlantic Council), government officials, and the corporate/government controlled mainstream media in Europe and the US, Russian President Putin had and still has verifiable legal justification for ensuring the security of his nation from American/EU ever-increasing threat of force, with American BSL-3 and BSL-4 laboratories containing deadly pathogens scattered around Ukraine including so very close to his borders representing just one of a long list of verifiable threats to the security of his nation.
No nation in world history ever tried to overthrow that many governments, directly or via proxies.
Perhaps now Ukrainians know what it feels like to be the target of such barbarity — the very same barbarity their weapons and militias were inflicting upon the innocents in Lugansk and Donetsk for eight long horrorfilled years.
The threats of missile bases, tanks, and other weapons was exacerbated a million-fold with the presence of potential dual use biological “research” projects and bioweapons that can pass through any nation’s borders with extreme rapidity.
Actual and imminent threat Actual and imminent threat refers to a physical danger that is real, would occur within an immediate time frame, and could result in death or serious bodily harm.
Economic sanctions, collective punishment, international law and United States habit Sanctions are imposed by the United States and its junior partners against countries that resist their agendas.
Meanwhile, the Ukraine War and body count escalates daily, while the UN is in near full support of this United States initiated war, and the United States continues to agitate and advocates sending more and more weapons of mass destruction to Ukraine.
False flag Operations and American media bias For those not familiar with this terminology, a false flag operation is when one side in a conflict does something horrible, like kills many of its own people, usually civilians, and then blames the opposing side in that conflict.
And, evidence from Ukraine strongly suggests that Kiev’s neo-Nazis have perpetrated at least two false flag operations thus far in an attempt to encourage the United States and/or Europe to enforce a no-fly zone over Ukraine, escalating this conflict into a much later international war.
Highly sophisticated Hollywood style media bias — a mockery of real investigative journalism This armed conflict in Ukraine is being reported in the United States in a manner far different from previous wars, as Julie Hollar of FAIR online news examines.
Even the three Ukrainian individuals identified as having a relevant professional expertise— two doctors and a journalist—spoke only of their personal experience of the war.
Motivation President Biden, his family members, and many of the top Cabinet officers he appointed have records of the appearance of conflicts of interest® between their government positions, lobby groups, think tanks, and war industry related corporations.
Simultaneously, most nations in the UN General Assembly are held as economic hostages to American threats and/or bribes.
That was not only “undiplomatic” but more extreme provocation of President Putin , virtually guaranteeing a Russian military response in the Donbass region, at least.
QORALIIMES Now, innocent Ukrainian military, and civilians, and innocent Russian soldiers are dying on the battlefields in Ukraine to “line the pockets” of the provably corrupt President Biden family and many of his top appointed government officials.
Relevant United States and international laws and policies allegedly violated by above named United States officials Il.
The people of Lugansk and Donetsk had voted in a referendum to secede, as they regarded the newly imposed Ukrainian government as illegitimate and had close economic and cultural ties to Russia. e During this attack, the city of Lugansk was surrounded and under siege for several months.
SUMMARY of Case Referral Out-of-control pervasive and illegal American censorship of the news is as much to blame for the Ukraine War as anything else.
Declaration of Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation Among States adopted b the UN General Assembly in 1970, 3. the Helsinki Final Act adopted by the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe in 1975, . the African Charter of Human and Peoples' Rights of 1981, 5. the CSCE Charter of Paris for a New Europe adopted in 1990, 6. and the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action of 1993.
President Obama’s possible motivations for launching the Ukrainian war against the citizens of Donetsk and Luhansk in 2014 Potential motivations for President Obama to start a war in Ukraine in 2014 are plentiful, but speculative.
Defense related corporate shareholders, boards of directors in United States and Europe Defense and cybersecurity stocks climb amid Russia’s invasion of Ukraine Mon 28 Feb 2022 Raytheon Technologies, the United States defense giant and maker of the Stinger ground-to-air missile that Germany has pledged to supply to Ukrainian forces, has seen its shares price increase more than 10% since the invasion began last Wednesday.
Northrop Grumman, leading manufacturer of attack and surveillance drones, saw its stock rise close to 7% on Monday, after rising 3% since the Ukrainian conflict began.
The Soviet Union is estimated to have suffered the highest number of WWII casualties.
Because President Putin is an oldfashioned romantic who believes in family values and honor, and is willing to risk all to help those in Lugansk and Donetsk suffering under the withering fire of Euro-AmericanKiev imposed genocide for eight long years, he is earning a place in history far more benign than the western political tools of the profit seeking corporations that are willing to ensure every last Ukrainian is killed to extract maximum quarterly dividends.
That is a comic book style rational cooked up legions of American disinformation experts posing as journalists.
At this time there is strong evidence Kiev is only escalating the US-NATO terrorism campaign in Ukraine begun in 2014 in attempt to further provoke and escalate it as much as possible to increase corporate profits in their respective countries.
Russia is not Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, or Yemen, and President Biden’s blitzkrieg media campaign may have met with initial western public support, however, that news media is not being honest at all about the date of the origin of this war, the true motivations for this war, the actual progress of the war (as United States media always makes it appear they are winning until they lose), and the very real potential for thermonuclear war.
Whoever makes that stuff up is creative, and knows how to inflame American audiences, however such totally unsubstituted rubbish only proves they know nothing about Russia military capabilities and protocol in this part of the world.
This test applies similarly to limitations of the right to freedom of expression under other legal instruments, including the African Charter.
The United States has, especially over the period of the decade installed a labyrinthine network of electronic news censorship organizations.
That would transition this Russian attempt to clear Ukraine of weapons of mass destruction and neo-Nazi extremists into a major war, which the United States and EU “defense” industrialists would just love, in spite of the fact it would flatten all infrastructure in Ukraine and kill millions.
Those kinds of considerations however never slowed down the US and European war machines by a second.
Thus, there is evidence President Biden is attempting to trap Europeans into a very deadly quagmire of a major world war, without the loss of a single American life.
Federal borrowing competes for funds in the nation’s capital markets, thereby raising interest rates and crowding out new investment in business equipment and structures.
The status of the dollar in international trade fell below 50% several months ago partly due to sanctions imposed on Iran.
Now, banning Russia from SWIFT is very likely to accelerate decline that into a landslide.
If the answer is yes, then continue to permit President Biden and the EU to continue pouring gasoline on the fire in Ukraine.
If the answer is no, they must back off immediately and start negotiating to back NATO off Russia’s borders entirely, close their BSL laboratories and get psychological help for those neo-Nazis to deprogram from their ultra-violent and extremist philosophies.
Given that in any large complex equation with many unknown variables, the best one can calculate the outcome is 50/50.
And thus, the fate of advanced life on earth beyond bacteria and viruses rests on a 50/50 gamble unless the “Western Alliance” of unrestrained capitalists start to back off now.
It appears highly likely the debt-riddled United States and EU have isolated themselves from world markets even more since February 24, and most of the people in Africa, Latin America and Asia have some new measures of hope that either 1) the United States will grow up and let a multi-polar world evolve naturally, or 2) just trigger Armageddon and get it over with.
It appears there is more at stake here than simply the survival of Ukrainians and Russians.
Ultimately however all are slaves to the dictates of the reptile-like big corporations, and until their power is contained, and campaign finance in the United States and Europe cleaned up, these wars will continue until thermonuclear war and a global biological pathology blitzkrieg occurs— both of which may be upon us at any time.
It has been my long belief that the system of governance is not as important as the quality of people in that government, though | have to admit Socrates was most certainly right about democracies ending with oligarchy, and now demagoguery.
The political system in the United States has reached such saturation level corruption, such expertise in overthrowing governments, and such a casual attitude towards killing innocents, not an honest person in the world is safe now, anywhere.
Avril Haines is at the axis of the revolving door between defense industries and the government's intelligence community and provably gives at minimum the appearance of conflict of interest.
