THE LINGERING SOVIET HEADACHE AND 25+ YEARS OF HYBRID RULE by Andrew B Hanson June 2017 Thesis Co-Advisors: Anne Clunan Jessica Piombo Approved for public release.
ABSTRACT Ukraine remains far from a robust democracy and qualifies as a consolidated hybrid state.
Despite more than 25 years of government development since independence, Ukraine continues to experience difficulty shedding the legacy of the Soviet era in order to advance to a truly democratic state.
This thesis seeks to understand Ukraine’s regime development and why the country experiences difficulty strengthening democratically.
Drawing on theories of democratic consolidation and the rise of hybrid regimes, this thesis explains how and why Ukraine has consolidated into a competitive authoritarian state of government vice a true democracy.
Analyzing six different criteria of regime development, including choices, institutions, elections, accountability, civil society, and economics, this thesis determines that while democracy exists on paper, overall, more than a quarter century of political development in Ukraine failed to bring robust democratic governance to this nation.
As a result, Ukraine remain in a hybrid condition with democratic and autocratic elements living in constant tension with each other.
Thus, the prospects for a strong democracy in Ukraine in the near future remain wishful thinking at best, unless Ukraine can find a way to radically break with its past.
SUBJECT TERMS Ukraine, democracy, governance, hybrid rule, competitive authoritarianism, authoritarianism, consolidation, democratization.
As a result, Ukraine remains in a hybrid condition with democratic and autocratic elements living in constant tension with each other.
To Leah, your steadfast love, support, and understanding kept me centered throughout this journey.
You always provided an honest sounding board and never complained when I had to stay late.
I am truly grateful for the sacrifices you made by taking these orders to Monterey and having our first child.
During the difficult and stressful days, you always brought a smile to my face.
I am truly thankful for receiving these orders, especially for the simple fact that I was able to be around for your birth and first year of life.
Second, I am thankful for the wisdom and mentorship from the faculty and staff at the Naval Postgraduate School.
Sandra Leavitt, thank you for sparking my interest in Ukraine and comparative politics during my first quarter.
Jessica Piombo, for taking me on-board as an advisee and guiding me throughout this process.
The countless hours and emails you dedicated to this project are immensely appreciated, and I cannot describe well-enough how grateful I am for your counsel.
MAJOR RESEARCH QUESTION This thesis studies Ukraine’s regime development and why the country experiences difficulty strengthening democratically.
Drawing on theories of democratic consolidation and the rise of hybrid regimes, this thesis analyzes Ukraine’s political development from 1991 to the present.
During that time period the nation observed two political revolutions, civil discord, foreign intervention, and a loss of territory.
After the Orange Revolution in 2004, Ukraine was trumpeted in the West as a nation on a better path to democratic development.
However, events in the last twelve years demonstrate that problems are still prohibiting progress.
Understanding the root causes of Ukraine’s development will shed light on what type of regime the nation is becoming.
Those questions have implications for policy makers and scholars of democratic consolidation theory.
For policy makers, much time and money is invested by the United States and international organizations for the development of democracies around the world.
The amount of foreign aid the United States has contributed to Ukraine over the years is a noteworthy example of United States priorities.
The video contains Nuland’s entire address to the U.S.-Ukraine Foundation in 2013 and provides sufficient context to know that Nuland’s comments on United States spending in Ukraine are not efforts to “subvert” the Ukrainian government as the title indicates, rather her comments on spending were to promote and build the democracy of Ukraine. 1 development.
More recently, according to foreignassistance.gov, the United States has contributed a range of US$90 million-US$140 mi llion in aid since 2013.
A strong, independent, and democratic Ukraine can act as a counterweight against Russian influence in the region, an example for other nations to follow.
Separately, a strong democratic Ukraine has higher prospects of joining Western organizations such as the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , which in turn could promote greater stability and security for the region.
Present-day Ukraine also provides an important case study for democratic theory as the debate over democratization and consolidation continues among scholars.
Fast forward to 2014 and the world observed another conflict and regime overthrow.
The last decade and a half of development provides yet another opportunity, as it did from 1991-2004, to analyze and evaluate theories of democratic development, with implications for the larger and longer evolution of democratic progress around the globe.
After two revolutions, the country has failed to change the government fundamentals that allow both democratic institutions and authoritarian practices to live in constant tension with each other.
Stemming from a failure to cleanly break with its Communist past, Ukraine continues to be affected by key decisions made over a quarter of a century ago.
Broken into five chapters, this thesis will apply democratic consolidation theory to the case study of Ukraine.
Chapter I covers the literature behind democratic consolidation, as well as a brief history of Ukraine.
Consolidation theory seeks to understand what makes a strong democracy, what happens when democracy fails to consolidate, as well as the rise of authoritarian and hybrid systems of government.
Ultimately, scholars attest to the development and analysis of six different criteria for determining a government’s development toward better democracy.
These same criteria nest hand-in-hand with determinants for failed democracies and the rise of authoritarian / hybrid states.
Following a discussion of the theory, the remainder of Chapter I provides a brief history of Ukraine, covering key events, timelines, and characters that are present throughout the remainder of the thesis.
As such, applying the six developmental criteria across Ukraine’s history will determine if Ukraine has consolidated closer to a democracy after 25 years, and if not, then what have they consolidated into and why.
Chapter II explores the development and evolution of Ukraine’s political institutions.
Key decisions following independence caused lasting implications for the nation’s stagnation towards democracy.
The persistence of communist influence after independence shattered chances at a meaningful transition to democracy.
Rather, the communist presence tainted the new government, stagnated reform, and allowed corruption to take hold.
From the beginning, Ukrainian institutions failed to adhere to democratic norms, and these flawed norms became entrenched.
At the same time, the flaws created incentives to cheat and commit fraud as a means to retain power.
Even elections, a fundamental pillar of democracy, remain defective in Ukraine’s political system, creating uneven barriers for opposition victory.
Ukraine’s institutions and practices remain deeply flawed and fail to serve the public or advancement of the state, which is far from democratic in nature.
Corruption remains rampant in Ukraine, affecting nearly every politician and 3 ordinary citizens.
Failing to pay taxes, bribery, and coercion are a means to get rich among elites, and a means to survive for everyday Ukrainians.
All levels of society are plagued by this deep entrenchment of corruption and failure to uphold the rule of law in the country, making its eradication all the more challenging.
While corruption and accountability problems are widespread, civil society development remains weak and unable to consistently shape the government.
Failing to establish a foothold in Ukrainian politics, early civil society engagement following independence was passive and designed to assist elites rather than citizens.
Today, Ukrainian civil society is making progress, but due to the entrenchment of perceptions and practices of the past, is proving extremely difficult to change.
Ultimately, these two factors do not bode well for Ukraine’s progress at democratic consolidation.
Chapter IV analyzes the economic development of Ukraine over the last quarter of a century.
Economic distortions resulting from a failure to reform immediately following independence allowed old Soviet practices to continue and perpetuated a close relationship between the government and economy.
The intermingling of money and politics continues even after reforms accelerated in the 2000s, giving rise to a wealthy class of Ukrainian oligarchs.
Ultimately, the economy of Ukraine consistently benefits elites and continually fails to serve everyday Ukrainians.
Throughout much of Ukraine’s history, ordinary Ukrainians struggle to make ends meet with low wages and high prices for basic commodities.
Ukraine’s economy is far from a free market model found in most well-developed democracies.
As a result of this economic situation, many Ukrainians are left disenchanted at their government’s ability to improve their lives and lack the resources necessary to remain consistently involved in the political system.
Finally, the conclusion chapter synthesizes the discussions of previous chapters through a lens of hybrid rule.
Making the argument that Ukraine is far from a consolidated democracy, Chapter V explains that Ukraine fits into a consolidated competitive authoritarian state.
While democratic on paper, the Ukrainian government consistently fails to practice democratically, and sufficient distortions exist to keep the 4 system in advantage of elites.
Ukraine’s long history has demonstrated an inability to fundamentally break with the past.
Choosing to allow the continued communist influence, immediately following independence, continues to linger in the government today.
Two revolutions failed to break with the past, and until Ukraine does, the nation will likely remain in a hybrid state for the foreseeable future.
LITERATURE REVIEW Debates over democracy date back to Aristotle in the fourth century BC and continue today.
This literature review will focus on two strands of this broad literature.
The first strand seeks to explain what creates strong democracies, as well as why democracies fail—the field of study known as democratic consolidation.
The second strand follows from the explanation of why democracies fail, and an examination of the rise of “hybrid” regimes.
The reviewed theories will serve as the foundation for the remainder of the research in this thesis.
One particular field of study, known as democratic consolidation, analyzes democracies based on how well they have habituated good democratic norms and procedures as part of everyday governance.
A survey of the main competing and 4 Frank Cunningham, Theories of Democracy , 6-7.
In Search of Consolidation,” in Consolidating the Third Wave Democracies: Themes and Perspectives , eds.
Though scholars and their arguments may share or disagree with certain components, they all agree that the habituation of certain aspects of these factors is key to ensuring democratic consolidation. a.
Elections The majority of scholars agree that the habituation of good electoral practices is essential to democratic development.
That being said, there are some that contend elections are the only condition needing habituation for a democracy to succeed—what is known as electoral democracies, or electoralism.
While elections provide a form of accountability and are widely accepted on the international stage, most scholars agree that analyzing the consolidation of a democracy based solely on elections is insufficient.
Election fraud and other efforts to subvert the process can undermine the true intent of a democracy, counter popular preferences, and render the practice as merely a fagade for authoritarian rule.
As a result of the numerous processes involved in a transition to democracy, as Andreas Schedler explains, even countries with an optimistic “initial opening crowned by free and fair elections” can end up falling into hybrid rule.
A hybrid regime is a type of governance that possesses both democratic and authoritarian institutions, norms, and practices.
Electoral authoritarian regimes lack accountability measures or a robust civil-society to significantly challenge the government.
Modern day Russia observes this hybrid characteristic, as Vladimir Gel’man explains, with Vladimir Putin’s reliance on subversive electoral practices including “shameless fraud,” limiting media access, and mobilizing workers in order to maintain the current regime. b.
Institutions While scholars acknowledge the importance of habituating the people’s vote as the bedrock for democratic consolidation, others have argued that political institutions are an additional key factor in consolidating democracy.
The habituation and strength of institutions act as a counter to human actions and impulses that lead to abuses of power and corruption.
Defective Democracy and Electoral Authoritarianism,” Democratization 16, no. , 407.
Though the impact of institutional choices may be intertwined with other conditions, they nonetheless play a role.
The habituation of political parties also promotes or degrades democratic consolidation.
So one may expect to find in a weakened or failing democracy a party system with too many parties that fail to compromise among a broad range of constituents, and parties and coalitions that dissolve frequently.
Pre-existing institutions can be helpful, though their application may vary and cannot be construed as a one-size-fits-all observation, particularly when it comes to postcommunist states.
Valerie Bunce shares Diamond’s perspective on preexisting institutions that facilitate democratic development in Latin America; however, she argues the post-communist situation is different.
Mark Kesselman and Joel Krieger , 61. 9 authoritarian regimes stem from an incomplete transition to democracy that leaves the nation with weak institutions and areas of contestation.
However, weak does not mean impossible, as the authors argue that four areas of contestation allow the opposition an opportunity to challenge or defeat an autocratic ruler through the electoral process, legislature, judiciary, and media.
Thus, the oppositional elements and authoritarian elements live in tension with each other. c.
Accountability / Rule of Law In addition to the role of institutions, democracy’s survival also depends on the habituation of the rule of law in order to keep officials and citizens accountable for their positions and actions.
Larry Diamond claims for a democracy to not only be considered a democracy, but also to survive, it must be a constitutional democracy centered on a written contract that establishes, limits, and upholds the rules of the political game.
Accountability ensures leadership maintains the highest standards of rule, and remains true to the preferences of the governed; thus, it is logical for the survivability of a democracy to be grounded in a society that adheres to the laws it creates.
Habituating accountability and adherence to the rule of law can prevent or mitigate corruption, human rights abuses, and promote a stronger democracy.
In contrast, a government that is weak in the rule of law leaves citizens in fear of carrying out their rights, as they may face unfair and inconsistent prosecutions that delegitimize and undermine perceptions of a democracy.
Even corruption, left unchecked, undermines the perception of government legitimacy.
Separately, when the rules established are so ambiguous or loaded with ideology, they become difficult to change even with a majority vote, and undermine consolidation efforts . 28 d.
Civil-Society Scholars argue that the role of civil society has a separate impact on the health and survivability of a democracy.
Taking the preferences or grievances of individuals, on issues that citizens may not address on their own, a rich civil society amplifies the preferences to a level representative of mass population.
However, the efforts fizzled out as the opposition candidate failed to win the Russian elections, and the civil society moves lacked the strength needed to continue and challenge President Vladimir Putin’s tightening grip against LGBT rights.
A narrative of far-right, neo-fascist groups seeking to undermine Ukraine’s democracy and promote the murder and persecution of Russian-speaking civilians, according to Samuel Ramani, gained traction in the press and with critics of a nationalist movement.
Ramani concludes that this narrative failed to address the reality on the ground, and the nationalist movement, while loud, lacked sufficient political capital to push an agenda.
Civil society will not maintain a democracy forever, and must work hand-in-hand with other institutions in a symbiotic relationship in order to strengthen a democracy and improve its survivability. e.
Economy and Affluence Other scholars argue that economic development is critical, if not the only factor for democracies’ survival, as an affluent nation lacks conflict over basic goods, services, and norms.
Wealthier citizens are also more able to pay attention and be engaged in politics, which is required for citizens to participate, to hold their leaders accountable, and for democracy to thrive.
Thinking back to Diamond’s argument, a society that worries less about basic survival will likely be more open-minded, flexible, and tolerant of different interests that develop within the democratic process.
Though the authors may be ambitious to peg a dollar amount to survivability, the general idea is present—that increased personal wealth improves democratic durability.
Aside from specific dollar amounts and wealth, other scholars add that a consolidated democracy cannot possess either a command or pure market economy, and that some government regulation is required.
Regulation can safeguard citizens and ensure delivery of goods ; additionally, some regulation allows the government flexibility to step in and attempt to fix the economy in times of crisis.
The economic level and structure can promote democratic endurance as they provide policymakers with tools to mitigate crisis, and ensure delivery of goods and wealth, which in turn enhances the flexibility and tolerance needed to weather crises.
Leaders’ Choices Ruling leaders’ choices have profound effects on promoting or undermining democratic consolidation.
Valerie Bunce outlines the role choice plays in democracy’s development by analyzing Boris Yeltsin’s decisions during the Russian transition to democracy in the 1990s.
As Bunce explains, Russia was not poised for a clean break with its communist past similar to other post-Soviet states.
Communist party members, elites, and the public lacked a consensus on how the new regime and state should develop, particularly when it came to the swiftness of economic reform.
Yeltsin was unable to implement economic reform quickly with the Duma , leading to a partial economic reform that allowed rent seekers to benefit and undermine stronger consolidation.
Flaws in the democracy, based on elite choices, allowed for the later exploitation and undermining of Russia’s democratic consolidation.
Getting it right the first time, and quickly breaking with the communist past can establish a strong foundation and entrench the correct norms and practices of democratic rule within emerging democracies, particularly within post-communist countries.
When Democracies Fail As scholars debate the importance of certain conditions for democratic strength, many generally agree that the transition period from authoritarian to democratic rule is critical for establishing a strong democratic foundation in order to promote future survival of a regime and prevent the return of authoritarian government.
States lacking strong institutional foundations to provide checks-andbalances on power will remain weak, and rulers will exploit that weakness to retain power.
Without the strong habituation of institutional norms and procedures, “widespread corruption, human rights violations, illegality, and abuses of authority by the holders of state power at all levels,” according to Schedler, will continue and challenge the survival of a democracy.
Russia’s early years as a democracy illustrate how weak institutional foundations negatively affect democratic consolidation.
Gel’man describes how the Duma granted Boris Yeltsin sweeping powers for a year to overcome legislative deadlock, and allow for the implementation of economic legislation.
The power included consolidating the President and Prime Minister positions under a single authority , canceling regional elections, and allowing the unchecked issuance of presidential decrees that carried the force of law.
While the powers bestowed on the president had the best of intentions, attempting to spur previously-stagnant economic legislation, the unchecked powers laid the foundation for a battle between Yeltsin and the Duma over who truly held power in Russia.
Following the bloody confrontation, a constitutional referendum and parliamentary elections were held that solidified Yeltsin’s power.
The referendums granted Yeltsin the unchecked ability to dissolve the Duma on a whim if he desired.
The standoff with Parliament and the subsequent referendums highlight how obtaining the correct foundation for democratic rule during the transition phase is critical for 50 O'Donnell, “Illusions About Consolidation,” 35, 37.
Establishing quality institutions right away allows for the habituation of norms and practices suitable to a healthy democracy from the beginning.
Aside from institutional and accountability problems during the transition period, democracies in the post-Soviet sphere may fail to consolidate if democratic reforms are implemented too slowly.
Some contend that successful democratization in postcommunist countries hinges on a quick and clean break with the communist past, unlike in Latin American countries, which used a bridging strategy that slowly integrated people and democracy over a greater amount of time.
Analyzing Poland’s transition from communism, Bunce describes that high popular support and a “sweeping economic... radical reform agenda,” contributed to a quicker than planned transition to democracy.
An abrupt severing of former Soviet ties facilitated a greater habituation of democratic procedures and norms, and improved the survivability of a democratic regime.
The Rise of Hybrid Regimes The democratic consolidation school often discusses transitional dynamics as either leading to consolidated or unconsolidated democracies, in a binary format.
Other scholars, as indicated earlier, analyze how the process of democratic consolidation may actually lead to the consolidation of a nondemocratic regime that has the trappings of democracy, which they label hybrid regimes.
Democracies that fail to follow through on a successful transition or instill flawed norms and practices open the door to regressing back to authoritarian rule or developing a form of hybrid governance that incorporates both democratic and authoritarian practices.
Hybrid regimes have their roots in the transition period to democratic rule, and these regimes use democratic institutions to mask authoritarian rule.
Matthijs Bogaards echoes the same idea that these types of governance are “inherited from an undemocratic 56 Bunce, “Rethinking Recent Democratization,” 174.
Authoritarian leaders manipulate the electoral process by barring opposition candidates or parties; however, elections in competitive authoritarian regimes lack the widespread fraud one sees in electoral authoritarian regimes.
The media can be a platform to challenge rulers, but at the same time be under authoritarian leadership control.
The key with competitive authoritarian regimes is that autocratic elements lack sufficient power to completely remove or degrade democratic elements, so there is a constant tension between the two.
Levitsky and Way indicate that rulers in competitive authoritarian regimes may choose more subtle means to exercise authoritarian tendencies, opting for “bribery co-option” over overt or pervasive violations of democratic norms and practices as in electoral authoritarian regimes.
BRIEF POLITICAL HISTORY AND CAST OF CHARACTERS Ukraine presents a turbulent political history.
The following will present a basic chronological evolution of Ukraine’s political history.
While not all encompassing, this section seeks to present key events and players that will be recurring throughout the thesis.
Leaving the Soviet Union in 1991, Ukraine experienced numerous political shortcomings and upheavals that hindered the nation’s ability to consolidate toward a strong democracy.
Separately, current difficulties are compounded by a recent war in the country’s east with Russian-backed separatists.
Unfolding between 1990 and 1991, the events surrounding independence were fast-paced.
Negotiations between democratic, nationalist, and communist forces seeking 59 Bogaards, “How to Classify Hybrid Regimes?,” 406.
All sides bargained for what future Ukraine should look like, and while they were unable to agree entirely, all sides wanted independence in order to chart their own path free from higher Soviet overreach.
Lastly, elections held that December rewarded Leonid Kravchuk, the former Head of Communist Ideology in Soviet Ukraine, as the nation’s first head of state, beating out the democratic opposition candidate, Vyacheslav Chornovil, 61. to 23. percent, respectively.
Kravchuk set out on an ambitious policy of establishing a national and cultural foundation for Ukraine.
The government maintained a priority on symbols of statehood, including a national anthem and flag.
Also, heated debates over national identity, including language and official history, pitted pro-European forces from Western Ukraine against the heavily Soviet-influenced East.
Privatization was extremely slow and faced stiff resistance from the carryover communists.
Separately, printing money, as Andrew Wilson describes, “hand over fist” to back production and pay state wages sent inflation through the roof and facilitated large amounts of capital flight from the economy.
Kravchuk’s entire presidency was a disaster that left many Ukrainians disenchanted by their new government.
Once the pride of Soviet production and economy, coal miners in the East demanded the government fix their economic situation.
Attempting to pay wage arrears by printing money, the economic situation only worsened.
The strike ended with early elections that forced Kravchuk out of office prior to the formal end of his term.
In June 1994, Ukrainians elected Leonid Kuchma over Kravchuk as their second president with 52 percent of the vote and a clear regional division of pro-Russian support in the East.
Kuchma’s presidency saw economic turnaround and expanding centralized control over the government.
Increasing privatization and introducing an official national currency, Kuchma reduced inflation and began to get a hold of the economy; however, his program gave rise to an elite oligarch class as the privatization of large state companies benefited the few that were loyal to the president.
Primarily revolving around energy trade, heavy industries, and the media, the oligarchs came to dominate the political scene, making millions as the overall economy continued to stagnate and decline.
Entering into the 2000s, Kuchma appointed a savvy economist as Prime Minister, Viktor Yushchenko, who accelerated economic progress.
Yushchenko’s reforms, along with his Deputy Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko, turned the economy around, which began experiencing real growth again in the 2000s.
Such a targeted and successful program made Yushchenko more popular than Kuchma and threatened Kuchma’s power base.
In addition to the economic turnaround, Kuchma expanded his control over the government.
Introducing a new constitution in 1996, Kuchma expanded his authority, 70 Wilson, The Ukrainians Unexpected Nation, 257.
In addition, Kuchma shored up his power of the media through both state-run stations and loyal oligarch elites.
Kuchma notoriously issued out censorship guidelines to the media, known as Temniki, as a means to control the popular narrative.
Also, Kuchma leveraged the tax and traditional police as a mechanism to control vocal opposition.
Shutting down dissenting or opposition newspapers was common through the use of tax police, or the denial of permit renewals.
At the same time, the national appointment of loyal police chiefs and judges ensured an extension of the executive pervaded the courts and law enforcement.
Kuchma built his own version of authoritarianism that was extensively developed by 2004, when his chosen successor faced the possibility of losing to the opposition party.
Exercising all levers of control built since 1994, Kuchma engineered a political campaign that attempted to guarantee his chosen successor, Viktor Yanukovych, victory.
Leveraging the tax police and shutting down opposition newspapers and television stations during the campaign season is one such example.
More importantly, engineering a widespread campaign of egregious voter fraud through ballot tampering.
Power, Politics, and Institutional Design , 86. 21 threatening polling stations, and poisoning his main contender, Kuchma went too far.
Kuchma’s actions sparked massive street protests demanding his resignation and a repeat round of voting, a movement known as the Orange Revolution.
Pressuring the courts to overturn the fraudulent round and force a repeat round of voting, the Orange Revolution was deemed a success.
The poisoned opposition candidate and former Kuchma prime minister, Viktor Yushchenko, emerged victorious as Ukraine’s third president.
Alongside his trusted campaign aide, Yulia Tymoshenko, the two were set to run Ukraine’s next government.
Yushchenko appointed Tymoshenko as his prime minister, but shortly after taking command of the government the two clashed over economic and political reforms.
These clashes resulted in a breakup of their grand coalition, and created inroads for Viktor Yanukovych to gain additional power in Parliament, eventually becoming Prime Minister.
Over the remainder of Yushchenko’s term, there was a back and forth for political power, with the Prime Minister position changing from Tymoshenko, to Yanukovych, then back to Tymoshenko.
Demonstrating popular anger over the previous government, the people elected Viktor Yanukovych, the disgraced 2004 candidate, as the nation’s fourth president.
Yanukovych, almost immediately after taking office, embarked on a campaign to shore up political power.
Establishing a loyal network of elites, Yanukovych allowed businessmen and politicians to continue corrupt practices and gain immense wealth without government opposition, so long as they pledged complete political loyalty to Yanukovych.
This network benefited Yanukovych until 2013, when his house of cards came crashing down.
Democratization, Corruption, and the New Russian Imperialism (Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger, 2015), 423.
Signing the EU agreement would mark a significant commitment to joining Europe, improving Ukraine’s institutions for economic trade, and more importantly represent a significant rebuke to Russia.
For decades Russia sought to expand its influence in Ukraine, establishing deep roots with economic and political integration through the ashes of the Soviet Union.
Signing the EU deal would have sent a stark message that Ukraine no longer required Russia’s support or influence.
Yanukovych’s decision resulted in small scale street demonstrations in Kyiv demanding a change to the status quo.
As a result of the demonstrations, Yanukovych ordered a harsh police response to break up the protestors.
The beating of demonstrators only fanned the anger amongst the populace, sending more people to the streets to demand Yanukovych’s resignation.
The events surrounding 2013 to 2014 came to be called the Euromaidan, or the Revolution of Dignity.
While the demonstrations started out small and were violently suppressed, in February 2014, Yanukovych’s order to use live ammunition against demonstrators turned the nation against the leader.
Yanukovych fled to Russia in February 2014 as a result of the political upheaval, Parliament voted to hold new elections, and the people, yet again, successfully dictated the terms of their political future.
Separately, while the Euromaidan was unfolding, Russia invaded Ukraine.
Taking advantage of the political chaos, the Russian government seized part of Ukraine’s southern territory, known as the Crimean peninsula.
Violating numerous international agreements, Russia’s actions added another layer of complexity and challenges to Ukraine’s domestic and international political situation.
Eventually, Ukraine held presidential and parliamentary elections in May 2014.
Fighting and Russian involvement hampered voting in the war tom regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, as well as Crimea.
In the end, Ukrainians voted Petro Poroshenko in as the country’s fifth, and current, president.
Winning 54. percent of the vote in the first round, for the first time in Ukrainian history, the nation elected a president with enough of a majority to avoid a second round runoff.
Ukraine’s progress toward democracy has been inconsistent with marked instances toward greater authoritarianism.
Given its rich political past, Ukraine presents an interesting case study to apply the principles of democratic consolidation and hybrid government theory to determine what type of government they are, why, and where things went wrong for democracy.
The remainder of this thesis applies the principles of theory to Ukraine, reaching the conclusion that Ukraine is far from a consolidated democracy.
Rather, Ukraine is something different, strongly akin to a hybrid regime coined competitive authoritarian regime.
INTRODUCTION Ukraine’s political institutions remain an area of contestation beyond the norms and behavior of a developed democracy and are indicative of a competitive authoritarian state.
Recalling that scholars attest post-communist countries are most successful at transitioning to democracy when they experience a clean break with the Soviet past, Ukraine did the exact opposite.
Essentially, a clean break implies that old elites must go, and institutions overhaul and cleanse themselves of centralized Soviet influences in order to have the best chance at transitioning to a successful democracy.
Ukraine opted for a bridging strategy that attempted to build a new type of government out of the old Soviet framework.
Failing to break with that past at the critical transition from Soviet to democratic rule allowed hybrid consolidation to take hold.
Democratic institutions were built out of a Soviet framework, with Soviet practices and actors, establishing democratic and autocratic elements that became entrenched and live in tension with each other.
Choosing to carry over political institutions from the Soviet era, and molding them from within, hindered democratic consolidation in Ukraine.
Following a description of Ukraine’s political system, this chapter will cover key choices just prior to and following independence that shaped Ukraine’s early system of governance, including maintaining the Soviet constitution, keeping communist elites in power, and electing a Communist as Ukraine’s first president.
These choices set the stage and early rules of the political game that influenced the transition and consolidation process.
Analyzing the impact of these choices on key governmental aspects, including the Parliament, the president and prime minster relationship as defined by the Ukrainian constitution, the dependent judiciary, and the electoral process will demonstrate these institutions continually fail to meet democratic standards.
Ukraine’s political institutions failed to consolidate toward a strong democracy, and remain stuck in hybrid rule.
BACKGROUND Both democratic and communist forces had interest in an independent Ukraine.
As national and democratic opposition movements gained seats in Ukraine’s Soviet parliament, known as the Verkhovna Rada, in 1990, these movements began to push for independence.
Even with growing opposition to single party rule, the Communists were also interested in achieving national independence.
An independent Ukraine allowed to determine its future, avoiding Mikhail Gorbachev’s forced policies of glasnost and perestroika , in theory could remain highly centralized.
Though events unfolded quickly in 1991, the Rada amended the 1978 Soviet constitution, added president and prime minister positions, declared independence from the Soviet Union, and held their first nationwide elections.
Additionally, Ukraine decided to keep its 1978 Soviet constitution as continued negotiations for a new one failed to come to fruition until 1996, creating lasting implications for the institutional shortcomings facing Ukraine today.
However, these institutions were dominated by single party rule through the Communists and failed to act as true checks and balances to each other.
Rather, these institutions were designed to promote and support the party in power.
In fact, the delineation of powers were often deliberately vague in documents so as to allow flexibility and informal practices beyond the scope of the law.
The influence of this relic carried over into independent Ukraine, with all of its amendments.
Three main decisions established the continuation of communist influence in the new government.
First, bargaining for independence allowed communist elites to remain in place, along with their influence and old ways of business, in the new government.
Second, the outdated Soviet constitution remained the law of the land, and was amended to add two new positions without clearly defined roles.
Third, electing Leonid Kravchuk, a former communist, as the nation’s first president did little to remove old influence from the new system.
These choices directly hindered democratic development and perpetuated Soviet influence in the new independent government.
CHOICES AND THEIR CONSEQUENCES—EXTENDING THE SOVIET SHADOW Deciding to keep communist elites in positions of authority directly hindered democratic consolidation in Ukraine’s early transition.
In order to achieve independence, the then-head of the Rada, Leonid Kravchuk, knew he needed both opposition and communist support to make it happen.
As a result, he had to bargain with both sides to determine the rules of the game going forward, which limited the country’s ability to break with its past.
The result of bargaining included keeping the communist elite on board in the new government.
As part of the deal for independence, old elites remained as long as they supported an independent Ukraine.
The presence of the old elite made chances of substantial reform next to impossible, as the former communists often blocked opportunities at modernization reforms that often ran contradictory to their personal interests.
Former communists in their reincarnated parties continued to block reform, democratic or otherwise, threatening their interests.
Also, deciding to keep the original Soviet constitution after independence contributed to lasting institutional weakness.
Remaining the law of the land from 1978 to 1996, the document called for three branches of government.
The Verkhovna Rada represented the legislative branch, crafting and voting on laws.
In addition, the constitution called for having both a president and prime minister.
In theory, the president remained responsible for foreign policy and key cabinet appointments such as defense, while the prime minister maintained other appointments, remained accountable to the Rada and the president, and remained concerned with day-to-day domestic affairs.
Political Reform, Economic Transformation and Security Policy in Independent Ukraine , 3.
Lastly, the judiciary branch was to be an independent apparatus; however, the persistent communist legacy undermined that mandate.
Overall, given its lack of definition and extended Soviet influence, the constitution promoted dysfunction, confrontation, and power grabbing in the three branches of government, rather than conducting any meaningful reform for the prospect of a better democracy.
The contest over power played out in 1996 when a new constitution was finally adopted.
Ukraine’s second president, Leonid Kuchma, rammed a new constitution through the Rada under an illegal threat of dissolving the Ukrainian Parliament.
The Rada capitulated to Kuchma’s threats and overwhelmingly approved the new constitution, granting the president greater powers and further weakening Parliament.
Enhancing presidential powers, the 1996 constitution granted the president the approval to dissolve Parliament, appoint and dismiss the prime minister, and remove deputies from the protection of immunity laws.
Though the Soviet constitution needed to be replaced, the new one was more undemocratic than the last as it centralized greater powers to the executive.
Additionally, the document’s adoption came about by illegitimate and illegal tactics on part of the executive.
This illustrates the willingness of elites to operate beyond the rules and is representative of building a greater authoritarian regime.
While electing a former communist as Ukraine’s first independent president did not guarantee an authoritarian future, in conjunction with the other factors of Soviet influence, it compounded the odds against a successful transition.
These key decisions had disastrous effects on the transition beyond the first presidency, as the Soviet legacy persisted in early government development.
Literature on post-communist states indicates the criticality for such nations to break away from their Soviet past as well as develop robust institutions right away in order to provide the best odds at achieving democratic success.
Ukraine’s political system continues to be plagued by these decisions that were made in haste from 1990-1991, with Soviet influence affecting the development of all three branches of government.
One need look at the development and impact of Ukraine’s Parliament, the uneasy relationship between president and prime minister, and the executive influenced judiciary branch to understand this conclusion.
PARLIAMENT—THE VERKHOVNA RADA The structural aspects and evolution of Ukraine’s Parliament promote fragmentation, corruption, and legislative stagnation.
Following a brief overview of Ukraine’s Parliament and what theory tells us about quality parliamentary systems, this section will analyze how Ukrainian political parties are created around individual interests, vice a public platform.
Parliamentary laws and procedures promote politicians’ self-interest, and predatory behavior.
These same laws also shield parliamentary members from punishment, changing the incentives in favor of corrupt practices.
Overall, this critical institution fails to serve the public interest and achieve the consistent cooperation found in strong democracies.
Rather, the predatory, competitive, and autocratic practices found in the Verkhovna Rada fall in line with hybrid governance as elites violate the rules of the institution so often and fail to uphold democratic norms.
While the structure has changed over the years, regarding how members of parliament are elected, thresholds of victory, and term limits, currently, the Rada is a mixed system.
Under PR, runner up candidates (second, third, fourth place) can gain seats if they cross a certain threshold of victory.
As scholars attest, the mixed system is polluting Ukraine’s political system as it promotes fraud, and fails to create incentives for coalition building, which leads to gridlock and fragmentation.
Though there are concerns regarding how the Rada elects its members, the problems run deeper and reflect how political parties work in Ukraine, and how Rada laws and procedures are practiced every day.
Democratic consolidation theory tells us that parliamentary makeup is critical to the success or failure of a developing democracy.
Political parties can play the vehicle of popular preference in government.
Too many parties with vastly different visions generally fail to achieve cooperation and compromise.
Too few political parties and popular preferences may not be adequately represented.
Separately, the rules of the game are also critical for the success or failure of parliamentary systems.
Rules such as an imperative mandate force politicians to maintain party platform or risk losing their seat to someone else in the party.
Immunity laws also foster honest debate and freedom of speech within Parliament’s chambers that is conducive for crafting quality legislation.
In contrast, blanket immunity laws can be utilized as a shield for corrupt practices and petty behavior, beyond the scope of legislative duties.
Thus, the make-up, including parties, structure, and laws, are critical to shaping or degrading democratic consolidation.
For Ukraine, Parliament fails to serve the public interests and ideals of democratic governance, and remains in a perpetual state of fragmentation.
Too many political parties in a mixed system makes coalition building difficult.
Separately, political parties in Ukraine are not exactly created to promote public interest.
Rather, they are often created to promote oligarch and individual interests.
By the time Kuchma entered office in 1994, there were nearly 40 registered political parties in Ukraine.
While most of them fail to reach the threshold to gain seats, consistently two or three parties hold a large share of the seats with the remainder sprinkled with numerous other smaller parties.
Generally, even with coalitions, few hold enough seats for even a simple majority.
Though more is discussed later, the idea is that too many political parties degrade the coalition building necessary to pass legislation.
Aside from the number, political parties remain fluid in Ukraine, shifting from new names and new leaders over the years, but predominantly revolving around the super wealthy.
Democratization, Corruption, and the New Russian Imperialism, 175. 32 influence in politics remains today.
One might think that such a diverse stage of political parties promotes competition in a manner conducive to democratic behavior.
However, in Ukraine, the majority of political parties are created to serve an elite few and their elite interests, and fail to uphold democratic values or work for the people.
As Ukraine’s wealthiest oligarch, Akhmetov became a parliamentarian in 2006 and never attended another session following his oath of office.
Perks such as blanket parliamentary immunity offer an attraction to individuals that is difficult to resist.
Akhmetov likely sought political office as a means to enrich and protect himself.
While parties often serve as a vehicle for elite power, protection, and enrichment, each election cycle typically produces at least three parties that are the most influential in the Rada.
For example, shortly after the Orange Revolution, three political parties maintained the most influence, and though there were others, for all intents and purposes Ukraine was a three-party system.
While other smaller parties held seats, all parties failed to achieve enough seats for a simple majority.
Perpetuum Mobile or the Endplay of Post-Soviet Elites?,” in Beyond the Euromaidan: Comparative Perspectives on Advancing Reform in Ukraine, eds.
Keeping coalition cohesion proves difficult, and even simple majorities are hard to come by.
As a result, persistent gridlock can be used as a pretext to justify greater executive powers in the president as a means to overcome legislative stagnation; however, it also reduces the checks against the executive arm, allowing for the growth of authoritarian overreach.
To make matters worse, the laws surrounding how parliamentarians operate promote corruption and selfish practices, as well as shield members of Parliament from prosecution.
For example, an “imperative mandate” requires elected officials to maintain loyalty to the party platform or risk surrendering their seat to someone else in the party.
Lacking an imperative mandate in the first decade allowed the habituation of poor practices by MPs that became entrenched, and persisted after the law came into effect in 2006.
Members could switch party platforms when it suited them, and simply vote as they pleased with little to no repercussions for their actions.
The practice contributed to parties that lacked a cohesive platform or identity.
In contrast, stronger political parties that not only have a clearly defined platform and ideology, but also follow it, could be beneficial for Ukrainian politics as there may be more avenues for cooperation.
Lacking strong parties, along with having the ability to vote for personal incentives, political parties and coalitions fragment easily within Parliament.
The ability to continue promoting selfinterests, through illegal means, if necessary, without repercussion, undermines good governance, and perpetuates an unfair playing field.
Furthermore, members that fail to follow the imperative mandate escape punishment in part due to the immunity given to parliamentarians.
Immunity laws protect politicians from prosecution and reinforce self-interested corrupt behavior found in autocracies.
Neopatrimonialism, Rent-seeking, and Regime Change,” in Beyond the Euromaidan: Comparative Perspectives on Advancing Reform in Ukraine, eds.
Subsequently, officials use this law to shield themselves from prosecution as they continue corrupt practices to gain power and amass large amounts of wealth.
Thus, the immunity law perpetuates the intermixing of money and politics that gave rise to Ukraine’s oligarch elite.
Efforts to reform the law are unlikely, as reform directly threatens elites with punishment or imprisonment.
Draft laws to amend or strip immunity have made little progress through the Rada.
Thus, the issue becomes that of self-preservation for politicians with little to no incentives remaining to change the system.
The long term distortions related to these laws perpetuates the intermixing of money and politics.
Today, the pattern remains much the same as the largest political party in the current Rada, Solidarity, was built and revolves around Ukraine’s current president.
Also known as the “chocolate billionaire” according to Wilson, Petro Poroshenko is himself an oligarch.
As a result of the Rada’s shortcomings, public opinion continues to hold little in regard of the Ukrainian political system.
Also, a Parliament that is disconnected from their constituents is more likely to continue seeking self-interest over public interests.
While decisions early to bridge between communist Ukraine and independent Ukraine promoted fragmentation and anti-democratic norms, the structure and laws surrounding Parliament compound the problem.
In summary, the Verkhovna Rada fails to uphold democratic values, norms, and practices.
Elites have become deeply entrenched in the system, as a result of the failure to establish a robust structure following independence.
Laws shield elites from prosecution and create incentives in favor of cheating and corruption.
In addition, the failure of the Rada to do its job as a legislative body for the public good provides a pretext to authorize greater executive control as a means to accomplish reform.
A weak legislative body allows a strong executive to implement reforms advantageous to themselves, and thus risks promoting authoritarianism, as observed with Kuchma’s 1996 constitution showdown.
These same institutional deficiencies remain today, as oligarchs dominate the political scene and the maneuvering for power between president, prime minister, and Parliament continues.
PRESIDENT AND PRIME MINISTER—A RECIPE FOR CONFRONTATION AND INEFFECTIVENESS Besides parliamentary problems, the president and prime minister relationship resulting from faulty constitutional writing is creating a recipe for confrontation and ineffectiveness that persists today.
Scholars argue that strong presidents only work in post-communist nations that have the overall political will to radically change their government toward democracy, often by radically breaking with the past.
Parliamentary systems are more successful for others given the nature of the relationship and accountability between a prime minister and Parliament.
Maintaining a mixed system was supposed to bring the best of both worlds to Ukraine, but, as this section demonstrates, this relationship results in perpetual confrontation and power shifts unfavorable to democracy.
No prime minister in Ukraine’s history has lasted an entire parliamentary term, with most MPs lasting only a year or two before being dismissed or resigning.
Mykola Azarov lasted the longest, staying on as prime minister from 2010-2014, before being ousted along with Viktor Yanukovych during the Euromaidan.
A prime minister that lasts only a year or two represents a tangible element to the institutional shortcomings and inadequate division of power.
This relationship presents opportunities for expanding presidential power and periods of greater authoritarianism, as observed with the Kuchma and Yanukovych regimes.
Through frequent turnover undermines consistency and stability, Ukraine also experienced an ebb and flow of political power between the president and prime minister over the years.
The confrontational relationship often justifies greater executive control to the presidency.
Under Kuchma and Yanukovych, Ukraine observed a greater centralization of presidential power, resulting in greater authoritarianism.
Nonetheless, the division of power stemming from the constitution remains unclear and a source of repeated tension in Ukrainian politics.
During Kuchma’s tenure as president, he went through seven different prime ministers over 10 years.
Notable prime ministers include Pavlo Lazarenko , who was fired for the slow pace of economic reform and improvement, and for becoming a political liability over allegations of corruption.
In addition, as will be discussed in greater detail in Chapter IV, Kuchma fired Viktor Yushchenko after successful economic reforms and rising popularity threatened the president’s power and chances of reelection.
Under the 1996 constitution, Kuchma maintained the authority to appoint and dismiss the prime minister and cabinet members at will.
Thus, Ukraine observed significantly high prime minister turnover, indicative of the lack of incentives to cooperate, and the encouragement to reject and replace.
Changes to the constitution after the Orange Revolution in 2004 attempted to split powers between the two positions.
The 2004 constitution granted the prime minister greater appointment powers, taking them from the president, while still retaining presidential authority in areas of defense, foreign affairs, and internal security.
In addition, the changes also granted the prime minister greater powers to counter-sign laws from the president.
Though the constitutional changes attempted to overcome the past super-presidentialism that brought about Kuchma’s authoritarian regime, and later Yanukovych’s, they nonetheless remain flawed and fail to promote cohesion.
The ability of the prime minister to counter-sign the president with greater ease perpetuates confrontation between the two positions, rather than promoting conflict resolution.
The effect of the 2004 changes played out in the failures of the president and prime minister following the Orange Revolution.
Known as the Orange Coalition or Orange Government, members part of the revolution banded together in an effort to end the corrupt and paralyzed practices of previous governments.
However, the division of power between president and prime minister ended the Orange Government, too.
In 2008, President Viktor Yushchenko gave Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko the mandate to fight corruption and fix the economy, at the same time, however, opposing her at every o turn.
Ultimately, Yushchenko opposed her at every turn by signing a number of decrees that prohibited all discussed privatization deals.
Aside from challenging Tymoshenko for the very thing asked of her, the president also appointed positions that specifically countered Tymoshenko’s influence.
Other reporting indicates that President Poroshenko solicited Yatsenyuk’s resignation over a loss of confidence in his coalition’s ability to implement reforms.
Disagreements over policy, and sometimes personal feuds, drive premier turnover.
This does little to improve Ukraine’s norms and behavior as a democracy, particularly when so frequent.
When elites disagree, compromise is often cast aside in favor of resignation and replacement.
Hardly a democratic process, high turnover keeps Ukrainian politics in a reoccurring state of crisis and stagnation.
Nonetheless, Yatsenyuk’s resignation exemplifies the problematic dynamic between the two positions.
In addition, prior to Yatsenyuk’s resignation, President Petro Poroshenko fought with the prime minister and Parliament over divisions of power and reform.
Poroshenko and Parliament disagreed over critical appointments, the authority to declare a state of emergency, the decentralization of the state, and various other political and economic reforms shortly after taking office in 2014.
Ultimately, adding both the president and prime minister positions in the constitution failed to achieve the best of both worlds; rather, it added yet another layer of complexity to the governance equation.
Inadequately defining the roles and responsibilities in the constitution perpetuates infighting for power plays between the two positions.
What it Means for the West, 154. 40 different prime ministers in the last 25 years.
The weakness of this relationship undermines public credibility, runs counter to democratic governance, and creates vulnerabilities for expanded executive authority to achieve progress.
The constitutional design contributes to infighting and expanding executive authority, thus creating autocratic tendencies found in hybrid and authoritarian governments.
CENTRALIZED JUDICIARY—SOVIET LEGACY LIVES ON Along with the battle for power between the president and prime minister, Ukraine’s judiciary has a long history of reliance on the executive branch that carries over from the Soviet era.
The inability to reform judicial institutions into an independent law enforcing body influenced accountability and the makeup of Ukrainian politics for o decades.
Theory explains that an independent judiciary provides a crucial check and balance against the other branches of government.
Judges that uphold written laws and are free from influence of other government branches reinforce confidence in the system.
In contrast, a judicial system that subverts laws and rules is vulnerable to corruption, human rights abuses, and degrading legitimacy of the government found in authoritarian regimes.
A judiciary that exists only to support the party in power undermines democratic development and remains vulnerable to authoritarian overreach.
Failing to overhaul the judiciary during the critical transition from authoritarian to democratic rule leaves vulnerabilities for perpetuating old authoritarian ways of business.
Hybrid judicial systems are independent on paper, may possess independent judges, but often allow overreach and influence from the other branches of government.
The executive and legislative arms may dictate rulings through coercive and co-optive mechanisms for favorable rulings to the party in power.
However, at the same time, the possibility remains for opposition contestation through truly independent judges that are willing to go against the grain of authoritarian influence.
The hybrid judiciary stems from the failure to purge the old system during the critical transition towards democracy, this is the case observed in Ukraine.
The problem, as with most of Ukraine’s shortcomings following independence, began when the government failed to implement judicial reform right away.
Rolling over the communist system into an independent nation-state kept the system weak and vulnerable to exploitation.
Soviet-era government controls persisted in the new system, with the executive branch able to directly influence judicial proceedings.
The Ukrainian judiciary existed to support the parties in power, rather than to promote and defend the rule of law.
As a consequence of a centralized judiciary, the executive maintained numerous levers of control including limiting judicial pay and threatening job loss for unfavorable rulings.
A 2003 Bertelsmann Transformation Index report noted that judicial wages remained low.
Failing to appropriately pay judges opens the door to executive manipulation for rulings favorable to the party in power.
As an example, a constitutional court judge discovered accepting a US$12 million bribe for a ruling, was fired by Yushchenko, but later reinstated by then Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych.
Additionally, pressure and coercion is used against judges to instill fear of job loss if they fell out of line.
For the courts in Ukraine, politics is king and to not follow the party line carries high consequences.
As a result of subjugating the judiciary to the executive, it has become a tool for the selective political punishment, the imprisonment of journalists, protestors, or political opponents is often granted on flimsy grounds.
Notably, the jailing of main opposition candidate Yulia Tymoshenko by the Yanukovych regime in 2011 demonstrated how political the judiciary is.
Shortly after being elected, a member of the Rada opened an investigation against Tymoshenko over the abuse of power during 2009 gas contract negotiations with Russia.
The timing and method of the trial inquiry reflects that it was politically motivated.
Separately, the regime appointed a judge that was too young and unqualified to carry the case.
The level of pressure, along with a historical training pipeline that mentored judges on the informal means of the law, made Judge Kireev easily susceptible to executive influence.
Tymoshenko’s trial and subsequent sentencing represent the weakness in Ukraine’s judiciary system that acts as a tool for political oppression, similar to those found in autocratic states.
Aside from political persecutions, the judicial system is also used as a tool to protect those loyal to the party in power.
Current reforms for the system look promising on paper but have yet to achieve results.
Constitutional changes to the judiciary passed in June 2016 call for the creation of a new Supreme Court.
Though this legislation was recently approved, it has yet to move to the implementation phase.
Establishing a truly independent court system would represent a step forward for Ukraine, but if this new court is stacked full of judges who have experience in the old system or are educated in the old way of business, achieving true change will remain a distant reality.
Nonetheless, Ukrainian courts have been and remain highly politicized vehicles for executive and elite interests.
The courts maintain a long history of failing to adequately uphold the rule of law or benefiting the people of Ukraine.
Government influence over the judiciary makes it far from an independent branch.
The failure to prosecute corrupt officials while jailing opposition voices is a trademark relic of the Soviet era and authoritarianism.
Hardly democratic in nature, subverting the rule of law allows authoritarian overreach and illiberal practices to become entrenched as business as usual.
With such a weak judiciary, the enforcement of election laws and punishing fraudulent activity proved elusive.
IMPROVED, YET VULNERABLE Underneath the institutional shortcomings previously discussed, flaws in the electoral system undermine democracy, and create a skewed arena advantageous to few that is found in hybrid regimes.
Ukraine’s electoral system, while improved, continues to create an asymmetric playing field advantageous to oligarchs and elites that are well connected and financed.
Following a brief description of Ukrainian elections and what consolidation theory tells us about elections, this section will first analyze the impact of campaign finance laws on the institution.
Second, changing incentives for election fraud reveals how widespread the practice is, and how election fraud continues to impact Ukrainian elections.
As a result, though improvements to the system make Ukrainian elections more inclusive and intuitive than the past, overall, the system retains sufficient barriers to entry and practices to de-level the playing field in favor of elites found in hybrid regimes.
While not completely designed to legitimize the party in power, a fundamental pillar of Ukrainian democracy, elections, remains flawed and advantageous to elite interests.
A strong democracy hinges on elections that are free, inclusive, and promotes a level playing field for all participants.
Elections provide the mechanism of vertical accountability from the public that is safeguarded by the secrecy of their ballot.
Laws are 45 crafted in a manner that promotes inclusiveness, transparency, ease of voting, and deters fraudulent activity.
Elections fail to meet democratic standards when they incentivize fraud, create barriers to entry or participation, and exist only to defend the party in power.
Under hybrid rule, electoral institutions are created in a manner that remains competitive to a degree, though the environment is deliberately skewed towards elites and the party in power.
Stemming from the failure to design rules and procedures during the transition period that promote free and fair voting, authoritarian practices and rules can persist.
However, that being said, hybrid regimes also allow the chance for opposition victories and reform that can change the rules and practices toward democracy.
This creates a tension between autocratic and democratic elements, stemming from a failure to clearly and quickly define an electoral institution and process that promotes free and fair elections from the beginning.
Currently, Ukraine holds elections for parliamentary and presidential positions.
Public officials are elected to five year terms via a popular vote across Ukraine’s 27 regions.
Ukraine does not elect regional government positions, such as governors, who are appointed by the president.
Suffrage is universal, with citizens over the age of 18 remaining eligible to vote, including women and minorities.
Though Ukrainian elections seem normal on the surface, problems relating to campaign finance and electoral fraud continually undermine the fairness of the institution.
The most problematic area for Ukrainian elections is that of campaign finance, and the mixing of money and politics that deliberately manipulates the playing field in favor of elites.
Ukrainian finance laws evolved from virtually no limits on contributions 1611 OSCE, ODIHR “Ukraine Early Parliamentary Elections 26 October 2014 OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission Final Report,” 6.
The limitations imposed in law are generally so small that they incentivize off the record contributions.
In the 1990s, donation limits were as low as US$200 for private citizens.
Since then, individual donation limits increased to -US$40,000 by 2010, but again with unlimited contributions from political parties.
Unlimited political party donations steer elections in favor of elite interests.
Opposition victories remain possible, but only to those well-connected.
The amount of money spent in Ukrainian elections is massive, and undermines the prospects for nonpartisan candidate participation.
Viktor Yanukovych’s 2004 presidential bid is one such example of the colossal amount of wealth spent.
Even Ukraine’s current president, Petro Poroshenko, had financial backing for his presidential bid in 2014 through oligarch Dmytro Firtash.
In addition, Ukrainian elections have a long history of associated election fraud.
Efforts to combat the most egregious and overt fraud from the Kuchma era drives modem fraud activity to covert tactics that are more difficult to detect.
With a weak judicial and law enforcement body, and immunity laws for members of Parliament, elites could manipulate away and face little risk of political blowback or punishment.
As international attention against fraud in Ukraine grew, and election monitor training improved, the risks for committing such overt fraud exceeded the gains and drove fraud toward less detectable tactics.
The 2004 Orange Revolution demonstrated the consequences and risks associated with traditional fraudulent activity.
As a result, the regime and majority of political parties opted for less overt tactics, utilizing fake parties and candidates to distract voters.
The use of clone candidates and covert tactics is equally damaging as that of overt means.
This covert fraud distracts voters from real candidates, and pulls voters away from main opposition challengers.
Ultimately, the practice worked as at least 63 seats in the Rada were directly affected by this type of fraud.
While all elections have some level of fraudulent activity, the pervasiveness and persistence of fraud in Ukraine is what sets it apart from other nations.
Incentives to cheat remain high in Ukraine, but have shifted as the penalties between overt and covert fraud are different.
The international community has insufficient means to detect and prevent fake candidates and parties from participation.
Thus, the incentives to continue this type of fraud, along with the risk of being caught and facing the public, remain lower than overt fraud.
Thus, the potential for widespread fraudulent manipulation by an overzealous leader, either overtly or covertly, remains possible in Ukraine.
The persistence of fraudulent activity undermines the credibility of the electoral process, and distorts a level playing field for all members.
The continuation of fraud necessitates that other candidates commit fraud in order to remain viable in the race.
Though problems associated with campaign finance and election fraud persist, there are some notable improvements in the system.
Registration for political candidates has become more streamlined and inclusive.
In the past, candidates had to jump through numerous hoops and obtain a large amount of signatures across the country in order to be eligible for public office.
The old process was cumbersome and not all candidates had an equal chance at meeting the requirements, which created unnecessarily high barriers to entry.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe reports indicate that current candidates must provide biographical information, tax and income documents, as well as a small fee; further, it appears that Ukraine no longer requires a set of signatures from across the country.
In addition to the registration process, switching to a positive voting method has improved the voting process and reduced the number of invalid ballots.
Throughout most of the 1990s, Ukrainians followed the cumbersome and confusing negative voting method.
Fortunately, by 1998 Ukraine switched the process to a positive voting method.
Switching to a positive voting method reduced the number of invalid ballots, improved voter confidence, and benefited the electoral system overall.
These procedural improvements, however, fail to counter the influence wealthy elites play at dictating who is most likely to succeed in an election.
Unlimited political party contributions and limited personal contributions have created incentives for off the books payments, and colossal amounts of money to be spent in Ukrainian elections.
This amount of money creates barriers to victory for those who are less connected or out of favor with wealthy oligarchs.
While opposition victories are possible in Ukraine, the likelihood of success without oligarch support is an immensely difficult challenge.
The system remains asymmetrically skewed in favor of elite preferences.
While the population elects a winner, the field of candidates is narrowed by those with ties to oligarchs and elites.
In addition, the persistence of election fraud over the years, from overt to covert tactics, perpetuates a corrupt electoral system.
It is not so much that Ukraine has fraud in its elections, but rather that fraud has become commonplace in some form or another.
Candidates that commit fraud reinforce the need for other candidates to do the same in order to maintain a viable shot at victory.
Parliamentary Elections 29 March 1998,” 12. 50 system is designed to skew the playing field in favor of elite interests with additional hurdles for opposition victory.
CONCLUSION Ukraine’s political institutions continue to benefit elites, promote infighting and fragmentation, encourage authoritarian overreach through a strong executive, and undermine democracy.
Over 25 years, Ukraine observed drastic shifts in political institutions and electoral practices that prevented consistency and undermined good governance.
Choices prior to independence to work within the old Soviet institutions rather than starting with a blank slate allowed Soviet influence to pervade Ukrainian institutions during the critical years of transition.
Consequently, a parliamentary structure was created that promotes fragmentation and deadlock.
Political parties fail to serve public interest and are often a mechanism for self-enrichment.
Lacking an imperative mandate for many years allowed decision making based on self-interest to become entrenched and has proven difficult to change.
Other laws surrounding the Ukrainian Parliament continue protecting elites from prosecution, allowing corrupt practices to flourish.
Scholars recommend switching to a full proportional representation government and eliminating the shield of immunity laws in order to change the incentives for accountability, cooperation, and coalition building within the Verkhovna Rada.
Currently, these changes do not exist and Parliament is failing to act as a strong democratic institution.
Additionally, the relationship and vague definition of powers between president and prime minister outlined in the constitution create a recipe for continued confrontation.
Continuous infighting over the division of powers has plagued every administration.
Democratization, Corruption, and the New Russian Imperialism, 357. 51 problem and resulted in continued legislative stagnation.
The combative relationship established incentives that promotes the resignation and dismissal of prime ministers over cooperation, which is an impediment to democratic development.
Additionally, this relationship opens the door for stronger executive power that leads to greater authoritarianism, as observed with the Kuchma and Yanukovych regimes.
Also, the judiciary system in Ukraine remains a relic from the Soviet era.
Carried over intact from the days of communism, the Ukrainian judicial system for most of its existence has been an extension of the party in power.
Judges are taught the informal relationship between judiciary and executive early in their careers.
The judicial system is used to prosecute opposition elements, such as the jailing of Yulia Tymoshenko, or as a mechanism to protect those loyal to the party in power.
Recent efforts to reform the judiciary appear promising on paper, but as with past efforts, continue to lack the necessary enforcement mechanisms to carry out their duties as a truly independent branch of government.
The hybrid system leaves a constant tension between judges and law enforcement officials that seek to continue favor with the party in power, and those that decide to act independently within democratic norms.
Lastly, Ukraine’s electoral process has improved over the years, with some aspects becoming more inclusive and intuitive.
Registration requirements have become more streamlined and less burdensome, reducing barriers to entry for candidates.
At the same time, changes to voting practices improve voter confidence, and reduce the number of rejected ballots.
While these are notable successes, continued shortcomings with campaign finance laws and election fraud hinder additional progress within this institution.
Massive campaign donations from the well-connected oligarchs, as well as the persistence of electoral fraud, pollute Ukrainian elections in favor of elite preferences.
As it stands, for all Ukraine’s improvements over the years, the electoral institution continues creating an un-level playing field advantageous to elites with extensive resources found in hybrid regimes.
Ultimately, shortcomings in leadership choice prior to and immediately following independence established flawed structures and procedures.
The flaws that promote selfinterest over public interest have become deeply entrenched.
Ukrainian institutions and 52 practices fail to serve everyday Ukrainians.
President and prime minister conflict with each other, and parliamentary structure promotes weakness and fragmentation that prevents successful reform and meaningful legislation.
In addition, the parliamentary makeup creates incentives for fraud and cheating.
The electoral system, though improved, maintains an extensive history of exploitation and remains vulnerable to future manipulation.
Given the historical precedent and current events, the future does not look good for Ukraine’s ability to consolidate into a strong democracy.
The long shadow of a Soviet conscience and shortcomings of the recent past continue to influence current Ukrainian politics toward hybrid governance.
The next chapter illustrates the pervasiveness of corruption in Ukraine, how it effects every level of society, and how it proves extremely difficult to eradicate.
In addition, it illustrate how civil society, for a quarter of a century, failed to build robust bridges between citizens and politicians.
This weakness allowed for the expansion of executive powers under the Kuchma and Yanukovych regimes.
However, as observed with multiple political revolutions, civil society in Ukraine remains able to mobilize during times of crisis in order to prevent full authoritarian consolidation.
While corruption remains pervasive and erodes democracy in favor of hybrid rule, civil society at the same time prevents full blown authoritarian consolidation.
These distortions are likely to continue working in tension with each other, placing boundaries on both democratic and authoritarian consolidation.
INTRODUCTION Corruption remains a deeply entrenched problem in Ukraine that limits democracy, degrades accountability, promotes authoritarianism, and hurts the civilian population.
At the same time, Ukrainian civil society remains too weak to challenge the shortcomings that makes such corruption possible.
The following chapter is broken into two sections, analyzing the evolution of Ukrainian corruption and civil society.
These sections are combined due to the interrelationship of accountability and civil society’s role as a check and balance to government.
First, examining various stories of politicians and civilians will reveal how systemic corruption is to everyday Ukrainian life, and how corrupt practices are used for self-enrichment, protection, and survival.
Second, analyzing factors other than money and bribery will reveal a system with a long history of violence as a legitimate tactic to retain power and wealth.
This level of accountability concerns are problematic and support expanding authoritarianism as it promotes inequality before the law.
Also, promoting narrow, elite interests vice popular interest and preferences, this behavior runs counter to democratic norms.
Though corruption is a cornerstone for Ukraine’s vast governmental problems, civil society remains too weak to challenge it.
An analysis of Ukraine’s civil society development reveals a long history of weak organizations that are great at educating and moving people into the streets.
At the same time, these organizations continually lack the long-term connections between the public and government that can bring about meaningful day-to-day change.
First, following independence, Ukraine observed an explosion of civic groups that failed to create bridges between public and government.
Second, following the Orange Revolution in 2004, organizations failed to capitalize on the climate of change, failing to stake their claims in a new Ukrainian government, and standing by as Yanukovych built his version of authoritarianism in 2010.
Third, attempting to finally build a proper bridge between public and government following the Euromaidan reveals that Ukrainian civic organizations continue to be viewed as the enemy and are repeatedly blocked by elites.
Ultimately, civil society in Ukraine, though 55 making recent inroads, remains an incapable political force for continual, day-to-day negotiation and change.
As a result, a weak civil society opens the door for greater authoritarianism as it is unable to adequately challenge the government.
The institutional and structural aspects that make such corruption possible were discussed in previous chapters, but this section provides examples to illustrate just how entrenched and commonplace corruption remains in Ukraine.
Separately, this section reveals the extent of the politicization of both the police and the court system, turning it into an extension of the executive branch.
Lastly, recent reform efforts that look good on paper maintain flaws that reflect a continued lack of elite will to fundamentally alter the system in favor of democratic rules and norms.
Such deeply entrenched practices continually challenge or refute the prospect of democracy in Ukraine, as they erode public trust and confidence in the system, and actively serve selfinterest vice public interest found in autocratic regimes.
Accountability is an important facet of any government, but it is especially crucial for democracies.
Reform after Revolution,"" in Beyond the Euromaidan: Comparative Perspectives on Advancing Reform in Ukraine, eds.
In contrast, subverting or failing to adhere to written laws undermines the government in the eyes of the people.
The inability to hold leaders accountable to written laws can lead to increasing corruption and human rights abuses.
Upholding written laws ensures citizens feel protected, are able to voice their concerns, and avoid living in fear of unnecessary or extrajudicial attention.
At the same time, upholding laws ensures criminals are punished, regardless of stature (politician or citizen), as everyone is equal before the law.
Failure to follow the law, or bending and subverting it to serve a political purpose, undermines government and leads to inconsistent persecutions.
Adherence to the law, and maintaining a principle of accountability, is critical to democratic consolidation.
Nearly all governments have some level of corruption, even if small in number and severity.
Kudelia describes a difference between petty and grand corruption, in reference to Ukraine’s deeply entrenched corruption problem.
A problem emerges when corrupt practices become a norm, widespread, and continue unabated by the other institutions within the government, such as the courts.
Thus, there is a difference between petty and grand corruption, and Ukraine has a grand corruption problem due to weak institutions and rule of law.
This level of corruption plays out through the abuse of positions for wealth and political power.
Advancing Wealth and Political Power Over Public Good Numerous politicians use their positions to aggrandize wealth and power.
An analysis of various cases reveals the extent of corruption in Ukraine and how nearly every modem president uses their position for self-enrichment vice public good.
Corruption and circumventing the rule of law are staples of Ukrainian politics, from well-connected oligarchs and politicians down to the average citizen.
Grand corruption has proven a systemic problem for Ukrainian politicians.
Rinat Akhmetov, discussed in the previous chapter, is one such example of using their position to acquire wealth, power, and protection, and Pavlo Lazarenko is another example.
Lazarenko received roughly US$72 million in kickbacks from regulators he managed within the company.
Representing the tip of the iceberg, Akhmetov and Lazarenko are not alone, with nearly every modern Ukrainian president tied to corrupt practices, wealth and the oligarchs.
The disposed President Viktor Yanukovych was the most egregious, amassing a monumental US$100 billion from and for his loyal political network through a patron-client scheme.
Activity such as this is problematic as it demonstrates that politicians care more about advancing their own interests, vice those of the state, a quality found in authoritarian regimes.
Aside from financial advancement, politicians use their positions to protect the corrupt system, oust reformers, and maintain power.
In 2000, when Prime Minister Yushchenko implemented economic reforms that directly threatened oligarchs’ power and wealth to improve the overall economy, Kuchma fired Yushchenko in order to protect the system.
Kuchma and Parliament’s actions went beyond public good, but rather they were more about selfinterest and preservation.
The ability to shore-up and protect power contradict the ideals of accountability, as laws, institutions and documents, including the Constitution, are meant to constrain elected official behavior.
Ridding Yushchenko because he was successful at turning the economy around, challenging the oligarchs, and more popular than the president indicate the level of behavior found in un-democratic regimes as a means to preserve elements or all of the system.
Poroshenko, referred to as the “chocolate king,” amassed a net worth of US$350 mi llion by the early 2000s through his businesses, including the Channel 5 television station, a shipyard, and his confectionary business, Roshen.
Additionally, Poroshenko continually protects the interests of the pro-Russian gas lobby and loyal elites.
Poroshenko’s ties with the gas lobby and oligarchs run deep as they helped finance his 2014 presidential campaign.
Aslund explains how many feared in the early 2000s that Poroshenko would use his government position to slowly “claw back” his fortunes after a large chunk was lost during the Kuchma era.
Currently, he does not appear to be charging forward on all of the crucial and tough reforms necessary for the country that fundamentally alter how oligarchs and elites play the game.
As previously mentioned, subverting the laws on the books to protect those loyal runs counter to democracy.
If individuals break the law, they are criminals and should be held accountable.
Failing to uphold these values of governance perpetuates the failure of the system and undermines its legitimacy to the governed.
Again, this type of behavior is pervasively problematic in Ukrainian politics.
Nepotism and cronyism occur in many governments, yet the broad extent that it occurs in Ukraine makes it a problem and in line with hybrid rule.
Hybrid and authoritarian regimes subvert and twist the laws in their favor when the opportunity presents itself, whereas strong democracies more often than not uphold the law.
Setting a precedent, elite corruption trickled down to lower level state employees and citizens, and became a way of life in Ukraine.
According to Sharon Wolchik and Volodymyr Zviglyanich, “to do business , one may have to pay as many as 18(1 Wilson, The Ukrainians Unexpected Nation , 316, 327.
The Origins of Ukraine’s Democratic Breakthrough (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2006), 112.
Corruption as widespread as in Ukraine is problematic for democratic progress.
As accountability problems extend through all ranks of society and become acceptable, this practice and process become normalized.
As corruption becomes normalized, breaking the trend becomes increasingly difficult as the number of those willing to push against the norm shrinks.
As a result, the corrupt system perpetuates and becomes more entrenched.
Ukraine has a long history of elites who rake in millions to billions of dollars, contribute little to the public good, shield themselves with immunity laws, and seek out new methods to consolidate power.
Ukraine’s leaders are far from democratic, with numerous politicians seeking to aggrandize wealth and power when the opportunity presents itself.
While this does not mean Ukrainian lawmakers are destined for authoritarianism or enrichment, the history does indicate a system so incredibly entrenched that the temptation is extremely difficult to resist.
Extensive Politicization of the Law In addition to accruing monetary and political benefits, Ukrainian elites also have a long history of selectively enforcing and subverting the law.
From Kuchma to Poroshenko, leaders have operated beyond the constitution, politicized the police, failed to investigate criminals, and frequently utilized violence to achieve their goals.
Far from within democratic norms and values, these practices erode confidence in the government, and are indicative of practices found in authoritarian regimes.
Also, the selective enforcement of laws undermines perceptions of the government, and creates a greater disconnect between citizens and politicians.
Failing to adhere to the laws then trickles down through all elements of society.
Expecting citizens to follow the law while elites can skate by furthers disenchantment and erodes the system from within.
Elites have long politicized the police and judicial system for personal gain and protection.
In addition, the expanding size of the police force after Communism provided an increasingly larger reach for the executive arm, as the Ukrainian police force quadrupled in the first decade following independence.
A centralized police force that was also ballooning created an extension of the executive arm that was later used to harass opposition groups, journalists, and businesses.
In other words, rather than using the police force as a tool for enforcing the law, the police and justice system existed as a political tool to further the executive agenda.
Thus, the police were not an independent arm of enforcement, but promoted authoritarianism as they existed to protect the party in power over the public.
The problem of politicized police was not left to the first decade, as it persisted through the Euromaidan.
The Berkut internal police force was associated with some of the worst violence during the revolution.
What it Means for the West, 75. 61 end the demonstrations, rather than allow peaceful protests to continue.
Providing monetary compensation from the regime for harsher crackdowns further undermined the independence of the force.
Incentivizing harsh responses toward opposition protests, the police were exercising their authority to defend the regime vice protect civil liberties such as the freedom of assembly.
Following the Euromaidan, in November 2015, the government disbanded and purged the Berkut force, often viewed as Yanukovych’s personal army, and established an entirely new National Police Force.
While welcomed, this is still a national police force that is headed by national-level appointments.
Due to the centralized nature of leadership, there still remains vulnerability to appoint cronies to the position, much like past police forces.
As such, the centralized framework exists for future exploitation by the government that could undermine the independence of this new force.
Additionally, in an effort to expand greater police authorization during the Euromaidan, Parliament approved expanded anti-demonstration laws that contributed to the brutal crackdown in an effort to restrict the freedom of assembly for demonstrators.
Directly degrading civil liberties, the passing of anti-demonstration laws on January 16, 2014 enhanced police capabilities and authority against lawful anti-government demonstrations by banning certain superficial criteria for demonstrations, making it easier for individuals and protestors to be arrested.
This voting method allowed the authorities to cook the results in their favor.
The film Winter on Fire depicts how absurd the laws were, ranging from granting the authorities the right to shut off Internet access to arresting individuals simply for wearing a helmet or mask in a crowd.
While these laws were eventually overturned after Yanukovych fled the country, they represent a willingness of officials to directly suppress civil liberties such as the freedom of assembly and speech, which are qualities found in authoritarian regimes.
At the same time, keeping the courts weak and in the government’s corner allowed the Rada and president to ram these laws through the system with no review process or input from civic groups.
There was no check or balance to the process, and no review by an independent court or human rights organization prior to processing the law.
This indicates another authoritarian practice existing in tension with other democratic elements of Ukrainian government.
In addition, a long history of centralizing and expanding police capability presents a threat to democratic development as law enforcement is organized to support the party in power vice protect and serve the public.
Furthermore, as the subversion of the law in Ukraine advances elite interests, it also provides a shield to protect others loyal to the system.
Centralized courts and police forces are authoritarian in nature as they extend the executive arm, vice serve as an independent institution found in democracies.
No Jail for High-Level Criminals While the courts and police are used to silence opposition, they fail to actually hold criminals accountable.
Failing to prosecute high level criminals is hardly anything new to Ukrainian politics.
Following the Orange Revolution in 2004, President Yushchenko bargained with the old regime, giving up his moral high ground, granting Kuchma and his cronies’ immunity, and dropping key investigations involving the previous regime.
Yushchenko missed a prime opportunity to change business as usual and establish a precedent for charging corrupt and ruthless officials.
The problem continues as four corruption cases in 2013 were for relatively low level officials; two attorneys representing the state in bankruptcy cases, and two other village council members.
The Euromaidan also failed to bring change, as Poroshenko’s current government fails to convict officials associated with the violent crackdown in the Euromaidan.
Failing to hold these individuals who created mass casualties of fellow citizens accountable allows popular anger to fester and reinforces the failure of the government to adhere to popular preferences.
In cases where investigations begin, the government often suspends them before a conviction is reached.
The cases against law enforcement officials and leadership responsible for the Euromaidan violence, according to Amnesty International, are “marred by bureaucratic hurdles,” in addition to deliberate efforts by the Prosecutor General to reduce his staff and the powers of the departments responsible for the Euromaidan investigation.
With personal attempts to sabotage the investigation progress, the Prosecutor General’s office and actions run counter to upholding the rule of law in the country and remain an effort to protect those loyal to the party in power.
One example of this protection effort includes the handling of former Berkut riot police investigations.
After disbanding the force in 2014, other efforts to hold them accountable have proven futile.
Roughly 20 Berkut officers were tipped off about future arrests, causing them to flee and 18 reaching Russia and Crimea.
The courts remain highly politicized in Ukraine, a quality of authoritarian regimes.
Cooperate and the system will find a way to protect or limit the damage.
Hardly democratic in nature, Ukraine’s justice system is flooded with examples of failing to uphold the law equally to all.
A system that is unequal before the law, allowing loyal political criminals to skate by and have protection, while citizens and opposition groups receive harsh sentences, is far from independent and democratic.
Degrading freedom for some, while protecting those loyal to the system, is a staple of authoritarian regimes.
A Centerpiece for Handling Vocal Opposition Maintaining the judiciary and police in the government’s corner makes using violence to suppress opponents and civil liberties more likely.
A regime that must coerce its population toward its policies and narratives, or remain obedient through the use of violence, is not democratic.
The murder of prominent investigative journalist and founder of new site Ukrainska Pravda Georgy Gongadze in 2000 represents the height of a brutal campaign to suppress negative government portrayal in the news.
Gongadze, who was investigating and publishing stories on government corruption, disappeared on September 16, 2000 only to be found a couple months later, decapitated and buried in a shallow grave.
In Orange Revolution , Gongadze’s wife, Myroslava Gongadze, explains how Georgy was investigating the regime and asking questions about corruption on live television.
Myroslava adds that the regime threatened Georgy, reminding him that he was “playing a deadly game” in relation to his reporting.
Even though the scandal rocked the public, and contributed to the downfall of the Kuchma regime, no one was charged and the investigation stalled out.
After the Orange Revolution, as mentioned earlier, part of the deal between the new and old regimes put a stop to the investigation into Gongadze’s murder.
The important point of the Gongadze affair is that the regime deliberately tried to silence free speech and an unfavorable narrative.
Violence extends beyond journalists as well, impacting a host of professions and activities that challenge or question the government.
A government that believes it can unfairly harass and assault the public is far from democratic.
Hybrid and authoritarian regimes extend their police forces as mechanisms to maintain and enforce their agenda, vice what is written in law.
The decision to use live ammunition was critical to the downfall of Yanukovych’s regime, stoking public anger and reinforcing opposition resolve to oust him.
While Parliament stopped the violence, it remains that Parliament along with the administration also voted to turn up the violence.
It was only when the violence got out of hand that Parliament opted to stop it.
This observation reinforces perceptions that violence has been deemed legitimate by the government as a mechanism to control the populace.
The institutional shortcomings discussed in the previous chapter allow this type of behavior, and these same structural problems remain in the system today.
Condoning violence remains undemocratic as politicians become eager to use the tactic over compromise and negotiations.
Compromising and negotiating with the opposition threatens the current power structure.
Thus, to preserve the power structure, rulers in authoritarian regimes are more likely to use violence as a tactic of choice in order to control the population.
Yuriy Grabovsky, a lawyer, went missing and was found murdered in 2016.
In July 2016, a car bomb exploded in Kyiv killing outspoken Ukrainian journalist Pavel Sheremet.
Poroshenko called for an immediate investigation into the bombing, but has yet to identify any perpetrators.
Numerous journalists that remain critical of the government or publish reports positively on the separatists in the east face increasing threats of violence and harassment.
Suppressing vocal opposition via violent methods remains an acceptable tool for the government.
The use of violence, particularly against journalists and lawyers, undermines the protection of civil liberties including free speech and the rule of law.
More importantly, these types of harsh responses undermine public confidence in the government, democratic or not.
As the next section will illustrate, Ukrainian civil society remains too weak to act as a consistent force for government development beyond complete regime overthrow.
As a result, the room for expanding authoritarianism exists, but at the same time, civil society places a limit on full authoritarian consolidation.
THE NEED FOR MORE BRIDGES With two revolutions that relied on mass public mobilization under the country’s belt, one may think civil society has become robust and entrenched in Ukrainian politics.
Several scholars reflected on Ukrainian civil society’s inability to establish long term government relationships.
A civil society that remains unable to build bridges with the government will continue to fail at changing government policy, or addressing public grievances before reaching a crisis level.
Ukrainian civil society appears to be both supporting and degrading democratization at the same time.
Negative aspects of civil society, such as armed thug groups and militias, directly challenge the stability of democratic consolidation.
At the same time, two revolutions prove Ukrainians are willing to place certain limits on the system, preventing full authoritarian consolidation.
Ultimately, Ukrainian civil society continually struggles to influence day-to-day governance in Ukrainian politics, living in tension with autocratic elements.
For a democracy, a robust and vibrant civil society can act as a critical counterweight to government overreach.
Civil organizations provide an infrastructure to take popular grievances and coordinate solutions within the government.
Promoting participation with the government, these organizations allow citizens who may otherwise remain silent the opportunity and platform to speak up.
Civil organizations provide a bridge, an official channel, between citizens and politicians to channel their concerns.
They also provide an alternative avenue of approach for negotiations when politicians fail to listen or adhere to their constituents.
In contrast, civil society in authoritarian regimes is viewed as the enemy that intends to alter the current power structure.
Efforts to silence, restrict, and co-opt civic groups are more common in authoritarian regimes.
When successful, civil society can prevent reversals toward authoritarianism, and push for democratic progress.
Civil society development is critical for democratic consolidation and the prevention of authoritarianism.
Analyzing the history of Ukrainian civil society will reveal numerous missed opportunities to develop closer ties between the public and politicians.
The Comparative Politics of Reform and Lessons for Ukraine,” in Beyond the Euromaidan: Comparative Perspectives on Advancing Reform in Ukraine, 272.
What it Means for the West, ix. 69 carried over from the Soviet era became part of the corruption apparatus rather than a force for worker rights.
Most political organizations opted to educate voters and monitor elections, a noteworthy contribution, but failed to maintain a lasting relationship beyond election season.
Separately, the Internet and personal ties have proven a more powerful motivator to get people into the streets for protest, vice civic organizations.
Examining the Euromaidan movement will illustrate a rise in negative organizations that ran in direct contrast to democratic behavior, advancing campaigns of violence and destabilization.
Lastly, even with recent success, current civic organizations continue facing uphill battles to building bridges between people and politics.
Flaws in the Soviet Foundation Even before the fall of communism and independent Ukraine, civil society began to emerge through Mikhail Gorbachev’s policy of glasnost —a policy of greater transparency and free thinking that brought about approximately 251,000 non-communist party organizations.
Following independence, hundreds of organizations including women’s leagues, youth organizations, and education organizations emerged, but few were political in nature.
Most of the organizations and activities associated with early Ukrainian civil society worked directly to counter the dominant government media campaigns and information operations.
While these organizations expanded to educate individuals in a narrative outside government channels, a quality needed for democratic governance, they did little to build bridges or try to influence policymakers directly.
The Search for a National Identity, 33. 70 organization,” and in 1993 that number climbed to 86 percent.
This was problematic for the prospect of democracy in early Ukrainian political development as the failure to continually engage in policy and government development allowed elites to shape the system in their favor.
Elites were able to set the rules of the game as well as the precedent to ignore the popular preferences of the governed.
Carrying over a number of trade unions from the Soviet era provided a base for civil society to grow; however, trade unions failed to operate in a capacity found in developed democracies.
Often times, union leaders merely worked to support the politician vice the worker.
Union leaders failed to understand how a market economy worked, or their role within it, and often sided with the employer because it was easier.
This means union leadership failed to understand their role in voicing member grievances, in order to be the vehicle for dialogue and reform within an organization.
Even though roughly 75 percent of businesses participated with union organizations, union membership tanked over the years, likely as a result of lost faith, losing half of their members over the first decade.
The failure of trade unions early on degraded a pillar upon which to build civil society.
Aside from mobilizing people to strike, trade unions could have provided a platform for negotiation with the representatives of industry and government, aggregating grievances of the workforce, and bringing about meaningful day-to-day changes.
Instead, this early failure left citizens without an important mechanism of influence that could prevent growing authoritarian trends.
Voter Education and Election Monitoring Though Ukrainian civil society failed to build bridges early on, there was notable progress in educating the electorate, which was worth value.
Also, the CVU was critical in conducting Parallel Vote Tabulation to monitor potential election fraud during the Orange Revolution in 2004.
Consisting of about 30,000 activists, and receiving technical assistance from the West, Pora went door to door, polling station to polling station during the 2004 election, educating voters on where to go, their rights, and how to vote properly.
While educating voters had a tremendous impact during election season, these organizations did little in the wake of affecting routine, day-to-day government policy.
More robust organizations are needed to interact with government on a daily basis, make negotiations, and hold leaders continually accountable beyond just election season.
In addition, the media began playing a greater role in educating the public during election season.
Ukrainska Pravda, a local news outlet, informed the public during the Orange Revolution.
While the Internet lacked robustness during the Orange Revolution when compared to the Euromaidan in 2014, Ukrainska Pravda published various exit polls and alleged fraud information online.
Providing other views from independent sources allows voters to draw independent conclusions on election progress contrary to the state-run storyline, and promotes quality democratic engagement, debate, and participation.
Internal and External Factors in Ukraine’s 2004 Democratic Breakthrough,” in Democracy and Authoritarianism in the Postcommunist World , eds.
Only One Peaceful Transition of Power While daily engagement and participation remains weak, popular mobilization for mass government overthrow has proven successful on a number of occasions.
As a result, civil society is at least strong enough to place limits on authoritarian consolidation, while remaining too weak and unable to push Ukraine toward full democratic consolidation.
Ukrainians have ousted their leaders through popular protest on three occasions, with only one peaceful transition of power from Yushchenko to Yanukovych in 2010.
The first ousting was in 1993, when a miners’ strike led to early elections and the ouster of Ukraine’s first president, Leonid Kravchuk. mine directors and hundreds of thousands of workers from the Donbas region banded together to force a region wide strike, eventually spreading to other sectors of the Ukrainian economy.
Protesting work conditions, harsh economic lives, and the political chaos that plagued their nation following independence, the miners brought a pivotal part of the Ukrainian economy to a screeching halt and demanded new elections as a means to throw out the government.
The second notable popular protest movement was the Orange Revolution in 2004.
Hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians took to the streets after the Central Election Commission ruled that Viktor Yanukovych won the second round run-off through widespread voter fraud on part of the regime.
Over 500,000 people poured into the streets of Kyiv by the third day of demonstrations, November 23, 2004.
Ultimately, mass citizen mobilization forced the courts to uphold the law, hold a repeat vote, and reject a continuation of an autocratic regime.
The last, and most recent mass protest transition was that of the Euromaidan in 2014.
Following President Viktor Yanukovych’s unilateral decision to back away from an EU Association Agreement in November 2013, thousands of angry Ukrainians took to the streets.
Implementing the agreement, which began negotiations in March 2007, would represent Ukraine’s most overt pivot away from Russian influence, and solidify the country’s commitment to Europe.
Demonstrations in Independence Square (the Maidan) started at about 100,000 on the first Sunday after Yanukovych’s announcement, but quickly swelled to an estimated 800,000.
Eventually, after numerous violent clashes and deaths between protestors and government forces, Yanukovych fled the country and the government stripped him of his power and held new elections.
People can mobilize effectively if their collective grievances reach a tipping point, which can help push the nation toward democratic consolidation.
However, what remains problematic and undemocratic is the continued absence of organizations on which to mediate and work through problems before they reach a breaking point.
Also, public opinion supports that Ukrainians are not exactly enthralled by civic engagement.
Aadne Aasland and Oleksii Lyska found that civic activity remains low, particularly at the local government level, with many viewing their local authorities in a negative light, attending public meetings vice actively participating in local governance.
First, low involvement exacerbates the disconnect between the success of the central governance trumpeted by politicians, and the contrasted reality on the ground experienced by citizens.
Second, low involvement allows for local governments to continue corrupt or abusive practices with little to no fear of punishment or no need to confront constituents face-toface, allowing authoritarian elements and practices to continue.
Overall, Ukrainian society, with some assistance from civic organizations, is successful at ousting regimes that become too extreme.
Providing a check to authoritarian consolidation is noteworthy and represents a glimmer of democratic nature in Ukrainian civil society.
However, civil society in Ukraine lacks the day to day engagement with government that can allow it to become a truly robust democratic force.
Also, failing to act appropriately prior to grievances reaching a level that requires mass mobilization is not a sign of a robust civic pillar.
While the success of civil society at checking autocratic consolidation is welcomed, much work needs to be done as there are other flaws in Ukrainian civil society that undermine democratic progress.
Other Flaws in the Civil Society Other flaws in civil society development hinder consolidation and habituation of this vital pillar to democracy.
Passivity of organizations allows grievances to fester and reach a breaking point that requires regime overthrow.
Also, negative civic groups undermine credibility of honest groups and provides a pretext for excessive government crackdown.
These flaws consistently undermine the habituation of quality civil society practices found in robust democracies.
A flaw in Ukraine’s civil society is that people remain largely passive to a point, allowing grievances to reach an extreme level that then requires mass mobilization to the streets and complete regime overthrow.
Failing, time and time again, to invest in civic institutions that address popular grievances before they reach a breaking point is a shortcoming.
Though the institutional design and odds remain stacked against civil society, as the entire system is built to protect elite interests and basic political 75 representatives hardly reach out to their constituents, Ukrainians need to create more organizations with direct involvement with the government.
Outside of election season, Ukrainians were largely silent under the Yanukovych regime as he reinstated a controversial Black Sea fleet treaty with Russia.
The treaty extended basing rights to the Russian Navy in the autonomous region of Crimea—prior to Russian annexation in 2014.
The treaty was highly controversial, and yet society did not mobili z e against this.
Additionally, civil society lacked the organizations to mediate between the public and elites.
To make matters worse, the rise of vigilante groups and organized crime under the Yanukovych government undermined legitimate organizations, eroded public confidence, added confusion, and contradicted democratic norms.
Way notes that negative civil society organizations, or hijacked civil society, directly undermine democracy and good governance.
Rising groups such as the Titushki detract and erode what little gains other, more honest organizations have achieved.
In addition, negative groups provide a bull horn for elite justification of harsh crackdowns that degrade civil liberties.
Ultimately, these organizations are built around the idea of causing trouble.
Notoriously, the Titushki were a group of armed thugs, hired by the Yanukovych regime, used to augment internal security forces during the Euromaidan uprising.
Yanukovych paid these thugs anywhere from US$17 to US$100 a day to beat up demonstrators.
Ultimately, the Titushki were responsible for some of the most heinous deaths, beatings, and kidnappings during the Euromaidan.
Organizations like the Titushki run counter to any democratic ideals and norms, and are often a tool for authoritarian overreach.
They prey on the disenfranchised and poor to fill their ranks, and do little in the face of public good or the promotion of civil liberties.
Vigilante groups promote authoritarianism by suppressing and coercing honest civic groups.
Finally, Building Bridges As stated earlier, one of the largest impediments to democratic progress and promoters of authoritarianism remains civil society’s inability to effectively influence government on a daily basis.
Today, civil society groups are finally making inroads and building longer term relationships between citizens and the government.
However, this fresh success is often met with stiff resistance from the old elite, reminiscent of past problems.
Starting out as an organization to craft and push anti-corruption legislation through the Rada, the Center assisted and lobbied for the creation of the National Anti-Corruption Bureau.
George Weigel explains another organization, Patients of Ukraine, that lobbied to break up the “de facto national pharmaceutical mafia,” making medicine more affordable for citizens.
An increasing number of success stories for civil society illustrates this pillar of democracy may finally be making inroads and bridging the divide.
While these successes are welcomed, caution is recommended as the system has proven resistant to change.
Though civil society appears to be improving since the Euromaidan, activist and organization efforts have continually met resistance from elites.
What it Means for the West, 155. 77 “everything possible,” to stop the implementation of anti-corruption reforms.
The battle remains an uphill one for civil society, though a handful of success stories is welcomed.
Through all of civil society’s successes and failures in Ukraine, civil society as a whole continually fails to attack the source of the problems.
Two revolutions have failed to change the system in a manner that rids the deep intermixing of money and politics that is the source of so much of Ukraine’s woes.
While there have been recent successes for civil society since the Euromaidan, they have taken almost three years to build and have faced resistance along the way.
This illustrates the current difficulties facing Ukrainian civil society today.
Though civil society appears to be growing in a manner that has evaded the country for a quarter of a century, there remains much work to be done and it remains far from a “robust” or consolidated pillar of democracy.
CONCLUSION In conclusion, corruption and accountability problems extend beyond petty infractions to colossal levels, and remain incredibly entrenched in Ukraine.
Politicians use their positions to acquire greater wealth and power, as citizens skirt the law as a means to get by or conduct business.
Hardly democratic in nature, these practices erode confidence in democracy and perpetuate authoritarian qualities.
Inheriting and expanding a centralized police force after independence extended the reach of government that allowed them to abuse and harass citizens.
Recent efforts to reform, while welcomed, appear to have the same centralized structure that allowed such government overreach of the past.
While many of these reforms look great on paper, they continually lack the enforcement mechanisms necessary for implementation, leading to criticism that elites do not truly intend to alter the status quo, allowing the authoritarian framework to remain.
Also, though corruption pervades all levels of society, and elites continually seek their own interests over public interests, civil society remains too weak to influence the routine shaping of government.
Organizations exploded into existence following independence but failed to truly build a bridge between citizens and politicians.
Incompetent trade unions carried over from the Soviet days advanced commercial interests vice worker rights.
At the same time, political organizations were active during election seasons but faded into the background after the polls closed.
Ukrainian civil society has little engagement to influence government policy on a daily basis.
As a result, Ukrainian civil society has proven extremely effective at mass mobilization for regime overthrow, ousting three different regimes since independence by popular protest.
This frequency of mass mobilization for overthrow does not bode well for democracy in Ukraine, but does appear to place limits on authoritarian consolidation.
Consequently, civil society in Ukraine is preventing and promoting both authoritarian and democratic consolidation in the country.
Civil society is unable to push consolidation fully toward democracy as a result of its relationship with the government.
At the same time, mass popular mobilization during times of crisis appears to also limit full authoritarian consolidation.
INTRODUCTION One may recall that economic success is one of many requirements for a democracy to remain strong and prevent authoritarian regression.
Establishing a market economy structure at the beginning of a democracy ensures the greatest likelihood of democratic success as it allows democratic norms and practices to become established early.
Nations that fail to transition to a market economy quickly allow the growth of corruption.
Separately, some argue that specific measurements of citizen wealth demonstrate the success and strength of government.
Economies showing approximately US$2,236 GDP per capita income are deemed on the threshold of stable, and a GDP per capita of US$13,418 indicates a democracy is well established.
The economic structure and performance within a country can support or degrade consolidation.
When the populace has to worry about survival, it opens the door for populism and authoritarianism as a means to address economic woes.
Following a brief overview of the Ukrainian economy, this chapter will illustrate how the first few years of independence left many citizens broke and angry at leaving the Soviet Union.
Delaying the crucial transition from a planned to market economy in the Kravchuk years wreaked havoc on the system.
The election of Kuchma and his eventual appointment of Viktor Yushchenko as his prime minister turned an ailing economy around within one year, bringing much needed relief to the system.
Though the economy has faced ups and downs with various crises, per capita GDP, overall, has remained low.
Reforms following the Euromaidan look promising, but they are currently hurting the everyday citizen.
The constant divide between the super wealthy and average citizen reinforces disenchantment with the government, undermines prospects for true reform success, and leaves the system vulnerable to exploitation by populism and authoritarianism.
INHERITING A CENTRALIZED ECONOMY Ukraine inherited a centralized economy from the Soviet Union in 1991.
Primarily revolving around agriculture and heavy industry, the Ukrainian economy has changed vastly since independence.
Ukraine once supplied roughly one-fourth of the food for the Soviet Union, but today, Ukraine’s farming sector only accounts for roughly 14 percent of the nation’s economy.
In addition, Ukraine’s economy was dominated by heavy industries such as metallurgy, coal, and chemicals under communism.
Heavy industry still accounts for a quarter of Ukraine’s economy, and is predominately located in eastern Ukraine.
Aside from heavy industry, a growing service sector now accounts for over 50 percent of economic activity in Ukraine.
With these changes, the transition from a command economy to a free market economy has been a difficult process for Ukraine.
Lingering communist influence and the presence of old Soviet elites hindered the implementation of radical reforms to a market economy in the early transition years.
Failing to radically break with a centralized past, after three years of independence, in 1994, 85 percent of the economy remained state-owned.
Both President Kravchuk and then-Prime Minister Kuchma faced strong resistance at instituting economic change.
The Search for a National Identity , 199. 82 the presidency by taking the rug of economic power out from the very people that got him elected.
Efforts at privatization would likely face stiff resistance from the sitting communists, or their reincarnated leftist parties, and jeopardize Kravchuk’s power base.
As for Kuchma, even during his tenure as prime minister, he understood how the corrupt game worked in Ukraine.
Aside from political inaction from old elites, Kravchuk was unable to jump start economy, even if he wanted to, as Ukraine lacked the basic economic infrastructure to do so.
After independence, Ukraine lacked a national bank, a budget, and an adequate means to collect taxes.
Kravchuk needed to build these institutions and mechanisms in order to establish a sense of order and rules for a new market economy.
The lack of these basic pieces contributed to the establishment of an oligarchy, and corruption at a time when Ukraine desperately needed reform.
Failing to reform the system quickly and implement vital infrastructure led to stagnated development, increased hardship, and the rise of a rent-seeking, predatory state.
ESTABLISHING AN OLIGARCHY AND PERPETUAL ECONOMIC HARDSHIP The Ukrainian oligarchs came to power shortly after independence as state-owned enterprises continued to operate in close coordination with the government.
As previously discussed in the corruption section, Pavlo Fazarenko, who operated the company along with Yulia Tymoshenko, siphoned off mi llions in profits in the late 1990s.
After Viktor Yushchenko became prime minister in 1999 and began implementing reforms that directly challenged oligarch interests, the elites simply maneuvered and diverted their energy to capture the sales of state enterprises and increased footholds in the political system through the greater backing and running of political parties as means to ensure access to the administration in power.
The lack of robust tax laws and enforcement mechanisms meant elite profits failed to reach the state.
The evolution of elites allowed for the continuation of policies advantageous to them, harming overall economic development, and everyday Ukrainians.
A large problem associated with the rise and persistence of the super wealthy in Ukraine remains tax evasion and the loss of income to the state.
Public projects may not be completed or achieved if taxes are not received by the state, and Ukrainians have long avoided taxes—especially the super wealthy.
Lazarenko is one such example; after raking in millions from UES, he paid only US$11,000 in taxes.
The inability to receive adequate taxes then shifts the burden on the lower affluent or connected population, as they may lack the means to hide their money.
In 2011, approximately 8 mi llion of the eligible 22 million of the workforce did not pay taxes.
Elite profiting robbed the economy of vital income to provide for government wages, pensions, and social benefits.
As these programs became increasingly insolvent and shifted the tax burden on the middle to lower income populations, an increasing number of individuals and businesses had to resort to barter and corrupt practices just to get by.
In turn, this set up forced increasing amounts of the economy underground.
MACRO REFORM AND POLICIES FAIL TO REACH THE MICRO LEVEL As a consequence of the lack of reform, Kravchuk, and Kuchma under his tutelage, allowed elites to pillage their way to enrichment, and entrench corrupt practices that wreaked havoc on the economy.
Prizel explains how the slow implementation of reform was possibly deliberate by then-Prime Minister Kuchma, as he “would avoid shock therapy in reforming the economy.
Separately, GDP per capita tanked, declining from an average of US$5,499 per person in 1991 down to a meager US$750 per person in 1998.
The deterioration of the economy, aside from the corrupt elite stealing millions, hindered democratic consolidation by shifting popular focus on survival vice everyday engagement with the government.
Thus, the system that became entrenched in Ukraine promoted self-preservation and evasion vice public good.
The effects of this economic catastrophe directly impacted everyday citizens.
As wages decreased and prices increased, Ukrainian families had a difficult time making ends meet.
Between 1990 and 1996, the average household spent between 56 to 66 percent of their income solely on food.
According to BTI, in 2003 approximately 25 percent of Ukrainians still lived in poverty and 80 percent believed they were poor.
It became increasingly difficult to understand how the government was taking care of everyday Ukrainians and working for the people when elites continued getting rich while the population worried about feeding their families.
YUSHCHENKO’S REFORMS AND FAILED ECONOMIC PROSPERITY After muddling through eight years of economic decline, Viktor Yushchenko’s appointment as prime minister in 1999 managed to turn the economy around.
Ukraine,” 7. 86 improved transparency, altered tax break incentives for the wealthy, and increased privatization.
Essentially, Yushchenko’s reforms targeted the corrupt oligarch practices that became so deeply entrenched during the first eight years of independence.
As Wilson explains, Yushchenko’s reforms swung the Ukrainian economy “dramatically” in the other direction, from a -0. percent decline in 1999 to +5. percent growth in 2000, with sustained gains for another seven years.
Yushchenko was fired only a year and half after taking the job, which allowed Kuchma to return to previously eliminated corrupt practices.
Reforms may have improved Ukrainian wages, but corruption eroded those gains quickly.
For all the economic success and turnaround, little made it to the populace as profits were squandered by public officials.
The Search for a National Identity, 118. 87 as corruption remained rampant; many citizens remained in poverty, or at least believed they were poor.
Democracy became associated with economic hardship early on, and as such allowed for the establishment of populism, nepotism, bribery, and corruption.
The corrupt practices and siphoning of money by elites may not have become as entrenched if there had been a clean break with the centralized past.
Inheriting a weak and centralized economy and failing to reform it right away degraded democratic success.
Civil society was unable to flourish as citizens worried more about basic survival and feeding their families vice investing in Ukrainian politics.
The distortions and holes in the independent economy allowed for the creation of economic institutions that promoted the enrichment of an elite few, with less returning to the people.
The Ukrainian economy in the first decade established corrupt, semi-authoritarian practices that worked against democratic consolidation.
As a result, elite pillaging and drastic income inequality continue today.
GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS AND THE YANUKOVYCH ERA The 2008 global financial crisis was the next shock to the system.
A Democratic Post-Soviet State?,” in Institutional Dimensions of Authoritarian Persistence: Lessons from Post-Soviet States , edited by Rachel Vanderhill and Michael E Aleprete Jr. , 150.
According to Kuzio, in 2011 roughly 36 percent of working Ukrainians did not pay taxes, with most receiving their salaries in cash envelopes.
Whatever small scale gains occurred after the Yushchenko turnaround were being erased.
SIMILAR TO THE PAST Currently, Ukraine’s economy is improving, but economic distortions and the pain of modern reform leaves many everyday citizens hurting.
According to Ukraine’s current Prime Minister Volodymyr Groysman, inflation has declined since the Euromaidan revolution where it peaked at 43 percent in 2015, fell to 12 percent in 2016, and is currently projected to reach 8 percent in 20 1 7.
The failures of transferring larger macroeconomic prosperity down to the micro level continues to impact everyday Ukrainians.
Wages remain low, prices for goods are high, and many Ukrainians have yet to benefit from the changing economy.
Roman Olearchyk explains that Ukraine’s GDP per capita is “just 20 percent of the EU 29 1 Menon and Rumer, Conflict in Ukraine, 50.
Hardly a sustainable living wage, the average Ukrainian monthly income is only US$194, and those living below the subsistence level nearly doubled from 2015-2016.
This situation leaves the country vulnerable to authoritarian overreach and the degradation of democratic progress as a means to fix economic hardship.
Wage concerns are only part of the problem, as the cost for goods and services is increasing as a result of recent reforms, only adding more pain for average citizens.
Even as wages remain low, the price of goods continues to increase, particularly energy costs.
An IMF-mandated end to energy subsidies caused prices to triple in 20 1 6.
Amnesty International echoes the current problem, noting that the living standards of many Ukrainians continues to decline as prices for heat and water go up.
As power and heating costs dominate the majority of Ukrainian income, so too does putting food on the table.
In 2014, 40 percent of Ukrainians spent nearly two-thirds of their budget on food and sustenance.
Plateauing or regressing wages in combination with rising prices is forcing a growing number of Ukrainians to live below the poverty level.
Democratization, Corruption, and the New Russian Imperialism, 321. 90 how the number of those living in poverty nearly doubled to 58 percent in 20 1 5.
While the government may provide some assistance through subsidies, and Ragozin notes that some landlords pay for some of the heating costs for apartment buildings, Ukrainians nonetheless predominantly spend their income on energy and food.
The persistence of poverty and low wages, in addition to the high cost of goods, perpetuates the corrupt practices discussed in previous chapters.
Contributing to bribery, barter, and favors as a means to get by, this set up remains undemocratic and vulnerable to authoritarian overreach.
Current reforms that are designed to help Ukraine’s economy are hurting Ukrainian citizens.
While GDP has improved since the Euromaidan, corruption continues to fleece money from society and leave Ukrainians continually disenchanted with their government.
The everyday Ukrainian sees little improvement as heating costs continue to rise with their incomes receding or flat lining.
While the theory may say the country appears in the stable range, in practice this seems far from true.
Continued economic shortcomings will only destabilize the government, leaving it vulnerable to another popular change in the next election cycle.
THE OLIGARCHIC DRAIN The largest part of Ukraine’s economic woes stems from the persistence of the oligarchs.
Oligarchs controlled 38 percent of the country’s GDP in 2014, higher than other developed democracies and some authoritarian states.
Democratization, Corruption, and the New Russian Imperialism, 319. 91 the Ukrainian economy and taxpayers of a better life, and they are continually successful at it.
The oligarchs have managed to evolve over the years from playing a direct role in o politics to shifting behind the scenes as a means to survive.
As a consequence, the oligarchs—as the few very wealthy were popularly called—changed qualitatively.
Until 1999, all the richest people in Ukraine made their money on gas trade, but from 2000 on, they became steel producers.
The country had traversed the crucial hurdle from arbitrage to export production.
The oligarchs were no longer courtiers who made their money on intrigues in the corridors of power but owners of large factories with well-defined and lasting interests.
Their specialization allowed new big businessmen to evolve in other industries, such as machine-building, banking, retail trade, real estate, and agriculture.
Greater decentralization, improving watchdog organizations, and implementing anti-corruption measures may challenge the relationship between politics and wealth, but history has shown oligarchs remain cunning and able to evolve with the system.
CONCLUSION In summary, Ukraine has a long history of economic distortions that enrich few and harm many.
The failure to reform an inherited centralized economy quickly allowed distortions and loopholes for corruption to flourish.
Efforts at reform and eroding the oligarchs’ power base have been met with stiff resistance.
The implementation of recent reforms failed to alter the fundamentals as oligarchs have been able to shift with the system.
As a result, average Ukrainians continue to live below or close to the poverty line, spending the majority of their wages on food and energy, and thus making them vulnerable to exploitation by their government.
Candidates are elected on promises of fixing the economic hardships and ending corruption, but nearly every one of them has failed to deliver.
Oligarch dominance and the continued economic hardship serve as platforms for authoritarian exploitation in order to achieve and preserve political power.
INTRODUCTION Failing to quickly break with the communist past resulted in over a quarter century for Ukrainian consolidation to a competitive authoritarian state.
Many of the same reasons Ukraine failed to develop as a democracy support the nation’s consolidation into hybrid rule.
Following a review of Steven Levitsky and Lucan Way’s criteria of competitive authoritarian governance, this chapter will demonstrate how and why Ukraine qualifies as a competitive authoritarian state.
Separately, this chapter reveals the source of democracy’s woes in the country, stemming from the critical years immediately following independence and the failure to break with the communist past.
Whether one views Ukraine as lost in transition, or firmly consolidated into hybrid governance, the nation qualifies as a competitive authoritarian state.
This author argues that 25 years of this type of governance constitutes a firmly consolidated hybrid government, vice being stuck in a transitional phase.
Competitive authoritarianism, as Levitsky and Way explain, is a form of governance in which “formal democratic institutions are widely viewed as the principal means of obtaining and exercising political authority.
Skewed and weak institutions allow for abuses by executives that can give rise to greater autocratic governments.
Though the government has an advantage, the institutions also limit full blown authoritarianism.
While this paper does not analyze the media component, there is plenty of evidence to support an analysis of the remaining three.
Levitsky and Way explain that “authoritarian governments may coexist indefinitely with meaningful democratic institutions.
Opportunities exist for opposition victories and democratic achievement, but the rules of the game are deliberately skewed in favor of the party in power.
Ultimately, as is the case for Ukraine, autocratic elements exist in inherent tension with the democratic ones that developed as a result of the continued communist influence following independence.
CHOICES, INSTITUTIONS, AND PERSISTENT COMMUNIST INFLUENCE The continued communist influence allowed elites to shape an asymmetric playing field in favor of elite interests, including within the electoral, legislative, and judicial arenas.
Three key choices allowed communist influence to pervade throughout the newly independent government.
Second, failing to craft a new constitution with clearly defined roles and rules for the new government allowed the Soviet constitution to remain the law of the land, and allowed a free-for-all of corrupt practices to continue.
Third, electing the former Head of Communist Ideology, Leonid Kravchuk, as the country’s first president was a far cry from breaking with the Soviet past.
As a result, the Soviet influence of highly centralized governance perpetuated and tainted Ukraine’s prospects of breaking through as a strong democracy.
The communist presence helped reinforce institutions that were flawed and gave rise to an elite oligarch class of society.
Iterations of constitutional reform continually fail to definitively separate powers between president and prime minister.
As a result, Ukraine maintains a revolving door of prime ministers that are too easily dismissed, and lacks incentives to cooperate.
In addition, Parliament is seen as a vehicle for elite enrichment and protection, vice a chamber for advancing public good.
The intertwining of political parties, leaders, and oligarchs has entrenched the mixing of money and politics that has proven extremely stubborn to uproot.
Parliamentary laws, or the lack thereof, allowed self-interest decisionmaking to become the norm.
In addition, immunity laws provide a shield from prosecution that creates incentives for elites to cheat and commit egregious corruption.
Parliamentary weaknesses resulted in multiple failed attempts at vital reform for the nation and legislative stagnation, and provided a pretext for stronger executive influence, as observed with the Kuchma and Yanukovych regimes.
The manner in which politicians have and continue to use Parliament fails to adhere to democratic norms, and ultimately fails to deliver basic government services to the people.
Furthermore, carrying the judiciary system intact from communism extended the influence and reliance of the executive branch over the courts and law enforcement in Ukraine.
Competitive authoritarian states often maintain a subordinated judiciary through coercion, bribery, and co-optation, but fail to completely control them.
The lack of complete control provides opportunities for “maverick judges” to challenge the executive.
Rulers may seek to punish judges who rule or operate in opposition to the executive.
Judges have a history of inadequate pay, providing a mechanism for bribery.
Judges are trained early on in the formal and informal rules of the judiciary, including the executive levers of influence.
The judicial system has been used for political persecutions, as observed through the jailing of opposition candidate Yulia Tymoshenko during the Yanukovych administration.
Also, the same system is used as a shield for those loyal to the party in power.
Consequently, the judiciary remains weak, and though current efforts to reform the system appear promising, they continue to lack adequate implementation mechanisms.
The harassment of lawyers and judges by the current Poroshenko, administration continues.
Thus, executive influence has not evaporated from the Ukrainian judicial system.
At the same time, the executive lacks complete control of the judicial system.
These dynamics continue playing off of each other, living in constant tension, and indicative of hybrid rule.
Ultimately, this vital institution of democratic governance, a strong and truly independent judiciary, has yet to come to fruition in Ukraine.
An additional consequence of weak institutions is the persistence of election fraud and an electoral system that continues to benefit elite interests.
While avoiding a complete electoral authoritarian system that exists to only legitimize the party in power, Ukraine’s electoral system creates an asymmetric playing field that makes opposition victories difficult, but not impossible.
In competitive authoritarian states, the government abuses state resources, maintains biased media coverage, decreases transparency, and suppresses opposition all in the name of giving the party in power an advantage.
Ukraine’s electoral process has improved since independence, but remains vulnerable to widespread manipulation and advantages in favor of elites.
Changing certain processes such as candidate registration and voting methods have improved voter confidence, increased participation, and bettered the system.
At the same time, the shift in persistent fraudulent activity undermines confidence and the freeness of the vote.
As a result, the risks to commit such overt fraud and face punishment or international condemnation became too great, and drove fraudulent activity to ulterior, covert tactics.
As overt fraud has become too costly, the rise of covert methods, which are difficult to detect, such as proxy candidates and parties, continues to distract voters and steal votes from other candidates.
Ultimately, its improvements aside, fraudulent activity continues to distort the playing field of Ukrainian elections to the advantage of those willing to cheat, and creates an unfree and unfair competitive electoral process found in hybrid rule.
Ukraine’s electoral system remains distorted to the advantage of elites, though opposition victories are possible.
The intermixing of money and politics, along with the unlimited contributions of political parties, has given rise to a colossal amount of spending during Ukrainian elections.
The high stakes electoral game reinforces that oligarchs and elites get to choose who the top contenders are in each race.
Though elections are competitive, and small-time opposition victories remain possible, the playing field is deliberately skewed in favor of those who receive oligarch financing and resources.
In the end, the perpetual communist influence following independence hampered the transition to democracy and solidified the weak institutions found in Ukraine today.
Communist resistance to early reform created incentives for politicians to cheat and subvert the laws, vice use their positions for public good.
Confrontation, fragmentation, and self-interest, which are anti-democratic aspects, fail to deliver for the people and have become a norm to Ukrainian government.
Communist resistance to widespread reform perpetuated a centralized judiciary and law enforcement system that existed to serve the government, and not the people.
Also, these flawed incentives carry over into the electoral arena as fraud persists, and opposition victories are asymmetrically challenging.
Supporting hybrid governance, Ukraine’s institutions fail to uphold democratic standards, but at the same time resist full authoritarian consolidation.
Consequently, these flawed institutions and incentives give rise to a monumental corruption problem that pervades all levels of Ukrainian society.
ACCOUNTABILITY / CORRUPTION Corruption is systemic to the Ukrainian way of life, and efforts to eliminate it prove extremely difficult.
All levels of Ukrainian society fail to adhere to the law with the political elite using their positions to acquire wealth and power, and citizens skirting the law as a means to do business or survive.
Also, the courts and police force remain too weak to challenge corruption, and are often complicit in its conduct.
As a result, accountability remains a persistent problem in Ukraine and reflects a continuation of undemocratic behavior found in hybrid and authoritarian regimes.
Problems associated with the protection of power and wealth prevent democratic progress and promote greater authoritarianism.
Colossal levels of corruption that are incredibly widespread undermine the current system of government.
Nearly every president and numerous other politicians have used their positions within the government for self-enrichment and power grabbing.
The most egregious representation of corruption is that of Viktor Yanukovych’s US$100 billion fleecing of the government.
Aside from monetary wealth, others have used their position to protect their prospects of future power as Kuchma fired his premier, Viktor Yushchenko, after his successful reforms threatened Kuchma’s power base.
These two extreme examples represent a greater 98 problem that is far from democratic and does little to serve the public interest or advancement of the state.
The lack of horizontal accountability mechanisms to act as checks and balances to this type of behavior is consistent with hybrid and authoritarian regimes.
Separately, the problem extends well beyond the political leadership as corruption and skirting the rule of law trickles down to civilians.
Everyday citizens face paying numerous bribes to simply do business or avoid jail time.
While related to economic hardship discussed in a following section of this chapter, the environment promotes perpetual corruption at all levels.
Corruption in Ukraine is truly grandiose, and its pervasiveness makes eradicating it all the more challenging.
Though corruption remains pervasive, the politicization of the courts and law enforcement adds levers of control that undermines democratic governance.
Inheriting a centralized law enforcement system from communism, failing to reform it, and quadrupling its size extended the reach of the government over its population.
This heavy police presence, run by presidential political appointees, ensured that distortions in favor of the party in power continued.
As a result, the police became a force to support the party in power, vice to protect citizens, and committed some of the most egregious acts of violence against their own population during the Euromaidan.
The politicization of the courts and law enforcement extended the reach of the executive over the population, creating a tool for coercive control that directly contradicts democratic government and mirrors authoritarianism.
With the police and the courts in the government’s corner, violence became an acceptable means to handle vocal opposition elements.
Numerous instances over the last 25 years support this, including the aggressive crackdowns on protesters and killing of an independent journalist during Kuchma’s presidency.
Also, the use of live ammunition against protestors during the Yanukovych era, and the harassment and attacks on journalists and lawyers during the Poroshenko presidency illustrate the use of violence is not a one-off instance in Ukrainian history.
Rather, violence remains a deeply entrenched norm that is proving stubborn to reverse.
A government that continues to accept violence 99 as a legitimate means to control its population is far from democratic and qualifies for authoritarian rule.
CIVIL SOCIETY For all of these accountability and institutional shortcomings, civil society remains too weak to influence the government on a consistent basis.
The analysis of three criteria in the remainder of this section support this argument.
First, Ukrainians failed to capitalize on an explosion of early civic organizations to establish a critical foothold between citizen and politician immediately following independence.
Second, while civil society was slow to start, Ukrainians themselves have proven quite capable of mass mobilization in support of regime overthrow.
Third, since the Euromaidan, Ukrainian civil society is finally making inroads and building links between citizens and politicians that are actually influencing policy development in the government; however, their success is still met with stiff resistance and skepticism.
Ultimately, recent success is not yet indicative of a larger trend for a robustly developed civil society that is capable of day-to-day government influence.
An explosion of organizations prior to and immediately following independence failed to seek a routine relationship with the government.
The few political organizations that did emerge focused on educating voters during election season, but stopped short of continuing engagement with the government after the votes were tallied.
Also, trade unions carried over from the Soviet era exploited their position to advance business interests vice worker interests.
Ukrainians missed an opportunity to leverage these types of organizations early to develop critical foundations on which to grow civil society.
The failure to capitalize on this transition period permitted the degradation, or isolation, of civil society by elites.
Though civil society development got off to a slow start in the country, Ukrainians have proven on three different occasions that they are capable of mobilizing to the streets to remove inept leaders.
Kravchuk was removed from power early over his poor economic policies that left many Ukrainians angry at the government’s lacking ability to ensure basic goods and services.
Most recently, the ousting of Yanukovych after backing away from an EU agreement seven years in the making, and the use of live ammunition to quell early protestors, provoked millions from all over the country to seek his removal.
This ability of civil society to mobilize for regime overthrow at least places limits on authoritarian consolidation.
However, having to consistently overturn the government via mass protests does little to support the institutions and practices of a democracy.
Other concerns regarding Ukrainian civil society include the relative passivity as authoritarian leaders rise, and the rise of negative organizations.
By and large, civil society remains silent on issues of concern until they reach a critical tipping point.
For instance, Yanukovych’s cozying with the Russians in 2010 and signing of a controversial Black Sea treaty went largely unanswered, but indicated intentions to warm relations with Russia and keep Europe at some distance.
In addition, the rise of negative movement organizations deliberately designed to cause trouble undermines honest civil society organizations in the country, and provides a pretext to justify a harsh government response.
Organizations such as the Titushki augmented security forces during the Euromaidan and were incentivized to cause trouble.
Also, the negative organizations threaten civil society’s credibility as they directly contradict the idea of building bridges between the government and society, in addition to providing a condition for suppressive government responses.
Recently, civil society organizations are making inroads with day-to-day government influence that is directly addressing popular grievances.
The creation of anticorruption legislation and anti-pharmaceutical organizations are a couple examples.
However, these organizations are not indicative of a larger trend and are often met with stiff resistance from old elites who still benefit from a distorted system.
Consequently, the problems of accountability and corruption, in conjunction with the institutional shortcomings, live in tension with civil society’s demands.
At the same time, it remains too weak to consistently challenge the government and advance public interest.
Recent success stories look promising, but skepticism remains as elites continually resist and block reform efforts.
Tension within these two areas of government promote and degrade democracy in Ukraine.
Both remain too weak to push consolidation in one direction or the other, leaving Ukraine in a state of hybrid rule.
ECONOMY Exacerbating civil society’s weakness, a chronically deficient economy that benefits elites is leaving many citizens worried about surviving vice daily political engagement.
Inheriting a centralized economy from communism and failing to quickly reform to a market economy entrenched predatory and corrupt practices, countering democratic development and creating vulnerabilities for populist and authoritarian victories.
Maintaining a highly centralized economy after independence perpetuated Soviet-style business in newly independent Ukraine, and hindered the prospects of reform.
Due to the economic distortions, a predatory class of elites was allowed to pillage their way to wealth, siphoning off profits for themselves and inadequately paying workers.
The close connection between business and politics gave rise to Ukraine’s oligarch class.
The efforts to accelerate reform in the 2000s under Yushchenko attacked the elite and oligarch power base, causing elites to oust the reformer.
Deliberately rejecting those that seek to reform the system for the better indicates a semi-authoritarian structure that is built to safeguard elite interests over the public good.
Consequently, the inability to reform the economy quickly to the free market, and the increased predatory behavior of the new elite class perpetuated the need to circumvent economic laws, such as paying taxes, as a means to get by.
Many Ukrainians, particularly more affluent ones, find ways to avoid paying taxes that then shifts the burden on to lower income citizens.
Thus, the economy lacks sufficient tax revenue to run and fund government programs that will provide goods and services to the people.
Also, leaving lower income and less connected Ukrainians to foot the government bill drives many underground to a large shadow economy.
Estimates place the shadow economy at roughly half of Ukraine’s total economy.
Such a large underground economy also leaves less revenue for the government to fund critical welfare and infrastructure projects that provide for the public good.
Thus, the entire Ukrainian economy is a vicious cycle of corruption and tax evasion that further perpetuates the shadow economy.
Overall, macroeconomic policies that are meant to improve the Ukrainian economy continually fail to reach the micro level.
On average, Ukrainian wages consistently remain along the threshold of government stability, but barely.
Periods of hyperinflation have eroded savings and increased the cost of goods and services, forcing the majority of citizen budgets to go to food and energy.
Currently, energy costs are astronomically high, as EU mandated reforms and an effort to eliminate the reliance on Russian gas are raising energy prices.
On average, Ukrainians spend three-quarters of their budget on heating their homes and keeping the lights on.
Leaving little money to pay for civil society groups, donations, education, or savings, many are simply trying to make ends meet.
As such, Ukrainians are more concerned about providing for their fa mi lies vice continual engagement with the government.
As a result of these economic distortions and shortcomings, Ukrainians are further disenchanted with their government’s ability to solve their problems.
The strength of democracy in Ukraine, let alone any regime type, remains threatened by the economic hardship facing average citizens.
Far from robust, Ukraine remains vulnerable to exploitation by populist and authoritarian overreach that claim to have simple solutions for these complex economic problems.
The system of government has a long history of distortions that support elites and the party in power.
Institutional shortcomings perpetuate internal battles and power politics that serve elite interests and present opportunities for greater authoritarianism through expanded executive powers.
Ukraine has a chronic problem of failing to uphold the law, and continues to bend it in elite favor when available, allowing corruption and abuses to flourish.
Civil society shows some success and promise, but overall remains too weak to challenge day-to-day government consistently.
The economy continually fails to serve the majority of Ukrainians, and consistently benefits an elite few.
This situation prevents government funding for critical projects that benefit all citizens, including welfare programs.
The economic distortions continue promoting the existence of a large shadow economy.
While democratic on paper, the government continually fails to uphold the standards and values of a true democracy.
At the same time, full-blown authoritarianism has managed to escape Ukraine.
Ultimately, Ukraine has consolidated into a competitive authoritarian state.
The democratic elements are in constant tension with authoritarian ones.
Political institutions such as the Rada and the presidency are the legitimate mechanisms for exercising political authority.
However, in true Levitsky and Way fashion, Ukraine’s institutions have continually failed to follow the law, pass meaningful legislation, and serve for the advancement of the country overall.
Weak institutions permit the rise of more authoritarian leaders such as Kuchma and Yanukovych.
At the same time, civil society remains in tension with expanding authoritarianism and serves as a mechanism to counter it.
Separately, in the electoral arena, the playing field is deliberately skewed in the elites favor.
Yet elections do not exist to solely legitimize the party in power, and opposition victories are still possible.
Fitting numerous wickets and practices of hybrid rule, Ukraine has consolidated into a competitive authoritarian state that negates the prospects of true democracy until a hard break with the status quo occurs.
Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2009. o Aslund, Anders, and Michael McFaul.
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
In Democracy and Authoritarianism in the Postcommunist World, edited by Valerie Bunce, Michael McFaul, and Kathryn Stoner-Weiss.
Przeworski, Adam, Michael Alvarez, Jose Antonio Cheibub, and Fernando Limongi.
Lessons from Post-Soviet States , edited by Rachel Vanderhill and Michael E Aleprete Jr.
