Ukraine's sovereign state and the constitutionality of the NATO membership course are the domestic affairs of the country.
The intelligence told about Russia's overthrow of military and powerful weapons to the border with Ukraine.
EU court rejected Gazprom and Russian state banks in abolishing sanctions.
The EU continued individual sanctions against Russia for another six months.
United States fighter aircraft intercepted two Russian bombers near Alaska.
In the United States, it was known that Syria did not lose all the chemical weapons.
The Alliance confirms recognition of Ukraine's aspirations to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Ambassador Alejandro Alvargonsales, Deputy Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization on Political Affairs and Security Policy, states that the consolidation in the Constitution of the foreign policy course on joining the Alliance is an internal affair of Ukraine.
You are a sovereign state, and for this reason, I do not dare to intervene in your discussions,"" said NATO Deputy Secretary General.
Also, the Under-Secretary-General of the Alliance said that in order to move closer to membership in NATO, Ukraine should focus on achieving genuine progress in the reform process.
Russia increases the number of forces of the RF Army near the borders with Ukraine.
This is reported by the Main Directorate of Intelligence of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine.
In particular, under the guise of participation in the maneuvers of the ""East-2018"" in separate areas of concentration along the Ukrainian border from the eastern regions of Russia, individual military units were transferred to regular equipment, including Artillery units, which are armed with the RSA Hurricane.
At the same time, in these areas, expanded military field camps, on the basis of which are formed special units to provide covert rotation and strengthening the advanced positions of the units and parts 1 and 2 of the Armed Forces of the Armed Forces.
According to the Main Directorate of Intelligence of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine, part of the units of the so-called ""Recruits"" is completed exclusively by representatives of Dagestan and Chechnya.
At the same time there are formed so-called ""Cossack detachments"", some of which have already come under the jurisdiction of 1 AK occupation.
In addition, under the guise of maneuvers, the command of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation carries out transportation to the border with Ukraine of new batches of weapons, engineering equipment and other assets for the covert transfer to parts and units 1 and 2 of the Russian occupation troops.
The Court of General Jurisdiction of the European Union, located in Luxembourg, refused to meet the requirements of Russian state-owned banks, as well as subsidiaries of Gazprom, to abolish sanctions.
As it is noted, Russian ""Sberbank"", ""VTB"", ""Prominvestbank"", ""Gazprom Neft"" and ""Rosneft"" filed a lawsuit in an EU court requesting to recognize the sanctions imposed against them unjustified and cancel them.
The declared goal of the disputed acts is to raise the price for Russia's actions, which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, as well as support the peaceful settlement of the crisis"", said in a court decision.
In addition, on September 12, the Kyiv Court of Appeal froze the actions of Ukrainian subsidiary banks VTB, Prominvestbank and Sberbank to comply with the Hague Arbitration ruling on damages from the annexation of the Crimea.
Let's remind that in the government of Ukraine offer sanctions against 19 Russian companies for the construction of the Kerch Bridge.
In July, the European Union for six months extended economic sanctions against Russia.
On June 29, the European Parliament passed a decision to extend sanctions against Russia for the annexation of the Crimea and Sevastopol.
Also, on May 14, 2018, the European Union imposed sanctions against five individuals through the organization of ""elections"" in the annexed Crimea.
The European Union on Thursday extended sanctions against Russia for six months until March 15, 2019.
The information on this decision will now be published in the Official Journal of the EU on September 14, 2018.
Not far from the Alaska coast, two F-22 Fighter aircraft of the United States Air Force were intercepted and accompanied by two Russian strategic Tu-95 bombers.
This is reported by the press service of the Joint Command of the Air Defense of North America.
On May 11, American F-22 fighters intercepted two Russian Tu-95 bombers off the coast of Alaska.
Poland does not approve the use of fines against Hungary and will vote against any European Union sanctions against that country.
As informs Censor.NET with reference to ZN.UA , this is stated in a statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Poland, distributed on Wednesday, September 12.
According to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Poland, measures against the EU member states ""serve only to deepen the division in the European Union, reinforcing the current lack of citizens' trust in European institutions""; in the structure called for the abolition of the resolution and the search for a solution to the problem in other ways.
It is unacceptable and grossly contrary to Russia's obligations regarding Minsk agreements.
According to the State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert, Censor.NET reports, referring to the Correspondent.
The United States' support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine remains firm,"" the State Department spokesman said.
Earlier, the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry stated that the intentions of the occupation administration of the Russian Federation to hold so-called ""extraordinary elections"" in the temporarily occupied territories of the Donbas roughly violate Russia's obligations as a party to the Minsk accords.
The fighters of the self-proclaimed ""Luhansk People's Republic"" declared their readiness to hand over 50 Ukrainian prisoners sentenced to 2014 under the control of the territory.
This was announced by the coordinator of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission Tony Frisch, who visited the occupied territories of the Donbas.
But it seems to me that they will be bigger after an important step by the ORLO is made.
And I have confirmed to ORLO that they are ready to move these people, ""said Frisch, reports Interfax-Ukraine.
Earlier in the self-called ""LNR"" they said they were ready to convey 44 convicts to Ukraine.
The Ukrainian ombudsman Lyudmila Denisova said she does not know exactly which convicts are talking about.
On September 5, Russia's representatives in the humanitarian subgroup of the Tripartite Contact Group in Minsk refused to discuss the issue of the exchange of Russian citizens, prisoners in Ukraine, on Ukrainian political prisoners.
As you know, already 22 citizens of Russia have appealed to Putin to exchange them for Ukrainians.
Recall Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko is ready to pardon the Russians convicted in Ukraine for the release of Ukrainian political prisoners.
On August 15, Russian serviceman Victor Agiev, who was sentenced to 10 years in prison in Ukraine, appealed to the Russian president to exchange them for one of the Ukrainian political prisoners.
Earlier Gerashchenko named 23 Russians , whom Ukraine is ready to exchange for political prisoners of the Kremlin.
Later, she said that Ukraine was ready to transfer Russia with 13 more convicted persons with dual citizenship, with the exception of 23 agreed earlier, in order to release Ukrainian political prisoners.
Thus Kiev is ready to give Russia 36 people in exchange for 23 Ukrainians.
Oleg Sentsov, the director, is in the list whom Ukraine expects to exchange.
The Kremlin commented on the possibility of exchanging Sentsov and other Ukrainians on Russians convicted in Ukraine.
In April 2018 Gerashchenko claimed that Moscow was delaying the process of liberating Ukrainians from Russian prisons.
It should be noted that in Russia and in the annexed Crimea, there are 64 Ukrainian political prisoners, 27 of whom are in Russia.
In the network there was a video showing the place of mass burial of Russians, some of the graves do not even have a name or a surname only the number.
Voice over the air reports that in the Rostov region suddenly appeared about a thousand graves.
Recall Kolpino a city in Russia, an inner-city municipality within the Kolpinsky district of the city of federal significance of St.
As reported by the ""Apostrophe"", social networks were published photos of the tomb of Russian militant Dmitry Vorotin, who died in the spring of 2017 in battles on the line of collision in the Donbas.
The Barack Obama administration knew that the Syrian government did not get rid of all the chemical weapons stockpiles.
As informs Censor.NET with reference to "" Correspondent"", about it on the air of the channel Fox News declared former United States secretary of state John Kerry.
Kerry agreed with the policies of the incumbent president, Donald Trump, that the use of force against Syria under the circumstances was acceptable, but complained about the lack of diplomatic efforts.
According to him, without the involvement of Iran, Russia and other countries, settlement in Syria is impossible.
Earlier, at the White House, they said that the United States and allies intend to respond quickly in the case of the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian authorities.
The ambassador of Russia to the United States, Anatoly Antonov, warned the State Department that militants are preparing provocations in Idlib using chemical weapons to subsequently blame Syrian authorities.
