ACAPS Briefing Note Briefing Note – 18 August 2014 Ukraine Crisis Need for international Not required Low Moderate Significant Urgent assistance X Insignificant Minor Moderate Significant Major Expected impact X Key Findings Anticipated scope and scale  Close to 140,000 people from eastern Ukraine have been displaced, another 16,000 from Crimea.
Human rights abuses, including abductions, torture/ill-treatment, pharmaceuticals and medical supplies; treatment of wounded. unlawful detentions and killings continue to be observed.
Humanitarian constraints Security issues hamper health services and access to health care in the  Insecurity and fighting limit access. conflict areas.
The drinking water supply situation heightens the risk of  Administrative issues. water-borne diseases; there is a risk of increased numbers of Tuberculosis incidences.
In a direct encounter between proand anti-government activists, clashes erupted in Odessa in the south-west of Ukraine, leaving 40 people dead.
Months of anti-government protests followed in which people expressed their dissatisfaction with corruption, poverty and social Voter turnout 25 May Elections inequality in the country.
In mid-February 2014, more than 80 people were killed in Kiev within several days.
The Ukrainian Parliament voted to remove Yanukovych and to hold new elections in May 2014.
A referendum in Crimea was held on 16 March 2014 on whether the region should officially join Russia.% of voters voted in favour of Crimea joining the Russian Federation and Crimea effectively becoming absorbed into the Russian territory.
The referendum was declared illegal by Ukraine, the European Union and the United States.
By late March, Russia seized all military bases in Crimea and Ukrainian forces were ordered to leave Crimea by the acting Ukrainian president.
Electoral Geography, 2014 the cities of Lugansk, Kharkiv, Donetsk, Slovyansk and others experiencing uprisings by pro-Russian activists and the seizure of government buildings by  On 26 and 27 May, the Ukrainian army launched an ""anti-terrorist operation"" to these groups. oust separatists who occupied Donetsk airport.
At least 40 separatists were  An agreement to ease the situation in Ukraine was reached in Geneva on 17 killed during fighting.
April 2014 between representatives from Ukraine, Russia, the European Union  Tensions between Ukraine and Russian Federation continued to increase when and the United States.
It collapsed after a deadly gunfight in an eastern Russian energy company Gazprom cut off natural gas supplies to Ukraine in Ukrainian town at a pro-Russian checkpoint on 20 April 2014 during the Easter mid-June, after Ukraine missed a Russian-imposed deadline to pay a 2 billion truce.
In late April, seven OSCE military observers were detained by proUSD instalment for past gas deliveries.
Another team  On 27 June, the EU signed an association agreement with Ukraine, along with that went missing in May was released a month later.
Georgia and Moldova that binds the three countries more closely to the West  Tensions escalated further with protests rising in Slovyansk and Mariupol and both economically and politically. with the Ukrainian forces strengthening their so-called anti-terrorism operations 2 ACAPS Briefing Note  On 6 July, government forces retook control over the separatists' strongholds Crisis Impact Slovyansk and Krematorsk.
Fighting in the following weeks concentrated on the densely populated urban centres of Donetsk and Luhansk.
At the end of July, the European Union and the United States announced further sanctions against Russia, targeting its energy, banking and defence sectors.
Continued fighting and lack of public transport limit the possibility for civilians from contested cities to seek refuge in other areas.
Shortages of medical supplies and limited health services have been observed.
Fresh food supply is limited in some of the contested cities in eastern Ukraine.
The human rights situation in eastern Ukraine deteriorated as a consequence of the continued unstable and violent situation, and insecurity prevails.
OCHA, 2014/08/15  According to UNHCR, by 13 August, a total number of 155,800 had been displaced in Ukraine.
Close to 140,000 IDPs from eastern Ukraine had registered for some form of assistance with government or local NGOs in Ukraine.
Almost 65,000 of them are located in Kharkiv and Donetsk oblasts, and more than 18,000 in Kiev.
During fighting in early August, some 3,000 people left Luhansk through such a  In eastern Ukraine, freedom of expression is under particular attack through the corridor, but many people are reportedly afraid to use evacuation corridors. harassment of, and threats to, journalists and media outlets.
Abductions, illegal Some 5,000 persons have left Slovyansk using humanitarian corridors that were detentions and in some cases torture and murder of journalists have been established in the beginning of August (AlJazeera, 2014/06/10, WSJ, 2014/06/10, reported.
In mid-April, all schools and orphanages in the areas under the control of armed groups according to kindergartens in Slavyansk city had been closed by the authorities.
Later that Ukrainian authorities . month, UNICEF Field Monitors reported that in Slovyansk the schools that were  In eastern Ukraine, a visiting UN human rights monitoring team documented the operating were experiencing low attendance of pupils because parents have use of landmines that have allegedly led to three deaths and left several people security concerns about allowing their children to go to school.
According to other sources, the crop harvest which began in late June oblast, children had been reported to be kept away from school in some city was reportedly complicated by farmers' fears of mines planted in fields centres due to the escalation of violence.
In Luhansk oblast, 31 secondary educational  In April, Ukraine’s Parliament adopted a law that defines Crimea as temporarily facilities and 7 kindergartens have been reported damaged (UNICEF, 2014/04/17, occupied and which regulates the entry and exit of Crimean citizens from the UNICEF, 2014/06/02, UNICEF, 2014/04/30, UNICEF, 2014/07/25.
In May, a new legislation under which Ukrainian citizens can move freely between Crimea and the mainland and are Protection only required to hold an identity document was adopted.
It also foresees that  As of 13 August, at least 2,119 people had been killed in eastern Ukraine since residents from Crimea will not be penalised for engaging in everyday activities the start of the fighting in April, including civilians, the military and members of that sustain normal life . the armed groups.
Numbers of casualties are rising further due to the continuing  Ukraine has accused Russian forces of laying antipersonnel mines in Crimea, fighting . but has not been able to identify the types or provide photographic or other  Armed groups have increasingly committed human rights abuses, including tangible evidence.
Russia has denied use of antipersonnel mines, indicating abductions, torture/ill-treatment, unlawful detentions and killings as well as only trip-flares have been used . seizure and occupation of public buildings.
Abductions have taken place across  In Crimea, harassment and discrimination has reportedly intensified against eastern Ukraine, in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
There are indications that UN, 2014/08/08). incidences of Tuberculosis may increase due to the risk of treatment  An average estimate of 260,000 Roma live in Ukraine.
Hate crimes against interruption, lack of access to health services or inadequate treatment (UNICEF, Roma have been reported frequently over the last years, however recent 2014/06/27, OCHA, 2014/08/08, IPS, 2014/08/18). nationalist aggressions have raised concern.
In April 2014, houses of Roma  Children experience anxiety, stress, loss of concentration, anger and aggression families have been subject to armed robberies by gunmen in the eastern as a consequence of the conflict.
Incidents of violence against Roma have been children in Donetsk oblast indicated that about half of all children aged 7-18 have reported from other cities as well.
Due to high dependency on governmental social transfers, the vulnerability level of the people that remain Health in the areas affected by unrest is high (UNICEF, 2014/06/13, UNICEF, 2014/06/27, OCHA,  By mid-August, more than 5,000 people have been confirmed wounded through 2014/07/03, IWPR, 2014/08/11). the conflict.
The number of people injured in the conflict is likely to be higher  Price increases of agricultural products may affect the ability of households to . buy food at affordable prices.
FAO/GIEWS reported that domestic prices of  Emergency and primary health care capacities in Donbas have deteriorated due wheat products in June were at record levels, in nominal terms, after sharp to the fighting and are reportedly insufficient.
Similarly, wholesale prices of maize have surged electricity and water supply, lack of pharmaceuticals, consumables and human since the beginning of the year and reached all time highs in June.
Slovyansk, Semyonovka and Krasny Liman that killed at least two medical staff  In Donetsk city, the continuing conflict is causing difficulties in supply for some . supermarkets, as locally-produced items are in short supply.
Pharmaceuticals and available; many supermarkets are closed (IWPR, 2014/08/11, NYT, 2014/08/13, Food medical supplies were limited, with basic support provided by local and and Nutrition Security Section, 2014/08/15, SOS, 2014/08/14). international NGOs and actors (UNICEF, 2014/06/13, UN Country Team Ukraine,  The number of tourists visiting Crimea between January 1 and June 30 has 2014/07/04). decreased by almost one-third compared to the same period last year.
Shelter and NFI The Ukrainian currency hryvnia has experienced further depreciation, and has  In mid-August, a total of 35,070 IDPs were accommodated in 1,648 collective lost almost 40% of its value by August against the dollar since the beginning of centres.
These include schools that will have to be vacated for the start of the the year . new school year on 1 September.
Agriculture  Other IDPs are staying in privately owned spaces, such as sanatoriums or  The unrest in Ukraine has not had a significant impact on spring sowing and total hotels.
In mid-June, hundreds of displaced people from Slovyansk were reported spring-crop area.
In mid-July, FAO GIEWS reported that harvesting of winter to have found shelter in old recreational compounds and a monastery in the cereals, mainly wheat and barley was underway.
About crop to be between 55 and 59 million tonnes, down from an all-time-high harvest 95% of IDPs in the Lviv region reportedly stay with relatives or in private of 63 million tonnes in 2013, mainly as a result of a return to more normal yields apartments . compared to the bumper yields in 2013.
In spite of the conflict, export  On 18 July, the Kirovska substation in Kamennobrodskyi region was damaged commitments were fulfilled.
In the new 2014/15 marketing year , and left Luhansk city without electricity and, as hydraulic power stations stopped total cereal exports were forecast to decrease from the record level of 2013/14 to working as a consequence, without water supplies.
Luhansk has reportedly been without power since for 80% of Crimea's freshwater supply.
No rice was cultivated, corn planted for the beginning of August . feed was sharply curtailed and crops like wheat and barley were stunted.
WASH  Water supply in eastern Ukraine is hampered by destruction of, or damage to Information Gaps water facilities, leaving the population without or only limited access to safe drinking water.
Ahead of the new school year, there is an information gap on how Slavyansk in the beginning of June and halted the water supply through the 130many school-going children have been displaced and to where, how many kilometre long North Donetsk-Donetsk canal that ensures the water supply in the teachers are available and how many children have had the opportunity to sit Slavyansk area.
The ensuing shut-off of mains supplies left several parts of their end of year exams.
Water infrastructure has been damaged during fighting and the lack of Dokuchaevsk and Selidovo, and parts of Konstantinovka.
Water constraints electricity has caused pumping stations in some areas to stop working.
The effects of the conflict on the availability and accessibility of health  Access to, and supply of potable drinking water is limited in Donetsk city due to services, medical supplies and vaccination campaigns require monitoring. fighting.
Food supply, food shortages and the effect of the crisis on livelihoods are the beginning of August . to be monitored.
The need for shelter repair of returnees and for NFIs needs to Distribution of native languages in Ukraine be established.
Further information on actual IDP numbers and their shelter and NFI needs is necessary.
Monitoring of human rights violations in eastern Ukraine and Crimea and treatment of minority groups is also necessary.
A number of incidents continued to occur between April and July in the region, especially in the cities of Slovyyansk, Donetsk and Luhansk.
Following the end of an agreed ceasefire, in late June, heavy fighting took place throughout the region, including in the cities of Donetsk, Slovyansk and Kramatorsk.
Slovyansk was retaken by government forces on 6 July, easing the burden on the population that had remained in the city.
In the second half of Crimea the 1980s, the Crimean Tatars, deported by Stalin to Central Asia in 1944,  The majority of people living in Crimea are of Russian origin , followed by began to return to their homeland, and since the Ukrainian independence, the Ukrainians and the Crimean Tatars, a Muslim minority who number Crimean Tatars have identified most closely with the Ukrainian population of about 280,000 ( FT, Crimea, rather than with Russia.
In his inaugural speech as the political, economic and social objectives (e.g. language, education, religion and new Ukrainian President, Poroshenko declared that the country would not give land use rights) . up Crimea.
The Ukrainian government also announced the out of their homes for fear they would be attacked by pro-Russian groups.
After the referendum, concerns regarding the Europe, 2014/07/22, Guardian, 2014/06/07, UNPO, 2014/07/16, Moscow Times, 2014/07/06). safety and access to rights of Crimean Tatars have remained.
Russia’s 8 ACAPS Briefing Note President Putin declared after the referendum that the interests of all of Crimea’s Relevant Stakeholders in Ukraine ethnic groups would be respected.
The party professes to defend and uphold the rights of ethnic Russians and Human rights concerns about the total lack of public debate as well as the speakers of the Russian language in Ukraine.
After Yanukovych’s escape, the exclusion of Crimean Tatars from the drafting process were raised.
The party’s also remain regarding citizenship issues, specifically, that those not accepting candidate for the 25 May elections, Mykhailo Dobkin, came sixth with 3% of Russian citizenship would reportedly face many obstacles in having their votes.
The party is currently led by Borys Kolesnikov ( ECFR, 2014/04/07, Aljazeera, property and land rights, access to healthcare and enjoyment of other civil and 2014/03/03, Kievpost, 2014/02/24, CVK, 2014/05/25). political rights guaranteed.
The party runs a pro-European and the referendum in Crimea is pointed out by the United Nations High anticorruption platform.
Klitschko was vocal during the protests in Kiev and Commissioner for Human Rights in May.
In mid-May, the house of the Crimean helped arrange a deal with parliament to hold presidential elections in May 2014.
Tatar leader Mustafa Jemilev, barred by Russia from entering the Russian In late March, Klitschko withdrew his bid for president in Ukraine and instead Federation and his native Crimea, was searched by police.
In the beginning of  Klitschko had declared his support for the independent candidate, Petro July, Refat Chubarov, the current leader of the Crimean Tatar Meijlis was Poroshenko, a billionaire who leads the Solidarity party and who sided with the banned from returning home for a period of five years by the peninsula's opposition during the Maidan protests.
The  Before Crimea was absorbed into the Russian Federation, the Russian military party advocates for European values and was one of the parties most active in had its Black Sea Fleet base in Crimea with the fleet headquarters and naval the Kiev protests.
In the presidential elections in May 2014, Yulia Tymoshenko infantry brigade headquarters located in Sevastopol.
There were also Russian won 12,8% of the votes and came second after Petro Poroshenko.
The party's coastal missile regiments and active bases in Crimea, including air bases.
At the end of July, he the annexation of Crimea, the port at Sevastopol had been leased by Russia.
In resigned as Prime Minister after the Svoboda and UDAR parties withdrew from late March, the Russian military seized all Ukrainian military bases in Crimea the Parliament's majority coalition and Parliament failed to pass infrastructure and Ukraine ordered its troops to withdraw from the peninsula ( Janes, 2014/03/13, reconstruction and military funding bills.
The party is allied with euro-sceptic far-right parties within the  Access to Crimea from Ukraine for supplies is constrained.
Svoboda is frequently from mainland Ukraine experiences many border checks established by the accused of anti-Semitism, which it denies.
Svoboda's support base is in western Crimean authorities and long delays at the ferry crossing in Kerch.
In the east and south of onwards, international shipping is prohibited from entering the ports of Ukraine, the party is widely seen as extremist.
International, 2014/05/29, Economist, 2014/01/06, BBC, 2014/02/26, FT, 2014/03/09) 9 ACAPS Briefing Note  The Right Sector is a radical nationalist opposition group said to be a key factor announced cuts to its budget for social issues, healthcare, and agriculture in behind the violent protests in Kiev.
According to a Right Sector leader, the order to support the armed forces.
In July, a 1.5% war tax was announced by organisation was set up in late November 2013 and includes several small ultrathe government in order to fund the military actions (Janes, 2014/05/12, BBC, right groups, among them Trident, Patriot of Ukraine, White Hammer and 2014/02/28, IISS, 2014/03/05, IISS, 2014/03/05, Aljazeera, 2014/07/31, Euronews, 2014/07/31, FP, Ukrainian National Assembly-Ukrainian National Self-Defence.
Mr Scenarios Yarosh, the current leader of the Sector, has announced that the Sector's paramilitary unit would not be disbanded in order to maintain a deterrent against The scenario development for Ukraine was informed by lessons learned from other Russia The Right Sector has been accused by Russia of being involved in anticrises in recent years where Russian forces were involved.
It has been noted that Russian violence in eastern Ukraine (BBC, 2014/04/18, Guardian, 2014/05/15, NYT, Russia's recent actions in Crimea follow a pattern similar to that of its interventions 2014/03/11, Reuters, 2014/03/07, BBC, 2014/01/21, SMH, 2014/03/28, BBC, 2014/02/01). in other parts of the former Soviet space over the past 25 years.
The 11 March referendum on organisation of ethnic Russian or pro-Russia social and political groups and so-called self-rule was held by the self-proclaimed “Donetsk People’s Republic” movements; the deployment or support of informal or unofficial security forces in key and “Luhansk People’s Republic”, two armed groups with separatist motives areas; and finally, the launching of formal military operations.
The Transdniestria region in Moldova unilaterally declared independence from recognised the presence of citizens of the Russian Federation, including from Moldova in 1990.
The region with a population of half a million held a referendum Chechnya and other republics of the North Caucasus, within their armed groups in 2006, in which 98% of voters opted for joining Russia.
Full annexation has not . happened though the region is to a large extent effectively under Russian control.
This separatist group allegedly bears the same name as a likely when transferred to the Ukraine situation, is not expected to have a strong Chechen unit sponsored by the Russian military intelligence service, GRU. humanitarian impact and therefore was not developed within this document.
In the Georgian region of South Ossetia, tensions between Tbilisi and Moscow 845,000 troops.
At the end of July an estimated 35,000 were in the area of resulted in a five-day war in 2008.
Ukraine’s armed forces continue to operate mainly Soviet-era and another separatist territory, Abkhazia, as independent countries and equipment, which is in need of upgrade or replacement.
They function as Russian been around 1% of GDP in recent years; the services have been inadequately protectorates.
This historical event was considered relevant for consideration in financed and defence reforms have been significantly under-funded.
Ukrainian forces are considered better-trained than Russians, have been engaged over the last decade in international peacekeeping missions and In public remarks made on 17 April 2014, Russia’s President Putin asserted established close contacts with western counterparts.
In May 2014, Ukraine Russia’s claim to New Russia, an area of Ukraine that used to be part of the Russian 10 ACAPS Briefing Note empire with an extent as shown in the map below.
The New Russia Low High claim referring specifically to Ukrainian territory has been considered as relevant in Affected Population Probability level X the scenario formulation.
Context &  Internal displacement increases; Impact  Population movements into neighbouring countries continue;  Further deterioration of the economy and the loss of livelihoods due to disruptions in industrial and agricultural production;  Increasing numbers of casualties;  Lack of access to medical facilities and food, electricity and clean water for civilians;  Increasing lack of basic food supplies and poverty among civilians;  Social tensions between host communities and displaced people arise.
NYT, 2014/04/17 Operational  Insecurity, targeted attacks and increased violence limit access.
Ethnic repressions in Crimea associated with forced displacement and two and activist groups;  Check points complicate access. extreme scenarios contemplating the invasion of the country by Russian troops and a civil war between nationalist, pro-Russian and other factions in the country.
Protection, Cash, Food, Livelihoods, Shelter and NFI, Education, Priority needs Health.
Operational  Insecurity, bureaucratic obstacles imposed by Russians, targeted attacks Constraints and increased violence limit access;  Access dependent on ceasefire agreements monitored by international observers;  Check points, restriction of access to aid.
