First it is almost impossible to identify a “nationalist school” that would have shaped Russia’s foreign policy decisions.
This is the only case where we can trace the inﬂuence of a nationalist group with clearly identiﬁable ﬁgures and lobbying structures; however, the nationalist content has been neutralized in the process of cooptation by state organs.
This article argues that even in the context of the Ukrainian crisis of 2014, which has partly changed previously established interactions between nationalism and Russia’s foreign policy, Russia may use a nationalist post hoc explanation but does not advance a nationalist agenda.
Usually it is journalists who describe Russia’s foreign policy their supposed desire to rejoin the motherland.
Deﬁning as “nationalist,” but the term tends to crop up in scholarly what is to be understood as “nationalism” in Russia is discussions as well, especially since the beginning of the challenging, as several traditions compete–some limiting it Ukrainian crisis.
This mostly uncritical use of the term to ethnonationalism, some including references to the “nationalist” as a broad, catchall category allows for a imperial past or Soviet identity, and some insisting on a simplistic description of Russian foreign policy in terms civic or legal deﬁnition .2 that readers presumably understand.
However, this assumpHere I deﬁne nationalism broadly as encompassing all these tion is precisely what needs questioning.
Another The discussion is signiﬁcant in light of Russia’s annexaissue is tracking the possible trajectory of speciﬁc narratives tion/reintegration of the Crimea in early 2014 and the subfrom intellectual groups and media outlets to state organs. sequent actions in eastern Ukraine.
Russian president This is even more challenging, given that nationalist groups Vladimir Putin justiﬁed these events with geopolitical arguexpress some viewpoints that are largely shared by the ments about Ukraine’s tilt toward the West, but he also majority of the population, making their narratives part of made ﬁnely honed references to the divided nature of the a larger Zeitgeist.
A causal relationship is therefore almost Russian nation and Russia’s legitimate moral duty to take impossible to demonstrate.
In this paper I restrict myself to care of Russian communities outside Russia and to respect discussing a case study, that of the “compatriot” narrative.
Nationalists have never directly among foreign policy practitioners is more difﬁcult to participated in decision-making processes on foreign policy, demonstrate.
The narratives about foreign policy that are but they have fostered a general atmosphere that can inﬂuspread throughout the public space are far removed from ence ofﬁcial narratives.
This is their interpretations of several speciﬁc foreign policy issues, the only case where we can trace the inﬂuence of a nationat least to a certain extent.
They share the same views of the alist group with clearly identiﬁable ﬁgures and lobbying Yugoslav wars at the end of the 1990s, of the “color” structures.
However, as I show in this paper, the content is revolutions in Georgia in 2003 and Ukraine in 2004, and neutralized in the process of co-optation.
Third, the paper of the war with Georgia in 2008 and the Crimea annexation/ explores brieﬂy how the Ukrainian crisis has partly changed reintegration in 2014.
They celebrate Putin’s reassertion of Russia as a great power on the international scene as compared to Yeltsin’s denial of the country’s global NARROW AND BROAD DEFINITION OF THE role and status, but they criticize the Kremlin for what they INFLUENCE OF NATIONALISTS ON consider to be half-measures.
Disappointment is thus the main nationalist but are excluded from decision-making; the balancers, who feeling regarding Russia’s ofﬁcial foreign policy.
If the endorse the view that Russia should be a geopolitically and most vocal nationalists had been able to shape foreign culturally distinct entity with a mission to stabilize relations policy, Russia would not have been the status quo power between East and West; and the great-power normalizers; it has been for the past two decades.
It would have acted with the latter two categories dominating the Putin more aggressively in the Near Abroad, occupied Russianadministration.
These to improve relations with Poland and Central Europe, introanalyses are ground breaking, but the authors do not deﬁne duced a restricted visa regime with the Central Asian repubtheir use of the term school.
A school of thought is a lics, and annexed the Arctic continental shelf without collection of people who share common opinions.
It prespending millions of dollars in geological studies in order supposes that they agree on shared contents, but also that to adhere to the United Nations’ ofﬁcial Convention on the they use—at least at a minimal level—similar outreach platLaw of the Sea procedures.
With the exception of the 2008 forms or strategies and work and network together. recognition of South Ossetian and Abkhazian independence When discussing nationalism in foreign policy, we face a and the 2014 crisis in Ukraine, where Moscow breached kind of words-versus-deeds dilemma.
The former expression refers to a while Russian nationalists have been calling for more pregroup of people with inﬂuence on foreign policy decisionemptive actions. making processes, whose practices and worldly perceptions If we use a fairly narrow deﬁnition of inﬂuence—namely, share a common background; the latter is a group of people inﬂuence on legislation and policy execution at the instituwho speak about foreign policy, with or without the means tional level–nationalist groups cannot be considered as to shape it.
Many public ﬁgures—politicians, journalists, powerful agents in shaping Russia’s foreign policy.
Few of and media pundits—discuss Russia’s foreign policy for a them have contacts within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, domestic audience, but without participating in actual deciwhich, of course, can be considered only as an executive sion-making.
We could discuss and the LDPR promoted nationalist themes at the Duma, but the articulation between nationalism and these civilizational their ability to inﬂuence legislation was modest, and only values, which now deeply mark Russia’s own image on the KPRF tried to hamper the legislative process. international scene, but that would go beyond the scope of Among individual ﬁgures, Alexander Dugin is one of this paper.
More important, this broader approach to trackthe few Russian nationalist thinkers with a sophisticated ing the inﬂuence of nationalists on foreign policy cannot doctrine on foreign policy and with ﬁrm networks abroad. demonstrate causal mechanisms.
Is it because nationalists He gained some inﬂuence in military circles when he are supposedly increasingly vocal on foreign policy issues taught at the Military Academy of the General Staff, and that Russia’s foreign policy is becoming more “nationalist,” he was close to Minister of Defense General Igor or are they simply providing, a posteriori, a discursive Rodionov in 1996–97.
Similar strategies orchestrated by Vladislav direct inﬂuence on two important ministerial ﬁgures that Surkov were developed toward Moldova and Georgia, but promote Eurasianist themes, Sergei Glazev, adviser to the on a smaller scale.
However, Nashi’s excessive confrontapresident for regional integration issues, supervising the tional behavior toward Estonia, a member state of the Customs Union and the Eurasian Economic Union, and European Union, tarnished the Kremlin’s image and conMinister of Culture Vladimir Medinsky, remains difﬁcult tributed to the partial discrediting of the movement among to assess.
Another example is the publishing house Chamber until spring 2014, when his right-hand man, Evropa, which Gleb Pavlovsky established in 2005 with the Valeri Korovin, was able to get elected by collecting nearly goal of promoting the Russian point of view in the “infor40,000 votes online. mation war” with the West and some CIS countries.
In these cases, his weekly newspaper, Zavtra, is the main platform for nationalist groups were a tool of Russia’s foreign policy, not nationalist voices.
Through this example I hope RUSSIA AS A DIVIDED NATION 91 to demonstrate the complexity of the interaction between did not win the 5 percent threshold needed for representanationalist groups and foreign-policy-making processes. tion in the Duma.
After its ﬂagrant electoral failure, the KRO collapsed, and its leaders pursued separate political trajectories.
From the Congress of Russian Communities to Rodina Rogozin, elected in 1997 as a single-seat Duma deputy By the autumn of 1989, several parliamentary factions had from Voronezh, was appointed vice-chairman of the formed within the USSR Supreme Soviet with a goal of Duma’s Committee for National Policy and dealt mostly preserving the unity of the Soviet federation, which had with the sensitive issue of the Russian North Caucasus. been undermined by Gorbachev’s liberalization policy.
Re-elected to parliament in 1999, he directed the Duma’s Within this Sovietophile camp, the most important organiCommittee for International Affairs, as well as the permazation was the Soyuz movement organized by ethnic nent delegation of the Duma to the Parliamentary Assembly Russian deputies from the union republics, such as Viktor of the Council of Europe.
In July 2002, in recognition of his Alksnis in Latvia, Yevgenii Kogan in Estonia, and Yuri loyalty to the Kremlin, Putin appointed him chairman of the Blokhin in Moldavia.
A few months after the collapse of Committee for Problems of the Kaliningrad Region Due to the Soviet Union in late 1991, the Congress of Russian the Expansion of the European Union to the East.
Glazev, Communities , led by Dmitri Rogozin and some of Baburin, Alksnis, Narochnitskaya pursued their careers as the Soyuz MPs, emerged as the ﬁrst movement seeking to MPs, and Lebed “retreated” to the Krasnoyarsk region until defend Russians abroad.
Luzhkov, meanwhile, remained a very nation to be uniﬁed in a united state on its historical terriactive player on the compatriot issue.
In addition, the municipality rities and, if possible, for modifying borders in order to established the International Council of Russian integrate Belarus, at least part of Ukraine, and northern Compatriots, and, in 2004, it opened the Muscovite House Kazakhstan into the Russian Federation.
The KRO’s nationof Compatriots, designed to be the main center for working alist motives were directly inspired by Aleksandr with Russians of the Near Abroad.
In March cial ﬁgures participated in the Congress, including Russian 2005, the Rodina faction pushed— unsuccessfully—for a State Duma spokesperson Ivan Rybkin and some members vote on a bill called “Accession to the Russian Federation of the Yeltsin government.
Proposed by featured General Alexander Lebed, at the time governor of Rogozin and Narochnitskaya, the amendments would have Krasnoyarsk Krai and later Russia’s Security Council facilitated accession to Russia for autonomous regions of secretary20; Konstantin Zatulin, long-time director of other CIS states without constituting, from the Russian the inﬂuential Institute for the CIS Countries; Sergei perspective, a violation of the international treaties recogGlazev, who represented Russian social-democrats who nizing post-Soviet borders.
In 1995, the KRO became a part of the Union Kremlin, but it gained autonomy and began overtly challenof the Russian People’s bloc, led by Yuri Skokov and ging the pro-Putin party United Russia; it quickly paid the Lebed, the latter then at the height of his inﬂuence; neverprice for this in 2006, when the Kremlin coopted some of its theless, in the 1995 parliamentary elections, the movement leaders and dismantled the party.
Despite its short, three92 LARUELLE year lifespan Rodina was able to unify many once disparate National Unity—and made Belov his personal adviser. nationalists under one partisan banner.
Some of them had Rodina was thus the ﬁrst ofﬁcial political structure to anticipreviously belonged to the KPRF or to the LDPR; others pate the role xenophobia would play in reconﬁguring the were members of parties that did not emphasize nationalism, public debate on Russia’s national identity. or—as in the case of Baburin or Alksnis–had pursued independent actions without partisan afﬁliation.
Rodina thus Russia’s Compatriot Policy and the Lobbying Role of gave structure to previously disparate individual actions KRO–Rodina and nationalist discourses in the form of a political party and parliamentary faction.
More important, Rodina manaMore important for our assessment here, KRO–Rodina is ged to formulate consensual, respectable nationalist arguthe only nationalist movement to have developed systematic ments and transform concepts that had previously been positions on the Near Abroad and that has tried to particideemed too radical when put forth by the LDPR, the pate in the ofﬁcial decision-making process.
It garnered support from members electoral failure in 1995, the Congress of Russian of the presidential majority, despite the fact that all of its Communities left a considerable heritage.
Its “Manifesto leaders began their careers in monarchic, Orthodox, or of Russia’s Rebirth” and Soviet nostalgic circles.
Largely thanks to Rodina, many its “Declaration of the Rights of Compatriots” (Deklaratsiya “nationalist” themes moved from the margins into the prav sootechestvennikov) directly inﬂuenced the ﬁrst ofﬁcial realm of publicly accepted topics. texts adopted by the Duma on the topic.
At that time, Rodina was also the only political party present at the Yeltsin’s pro-Western Kremlin argued that the Russians of fourth Duma that linked its narrative on Russia as a divided the Near Abroad were sufﬁciently protected by international nation to the country’s global migration policy.
In fall 2005, legislation on the protection of national minorities, to which during the election campaign for the Moscow City Duma, the new states had subscribed.
This decree proposed politician, and his ability to encroach on Zhirinovsky’s to organize diverse protective measures for compatriots in niche.
Rodina’s CIS member states and in the Baltic countries and to form a slogans actually came to dominate the campaign; and its governmental commission to coordinate the activities of leaders, perceived as victims of the Kremlin, gained legitistate bodies on this question.
However, it was not followed macy in the nationalist camp and were heralded as defenders by any practical measures and seems to have been one of of a Russian people under attack from migrants.
Between 2004 and 2006, Rodina deputies campaigned A new phase opened in 1995, when the Yeltsin adminfor a bill restricting the retail business of foreign citizens in istration decided again to take up the topic of the diaspora Russia.
The Duma did not pass this bill but it did directly in order to challenge the Communist and nationalist oppoinspire a November 2006 law prohibiting foreigners from sition and avoid letting them appear to be the lone defentrading in Russian markets.
The government organized the Saveliev, then Rodina’s number two and vice-president of ﬁrst material aid for the diaspora and allocated special the Duma Committee for CIS Affairs and Relations with federal funds for compatriot policies.
A ﬁrst “Declaration Compatriots, became the linchpin of the rapprochement of Support for the Russian Diaspora and for the Protection between some MPs and the Movement Against Illegal of Russian Compatriots” (Deklaratsiya o podderzhke rosImmigration , led by Alexander Belov.
The DPNI siiskoi diaspory i o pokrovitel’stve rossiiskim sootechestnot only dramatically contributed to making the migration vennikam) was passed that year, and considered by issue one of the most debated topics in the Russian media nationalists to be a great personal victory for Rogozin, but also fomented anti-migrant riots, especially the ﬁrst big Baburin, and Zatulin, all of whom had worked hard to one in Kondopoga, by recruiting skinheads.
He participated Nevertheless, in practice the state only paid lip service to in the ﬁrst Russian Marches—the demonstrations of Russian the diaspora.
In 1997, a bill on Russia’s policy toward nationalists organized on November 4 for the Day of compatriots was the ﬁrst to deﬁne precise rights for these RUSSIA AS A DIVIDED NATION 93 individuals.
However, it provoked violent polemics in the codiﬁcation, in June 2006, of the “State Assistance Duma between Communist and liberal deputies.
This program was designed to frame the “return” used his veto, arguing that the proposed resolutions would of compatriots, who were deﬁned as “those educated in the interfere in the domestic affairs of neighboring countries.
The Program of State Assistance for Voluntary Vladimir Putin’s promotion to the presidency in 2000 Travel of Compatriots to Russia can thus be considered as gave a new validation to the KRO claims.
From his ﬁrst the group’s main—and only—success in directly inﬂuenmonths in power, he decried the demographic danger that cing Russia’s foreign policy making, even if its results have was creeping up on Russia and that threatened it with been more than disappointing. extinction—remarks he would repeat on several occasions The KRO–Rodina network is the only instance in which afterwards.
In 2001, a “Concept on the Demographic a group with a well-deﬁned nationalist agenda has been in a Development of Russia 2001–2015” was adopted and position to submit draft bills to the Duma on such a regular deﬁned immigration as one of the country’s priorities.
In basis, to have its concerns ﬁlter up to the presidential October 2001, Putin attended the ﬁrst World Congress of administration, and to secure decrees and a state program Compatriots Living Abroad, a gesture welcomed by KRO on a topic dear to it.
But it is also clear that in the process of circles, which saw this as the Kremlin’s endorsement.
At the shaping foreign policy, many aspects of the nationalist doccongress Putin stated, “Russia is interested in the return of trine have been lost.
There have been obvious insufﬁciencies of the Russian Federation–that is, until the Ukraine crisis of on the part of the ofﬁcial authorities, on the part of the state, 2014.
Once integrated into Russia’s foreign policy, hom), which for the ﬁrst time outlined the range of possible the issues raised by nationalist groups lose their conﬂict actions that Russia could take on this issue.
Here also, the KRO–Rodina network planted the of mechanisms for their legal and controlled migration to seeds but didn’t reap the beneﬁts.
The Russian World concept promotes The KRO–Rodina lobby played a key role in fostering a Russian culture in the world (by providing funds for the state repatriation program.
The Russian World became a more Russians in the Near Abroad to becoming a tool for prominent part of Russia’s ofﬁcial narrative in the second Russian soft power encapsulates the blurry boundary half of the 2000s.
On the occasion of the “Year of the between ethnic and state identities.
The slogan “Russia as Russian Language” in 2007, Putin established a Russian a divided nation” used during the Ukrainian crisis does not World Fund and assigned it to the portfolio of a loyal help to solve the dilemma, as the “divided nation” can also intellectual apparatchik, Viacheslav Nikonov, the head of be a Soviet one, and not necessarily the ethnic one. the Politika Foundation, not to a member of the KRO– Rodina network.
Fund moved away from its initial “compatriot” aspect to include a broader promotion of Russian language and culDoes the 2014 Russo–Ukrainian crisis constitute a game ture abroad and at home.
Putin Rossotrudnichestvo under the decided to annex Crimea but he stood ﬁrm on taking a Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the aim of which was to “rein“wait-and-see position” for eastern Ukraine, which allowed force international relations and close cooperation in the Donetsk and Lugansk to slide into civil war.
Until July 2014 its into more palatable public-relations campaigns, and the assistance to pro-Russian insurgents was not sufﬁcient for group lost its stranglehold on a brand it largely helped them to prevail, but it did allow them to withstand attacks create. from the Ukrainian regular army.
In KRO’s perception the term the conﬂict by creating a gray area in which the authorities was inspired by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn’s assumptions and neither approve nor disapprove of their doing so. encompasses only ethnic Russians and the Slavic populations Nationalists have invested in the conﬂict in every sense, , and thus has a by sending brigades of volunteers trained in paramilitary clear ethnic/linguistic focus that excludes other Soviet peoactions, distributing humanitarian aid, and dominating the ples.
First, it violated an implicit agreezens permanently residing abroad; individuals and their ment, according to which Russia accepted an independent descendants who live abroad and are linked (otnoshyashieUkraine, provided it did not espouse anti-Russian policy and sya) to the peoples historically residing on the Russian did not rally to the Western camp.
In preparing to sign a free Federation territory; those making the free choice of a spiritrade agreement with the European Union that would symtual, cultural, and legal link to Russia; those whose ancestors bolically pave the way for Ukraine’s slow integration into resided on the Russian Federation territory, including former Europe’s economic and military spaces, Ukraine violated USSR citizens now living in states that were part of the this implicit Finlandization status.
The price to pay was USSR, regardless of whether they became citizens of another the outright annexation of Crimea, which was efﬁciently state or are stateless; and those who have emigrated from the carried out without any military blunders.
Second, Ukraine Russian state, the Russian republic, the Russian Soviet was poorly governed and experienced recurrent “Maidans,” Federative Socialist Republic, the USSR, and the Russian that is, regime changes driven from the streets, which, Federation that either became citizens of another state or depending on one’s point of view, can be deﬁned as demobecame stateless persons.” 42 cratic revolutions or as coups.
For the Kremlin, political The legal deﬁnition of compatriot functions in a coninstability in the name of democratization, inspired by centric way.
It is going from a civic core Western values and funded by Western money, is a direct to a broader group of people who are culturally and spiriroute to domestic chaos and lost sovereignty.
The transformation during the Ottoman wars up until the Crimean War of the notion of Russian World from deﬁning ethnic and during the Second World War—and by RUSSIA AS A DIVIDED NATION 95 emphasizing the importance of Sevastopol in Russia’s asserinner circle.
But Rogozin also leads a new Rodina party, tion of its strategic autonomy.
In eastern Ukraine, it thus continuing the role he played in the 2000s, linking emphasized Russia’s relationship to “Russian-speakers” radical nationalist groups and ideologies to the Kremlin, and “Russians” abroad, which hits more of an emotive along with the personal support of Alexander Prokhanov register because it plays on an essentially ethnic and/or and his Izborsky Club.
However, to say that Putin has ofﬁce of the Russian Institute of Democracy and become a frenzied ethnonationalist since the onset of the Cooperation, has gained a level of inﬂuence that she has Ukrainian crisis is a mistake.
Sergei rules of the game, not to reconstitute a divided Russian Glazev, adviser to Putin for regional integration issues, nation. supervises the Customs Union and the Eurasian Economic It is true that with the crisis in Ukraine, Putin has Union.
He has become one of the regime’s key ﬁgures, one enlarged his own repertoire of arguments.
He has unambiguof the few—along with Putin himself—to defend a project ously declared that “the Russian nation became one of the of integration with Central Asian countries that includes a biggest, if not the biggest, ethnic groups in the world to be visa-free regime.
As is the case with many former empires, Russia’s “cultural body” is larger than its territory, which has shrunk from the CONCLUSIONS Soviet-era borders.
But this does not mean that every country with a Russian minority should prepare for a Ukrainian Exploring the articulation between nationalism and Russia’s scenario.
The Kremlin’s relationship to this cultural body foreign policy involves accepting and recognizing myriad abroad is contextualized.
Russian nationalists do not constitute a abroad if the country that hosts it accepts being “school” of foreign policy similar to the other schools, as Finlandized.
Ukraine refuses to play according to the they have no direct access to or inﬂuence in places where rules, and therefore paid the hefty price of both annexation decisions are taken.
As seen from the Kremlin’s perspective, nationalists in the upper echelons of the state and who it was because of Maidan that Ukraine lost Crimea and have managed to become part of Russia’s policy establishfaced civil war, not because it hosts part of the divided ment have very speciﬁc trajectories.
Many nationalist proponents consider that they have the Kremlin needs to penalize a neighbor for its geopolinot moved toward the regime or evolved in their views, but tical or political disloyalty, but it does not appear as a that the current political and cultural landscape around them driver of routine foreign policy decisions.
The Ukrainian has changed and progressively created a kind of mirroring crisis has extended and made ofﬁcial a storyline that was effect with the state-run discursive repertoire.
Already back elaborated immediately following the fall of the USSR by in 1995, the Kremlin began to appropriate topics that were groups then outside of the decision-making process. previously considered the domain of nationalist circles and Some KRO–Rodina personalities have also gained in coopted them into its ofﬁcial narrative.
In 2011 Dmitri Rogozin was “patriotism” and Soviet nostalgia, “memory wars” with named deputy prime minister in charge of the defense other post-Soviet states, and the policy of compatriots and industry and is therefore connected with the military-industhe Russian World.
In all cases, once integrated into a statetrial complex, which has probably the most organized lobrun narrative, issues that once belonged to nationalist groups bying effort in Russia and direct connections to Putin’s are largely rendered harmless.
They lose their mobilizing 96 LARUELLE potential and their most conﬂictual aspects, and they are NOTES assimilated into a narrative more likely to ﬁt the status quo.
See Oxana Shevel, “Russian Nation-Building from Yeltsin to Then the Ukrainian crisis emerged.
Change and Continuity in National Identity . aspect—changing state borders.
Domestic Foreign Policy Debates in China, India, Iran, Kosovo’s independence, the United States invasion of Iraq, and Japan, and Russia, ed.
Their inﬂuInterpretation of Public Life in Contemporary Russia,” Russian ence can thus be typologized in three levels.
On Dugin’s connections with military circles, see John B Dunlop, Ukraine, or Russian nationalist paramilitary groups that “Aleksandr Dugin’s ‘Neo-Eurasian’ Textbook and Dmitrii Trenin”s Ambivalent Response,” Harvard Ukrainian Studies 25, no.–2 have joined the ranks of the Donbass insurgents.
Yevgeni Fedorov, “Tsel’ natsional’no-osvoboditel’nogo dvizheniia– for Russian nationalist groups and leaders to “escort” vosstanovlenie suvereniteta, poteriannogo v 1991 gody” (The goal of Russia’s foreign policy by crafting legitimizing ideological the national liberation movement is the re-establishment of the soverstorylines.
Hurst Estonia,” Baltic Security and Defence Review 10 : 5–28; Eva& Company, 1995); David Laitin, Identity in Formation.
The illegal entry of Nashi members onto Estonian territory in Soviet Union . military uniforms merited their being arrested, expelled, and above all 33.
The following section is based on the systematic analysis of Materik prohibited from having a Schengen visa for ten years.
Daidzhest materialov Rosinformbiuro KRO (The Rossiiskoi Federatsii sootechesvennikov, prozhivaiushchikh za Congress of Russian Communities.
Nationalism and Citizenship Policy in Post-Soviet Russia,” Post-Soviet Affairs 28, no.
Sergey Glaz’ev, “K voprosu ob ideologii organizatsii” (The question 43.
Policy Response and Public Debate,” Europe–Asia Studies 66, no. kremlin.ru/news/7034.
