The conflict in Ukraine has resulted in the deaths of roughly 10,000 people, including 3,000 civilians, and displaced roughly 1. million.
The Pentagon on Friday announced it's giving $200 million to Ukraine to bolster its defenses as its conflict with pro-Russian separatists rages on.
This move comes as President Donald Trump continues to face backlash over a recent meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
This move comes as President Donald Trump continues to defend his controversial relationship with Russian President Vladimir Putin after the two world leaders met in Helsinki earlier this week, highlighting the disconnect between the president's rhetoric and his administration's policies.
The statement also said the United States has given more than $1 billion to Ukraine since conflict broke out there following the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014.
The Trump administration this week also said discussions are ""underway"" to host Putin in Washington this fall, a visit that could occur close to the 2018 midterms.
The United States intelligence community, which concluded Russia interfered in the 2016 United States presidential election under Putin's guidance, has warned the Kremlin is also planning attacks on future United States elections including the midterms.
Director of National Intelligence Dan Coats appeared to be shocked on Thursday when he learned Putin was being invited by the Trump administration to the nation's capital after spending much of the week reiterating warnings about Russia's dubious intentions regarding the United States electoral process.
Though Trump has long signified a desire to have a strong relationship with Putin and often complimented the Russian leader, his administration has maintained support for Ukraine in its fight against the Russian-leaning separatists in the Donbass region.
The United States government in recent months delivered Javelin anti-tank missiles to the Ukraine, a move met with resounding approval by Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko.
Defense Secretary James Mattis has maintained a hawkish stance on Russia but on Wednesday urged Congress to waive sanctions on allies who purchase Russian arms over an apparent concern it could push these countries into the Kremlin's arms.
