It’s easy to understand why a majority of Ukrainians want NATO’s and America’s protection.
And Western officials insist that no third party,e., Russia, has any say on who joins the alliance.
NATO should add nations only if they increase the security of the whole.
Given the fact that the United States would do most of the heavy lifting in any conflict with nuclear-armed Russia, the critical question for Washington is whether adding a new member would increase Americans’ security.
The current president came to power after a street revolution against the previously elected, though notoriously corrupt, president.
Wealthy oligarchs still hold disproportionate power, while extreme nationalists exercise worrisome influence.
The country would be a huge security black hole for NATO and especially America.
Historically Washington had little concern about a territory which spent most of the last two centuries as part of either the Russian Empire or the Soviet Union.
Ukraine’s independence, though a moral good, didn’t matter much militarily.
The United States would vastly outrange whatever Russia emerged, irrespective of Kiev’s status.
Today America possesses a substantially stronger military, vastly larger economy, and far greater array of allies than Russia.
But adding Kiev to NATO would also bring in Ukraine’s conflict with Russia.
However, that doesn’t change the fact that it’s a conflict Washington should avoid.
America simply has no interest at stake worth confronting a nuclear-armed power.
Especially when Russia’s security interests are immediate, serious, and obvious.
The best way to understand Moscow today is as a pre-1914 great power, concerned about international respect and secure borders.
The United States and NATO ignored both when expanding the transatlantic alliance up to Russia’s borders, dismantling Moscow’s long-time friend Serbia, promising Georgia and Ukraine NATO membership, and backing the 2014 street putsch against the elected Viktor Yanukovych, who leaned toward Moscow.
Despite NATO’s official welcome to Kiev’s membership efforts, applicants are supposed to resolve any territorial disputes before they are eligible for inclusion.
That seemingly rules out Ukraine, but only so long as conflict rages in the Donbas.
Kiev’s ongoing pursuit of NATO actually gives Russia an incentive to keep the geopolitical pot boiling.
The United States and Russian governments, in consultation with the other NATO members, should go deep to forge a lasting peace.
As part of such an agreement Ukrainians would be free to trade either east or west and Kiev would be free to join the European Union.
Ukraine would allow greater regional decentralization, especially in the Donbas.
No Russian government is likely to yield Crimea under any circumstance, short of losing a general war.
However, the United States and Europe should indicate they do not plan to extend security guarantees to Ukraine under any circumstances.
That would allow all parties to move on in search of a practical resolution to the conflict in Ukraine.
Doug Bandow is the Senior Fellow and former Special Assistant to President Ronald Reagan.
If Ukraine has a long way to go to become a democracy , I'm wondering if NATO should expel Turkey, which seems hell-bent to go the other way.
Maybe Turkey, moving in the direction of Shari'a and away from democratic norms, should get off the NATO bus.
