January 11 Yuri Lutsenko, one of the leaders of the protests, is injured during clashes with the police.
January 19 New violent clashes erupt in Ukraine as a reaction to new strict anti-protest laws.
January 21 Violent clashes occur for a second day between protesters and police in Kiev.
January 22 – At least five people are shot dead and hundreds injured as demonstrators clash with police over new laws limiting the right to protest in Ukraine.
January 24 Unrest in Ukraine spreads to the cities of Khmelnitsky, Zhytomyr, Cherkasy, Lviv , Ternopil, Ivano-Frankivsk, Lutsk, Rivne and Chernivtsi.
In Rivne and Lviv, the offices of the governors were broken into; the Lviv regional governor was forced to sign a letter of resignation.
Ukrainian Prime Minister Mykola Azarov submits his resignation to President Viktor Yanukovych in a bid to defuse the conflict in Ukraine.
Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovich accepts the resignation of Prime Minister Nikolay Azarov and his cabinet; the cabinet will continue to work until a new government is formed.
February 1 Activist Dymtro Bulatov reappears after allegedly being tortured by the government.
February 4 – At least 13 people die and five others are injured when a commuter train slams into a shuttle bus in Sumy Oblast, Ukraine.
February 7 A man attempts to hijack a Pegasus Airlines flight from Kharkiv, and demands to be flown to Sochi; the pilots turned off the inflight monitors and landed in Istanbul, Turkey, where the passenger was arrested.
February 15 French pole vaulter Renaud Lavillenie breaks Sergey Bubka's 21-year-old record with a 6.16 metres leap in Donetsk.
February 16 Anti-government protesters in Ukraine end a two-month occupation of Kiev’s city hall, following an amnesty offer aimed at easing a standoff over President Viktor Yanukovych’s rule.
February 18 Violent clashes between police forces and opposition demonstrators reignite in Kiev.
The death toll rises to 14, six of them policemen who were shot dead during the confrontation.
February 18 – Seven miners are killed and nine injured in an explosion at the Pivnichna coal mine in Ukraine's Donetsk Oblast.
After protesters had resisted the police, opposition and President Viktor Yanukovych hold talks and reach a truce.
The President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych sacks Volodymyr Zamana as Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine; replacing him with Yuriy Ilyin.
In a few cities in Western Ukraine anti-government protesters seize government buildings.
A shaky truce is broken with police and protesters renewing clashes on Kiev's Maidan Nezalezhnosti, with scores of deaths reported.
The European Union imposes sanctions against Ukraine including asset freezes and visa bans.
At least 77 people are dead and large parts of Kiev's occupied Independence Square are burning after a bloody escalation of Ukraine's three-month political crisis.
February 20 Alpine skier Bogdana Matsotska of the Ukraine olympic team decides to pull out of the Winter Games in Sochi, as widespread anti-government protests back home leave dozens dead and hundreds injured.
February 21 The Ukrainian government and opposition agree to form a unity government and to hold early elections.
The Parliament of Ukraine removes President Viktor Yanukovych from office and frees ex-Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko.
Protesters claim control of the capital Kiev with reports that President Viktor Yanukovych has fled to eastern Ukraine.
Ukrainian economist and writer Oleksandr Turchynov is voted Speaker of the Parliament, and in that capacity acting President of Ukraine.
February 23 Former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych is blocked by Ukraine's customs in Donetsk from taking a plane to Russia.
The European Commission recognizes Oleksandr Turchynov as Ukraine‘s legitimate interim president.
Ukrainian economist and banker Stepan Kubiv, who worked as one of the commandants for the EuroMaidan demonstrations, is selected as governor of the National Bank of Ukraine.
An arrest warrant is issued for the former President Viktor Yanukovych and other officials for their alleged role in killing protesters.
February 25 The Parliament of Ukraine removes the five-pointed red star from its spire in a measure aimed at erasing the nation’s Soviet legacy.
Ukraine's interim President Oleksandr Turchynov formally becomes the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
Ukraine's acting interior minister Arsen Avakov says the elite Berkut police unit, blamed for the deaths of protesters, has been disbanded.
February 26 The President of Russia, Vladimir Putin, orders snap military exercises near the Ukraine border.
The Parliament of Ukraine’s Autonomous Republic of Crimea announces a referendum to determine the region’s future and ousts the regional government.
Ousted President Viktor Yanukovich, whose whereabouts remained unknown before he turned up in Russia, issues a statement saying that he is still the legitimate president and ""ready to fight to the end"" to fulfill his deal with the opposition.
Around 50 armed men bearing Russian national symbols seize the building of the Supreme Council of Crimea following clashes between the ethnic Tatar and Russian protesters.
The Verkhovna Rada or parliament of Ukraine appoints Arseniy Yatsenyuk as the Prime Minister of Ukraine.
February 27 The Autonomous Republic of Crimea has announced that it plans to hold a referendum for independence the same day as the elections in Ukraine.
Members of the Russian Parliament propose new laws that would make it easier for Russia to incorporate parts of Ukraine.
Russia finally confirms that it has moved troops in Ukraine's Crimea region to protect its own interests.
Mykhailo Kutsyn is appointed Chief of the General Staff and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
Acting General Prosecutor General Oleh Makhnitsky formally calls on Russia to extradite ousted President Viktor Yanukovych along with 10 other figures; the list includes former Prosecutor General Viktor Pshonka, former Interior Minister Vitaliy Zakharchenko, Yanukovich aide Andriy Klyuyev, and former Justice Minister Olena Lukash.
News agency Interfax-Ukraine reports that armed pro-Russian men have taken over control of two airports, among which Simferopol International Airport, and raised the Russian Navy flag.
March 1 – Amid tensions in Ukraine's Crimea, the Federation Council of Russia authorizes President Vladimir Putin to use force.
March 11 The Crimean parliament and the Sevastopol City Council issued a letter of intent to unilaterally declare independence from Ukraine.
March 16 Official results of the Crimean status referendum show a large majority voted in favour of independence of Crimea from Ukraine and joining Russia as a federal subject.
May 2 Clashes between pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian groups broke out in multiple in the streets of Odessa.
July 17 A Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was shot down and crashed near Torez in Donetsk Oblast.
Ukrainian forces battle pro-Russian rebels near Luhansk International Airport.
The RIA Novosti news agency reports that Russian photojournalist Andrey Stenin has been found dead in Ukraine.
NATO sources claim that there are ""several thousand"" Russian troops inside Ukraine.
September 5 The government of Ukraine and pro-Russian rebels agree to a cease-fire, fighting continues after the announcement.
September 6 In an official statement, Patriarch Filaret, who heads the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyivan Patriarchate, says that Russian President Vladimir Putin has fallen under the spell of Satan and faces eternal damnation to hell unless he repents.
September 8 Pro-Russian rebels release 1,200 prisoners under ceasefire deal.
September 12 The Government of Ukraine and pro-Russian separatists exchange dozens of prisoners agreed to as part of a ceasefire a week ago.
September 14 Heavy fighting resumes between Ukraine forces and rebels near Donetsk International Airport with at least six people dead.
September 15 Heavy shelling on the city of Donetsk leaves 6 people dead and 15 wounded.
September 16 Lawmakers from Ukraine ratify a landmark agreement with the European Union in tandem with a meeting of the European Parliament.
September 17 A rocket attack by pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine kills 10 civilians and injures 12 others in the village of Nyzhnya Krynka near Donetsk.
September 18 The President of Ukraine visits the United States to seek assistance in combating separatists in eastern Ukraine.
September 21 More than 26,000 people in Moscow participate in the largest demonstration so far against Russian president Vladimir Putin and the War in Donbass.
September 23 President of Russia Vladimir Putin warns in a letter to his Ukrainian counterpart Petro Poroshenko that Moscow will restrict Ukraine's access to Russian markets if Kiev implements any part of a trade agreement with the European Union.
September 25 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko announces a wide-ranging reform program entitled Strategy 2020 to prepare Ukraine for applying for European Union membership in 2020.
September 29 Renewed clashes around the Donetsk International Airport between the pro-Russian rebels and Ukrainian government troops kill at least 12 people in the worst flareup of violence since the ceasefire accord earlier in September.
September 30 The Ukrainian military say they have repelled a renewed assault by the pro-Russian forces on the Donetsk International Airport.
The airport has been under sustained assaults for over 2 weeks despite an official ceasefire.
October 1 At least 12 people are killed when shells hit a school and, in a separate shelling, a bus station in the separatist-controlled city of Donetsk.
November 2 Voters in break away ""people's republics"" in Donetsk and Luhansk go to the polls for parliamentary and presidential elections.
Rebel leaders Alexander Zakharchenko and Igor Plotnisky appear set for victory in early counting in elections which will be recognised in Russia but not elsewhere.
November 12 NATO claims that Russian Army troops and military equipment have entered Ukraine.
November 26 At least three people die in a new round of fighting between the Armed Forces of Ukraine and pro-Russian separatists.
November 27 The Parliament of Ukraine meets for the first time since recent elections with Arseniy Yatsenyuk expected to be confirmed as Prime Minister.
Georgian-born Alexander Kvitashvili, US-national Natalie Jaresko and Lithuanian Aivaras Abromavičius.
December 12 Prosecutors at Sary-Arqa District Court in Astana charge 30-year-old Yevgeny Vdovenko, a Kazakh citizen, of intentional and illegal participation in a military conflict abroad because he had fought alongside pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine.
December 18 The European Union imposes sanctions on Russia-occupied Crimea by banning investments and tourism in the region and halting oil explorations.
December 22 Kazakhstan renews its military cooperation with Ukraine, to which it promises vital supplies of coal, following a visit to Kiev by the Kazakh leader, Nursultan Nazarbayev.
