The office of Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko said Wednesday that he and Russian President Vladimir Putin agreed on a cease-fire in eastern Ukraine during this phone call, but the statement was brief and ambiguous, saying ""mutual understanding was reached regarding the steps that will contribute to the establishment of peace"" but gave no details.
Poroshenko's Twitter account even tweeted that the two presidents had agreed on a ""permanent"" cease-fire in Donbass, a region in eastern Ukraine where pro-Russian rebels have been battling Ukrainian forces.
As a result of my telephone conversation with Russian President we reached an agreement on a permanent ceasefire on Donbass.
However, Putin's office seemed to have no idea what Poroshenko was talking about and said no cease-fire deal had been reached because Russia wasn't involved in eastern Ukraine.
The Kremlin did, however, confirm that Putin and Poroshenko spoke over the phone on Wednesday about eastern Ukraine, but the official statement on that conversation was just as vague as Poroshenko's.
The changes appeared in Ukrainian, Russian and English-language versions issued by the office.
There have been previous statements of agreements on steps for peace in the east, but the conflict has only intensified, and a top rebel figure said no cease-fire was possible without Ukraine withdrawing its forces.
Wednesday's statement came as United States President Barack Obama arrived in Estonia in a show of solidarity with NATO allies who fear they could be Russia's next target.
Even though there have been attempted cease-fires before — most notably after Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 was shot down — peace hasn't yet reached the front lines.
The rebels ignored a 10-day unilateral cease-fire that Poroshenko had called in June.
For his part, Obama said it was too early to tell what the announcement meant.
He noted previous unsuccessful attempts and questioned whether pro-Russian separatists would abide by any cease-fire.
Ukraine and the West have accused Russia of sending its troops and weapons to support pro-Russian insurgents who have been fighting government forces in eastern Ukraine since mid-April.
Meanwhile, NATO and Ukrainian leaders have accused Russia of sending tanks and troops into strategic cities a new front in southeastern Ukraine, just north of the Crimea region that Russian annexed earlier this year.
Russia has also denied this claim, and NATO then released images showing troop presence inside Ukraine.
A satellite image released by NATO appears to show Russian military units moving in a convoy formation with self-propelled artillery in the area of Krasnodon, Ukraine, on 21 August 2014.
After a meeting with Poroshenko last week, Putin had said a cease-fire was not discussed because Russia was not a party to the conflict, echoing the statement that Peskov gave to CNN on Wednesday.
Peskov, was quoted by Russian news agencies on Wednesday as saying the leaders had ""largely agreed on steps that would be conducive to a cease-fire,"" but repeated that Russia is not involved in the fighting.
On the ground, rebel leaders say they just want autonomy, and that's why they continue to fight Ukrainian troops.
The separatists previously have called for full independence for their regions or possible absorption into Russia and have even held referendums.
Nearly 2,600 people have been killed and more than 340,000 have been forced to flee their homes since the conflict began in eastern Ukraine.
