May 12 The Donetsk People's Republic may consider a possibility of negotiations with the Kyiv authorities only if the latter quit the aggressive form of the conflict resolution, Donetsk People's Republic government cochairman Myroslav Rudenko said.
Probably, they are doing so on purpose in order to involve Russia in this conflict,"" he presumed.
May 12 Ukrainian interim President Oleksandr Turchynov has removed from office Luhansk Region State Administration Head Mykhailo Bolotskykh.
Bolotskykh was appointed as the head of the Luhansk Region State Administration on March 2.
Prior to that he was in charge of the State Emergency Service of Ukraine.
May 12 Over a hundred armed people have seized the Miners' Dawns sanatorium in the Budyonovskiy district of Donetsk, the Donbass News on-line mass media outlet reported on Friday.
Militia surrounded the sanatorium outside Donetsk, in which Ukrainian interior forces servicemen are accommodated, ""Donetsk People's Republic"" government co-chairman Myroslav Rudenko has told Interfax.
May 12 The Ukrainian authorities are ready to negotiate with regions, including Donbas, Ukrainian interim President Oleksandr Turchynov said.
He recalled the initiative he had put forward together with Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk to hold national unity roundtables across the country and, shortly, in Kyiv.
Local self-government bodies, Donbas scientists, cultural figures, and representatives of political movements and public organizations have been invited to take part in the roundtables, he said.
We are ready to sit down and talk no matter what is going on and what slogans are being proclaimed,"" Turchynov said.
In his words, Ukraine is independently moving along the de-centralization path.
We are interested in strong regions, the regions which will be able to form their executive committees that will make important decisions and be responsible for them.
This is the path we are following in preparation for the constitutional amendments,"" Turchynov concluded.
May 12 The International Committee of the Red Cross employees who were taken hostage on Friday have been freed in Donetsk.
One is severely beaten, he is staying at a hospital,"" Iryna Tsaryuk from the ICRC Ukrainian office told Interfax.
Online media outlet Novosti Donbassa reported earlier that unknown men had taken hostage seven employees of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
It said the humanitarian organization's office on Vatutina Avenue in the center of Donetsk was attacked on Friday night.
ICRC employees told the media outlet the attackers let women go and abducted seven men.
The hostages are ICRC volunteers from Kyiv, who brought drugs to the Donetsk office in the evening of May 9.
The attackers grabbed the drugs and took away the hostages in an unknown direction.
The media outlet reported the hostages were being held in the seized building of the Donetsk region state administration.
May 12 The Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchy has confirmed that a priest was killed in the Donetsk region but could not elaborate on the circumstances.
But it is unclear for now at which block post this happened, different information exists… No details exist for now,"" head of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church synod information and enlightenment department, Archpriest Georgy Kovalenko told Interfax on Friday.
According to Kovalenko, getting information is complicated by the fact that the priest killed was outside staff for several years and did not maintain contact with eparchial leadership.
Everything the eparchy knows is what happened and the rest is rumors,"" Kovalenko said.
Priest of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchy Pavel Zhuchenko was killed near a block post in the Donetsk region, local on-line mass media outlets and Orthodox activists have said.
At the same time, mutually exclusive versions of what happened were given.
The priest lived next to the block post, tried to urge opponents of the Kyiv authorities to surrender arms and was killed as a result of this, editor-in-chief of the Island on-line mass media outlet Sergei Garmash twitted.
Meanwhile, Russian Orthodox activist, head of the Orthodox action corporation Kirill Frolov told the Internet Religion portal that the Orthodox priest killed guided militia spiritually.
According to the information of the Ukrainian Prosecutor General's Office, the crime was committed at a block post at the exit from the town of Druzhovka on May 8.
The law enforcement authorities have started an investigation of the incident.
May 12 The Ukrainian Defense Ministry said it denied reports on the seizure of two Grad multiple rocket launchers near Slovyansk in the Donetsk region.
Meanwhile, self-defense forces claim that Slovyansk militia has seized two Grad multiple rocket launchers.
May 12 Three people died and 25 were injured and brought to hospitals during the forceful operation held in Mariupol, the Donetsk regional state administration healthcare department said in a statement on Friday.
May 12 A concert for veterans and anti-governmental rally are being held simultaneously at Svoboda Square in Kharkiv the two events are separated by a police cordon, the Interfax correspondent reported on Friday.
Up to 1,500 people activists of the South-East, Russian East, and Borotba movements participate in the rally and some of them came from the Glory memorial, where flowers were laid in the morning.
Protestors have brought a giant S George's ribbon, flags of their organizations, and portraits of Georgy Zhukov and Iosif Stalin.
May 12 The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry has issued a statement protesting Russian President Vladimir Putin's arrival to Crimea because the visit has not been accorded with the Ukrainian authorities considering Crimea to be Ukraine's territory.
The trip is considered as ""Russia ignoring the existing Ukrainian legislation and international law standards, and a serious violation of Ukraine's sovereignty by Russia,"" the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry said in the statement on Friday.
Russia ""escalates further tension in the Ukrainian-Russian relations"" and has no wish to resolve diplomatically the issues existing in the bilateral relations, the document said.
May 12 Certain countries use the events in Ukraine as a pretext to enhance NATO activities near the Belarusian borders and this is disturbing, Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko said.
Clouds of the civil war have piled up over the brotherly country and brother has laid a hand on brother.
We must stop this, whatever it costs is,"" Lukashenko said at the ceremony of laying wreaths to the Victory monument in Minsk on Friday.
All this requires special vigilance and solidarity of the nation,"" the president said.
Belarus will celebrate two significant dates in 2014 the 70th anniversary since the country was freed from the German fascist invaders will be marked in June and the 100th anniversary since the World War I began in August, Lukashenko said.
It is regrettable that ""today some politicians forget history lessons, try to diminish the role of the Soviet nation in fighting fascism and encourage Nazism revival,"" Lukashenko said.
We observe such examples in the Middle East, North Africa and other trouble spots of the planet,"" the president said.
Belarusian neighbor Ukraine has recently become one more trouble spot, Lukashenko said.
May 12 Belarus President Alexander Lukashenko said Minsk will not obstruct the signing of the treaty on the formation of the Eurasian Economic Union at the Astana summit on May 29.
Lukashenko also said that Belarus' position is that the union must be formed without any exemptions and limitations.
But he said that during his visit to Moscow almost all of the bilateral issues of interest to Belarus were settled.
He said he had instructed the Belarusian government to prepare thoroughly for signing the treaty on the formation of the Eurasian Economic Union ""so, by May 29, when the Astana summit is held, it becomes clear what we are going to sign and how, and what benefits we will get from this economic union,"" he said.
May 12 Belarus President Alexander Lukashenko said the country's next president must not destroy what was achieved during his tenure.
I am not an eternal president and I will have to go some day,"" he said.
May 12 The self-defense forces in Mariupol claimed that a Ukrainian law enforcement contingent has made use of military hardware while storming the city police department.
It is an old building with thick walls which cannot be crushed by gunfire,"" a spokesman for the self-defense command told Interfax on Friday.
He said, citing immediate reports, that several dozen police officers remain inside the building.
Local media reported, meanwhile, that the city police department and military garrison are being stormed.
Streets are being closed for traffic and local residents have been denied access to this part of the city.
Bursts are fired with automatic rifles in the center, according to the city medical services.
May 12 National-unity roundtable discussions will start in Ukraine on Wednesday, May 14, said Ukraine's interim prime minister, Arseniy Yatsenyuk.
On Thursday, Ukraine's parliamentary speaker and interim president Oleksandr Turchynov and Yatsenyuk released a joint statemenet saying that all-Ukrainian national-unity roundtable discussions would be held.
We are prepared to join dialogue with all the parties that pursue legitimate political goals and intend to defend them using legal means those who have not stained their hands with blood.
We invite representatives of all political forces from all regions, civil society and experts to start a dialogue on all issues and problems facing the Ukrainian people today,"" the joint statement says.
May 12 The leaders of the ""Donetsk People's Republic"" claimed that self-defense forces in Mariupol came under a chemical attack when the City Council building was being stormed by Kyiv-controlled armed units.
Many of them had their breathing systems damaged, which is likely to have consequences and probably be a danger to their lives,"" the statement says.
No confirmation of this information from other sources is available to Interfax.
May 12 The Ukrainian leadership is initiating national-unity roundtable discussions, involving all political forces representing all regions, as well as public figures and experts.
The proposals to be forged in dialogue between all political forces will be implemented by the Verkhovna Rada, including through mechanisms of amending the constitution and legislation,"" the statement says.
Turchynov and Yatsenyuk invited all the parties in the political process, as well as representatives of the public, to play and active role in implementing this initiative.
The Ukrainian leaders also said that all of the illegal armed groups must surrender their weapons and free the hostages and seized buildings.
Turchynov and Yatsenyuk again urged all signatories to the Geneva agreements to abide by them strictly, noting that the Ukrainian leadership is ready to propose additional steps to form national consensus and compromise.
May 12 A Moscow court has upheld the investigators' request to arrest in absentia Hennadiy Balashov, placed on the international wanted list on the accusation of extremist statements towards Russian citizens living in Ukraine, Russian Investigative Committee spokesman Vladimir Markin said.
Balashov is a defendant in the criminal case on inciting hatred and abetting attempted murder, the spokesman said.
Russian investigators opened a criminal case regarding Ukrainian businessman Balashov, Markin told Interfax on March 12.
At the same time, similar criminal case was opened against Right Sector leader Dmytro Yarosh, who is accused of public appeals to anti-Russian forces for extremist actions and terror on Russia.
May 12 Ukrainian police have arrested alleged organizers of ""mass riots"" in Odesa on May 2, the Interior Ministry said on Thursday.
May 12 The governor of Ukraine's Kharkiv region has said 24 large checkpoints have been put up on the province's border with two other regions in the east of the country Donetsk and Luhansk to keep ""saboteur groups"" out.
May 12 The CIS borders should unite, not separate countries, and Russia is an irreplaceable strategic partner, Kyrgyz President Almazbek Atambaev said on Thursday.
May 12 A leading pro-Russian activist who was arrested in Kharkiv on April 30 on charges of a coup attempt has been released from jail and put under house arrest, his allies said on Thursday.
Yury Apukhtin, a member of the coordinating council of the Southwest alliance and leader of the Great Russia group, is going to go on trial but will be under house arrest before that, Kharkiv Militia said on Facebook.
Ukrainian security services claim that allies of Apukhtin plotted terrorist attacks for May Day.
Two-months in custody was initially ordered for Apukhtin, who was detained by the Security Service.
May 12 A shooting has occurred near a checkpoint at Bahmutskiy way in Ukraine's Luhansk region.
According to the information of police, at around 4m. two VAZ-2105 cars and a Daewoo Nexia approached the blockpost near the Teplychnoye-Aleksandivka-Metallyst crossing.
These vehicles were followed by a Niva car and people driving in these cars were shooting.
Armed people, who were at the blockpost, opened fire at the cars approaching upon seeing what was happening.
According to the preliminary information, the person who was in Niva died of their sustained injuries, the press office said.
An Odessa resident and a Luhansk resident, who were in Daewoo Nexia, were sent to a hospital with injuries.
The Odessa resident left the hospital upon getting medical care, the Interior Ministry said.
May 12 The ""people's governor"" of the Donetsk region appointed by the pro-Russian insurgency has demanded that Ukrainian authorities stop their ""practice of abducting"" rebels and threatened tit-for-tat retaliation.
Otherwise we will be forced to react commensurately and continue to take Ukrainian soldiers and Kyiv special service personnel prisoner,"" Dmitry Gubarev wrote on Facebook on Thursday.
Gubarev, who was appointed as ""people's governor"" at a rally in Donetsk city on March 1, was arrested by the Ukrainian Security Service in the city on March 6.
However, on May 7, he and Igor Perepechayenko, deputy leader of the ""Slovyansk Self-Defense,"" were released as part of a prisoner swap deal, with the rebels freeing three members of the Alfa special forces unit.
May 12 Roman Lyagin, head of the Central Elections Commission of the Donetsk People's Republic, is not sure if the Commission will be able to produce a final referendum report shortly and suggests looking to the tentative data he announced earlier 89.07% support to the independence of the Donetsk region.
But we can hardly do so because of tensions in the Donetsk region,"" Lyagin told Interfax on the phone on Monday.
He could not say when the official referendum report would be available.
I fear for my own life and the life of my team who has prepared and held the referendum,"" he said.
The Donetsk and Luhansk regions held referenda on their self-determination on May 11.
May 12 Novaya Gazeta journalist Pavel Kanygin has been abducted by unknown individuals in Ukraine, Ekho Moskvy radio has reported.
Last night, he sent a text message to some of his colleagues saying 'I have been abducted, call Moscow,'"" Ekho Moskvy has reported.
The Novaya Gazeta administration has declined to comment on the information on Kanygin's abduction.
May 12 -Oleksandr Turchynov, acting president of Ukraine and speaker of the Ukrainian parliament, said the so-called referendums in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions will not have any legal consequences and their organizers will be prosecuted.
