From the Tsarist era, Kyiv and Crimea have featured centrally in Russian national mythology as the cradle of Russian Christianity.
This nationalist conception of space persisted after political borders changed with the collapse of the Soviet Union, as has the Russian Orthodox Church’s historic jurisdiction in Ukraine.
As a result, Russian Orthodox believers retain a special affinity for Kyiv and Crimea, and many Ukrainian citizens have looked to Moscow for matters of faith.
Subjects of inquiry include religious nationalism, the baptism of Slavic Prince Vladimir , Orthodox holy places in Crimea and Ukraine, Patriarch Kirill’s Russian World concept, and religious violence in Ukraine and Crimea.
Orthodoxy; Ukraine; Crimea; Russia; religious nationalism; antiSemitism; anti-Islam; Church and State; Patriarch Kirill; Russian World; Russian Orthodox Church; Ukrainian Orthodox Church The preamble to President Vladimir Putin’s speech on 18 March 2014, explaining Russia’s absorption of Crimea, cast the affair in a religious light.
This is the location of ancient Khersones , where Prince Vladimir was baptized.
His spiritual feat of adopting Orthodoxy predetermined the overall basis of the culture, civilization and human values that unite the peoples of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus.
These words formed a small portion of a much longer justification of the Russian annexation of Crimea that referenced the memory of war, questioned the legality of the transfer of Crimea to Ukraine in 1954 and promised Crimean Tatars protection.
Still, President Putin’s allusion to Crimea as a Russian holy place at the opening of his address underscores the importance of religion in this crisis.
Beyond Putin’s speech, the religious dimension in the Russian–Ukrainian conflict has become everywhere apparent, whether in the violence committed against priests, the nationalist rhetoric of Orthodox prelates, or the existence of self-styled Orthodox militia in breakaway regions.
Religion, and more specifically religious nationalism, as this article argues, permeates the conflict.
Religious nationalism is the potent infusion of national identity with religious belief.
Studies of religious nationalism have grown considerably in the last few decades, particularly after the terrible events of 9/11 forced Western attention upon religiously inspired violence.
He dismissed the formerly popular Marxist critiques of religion as ‘a smoke screen’ for ‘real’ material, political and social issues.
As van der Veer and others have suggested, religious belief lies at the very foundation of identity construction and motivates behaviour.
Isolating the causes and effects of religious nationalism can often be difficult because religious institutions operate outside traditional political channels.
Terms range widely from ‘religious politics’, ‘ecclesiastic politics’, ‘confessional politics’, ‘confessional empire’, and so on to describe the ordering of imperial Russian state and society and political behaviour.
No other place in Europe came as close as pre-Revolutionary Russia to a theocratic interpretation of state power.
Today, the Russian government appears to have invoked aspects of the pre-Revolutionary model, leading to what some scholars have described as a ‘re-sacralization’ or ‘Orthodoxization’ of political behaviour and public consciousness.
The goal here is not to parse the exact nature of Russia’s evolving church – state relationship, a topic well covered by others.
Rather, I wish to suggest that Orthodoxy’s penetration of Russian political culture provides a critical context for understanding the crisis in Ukraine.
The importance of religion for the crisis in Ukraine should not be underestimated.
This is not to say that Orthodoxy has inspired individuals to commit acts of violence in as much as religious belief has framed the way many Russians and Ukrainians regard each other.
Thus, for example, Dmitrii S Likhachev, a famous essayist and scholar from the Soviet era, attributed the creation of the Russian state to the conversion of Slavic tribes to Christianity, which according to medieval chroniclers, took place in Kyiv.
Filatov has traced the resurgence of religion in Russian mass consciousness and political behaviour.
Knox, Russian Society and the Orthodox Church; idem, ‘The Symphonic Ideal’; Papkova, The Orthodox Church and Russian Politics; Richters, The Post-Soviet Russian Orthodox Church; Wallace, The Orthodox Church and Civil Society in Russia, and Curanović, The Religious Factor in Russia’s Foreign Policy.
Building upon the medieval story of Prince Vladimir/Volodymyr’s Christian conversion, nineteenth-century religious nationalists came to view Kyiv and Crimea as the cradle of Russian Christianity.
During the reign of Nicholas I , Russian religious scholars and nationalists cast Ukraine and Crimea as the core of Russian identity.
The Russian Orthodox Church, meanwhile, embarked on a massive programme of spiritual colonisation that coincided with ever-expanding Russian borders.
This spiritual colonisation was material as well as metaphorical, as the Russian Orthodox Church, then and now, physically assumed authority over churches and holy places.
Despite the emergence of nationally based Ukrainian Orthodox churches in the post-Soviet period, the Russian Orthodox Church has led the re-Christianising of Ukraine and Crimea, a process which has encoded these distant regions in a cognitive Russian map of faith and practice.
Although the long-term context for the religious dimension of the Ukrainian crisis dates to the nineteenth century and earlier, immediate antecedents can be seen in the post-Soviet era.
Over the last twenty years, the church – state relationship has been reconstituted in Russia and religion has assumed an increasing presence in Russian domestic and foreign policy.
Simultaneously, as the church – state relationship evolves, religious-nationalist ideas positioning Kyiv and Crimea as cradles of Russian Christianity have resurfaced.
In addition to exploring the nineteenth-century roots of Russian religious nationalism, then, a good portion of this article discusses the entwining of Orthodoxy, identity and politics in the post-Soviet period.
Special attention is given to Patriarch Kirill’s Russian World concept, an idea that recasts Ukraine at the centre of Russia’s religious identity.
Finally, this article reviews the implications of religious nationalism in the Ukrainian crisis, including the growing discord among Orthodox churches in Ukraine as well as episodes of religious violence in Ukraine and Crimea.
Crimea and Kyiv One could argue that the current crisis began with medieval monks, who recorded in vivid detail the origin-story of the Rus.
Presumed by many scholars to have been Vikings, the Rus established a network of trading outposts southward from the Baltic Sea along the 10 Likhachev, Reflections on Russia, 160.
In the British context, for example, much of the literature concentrates on the connection between Christianity and commerce.
Other studies have shown that nineteenth-century missionaries viewed Christianisation as a companion to civilisation.
In Russia, however, the importance of religion for empire was perhaps even stronger, given the close relationship between church and state.
For general literature on the topic, see Porter ‘Commerce and Christianity’; Stanley, ‘Commerce and Christianity’; and van der Veer, Conversion to Modernities.
With Kyiv as the leading city-state, the Vikings gave the roaming Slavic peoples political structures, settled local disputes, pulled order from chaos.
Yet they were not Russian until Vladimir 14 converted to Christianity in 988.
Centuries later, the Normanist Controversy emerged, as some historians called into question the veracity of this ancient tale.
At the religious centre of the Ukrainian crisis today is the eponymous tale The Chronicle of Nestor, which describes how peoples of Kyivan Rus received Christianity through Vladimir, a Kyivan prince who converted from paganism in 988.
Vladimir sent out representatives to study Western Christianity, Greek Christianity, Judaism and Islam.
Drawing narrative structure, perhaps, from the ninth-century Khazarian tale (in which the King Bulan chose Judaism, not Christianity in a similar, earlier, quest16), Prince Vladimir chose Orthodoxy.
Vladimir’s envoys found Western Christianity, which they experienced in German lands, as stuffy and uninspiring.
Whereas Bulan chose Judaism because it sat at the foundation of Islam and Christianity, and so must have been the one true faith, Vladimir rejected it, concluding that the Jews’ loss of Jerusalem boded poorly.
At last, Vladimir’s envoys returned from Byzantium awed by the transcendent beauty of Orthodoxy.
Not quite ready to relinquish his hundreds of concubines, or bend his will to the Byzantine Emperor, Vladimir took some time before committing to conversion.
Ultimately, Vladimir did convert in 988, and it was in Crimea, in the small ancient village of Chersonesos, just outside Sevastopol, that he received baptism and the miracle of transformation.
The Byzantine emperor sailed from Constantinople for the event, and gave his disappointed niece, Anna, to Vladimir in marriage.
From Chersonesos, Vladimir travelled to Kyiv and forced conversion upon his people.
Christianity spread from an epicentre in Kyiv through the various trading centres along the Volga.
Ukrainian historians have argued that the The Chronicle of Nestor depicts a uniquely Ukrainian experience, and had nothing to do with Russia, which then did not exist.
Nevertheless, Russian historians have seen in these medieval Kyivan chronicles origins of the Russian state.
If Catherine the Great was known for attempting a separation of church and state – the only Russian 14 Vladimir is the Russian form of the name and Volodymyr the Ukrainian form.
As will be appreciated, the choice of name may indicate a political stance.
A devout Orthodox Christian, Nicholas I believed that ‘the State was to serve God, not God the State’.21 This religious interpretation of state power infused Nicholas’s reign, demonstrated in the official nationality platform ‘Orthodoxy, autocracy, nationality’, formulated by the Minister of Education, Count Sergei Uvarov, in April 1833.
Uvarov viewed the ‘advent of Christianity’ as the ‘turning point of civilization’,22 and, along with the Tsar, understood Russia ‘within a Christian framework’.23 This conviction translated into a Christianising of Russian history and empire.
The territory of present-day Ukraine and Crimea, both of which Russia conquered in the eighteenth century, became the heart of Russian spiritual and political landscapes.
The famous hierarch, church historian and scholar, Metropolitan Makarii , a contemporary of Nicholas I, established the foundation for present-day Russian interpretations in his classic history of the Russian Orthodox Church.
With moral and financial support from the Russian Tsars, leagues of Russian biblical scholars, archaeologists, historians and essayists poured out a flood of research pinpointing the exact location of Vladimir’s conversion to a small, ancient city in Crimea, Chersonesos.
Before and after the Crimean War , the Russian Orthodox Church constructed an elaborate network of shrines to commemorate Russia’s Cradle of Christianity.
Pilgrims travelled southward through the Russian empire, through Kyiv, southern Ukraine and Crimea, to visit Russia’s very own holy places.
The location of Vladimir’s conversion as a holy place is etched deeply into the historical memory of Russian Orthodox believers, and deeply enshrined in the origin myths of the Russian state.
In the nineteenth century and through the Revolution, Russian writers identified myriad other religious figures and saints of Ukraine and Crimea who played foundational roles in Russia’s religious national identity.
Biblical scholars debated whether Scythia, depicted as the home of a proto-Slavic nation, was a mission field of the first-century apostle Andrew .26 After closely comparing legends with texts from the Middle Ages, Metropolitan Makarii concluded that Andrew visited the southern shores of the Crimean peninsula.
From there, Andrew travelled up towards the future site of Kyiv in AD 63.
In consequence of Andrew’s visit, he claimed that several early, first-century Christian communities were formed, including a population of over 2000 near Chersonesos.
Effectively Makarii’s work revitalised the myth of Andrew, 21 Riasanovsky, Nicholas I and Official Nationality in Russia, 1825– 1855, 16.
Russians, who lived in the region and who constituted Andrew’s mission field.
Pope Clement, exiled to Crimea in the first century by the Roman Emperor Trajan, is another Christian martyr whom Russians closely associate with Crimea.
At Inkerman cliffs according to Makarii, Clement found Christian communities inspired by Andrew and converted more Christians himself.
For Russia’s nineteenth-century religious nationalists, as today, these foundational figures, Andrew and Clement, gave Russia a first-century pedigree.
This elaborate spiritual landscape connected the territory of southern Ukraine and Crimea to Russia.
In the case of Crimea, the Christianising of landscapes served to dissociate Muslim Tatars’ claims to their homeland.
Further, the first-century pedigree bolstered the Russian Orthodox Church’s claims to primacy over the ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople.
The Russian Revolution in 1917 brought a quick end to religious identity formulated on an Orthodox platform.
Efforts to unite Ukraine to Russia through the spiritual feats of Vladimir waned, although they did not entirely disappear.
For instance, the thaw towards religion under Gorbachev coincided with the 1988 millennial celebration of Vladimir’s conversion to Orthodoxy, and once again the church touted Kyiv as the cradle of Christianity.
Renewed interest in Archbishop Innokentii , , theologian and architect of Crimea’s transformation into a Russian holy place, offers a salient example of this trend.
Orthodoxy, identity and politics in the post-Soviet period Russia Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, religion re-emerged throughout the postSoviet states.
Well-meaning foreign missionaries inundated former atheist republics with the message of the Gospel.
Official religion proved to be as resilient as popular faith, and the Orthodox Church arose 28 Ibid., 98.
The history of the Russian Orthodox Church during the Soviet regime is much more complex, however, than can be represented in this article, though the Soviet period was a time of extraordinary trauma for its members, and this experience cannot be forgotten in an assessment of its current resurgence.
For a good survey, see Pospielovsky, The Russian Church under the Soviet Regime, 1917– 1982.
Resurgent interest relates in part to the prelate’s work in Crimea, for which he earned the epitaph ‘Patriot of the Fatherland’, as well as his extraordinary contribution to Russian Orthodox theology.
Religion offered postSoviet states a tool to rally populations ‘when the older twentieth-century political identities rooted in the October Revolution no longer viable’.35 Registered religious organisations in Russia and Ukraine multiplied.
The Russian Federation had listed more than 21,000 organisations by the early 2000s.
By contrast, the smaller state of Ukraine had registered more than 30,000 religious organisations, or ‘one religious community per 1000 adult citizens of the country’.36 The high number of religious organisations around the turn of the millennium reveals in part the proliferation of denominations inspired by western missionaries, whose success also prompted concerns about Western cultural and religious hijacking.
The presence of well-funded Western evangelicals soon became everywhere evident throughout Russia and Ukraine during the terrible economic crisis of the 1990s.
Subsequently, Russian lawmakers passed the 1997 Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organisations.
Among other things, the Law on Freedom of Conscience limited the ability of foreign missions to operate in Russia.
It has been invoked against the Salvation Army and Jehovah’s Witnesses; as a result, both groups are unable to operate legally in Moscow.
While the Catholic Church has not fallen foul of the law, the state has thrown up other obstacles, such as visa restrictions for Catholic priests.
The Church of The Latter Day Saints fare somewhat worse, as Russian agents have accused its missionaries of CIA activities.
Defending the spirit of the 1997 law, Patriarch Kirill, then chair of the Office of External Church Relations, described it as a necessary foil to Western ‘colonial habits’.40 The above law is symbolic of a tightening relationship between church and state in Russia, as well as the growing influence of the Russian Orthodox Church in Russian domestic and foreign politics.
The Russian Orthodox Church also sought to retain its sphere of influence among all Orthodox believers in the former Russian/Soviet Empires, as well as reasserting itself as the ‘leader of the international community’.42 Both post-Soviet patriarchs, Aleksii II and his successor Kirill I , have taken an interest in Russian political affairs.
Patriarch Aleksii supported Yeltsin’s presidency and campaigned against communist 34 Sysyn, ‘Politics and Orthodoxy in Independent Ukraine’, 8– 19.
Patriarch Kirill has been even more politically active, throwing open support behind Dmitrii Medvedev and President Putin.
This political activity can be compared to that of a strong lobby, as the church has taken to political behaviour to pursue its own agenda, not to reinforce the agenda of the state.
Thus, for example, in the last few years under Patriarch Kirill, the Russian Orthodox Church has gained considerable ground toward achieving the goals of the original platform established by Patriarch Aleksii.
Externally , the Russian Orthodox Church has struggled to retain its historical jurisdiction in the space of the former Russian and Soviet empires.
With the emergence of movements to create nationally based Orthodox churches or, as has occurred in Estonia, a switch of canonical jurisdiction from Russia to Constantinople, the Russian Orthodox Church faces the loss of parishes and important religious monuments.
To shore up its authority in its traditional territory outside the Russian state, the Russian Orthodox Church has invested heavily in reclaiming and renovating Orthodox holy places.
Its desire to protect holy places, however, is not necessarily political, nor territorial in nature.
Rather, the protection of holy places is intrinsic to its spiritual mission.
In nearly all religions that attach significance to place, religious authorities take great care to stake claims and to protect landscapes considered holy.
Jews, Muslims and Christians, one scholar writes, are concerned that a holy place might be ‘in danger of contamination’, by those who are spiritually ‘unclean’, or who do not know how to worship correctly.
Therefore, ‘to guarantee the spiritual cleanliness of the holy places’, it is imperative that they are in the hands of the rightful guardians.
Whilst not always welcome, the Russian Orthodox Church’s efforts to preserve its canonical jurisdiction in spaces outside Russian borders can be seen in a similar light.
Ukraine Ukraine has had a much stronger record of church –state separation than Russia, evidenced in part by the greater plurality of religious communities.
Of its nearly 35,000 registered religious communities, approximately 9000 are Protestant, and of the 20,000 Orthodox congregations, only two-thirds are associated with the Moscow Patriarchate.
When Ukraine separated from the Soviet Union in 1991, Orthodox hierarchs made a bid for independence from the Russian Orthodox Church.
The Moscow Patriarchate claims by far the most Orthodox churches and believers in Ukraine, and has registered approximately 12,000 communities with the Ukrainian State Committee for Nationalities, as compared with 4400 communities associated with the Kyivan Patriarchate.
The UAOC registered approximately 1190 communities and the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church , about 3650.53 Throughout the last two decades, Orthodoxy in Ukraine has become enmeshed in questions of national identity.
Lines of faith have tended to follow geography as well, with UAOC, UOC-KP and UGCC attracting more believers in western Ukraine, and the UOC-MP historically having found more support among the Russian-speaking populations in the east and Crimea.
Over the years, some members of the Ukrainian leadership have seen religious divisions as an obstacle to the unity of the state and nation, and so have encouraged a single Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
Most recently, on the election of Metropolitan Onufriy of Chernivtsi and Bukovyna as the new head of the UOC-MP, President Petro Poroshenko and Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk reminded the Council of Bishops of the church’s ‘patriotic potential’, advocating the election of ‘a new metropolitan, who wishes for an independent Ukraine and one united Orthodox Church’.54 As faith has fallen along nationalist lines, Ukraine and its holy places, such as the Monastery of the Caves in Kyiv or the baptismal font of St Vladimir in Crimea, have become battlegrounds of identity.
The Ukrainian Law on Freedom of Conscience and Religious Organisations established that religious institutions should have access to their former religious property, whether by direct ownership or free access for services.
In practice, the law granted local communities the right to adjudicate among competing claims from the various Orthodox and Catholic churches.
Complicating the process of identity construction for post-Soviet Ukraine, the new state found itself granting national monuments with deep historical and cultural value ultimately to Russian administration.
Whereas property restitution has been relatively straightforward in Russia, with the Russian Orthodox Church as the chief claimant of Orthodox property, religious property restitution in Ukraine became highly contentious.
The Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, Patriarchate of Alexandria, Patriarchate of Antioch, Patriarchate of Jerusalem and Patriarchate of Moscow.
In the plummeting economy of the 1990s, Soviet era occupants of religious institutions could little afford to relocate.
More seriously, municipalities often return property selectively, favouring some faiths and discriminating against others.
From 1992, the UOCMP managed to exert control over at least the Lower Caves of the famous Kyiv Lavra, a matter which upset its rival.
Neither the UOC-MP nor the UOC-KP has been able to establish control over St Sophia.
Recognising the enormous consequences of allowing the cathedral to fall to one church or the other, the Ukrainian government has chosen to administer it directly.
The apparent delicacy of guardianship over this holy site was publicised as early as 1990, when Patriarch Aleksii attempted to visit the cathedral but was met at the front doors by advocates of the autocephalous movement.
Ultimately, the patriarch did manage to enter the side door, but the tricky circumstances of his visit were a forewarning of trouble to come.
Most memorable was the stand-off between the Orthodox churches and the Ukrainian government in 1995, when Patriarch Volodymyr of the UOC-KP stipulated his wishes to be buried in the grounds of St Sophia.
On July 18 of that year, the funeral procession transported the body of the deceased patriarch to the grounds of St Sophia, blatantly disregarding the government’s decision.
Several people were injured in this fight over a holy place, causing the episode to be remembered as ‘Black Tuesday’.57 Such incidents in Ukraine have, unfortunately, been hardly isolated.
Repeatedly the churches have called in Ukrainian police and Ukrainian courts to resolve disputes.
The problem of religious property restitution plagued Yanukovich’s presidency, and became one of a number of stumbling blocks in Ukraine’s EU bid.
Crimea The Russian Orthodox Church’s efforts to establish its authority in post-Soviet space extended to Crimea, where waves of conversion to Christianity and Islam over the centuries complicated claims upon religious monuments, even more so than in Kyiv.
Most importantly for this article, however, was the battle for Chersonesos, the location of Prince Vladimir’s baptism.
During the Soviet era, Chersonesos became an archaeological preserve for its vast array of ruins dating back to the fifth century BC.60 In accordance with the Ukrainian Law on Religious Property, the Russian Orthodox Church sought to reclaim space in the preserve, a nineteenth-century cathedral in ruins and a nineteenth-century monastery dedicated to Vladimir.
Archaeologists used the former monastery for the museum, and ran active excavations of the ruins.
While they did not object to property restitution in principle, they feared church plans might impinge upon previous and ongoing research.
Complaints about the futility of drawing comparisons between Pompeii and Chersonesos are also quite old.
Gradually, the monk’s living quarters spread, first with a small garden plot, then with a small shed, then with new monks.
Suddenly, or so it seemed, the preserve realised that a community of monks were squatting on a space significantly larger than originally allotted them.
It was later revealed that the ascetic monk Father Paissy had led other land reclamation initiatives elsewhere, using similar, indirect methods.
Conflict between the church and the preserve escalated as President Kuchma approved the reconstruction of the church of St.
UOC-MP expansion in Chersonesos continued in an assertive manner until 1997 when the Church hired a helicopter to airlift a gazebo to mark the baptismal font of Vladimir in the ruins.
This act was accomplished against the express wishes of the Ukrainian Ministry of Culture.
Once church officials installed the gazebo, it proved impossible to remove for it had the devotion of Orthodox believers.
Matters became much worse in the summer of 2000 when Father Paissy, with several other monks, took over the museum’s property at gun-point.
The relationship between the archaeological preserve and the Russian Orthodox Church reached peaceful resolution.
Nonetheless, the church on the ruins retains its old attraction to state powers; both President Vladimir Putin of Russia and President Kuchma attended the elevation of the church’s cross on July 28, 2001.64 Putin’s visit calls to mind the visit of the first Russian leader to attend the consecration of the cathedral.
In 1861, Tsar Aleksander and his family toured Crimean holy places, with Chersonesos as their first stop.
The ceremony featured Christian artifacts found in Chersonesos, including a cross with a Greek inscription believed to be 1000 years old and relics of St Vladimir, which the monastery acquired from Kyiv especially for the opening.
Elite officials, including Count Stroganov, the Governor General of New Russia, and Eduard Totleben, the Crimean War hero, also attended.
With the turn of the millennium, Patriarch Aleksii II of Russia gave his full support to the recreation of Crimea as a holy place and encouraged Russian pilgrims to travel there.
Almost one thousand years from the preaching of the Apostle Andrew the First Called in Chersonesos, comes the great event of the Christianizing of Russia.
Namely, Tauride became for many people from all of Eastern Europe the source of life-giving water, quenching the spiritual thirst of each person striving to find the way to the Holy Land.
Popes Clement and Martin, the Seven Martyrs, Stefan of Surozh, Cyril and Methodius, and of course, Vladimir.
He presided at a liturgy attended by thousands on the ruins of Chersonesos.
Orthodox clergy from Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova attended, as did local and national Ukrainian dignitaries.
Former President Kuchma was there, as was the Russian Admiral of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet.
Metropolitan Lazar of Simferopol and Crimea (who along with the Metropolitans of Odessa and Donetsk has been consistently Russian leaning) delivered an address after the liturgy that knit Crimea to Russia in a seamless spiritual landscape.
His words revealed the growing significance of Crimea for the Russian Orthodox Church as well as Crimea’s place in the new agenda of Patriarch Kirill.
He laid out the conceptual framework for the Church’s mission field during the opening celebration of the third Russian World Assembly on 3 November 2009.
The Russian World forum evolved from a presidential decree of two years earlier, with the explicit goal of ‘popularizing the Russian language, revealing the national characteristics of Russia and the important elements of Russian and world culture, and supporting a programme of study of the Russian language in the Russian Federation and abroad’.71 It became the foundation of many of the Russian nationalist projects that have appeared in the last few years, and underscores Russian nationalist interest in Ukraine.
Religion constituted the focus of the third conference of the Russian World Fund.
Ravil Gaynutdin, a leader of the Russian Muslim community, reminded participants that Muslims and Islam were an historic part of the Russian World.
He encouraged the maintenance of ties with diaspora Russian Jews, and offered the particular recommendation of youth exchange programmes.
He gave Putin’s Russian World concept spiritual legs and defined the Russian World along older, imperial lines.
Throughout, he invoked a transnational idea of the Russian World, one that coincided with the Church’s historic jurisdiction in Russian imperial and Soviet space.
Limiting the Russian world to the state borders of the Russian Federation, he argued, would be a ‘sin 68 Papkova, ‘Russian Orthodox Concordat?’, 671.
Ushakov was the Russian Admiral who led the Russian victory over the Turks in the Black Sea; his feats helped secure southern Ukraine for the Russian Empire.
His post-Soviet canonisation, as well as the transfer of part of his relics to Sevastopol, offers another symbol of blending Russian Orthodox patriotism on the territory of Ukraine.
It would artificially exclude ‘many millions of people’ who identify with Russia.
Although Kirill did consider Russian Orthodox communities abroad 2 in Europe, the Americas, Asia 2 as part of the Russian World, he mainly focused on Russia, Ukraine and Belarus.
He invoked the words of the Ukrainian-born Orthodox saint Lavrentiy Chernigovskii, who said, ‘Russia, Ukraine, Belarus’ 2 this is holy Rus’.73 Patriarch Kirill expanded upon Chernigovskii to suggest that the Russian World included anyone who might base their national identity, either in whole or in part, on Russian spiritual and cultural foundations, such as Moldovans.
Instead, shared space, history, language, and respect for national differences within Holy Rus defined the Russian World.
Patriarch Kirill outlined several ways in which to shore up the Russian World, such as developing pilgrimages to Russian holy places inside and beyond the borders of the Russian Federation, and maintaining active lay communities, churches, and monasteries.
Other methods involved drawing upon civil society and cultivating elites inside and outside Russia to foster the Church’s mission.
Throughout his speech, Patriarch Kirill described the Church’s position as a-political.
Yet, towards the end of his speech at the Russian World Forum, he proposed that the Russian World could play an active role in world politics, and ‘activities of the Church and civil society’ would fail without ‘co-ordinating efforts with governments’.76 Ukraine featured centrally throughout Patriarch Kirill’s speech and in the overarching theme of the Third Assembly.
The official narrative of the event summarised the patriarch as having argued that ‘state borders put up obstacles for inter-relations’ between Ukrainians, Belorusians and Russians.
Chernomyrdin, former Russian Prime Minister and consul in Ukraine , made a case for strengthening the Russian language in Russian-identifying communities outside Russia.
Two other speakers discussed the necessity of protecting the rights of Russians living in Latvia and Ukraine.
Patriarch Kirill’s Russian World concept quickly attracted criticism within Ukraine.
For the purposes of this article, I consider Kirill’s Russian World concept as being interconnected with his ‘Holy Rus’ concept.
However, it is important to bear in mind that Kirill’s Russian World concept is only one articulation of many visions expressed in the Russian World conferences.
It is an alternate chain that someone is trying to throw on the UOC-MP and use for the benefit of a foreign state.
The faithful of this church understand this’.79 In concert with the expansionist-nationalist platform evolving through the Russian World concept, Patriarch Kirill began annual trips to commemorate the baptism of Prince Vladimir in July.
Illustrating the change, which can be associated with the transition of a government led by Westernleaning Yushchenko to Russian-leaning Yanukovich, the Ukrainian government permitted the Russian Patriarch to hold services in the Cathedral of St Sophia, hitherto limited to ecumenical services.
Patriarch Kirill refused to meet with Patriarch Filaret of the UOC-KP despite repeated requests from the former.
Instead, Patriarch Kirill increased his call for the UOC-KP ‘schismatics’ to return to the one, true Church.
Patriarch Kirill’s visit during 2013 for the 1025th anniversary of the baptism of Vladimir embodied his Russian World concept, and can be seen as a direct precursor to the religious aspect of the current crisis.
In coordination with the celebration for Vladimir, Patriarch Kirill organised a spiritual journey for the Cross of Saint Andrew.
The 8-foot tall cross arrived from its home in Patras, Greece, and travelled through Andrew’s mission field of Russia, Belarus and Ukraine from 11 July to 2 August.
Orthodox hierarchs from around the world gathered in Moscow before flying to Kyiv to commemorate Vladimir’s baptism.
President Putin played a leading role, reprising, as it seems, the preRevolutionary Tsarist identity of protector of Orthodoxy.
The acceptance of Christianity determined Russia’s fate and choice of civilization; it became a decisive turning point in the Russian state’s ecclesiastical and secular history.
The moral foundations of the Orthodox faith played a major role in the formation of our national character and the mentality of Russia’s peoples, revealing the best creative qualities of our nation, helping Russia hold a dignified place among the European and global civilizations.
Orthodoxy has become a spiritual buttress for the Russian state and for our national consciousness, uniting Russia, Ukraine and Belarus through strong bonds of brotherhood.
It is symbolic that a joint steering committee headed by Patriarch Kirill of Moscow and All Russia was formed to organize the combined celebrations of the 1025th anniversary of the Baptism of Rus in our three nations.
Following the meeting at the Kremlin, President Putin along with state and church dignitaries travelled to Kyiv with the cross of Saint Andrew.
Constituting a huge media event for Russian national news outlets, Putin’s visit seamlessly blended religion and politics on an imperial scale.
It began with a stop at the heart of Kyiv, the hill upon which stands the monument to St Vladimir.
Putin’s busy day continued with an evening service at the Kyivan Monastery of the Caves.
The next day, 28 July, the Russian president travelled to Sevastopol for the parade of the Black Sea fleet.
Patriarch Kirill, meanwhile, presided over the main prayer services at Kyiv’s holy sites accompanied by the cross of Andrew that had travelled from Moscow.
Portrayed as a great success in Russia, the Russian involvement in the 1025th anniversary met multiple protests in Ukraine and was the subject of extensive criticism leading up to the event and after it.
Referring to the secondary status attributed to the noncanonical Orthodox Churches and other Christian groups, Viktor Yelensky, President of the Ukrainian Association for Religious Freedom, called the anniversary ceremonies ‘divisive’, ‘a humiliation for millions of Ukrainian Christians’.85 Representatives of the UGCC and UOC-KP concurred with the portrayal, arguing that Moscow transformed the 1025th anniversary into a geopolitical event.
Further, Ukrainian sources suggest that the successful gloss placed on the event by the Russian media did not match the reality.
Thus, while President Viktor Yanukovich of Ukraine publicly rolled out the carpet, he reportedly reduced the scheduled meeting with President Putin from 40 minutes to 15 minutes.
To some, Yanukovich’s cautious behaviour signalled a move towards independence from Moscow.
The collapse of Ukraine’s EU talks dashed such optimism a few months later.
Religious nationalism and the crisis in Ukraine Rhetoric Religious nationalism in Russia and Ukraine has intensified with the Ukraine crisis, and religious leaders have taken a leading role in framing the conflict for their adherents and the world at large.
Analysis of their rhetoric during Euromaidan, the annexation of Crimea, through the present violence over eastern Ukraine could easily become the sole focus of an extended study.
Here, attention to a one or two key speeches around the annexation of Crimea will suffice to illustrate the confluence of religion and politics.
We are deeply disappointed in the position of the Russian Orthodox Church and her head, Patriarch Kirill, who in essence, has done nothing in order to stop the flow of blood.
Therefore, the responsibility in front of God for the consequences of Russian aggression against Ukraine also resides with the Russian Orthodox Church.
Here, bishops of the UOC-KP directly accused the Russian Orthodox Church not of mere silence, in the face of Russian annexation of Crimea, but of contributing to the crisis.
From the Euromaidan to the present, Patriarch Filaret of UOC-KP has repeatedly condemned the Russian state and the Russian Church for aggression, and has made frequent calls for international support.
The UOC-KP has adopted the role of a national voice and conscience for Ukrainian territorial integrity.
On 19 March 2014, just three days after the Crimean Referendum, and the day after President Putin’s address on the occasion of Crimea’s annexation with which this article opened, the Holy Synod presented the Russian Orthodox Church’s official statement regarding the event.
These events were portrayed as a fratricidal conflict, with brothers fighting against brothers, over the direction Ukraine should take.
Naturally, Patriarch Kirill’s Russian World view permeated the statement.
The mission of the Church and the sacred duty of all the faithful are to strive for peace in the land inhabited by the peoples of Holy Rus’ and to call for the abandonment of the language of hatred and enmity.
Whatever happens in the relations among the states and whatever development the political confrontation takes, the unity in faith and brotherhood of people baptized in one and the same baptismal font cannot be deleted from their common past.
We believe that it can neither be deleted from our common future, in which the fraternal Byelorussian, Russian, Ukrainian and other people should live in peace, love and solidarity.
Here, the Church advocates peace, promoting a vision of a transnational Orthodox community united by shared faith.
Yet, critics have interpreted this message as a failure to recognise Ukraine’s desire to have an identity distinct from Russia.
The press has produced a great deal of speculation about Patriarch Kirill’s relative silence on events in Crimea and eastern Ukraine, as the principle statements have come from the Office of External Relations.
Some have seen Kirill’s reticence as symptomatic of regret over divisions caused by the Russian World concept, divisions that may cause ranks of Ukrainian clergy to leave the Moscow Patriarchate.
On the other hand, it is also possible that the Patriarch is content to allow Metropolitan Hilarion, whose office has been responsible for implementing the Russian World view over the last few years, to take a leading role.
In Crimea, both on official and unofficial levels, religious nationalism has taken a dangerous and sad turn from the moment of Russian annexation.
Religious freedoms have been restricted; religious minorities have experienced persecution; religious believers have become the first refugees.
Within days of Russian annexation, the official Russian Union of Evangelical Christians entered Crimea to register local Baptists.
The clergy of the UOC-KP have lost religious property to the UOC-MP, and some priests have fled.
Similarly, stories of violence and persecution of Greek Catholics in Crimea have appeared.
Father Mykola Kyvich, a Greek Catholic priest, for example, was detained and roughly interrogated for eight hours.
Mufti Ravil Gaynutdin, Chair of the Council of Russian Muslims, visited Crimea very soon after annexation to register Crimean Muslims within official state structures.
Registration entails loss of religious autonomy for the Tatars’, as well as de-legalisation of Islamic groups not recognised by the Russian state.
In addition to the pressures of Russia’s religious law, Crimean Muslims have faced violent outbursts of Orthodox nationalism on the popular level, which has been on the rise in eastern Ukraine and Crimea for the last two decades.
In March 2014, Tatars in Bakhchisarai reported that many of their homes had been identified with crosses by ‘unknown individuals’, while stories of terrible violence against individuals have surfaced.
Other Tatar leaders have been harassed or kidnapped and Tatar buildings have been desecrated.
In other areas of Ukraine, similar episodes of religious violence have appeared.
The Institute for Religious Freedom in Ukraine has assembled a damning portrait of the Donetsk People’s Republic , members of which have been identified as terrorists by the Ukrainian Government.
This priest had visited the region to secure the release of two local priests from prison.
The Donetsk militia made international news when it allegedly distributed notices at a synagogue that Jews must register with the government.
The emergence of Oleh Tyhanybok, head of the Svoboda party, as a central leader of Euromaidan prompted widespread scepticism about the direction of the interim Ukrainian government.
Scepticism appeared justified, for example, when a New Year’s Eve celebration at the Euromaidan main stage featured an anti-Semitic skit, which included the ostensibly Jewish character named Zhyd ‘create problems for the newborn Jesus’.100 In Russia, meanwhile, observers report anti-Semitism creeping into the official media, in tandem with nationalist enthusiasm for Crimean annexation.
Unlike Crimean Tatars, whose support from the Ukrainian government had not been tainted by ethnic chauvinism, many Crimean Jews saw no real option between Russia and Ukraine, as the referendum in Crimea approached.
Conclusion Religion is a significant factor in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
The Russian Orthodox Church has administered religious space in Crimea and Ukraine 2 parishes, Christian monuments, and holy places 2 for hundreds of years, and managed to keep its spiritual territory when the Soviet Union collapsed, even when new political borders appeared.
As the post-Soviet state of Ukraine attempted to craft an identity distinct from Russia, the Russian Orthodox Church maintained its jurisdiction among Ukrainian citizens.
The result has been, for lack of a better word, a Russifying of Ukrainian and Crimean laity and spiritual space.
Further, in accordance with Russian Orthodox Tradition, many Russian believers retain a sense of ownership over Kyiv and Crimea, the Cradle of Russian Christianity.
In Ukraine and Crimea, the Russian Orthodox Church has provided an enduring bond with Moscow, a constant reminder of shared past and faith.
Religious nationalism has permeated the Ukrainian crisis deeply and broadly.
Russian and Ukrainian leaders have appealed to religion, while religious chauvinism and religious violence has been a feature of the separatist movements.
Given evolving events, it would seem likely that religious divisions will deteriorate before they improve.
This includes the potential for a secession of Ukrainian Orthodox clergy from the Moscow Patriarchate, many of whom , have condemned the annexation of Crimea and support the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Of more immediate concern, however, is 98 The nature of anti-Semitism within the Ukrainian crisis has become muddled by propaganda from all sides.
Joseph Zissel, President of the Association for Jewish organisations and societies, has argued that anti-Semitism has not figured as significantly within Euromaidan as the media suggest.
If President Putin holds to the promise to protect the Tatars, as made in his 18 March address, he will need to act swiftly to quell the tide of local, violent nationalism.
International intermediaries similarly should not lose sight of the need to ensure that Crimea’s religious minorities safely make the transition to their changing political landscape.
Meanwhile, we must hope that peace-brokers can bring the conflict to resolution.
Currently, she is working on a book about the Crimean War, tentatively titled War and Recovery.
Andrzej Poppe and Frank E Sysyn (Ed.-inChief), with assistance of Uliana M Pasicznyk.
The Contest for the Legacy of Kievan Rus’, Eastern European Monographs.
Povest’ Vremennykh Let po Lavrent’ievskoi Letopisi 1377 Chast’ Pervaia, Tekst i Perevod, Comp.
Mission, Governance and Confessional Politics in Russia’s Volga-Kama Region, 1827– 1905.
Literatura i gosudarstvennaia ideologiia v rossii v poslednei treti XVIII-pervoi treti veka.
