The Problem of Definitions Evhen Tsybulenko and J’moul A Francis Contents 6.
As a result, this definitional problem has led to a distorted view of the conflict in Donbas.
Hence, this chapter firstly argues that the conflict is an international armed conflict under international law and that the notion of the existence of both international and non-international armed conflicts ought to be debunked.
Secondly, this chapter examines the nature and role of individuals fighting in Donbas, evidencing their manner of participation and true characterization.
Attention is also given to the relationship between Russian troops and local collaborators whose cohesive effort sustains Russian aggression in Donbas.
Furthermore, consideration is given to the issues regarding how distortions are ‘creeping’ into reports and other publications, which form part of the pool of information used at public, legal, and diplomatic levels.
Fourthly, this chapter analyses the consequential issues concerning the normative backlash, the attribution of responsibility, and the manner of response to the conflict from the international community.
The analysis then focuses on the argument that the use of distorted information could be used to influence future decisions, inevitably resulting in futile solutions.
Finally, this chapter concludes by discussing the propagation of incorrect definitions, which has an undermining effect on the principles and doctrines of international law.
Moreover, emphasis is given to the importance of the responsibility of definitional accuracy during times of perilous conflict.
Keywords Ukraine · Donbas · Russian aggression · international armed conflict · definitions · accuracy · public international law · international humanitarian law · reporting 6.
Background The conflict in Ukraine presents a unique challenge, in that there is a general lack of understanding about the players on the ground and the conflict itself.
A corollary of the aggression is the occupation and unlawful annexation of Crimea1 and the unlawful occupation,2,3 or at least effective control, of Donbas.
Much is known, to a degree, about the unlawful annexation of Crimea that took place on 20 March 2014; however, little is known about the continuous unlawful activities taking place in Donbas.
Despite the fact that varying specific international resolutions and statements defined constitutive elements of the conflict within their right contexts, such as naming the situation as Russian aggression5 and identifying the presence of Russian regular troops,6 there are varying alternative and misleading terms utilized to tell the story of the conflict.
See also, inter plurima alia, UN General Assembly 2014; Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe 2016a, b; OSCE Permanent Council of the European Union 2016.
With the intermingling of Russian regular forces and local fighters, the lines between the conflicting labels are blurred and may create a degree of definitional doubt.
As such, this clash of labels could affect how international law is accurately viewed and applied.
This diametrical tension of definitions is reflected in a 2016 preliminary examination report published by the International Criminal Court .14 If the tensions are not resolved, there could be undesirable results in relation to attribution, liability and responsibility under international law.
Hence, it is important for the parties to the conflict to be properly defined in the eyes of the public and the international community.
Moreover, there is a duty not to introduce and incorporate alternative definitions of critical terms into the language around any international conflict.
The primary objective of this duty is to combat and repel the spread of distorted information, unfounded claims, baseless evidence and mistaken policy positions, which could arise during times of conflict.
Therefore, the problem of definitions around the conflict in Donbas ought to be resolved before it is too late to correct the distorted information.
Defining the Separatists, Russian Troops and Local Collaborators The collaborators rose to power through the seizure of Ukrainian government buildings in Donbas.
See also, inter plurima alia, Reuters 2017; Channel News Asia 2017; Jurist 2017.
Francis enabled them to gain ‘effective control’ over the local government administration.
These buildings are located in the major cities in Donbas including, most importantly, Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
Due to their de facto control in those oblasts, the collaborators decided to declare those areas independent from the rest of Ukraine via the infamous ‘referendum’ process.
As a result, the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts were self-declared as the “Donetsk People’s Republic” and the “Luhansk People’s Republic” , respectively.
The first prime minister of the “DPR” was Alexander Borodai, a Russian citizen with close connections to the Russian intelligence services.
However, the Ukrainian Alexander Zakharchenko is currently leading the “DPR”,21 while the “LPR” is currently led by another Ukrainian, Igor Plotnitsky.
Furthermore, these ‘leaders’ and their associates have admitted that thousands of Russian citizens and soldiers are supporting the fulfilment of their agenda.
The vehicles, machinery and weaponry utilized by Russian troops and collaborators in the “DPR” and “LPR” include infantry mobility vehicles, BTR and BMP armoured personnel carriers, battle tanks, self-propelled and towed howitzers and guns, armoured trucks, multiple launch rocket systems, battlefield surveillance radars, surface-to-air missile systems, and air reconnaissance drones.
Moreover, some of the weapons employed were produced in the Russian Federation after the collapse of the Soviet Union, which were never supplied to Ukraine.
Furthermore, the weapons could not be seized from the Ukrainian forces, as the local collaborators claim, because those weapons were never part and parcel of the Ukrainian Army.
Behind the Russian-made and -supplied military equipment is an organized military command, which supports Russian military personnel in waging war against the Ukrainian military.
Such was the case when the Russian 58th Army Command posted military personnel from Russia’s 136th Motorized Rifle Brigade to fight against the Ukrainian Army in Donbas.
One such fight against this army took place in 2014, during the Battle of Ilovaisk, in an attempt to gain control of the city of Ilovaisk and divide the “rebels” in Donbas.
This battle saw a number of Ukrainian military personnel killed as a result of Russian military personnel opening fire on a previously agreed “live corridor” for treating Ukrainian soldiers.
Another battle near Debaltseve in 2015 saw not only the loss of life of a number of Ukrainian troops, but also the flagrant breach of the Minsk II Agreement.
As with the Battle of Ilovaisk, it was also reported that regular Russian troops were actively engaged in the Battle of Debaltseve, fighting alongside local collaborators.
Furthermore, according to the commander of a separatist “special forces” detachment, “Russian tanks and soldiers have been “decisive” in winning key battles against government troops in eastern Ukraine”.30 These are two from among a plethora of examples, which give credence to the fact that Ukraine is facing an enemy with highly trained personnel and vast military resources.
Hence, it would be a mistake to merely limit Russian aggression in Donbas to participation through the supply of weaponry and agents,e., a proxy war.
Francis is evident through the movement of Russian military personnel and weaponry into Donbas to fight against Ukrainian resistance.
The placement of Russian military personnel in this manner also highlights a military agenda, which seeks the sustainability of hostilities.
As such, the identification of Russian military apparatus and personnel further proves that labelling the participants of the conflict as “rebels” and “separatists” is irreconcilable with the reality of the conflict.
It is to be noted at this point that the full list of regular Russian troops taking part in active hostilities in Donbas can be retrieved from the Inform Napalm database.
The sustainability objective is not only limited to the supply of personnel and equipment; it also includes the use of local personnel who are used for strategic military advantages in order to harness their local knowledge.
Thus, this cooperation presents another dimension of the Russian aggression whereby Russian troops, with the assistance of local collaborators, wage war against the Ukrainian state on Ukrainian soil.
The collaboration between local Russian sympathizers and Russian troopers could be viewed as a ‘proxy war’; however, both state actors – the Russian and Ukrainian military – are directly fighting each other.
However, there are non-state actors playing a significant secondary role in the conflict.
As mentioned, alongside the military personnel are Russian voluntary fighters.
Indeed, it is reported that over 10,000 individuals were enlisted to fight in Donbas through the “Union of Donbas Volunteers” organization.
Thus, the policy employed by the Russian Federation is one that also guarantees the destabilization of Donbas through the supply of sustained levels of personnel through collaborating recruitment agencies.
A further policy implication is the expansion of the Russian military to reinforce its direct resistance against the Ukrainian Army on Ukrainian territory.
This is made possible through the idea of a “Greater Russia” which appeals to many young local Russian nationalists,35 who also form part of the military command.
As such, this results in the further expansion of Russian military personnel, whilst establishing relations with Russian sympathizers, in order to utilize their local knowledge to assist in the execution of military objectives.
Hence, local fighters are said to be paid to fight as mercenaries, working alongside imported fighters in the same vein.
It is important to note that local fighters form part of a very small minority in a region where the appetite for separation or reconnection with Russia is very low.
Thus, it is of no surprise that the extent of local collaborators’ participation is miniscule in the larger scheme and hierarchy of Russia’s operations in Donbas.
Therefore, military personnel and local collaborators are part and parcel of what is effectively the Russian agenda of open aggression in Donbas.
Based on the evidence concerning the de facto power of the Russian military in Donbas, it is clear that local collaborators are subordinate to the command of the Russian military and its agenda.
Therefore, it is necessary to examine how such terms ought to be construed in a conflict.
As terms or labels, “rebels” and “separatists” infer the presence of an agenda of independence, theoretically free of the military support and apparatus of another state.
As such, it is important to engage with the definitions of “rebels” and “separatists” in order to determine whether local collaborators are acting in their own right.
Rebels are defined as militant organizations fighting against a central government employing confrontational and violent methods.
Moreover, rebels can be classified as “armed opposition groups”, “guerrillas”, “freedom fighters”, “non-state armed groups” or even “parties to an international armed conflict”.39 Rebels primarily fight for political causes, independence and the rights of minorities in society.
Separatists are similar to rebels, but they fight for a cause in connection with a specific territory, the value of land and the security of an area of economic interest.
Therefore, the use of “rebels” and “separatists” interchangeably translates into local collaborators being viewed as fighting for a political cause, rights and independence, premised upon the significance of the land in Donbas.
This notion falsely implies that the situation in Donbas is an internal conflict over political and civil rights, which also gives the impression that the conflict existed in a subtle form before the Euromaidan Revolution.
Therefore, it is important to determine whether the conflict was triggered by the existing sociopolitical intricacies of Donbas.
The fact is that the situation in Donbas before Euromaidan was one of peace and normalcy, rather than years of suppressed political tensions over independence.
As such, the inaccurate labels would lead one to conclude that the fight for independence, and other political and social rights, would entail pre-existing issues of territoriality, language and economics.
However, those three issues cannot be regarded as contributing factors of the conflict.
There have also been no issues in relation to territorial demarcation because the delineation of the border occurred without conflict when the USSR collapsed.
In fact, the border was established according to the old border of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic .43 Additionally, Ukrainians represent the ethnic majority in Donbas; however, Russian is the predominant native language.
Despite this fact, the majority of individuals residing in Donbas are fluent in both Ukrainian and Russian.
In relation to economic issues, even though Donbas was at an economic disadvantage compared to the rest of Ukraine, it had a viable economy due to its output of steel and agricultural products.
The pre-existing Russian influence is evident from the pressure placed on the then pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych, who succumbed to pressure and made the decision not to sever ties with Russia in favour of the EU.47 Due to the political force of Euromaidan, President Yanukovych fled the state, which effectively ended any Russian influence over subsequent Ukrainian administrations.
Therefore, the causes that are purported to inspire “separatism” or “independence” in Donbas are not compatible with factual history and current statistics.
As such, one may reflect on the reasons why the terms “rebels” and separatists” were incorporated into the language around the conflict in Donbas.
The uniqueness about the actions of Russian collaborators at this juncture is that they tend to resurrect themselves in former Soviet states during times of diminishing Russian influence.
As such, these Russian collaborators take on the persona of “rebels and “separatists” as a cover for a geopolitical and military strategy.
This strategy fits in with the “Grachev Doctrine”, which holds that Russia must maintain a degree of political and economic influence over its ‘close neighbourhood’.48 Similar tactics were used in Georgia in 2008 when Russia was losing its grip on its sphere of influence in the Caucuses.
Furthermore, it has been said that Russia’s actions were also triggered by the thought of NATO being on its doorstep.
In such cases, the doctrine demands that Russia must act to protect its ‘legitimate interests’, which is then used as justification for aggression.
This was the same excuse used to justify the invasion of Georgia, which, like Ukraine, sought to shift its attention towards the West.
As in Georgia and Crimea, Russia tends to justify its occupation on the grounds of ‘protecting’ its citizens.
From another perspective, involving another Russian border region, the Baltic States are starting to see subtle movements by Russia similar to those used in Georgia and Ukraine.
As a result, the Baltic States are extremely fearful that Russia may eventually pursue a similar agenda against them.
Thus, one can see an emerging pattern, whereby the events in Donbas do not relate in any way to mere internal strife.
What is playing out in Donbas is part of a large-scale plan and a policy of maintaining the “Grachev Doctrine” in an effort to remain as a regional superpower.
The collaborators on the ground are the ones giving effective assistance to the doctrine, and not pursuing a cause for liberalization, independent of both Ukraine and Russia.
Therefore, consideration must now turn to whether the collaborators acted under directions from or control of the Russian state.
See also the interview with a former United States Ambassador to Ukraine on PBS News in 2013.
All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state, or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations.
Article 2 ought to be interpreted as being applicable not only to direct actions, but also indirect actions through private actors.
If no such actions can be attributed to a state, one can conclude that the collaborators acted independently.
Article 2 of General Assembly Resolution 56/8355 emphasizes this view by confirming that a state is liable for an internationally wrongful act when there is an act or omission, attributable to the state under international law, which constitutes a breach of an international obligation.
Furthermore, in Article 8 of the same resolution, attribution to a state will be found if the conduct in question was “directed or controlled” by the state through a person or group of persons.
With regard to a breach of international obligations, a violation of Article 2 of the UN Charter will suffice when considered with Article 12 of General Assembly Resolution 56/83.
Therefore, the link between Russia’s large-scale plan and policy and its collaborators must be established to dispel the notion of the collaborators being “rebels” and “separatists” under international law.
Such was the contention in the International Court of Justice Nicaragua United States case,57 which established the “effective control” test to determine the degree of control over collaborators violating Article 2 of the UN Charter.
Moreover, Article 3 of General Assembly Resolution 3314 on the Definition of Aggression defines aggression as sending armed bands, groups, irregulars or mercenaries to conduct acts of armed forced against another State, even to a substantial degree of involvement.
Thus, the aforementioned ICJ case held that the threshold of state responsibility for groups acting upon the territory of another must go beyond encouraging, supporting, supplying, training and assistance.
Going beyond that threshold is linked with the hurdle in Article 8 of General Assembly Resolution 56/83, which requires the conduct by persons or a group of persons to be “directed or controlled” by the state.
The ICJ Nicaragua case and its “effective control” test requires that the collaborators “participated in the planning, direction, support, and execution” of unlawful actions.
In this case, however, the US was not held liable because its military personnel did not take part in the “execution” of unlawful actions.
To apply this concept to the Russian collaborators, it can be 54 Charter of the United Nations – opened for signature on 26 June 1945 ; entry into force on 24 October 1945.
Francis argued that Russia cannot be held liable for the collaborators’ actions because its military personnel did not participate ‘directly’ in the execution of acts in Donbas,e., took command of the actions.
However, as discussed above, there is evidence of regular Russian military personnel actively engaged on the ground in Donbas taking command of many military operations.
Thus, the “effective control” of Donbas by the military actions of the Russian Federation can be established upon the basis of the Nicaragua case.
It must be noted that the “effective control” test presents a hurdle requiring command, rather than a direct mandate.
If command cannot be established, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia established the much preferred and more realistic “overall control” test in the Tadić case.
This test requires not only equipping, financing, training and support, but also “coordinating or helping” in the general execution of the act.
Based on the evidence, Russia is not only equipping, financing, training and supporting the collaborators, but it also organizing and assisting in the execution of unlawful actions in Donbas.
This is evident through the continuous supply of weapons, machinery, vehicles and so-called ‘humanitarian assistance’ in the occupied region.
Moreover, Russia is paying the salaries and pensions of individuals, including its collaborators, living on what is lawfully Ukrainian territory.
Therefore, it is suggested that the collaborators are not fighting for the separation of a race, creed, or religious minority for the purpose of succession to independence.
The collaborators are in fact fighting for Russia and the maintenance of its sphere of influence.
Defining the Conflict To all intents and purposes, the situation in Donbas is an armed conflict according to customary international humanitarian law.
This is premised on the fact that, according to the definition of an armed conflict given in the Tadić case,66 collaborators on the ground resorted to armed force in the pursuit of their objectives.
One may conclude, based on the analysis in the previous section, that the situation is indeed an IAC; however, it would not be so simple to establish such a fact.
In order to determine whether the conflict in Donbas is one between Russia and Ukraine, or between Ukraine and Russian collaborators, Article 2 of the UN Charter (the prohibition on the use of force) is once again the default starting point.
This principle derives from every state’s right to political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Moreover, this principle is restated in Article 2 of the UN Charter prohibiting nations from intervening in the domestic jurisdiction of any other state.
Therefore, the implication of these principles is that, where there is a conflict between two states, the aggressor state has very little grounds to justify its actions.
NIACs entail situations where belligerent forces are a product of a purely domestic crisis.
Thus, such conflicts will be within the remit of the jurisdiction of the state and should be free from external intervention.
However, some authors argue that the only exception to this rule is that any intervention must be pursued with the aim of upholding imperative treaty obligations and to protect the nationals of the intervening state.
It must be noted that this exception is disputed by jurists,69 which results in doctrinal and interpretative uncertainty about it.
The latter justification (protecting nationals) is the one in which Russia sought to legitimize their military actions in Georgia, Crimea and Donbas.
However, in the Donbas region, Russian citizens are not in the majority.
Furthermore, Russian citizens were not under any form of threat from the anti-Russian protests due to the fact of their peaceful coexistence during the protests and prior to the conflict.
Moreover, there was no appetite in the region for separatism, reunification with Russia or independence, because Donbas was fully represented in the Ukrainian Parliament.
Russia submitted to the contrary view that ‘radical extremists’ linked to Euromaidan threatened its citizen; however, these ‘extremists’ were protesters who enjoyed national and international support.
Again, this is the same line that Russia used in South Ossetia and Crimea,e., under the guise of protecting Russia’s interests.
It seems that the collaborators are using NIAC tactics as a cover for a greater IAC agenda.
It must be noted that the situation in Donbas was first triggered by the actions of the Russian Federal Security Service through an FSB colonel, 67 Jennings and Watts 2008, 428.
Francis Igor Strelkov, also known as ‘Igor Girkin’, who confessed to being the own who “fired the trigger for the war”.75 His rationale for being instrumental in starting the conflict in Donbas was to take control of populated areas and stop the “rebellion” from expanding.
Over time, the situation was joined by a host of collaborators engaging in disturbances before an armed conflict came into being.
Subsequently, the collaborators took on the persona of belligerents with an agenda.
In turn, they have sought to be recognized as belligerents, a status that enjoys legal benefits and consequences ranging from the conferral of rights to the ascription of neutrality.
As such, both “states” seek to solidify their possession of parts of legitimate Ukrainian territory, establish a form of ‘government’ and conduct their objectives against a legitimate government.
This approach is gravely mistaken because of the overwhelming evidence that the declared ‘separatism’ is not of the kind faced by Israel , the UK , China , Spain (with Catalonia) etc.
With Russian political “tourists” and regular military personnel propping up the “DPR” and “LPR” to the total exclusion of the Ukrainian Government, the conflict, ipso facto, became international ab initio.
Under international law, an IAC exists when states resort to armed force against each other.
This definition, when read alongside Common Article 2 of the Geneva Conventions, expresses that an IAC will come into being when a state, inter alia, occupies the territory of another state through armed force.
Hence, that is why there is an IAC between Ukraine and Russia, which started at the time of the occupation of Crimea.
From another prospective, prior to Euromaidan, Donbas was not subjected to Ukrainian colonial domination, racism, nor alien domination; nor was it pursuing independence.
Some would argue that the movement behind the ‘restoration of Novorossiya’ was the basis for the start of the conflict in Donbas.
However, based on the discussion above, it is evident that the ‘restoration of Novorossiya’ was simply a Kremlin propaganda exercise.
Later, with the shooting-down of Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 and other grisly criminal activities, it became clear that the conflict in question was not one of self-determination.
In relation to MH17, the Dutch-led Joint Investigation Team, in their report, stated that there is “irrefutable evidence” that the Malaysian jet was shot down by a Russian-made BUK missile from the 9M38 series.
Furthermore, it was the 69th Separate Logistics Brigade 75 Chekalkin 2017.
After the missile was fired, the vehicles were then transported back to Russia over the border.
In addition to shooting down flight MH17, there is damning evidence that Russia used its territory to fire its military artillery into Ukraine.
According to United States intelligence, weapons were supplied not only to target Ukrainian military positions, but also to boost the resources of “pro-Russian rebels”.86 These abhorrent acts both highlight the brutishness of the so-called “rebels”, and prove Russian responsibility in connection with an objective that is most unrelated to self-determination.
Therefore, as a result of an absurd agenda, one can understand why the region has, in part, turned into a cesspit of criminality and corruption.
The notion of a “civil war” or “separatist conflict” in Donbas has an unfounded premise in international law.
Furthermore, with the absence of an agenda linked to liberalization and independence, there can be no parallel conflict.
Thus, it is submitted that Russia has created a situation in which to destabilize Ukraine for its own ‘advantage’ and as a warning to other border states, should they attempt to look to the West.
Thus, the conflict in Donbas has nothing to do with the people in that region; the conflict is about penalizing Ukraine, as was the case in Georgia, for ditching its pro-Russian government.
Moreover, the military intervention has been to maintain a degree of control in Ukraine.
As such, based on ICTY jurisprudence in the Blaskic, Kordic and Rajic cases, the situation in Donbas is an IAC on the basis of Russia’s military intervention under the overall control of armed collaborators.
The Effect of the Distortion The distortions surrounding the definitions of the collaborators and the conflict have resulted in the distortion of the real conflict.
The media portrayal of the collaborators as “rebels” and “separatists” gives the impression that the collaborators are seeking to be liberated, when, in fact, there is a greater agenda at hand.
As such, the collaborators may take advantage of the distortion of definitions to solidify their ‘justified’ position in the eyes of the public.
One major source of alternative facts is the Kremlin’s media machine, which is keen to portray its actions in Ukraine as being in conformity with international law.
Broadcasters will then republish and even incorporate certain terms, such as “rebels”, “separatists”, “civil war” and “internal affair”, into their mediated language.
As a result, these terms feed into the everyday discourse about the conflict because the majority of individuals do not understand how such labels ought to be ascribed.
This distortion of definitions has also infected the diplomatic realm, such that even Ukraine’s UN Ambassador, Yuriy Sergeyev, saw the need to correct the distortions around the conflict.
Despite this correction, the distortions are continually republished in academic literature and the reports of certain international organizations.
This could only be a consequence of ‘reporting language’, which has a legitimizing effect on the terminologies around the conflict.
In the spheres of international law, however, such distortions are now absent from the language used by international courts.
For example, the ICC, in its preliminary report, refrained from ascribing such labels to the Russian collaborators in Ukraine.
This apparent policy is in fact due to the evidence of a larger Russian agenda, which goes beyond mere internal conflict between “separatists”, “rebels” and the Ukrainian Government.
Another problem lies with how distorted broadcasts are translated and interpreted through their dissemination on social media.
The manner in which armed conflicts are broadcast to the public has changed significantly over the years due to the rise in social media,92 which gives everyone, regardless of their intention, the tools needed to address the public and mass media.
Journalists who are active on social media will absorb the means by which conflicts are interpreted, which will then influence the composition of their reports.
Such influence could stem from how terms are applied and used en masse during times of conflict.
This form of newsgathering and interaction is evident with the increasing prominence of the social media editor in the field of journalism.
However, despite the evolution of this new form of journalism, many hold that the traditional principles of journalism ought to remain steadfast to ensure that accuracy continues to be the primary goal of reporting.
Even with the traditional model of journalism, conflicts, such as those in Rwanda and Yugoslavia, have been subjected to terminological inaccuracies and sensationalist reporting.
Thus, traditional problems coupled with new challenges posed by social 89 UN Security Council 2014, Security Council Briefed on Fast-breaking Developments in Ukraine, as Political Official Warns Failure to Secure Russian-Ukrainian Border Obstructing Peace, UN Doc.
Therefore, the interaction between traditional and social media journalism can have a direct and indirect influence on the conflict and its participants.
Alternative facts are borne out of the tensions between authority and authenticity during times of international conflict.
Since social media, in particular, provides a voice for everyone, individuals, including those in and around conflict zones, will publish information as they see fit.
As such, some information may be deemed ‘credible’ in the eyes of the wider public because of the ‘professional’ manner in which it is published.
Hence, the collaborators and the Kremlin will utilize social media in such a manner as to spread their propaganda, which in turn will be picked up by global broadcasters.
When broadcasters republish inaccurate information and terminology , individuals and even experts will form their opinions based on the presumption of authority being equated to accuracy in the world of news.
However, issues of credibility will arise when distorted definitions are challenged by more prudent experts, thus creating an environment of intellectual misunderstanding.
Alternatively, a negative by-product of social media is that many individuals feel that they are an authority on issues because they absorb a plethora of publications available on social media.
Some are even emboldened to challenge and discredit experts, who are qualified and spend most of their time in researching the area in question.
This problem is made even worse because social media provides a platform, not only to share ‘opinions’ but to spread ‘opinions’ at frightening speed.
In turn, the collaborators and the Kremlin utilize social media to distribute their propaganda, which will consequently reach a vast audience who will think that the ‘information’ is credible.
The ‘information’ will also incorporate twisted terms in an effort to divide public opinion and lessen the opposition against the situation in Donbas.
As it stands, the public and even diplomatic circles are divided over the conflict in Donbas because the Russian agenda has been effective to a degree.
This is why the EU, in particular, is seeking to aggressively confront the problem of alternative facts.
Therefore, it is the duty of the media to ensure that accuracy is given primacy over authority.
This disrupts the mission behind the distorted definitions, which seeks to galvanize a certain narrative about the conflict by the parties involved.
As demonstrated in Sects.. and 6.3, alternative definitions can alter the characterization of the participants in a conflict and the nature of the conflict.
Moreover, persons who are not entrenched in research around the conflict could be intellectually led astray because they have no other sources of information.
Francis are given priority in broadcasting in order to combat the tide of alternative facts.
Furthermore, journalists must not be too eager to compile reports based on material published on social media.
As such, there should be a process of cross-checking and prudent expert-checking to ensure that everyone outside of a conflict is not led towards intellectual peril.
The Importance of Definitional Accuracy During International Conflicts During times of international conflicts, especially regarding the conflict in Donbas, definitional accuracy is important for several reasons.
Firstly, labelling collaborators as “rebels” and “separatists” has led to the notion that there is a “civil war” being waged in Ukraine.
This is what the narrative of Russia’s propaganda machinery wants to achieve; and, to a degree, it has been successful.
The aim is to portray Russia as the great protector of its citizens and the high paragon of international virtue.
Secondly, incorrect definitions that feed into the language surrounding the conflict legitimizes the role and actions of the collaborators.
This builds upon the previous point, whereby flagrant violators of international law must be called out for all that they erroneously embody.
By ascribing alternative definitions to them and their actions, their public image is softened and not regarded as a serious problem in international law.
History shows that such actions had dire consequences for the future of Europe and the rest of the world.
From another angle, applying mistaken labels can also be likened to also referring to the Russian troops who fought for Germany during the Second World War against the Soviet Union as separatists and rebels.
The point is that the presence of Russian military in Donbas cannot be classed as a situation involving “rebels” and separatists” in straightforward internal conflict.
The conflict is one in which one country seeks to maintain a degree of control through unlawful methods over another, and should be framed as such.
Therefore, the aim of definitional accuracy is to create a specific mindset, which ensures that the collaborators know that their time is short and that there will be consequences for their actions.
Moreover, the information war waged by Russia and its enablers will fail if individuals become acquainted with the correct terminology and can ascribe them accordingly.
Building upon the third point, incorrect definitions have ultimately undermined the normative and moral treatment of the reality in Donbas.
As it stands, even though Russian leaders are seen as corrupt and war-like, the response to their unlawful actions has been less than adequate.
This creates a dampening effect on the minds of not only onlookers, but also those living in Ukraine, and Donbas in particular.
Hence, some commentators are of the view that the Ukrainian Government ‘gave up’ on Crimea because it saw no incentive to do otherwise.
Moreover, coupled with Russia’s focus elsewhere, the situation in Donbas is not seen as serious as the conflict in Syria.
As such, failing to attribute the correct terminology at the start of the conflict resulted in a temporary de facto win in terms of the Russian occupation in Donbas.
This is based on the fact that the conflict was not viewed as it should have been because of the promulgation of alternative definitions creating alternative facts.
As a result, divisions were created at all levels, where different standards and expectations clashed, causing the conflict to worsen.
Therefore, the normative and moral treatment of the situation in Donbas must be recalibrated in order to prevent such future actions in other border states.
Finally, incorrect definitions ascribed to the conflict in Donbas will negatively affect the way in which the international community responds to similar conflicts in the future.
This was the case with the woeful response to the Russian occupation of Georgia, which led to the conflict in Ukraine.
With reports from international broadcasters and organizations employing distorted definitions, the conflict was inaccurately framed, while policy responses were misguided.
Hence, the general misunderstanding surrounding the conflict in Donbas contributed to a lacklustre response from certain national governments around the world.
Thus, with differing views based on differing definitions, it is inevitable that a lack of a common, accurate understanding will even impede diplomatic efforts to find a solution.
Another explanation could be that any response would have led to direct conflict with Russia, for which there was no appetite.
Whatever the reason, the central point is that an improper attribution cannot invoke an appropriate response to a violation of international law.
If accurate definitions had been ascribed ab initio, the ICC may not have had to conduct an additional attribution process.
Russian foreign policy has been able to violate international law with impunity because the seeds of doubt had been planted.
Embedded within the alternative facts concerning Donbas, are the seeds of definitional accuracies, which are wreaking havoc on a united and coherent solution to the conflict’s end.
Conclusion The labels “rebels”, “separatists”, “Russian-backed separatists” “civil war”, “internal conflict” etc. are incompatible with the reality of the conflict in Donbas.
Moreover, incompatible labels create problems when applying international law, where attri103 Bershidsky 2016.
Therefore, the reality is that the situation must be deemed to be an IAC, with the involvement of Russian regular and irregular troops aided by local collaborators.
The collaborators’ characterization of fighting for their own cause is a fallacy; what is true is that they are fighting to support Russian aggression on the sovereign territory of another state.
Moreover, the collaborators are emissaries of the Russian Federation, who are fighting to preserve a zone of pro-Russian influence through the use of force.
As such, the conflict cannot be classified as an NIAC for the simple fact that Russia exercises effective or even overall control over its collaborators.
In fact, the collaborators are embedded with Russian military personnel, jointly and collectively, engaging in the active destabilization of Ukraine.
To create a positive narrative, inaccurate labels have been ascribed to create an ‘idealistic’ picture of the conflict and its participants.
The sources of these inaccurate characterizations are those who flagrantly violate international law and norms.
These labels are then incorporated into the broadcasts, reports and findings of international media and other organizations, which are then absorbed by the public and diplomats.
Furthermore, the openness of social media further deepens the problem in which authority no longer means accuracy in the world of information.
As a result, divisive opinions are formed over the conflict, which in turn produce a distorted and counterproductive view of the real conflict.
Thus, the role of the media is, now more than ever, paramount in combatting alternative facts buoyed by alternative definitions.
This is because incorrect labels undermine the realities of the conflict, contribute to the legitimization of aggressors’ actions, erode moral and normative treatments of the conflict, and impede efforts to find an effective solution to the conflict.
Moreover, established incorrect definitions will negatively affect the manner of response to similar conflicts in the future.
International law is based on well-defined principles and norms that maintain the rule of law.
If these principles and standards are distorted, the rule of law will be further weakened and give way to the further international violation conducted with impunity.
This has been evident from Russia’s actions around its borders for decades and decades.
Therefore, definitional accuracies will ensure that conflicts are precisely described, such that violators of international law are duly held responsible in the courts of law and public opinion.
Accessed 7 April 2017 European Parliament Ukraine and the Minsk II agreement.
Accessed 23 April 2017 Jennings R, Watts A Oppenheim’s International Law, 3rd edn.
Accessed 2 April 2017 Killingsworth M, Sussex M, Pakulski J Violence and the State.
Accessed 2 April 2017 Rodrigues L, Dubovyk V Perceptions of NATO and the New Strategic Concept.
Lessons to Be Learned from the Role of the International Community and the Media during the Rwandan Genocide and the Conflict in Former Yugoslavia.
UN Security Council Security Council Briefed on Fast-Breaking Developments in Ukraine, as Political Official Warns Failure to Secure Russian-Ukrainian Border Obstructing Peace, UN Doc.
