In a February 23 speech, Russian President Vladimir Putin said that a “special military operation” would begin in Ukraine, following the 2014 annexation of Crimea.
Explosions and outbreaks of fighting have since been reported across the country.
It was part of the Soviet Union until 1991, and since then has been a less-than-perfect democracy with a very weak economy and foreign policy that wavers between pro-Russian and pro-European.
Up_large_locator This all began as an internal Ukrainian crisis in November 2013, when President Viktor Yanukovych rejected a deal for greater integration with the European Union , sparking mass protests, which Yanukovych attempted to put down violently.
Russia backed Yanukovych in the crisis, while the United States and Europe supported the protesters.
In February, anti-government protests toppled the government and ran Yanukovych out of the country.
Russia, trying to salvage its lost influence in Ukraine, invaded and annexed Crimea the next month.
In April, pro-Russia separatist rebels began seizing territory in eastern Ukraine.
Fighting between the rebels and the Ukrainian military intensified, the rebels started losing, and, in August, the Russian army overtly invaded eastern Ukraine to support the rebels.
This has all brought the relationship between Russia and the West to its lowest point since the Cold War.
Sanctions are pushing the Russian economy to the brink of recession, and more than 2,500 Ukrainians have been killed.
A lot of this comes down to Ukraine's centuries-long history of Russian domination.
The country has been divided more or less evenly between Ukrainians who see Ukraine as part of Europe and those who see it as intrinsically linked to Russia.
An internal political crisis over that disagreement may have been inevitable.
Meanwhile, in Russia, Putin is pushing an imperial-revival, nationalist worldview that sees Ukraine as part of greater Russia — and as the victim of ever-encroaching Western hostility.
It remains unclear whether Russian forces will try to annex parts of eastern Ukraine as well, how the fighting there will end, and what this means for the future of Ukraine — and for Putin's increasingly hostile but isolated Russia.
That distinction actually turns out to be pretty important for understanding the current crisis.
Ukraine has a very long history of being subjugated by outside powers, and a very short history of national independence.
In other words, it may have been called ""the"" because it was considered more of a geographic region than an independent country, and one defined by its in-between-ness.
You've got to reach pretty far back in history to find the last time Ukraine was independent, before 1991.
There were a few years right after World War I, and before that a short time in the 1600s.
The country has been under partial or total Russian rule for most of those intervening centuries, which is a big part of why one in six Ukrainians is actually an ethnic Russian, one in three speaks Russian as their native language , and much of the country's media is in Russian.
Crimea is considered by most of the world to be a region of Ukraine that's under hostile Russian occupation.
Russia considers it a rightful and historical region of Russia that it helped to liberate in March.
Geographically, it is a peninsula in the Black Sea with a location so strategically important that it has been fought over for centuries.
Crucially, Crimea spent a very long time before 1991 as part of the Soviet Union and the Russian Empire, and most of its citizens are Russians themselves.
In late February, a few days after Ukraine's pro-Moscow president was ousted from power, strange bands of armed gunmen began seizing government buildings in Crimea.
Some Crimeans held rallies to show support for the ousted president and, in some cases, to call to secede from Ukraine and re-join Russia.
The bands of gunmen grew until it became obvious they were Russian military forces, who forcefully but bloodlessly brought the entire peninsula under military occupation.
On March 16, Crimeans voted overwhelmingly for their region to become a part of Russia.
Still, legitimate or not, Crimea has effectively become part of Russia.
The United States and European Union have imposed economic sanctions on Russia to punish Moscow for this, but there is no sign that Crimea will return to Ukraine.
The conflict in eastern Ukraine began in April 2014 with low-level fighting between the Ukrainian military and Russian-backed separatist rebels who seized some towns in predominantly Russian-speaking eastern Ukraine.
It has since escalated to outright-if-undeclared war between Russia and Ukraine.
Separatist rebels began popping up in eastern Ukraine shortly after Russia had invaded and annexed Crimea, where supposed Crimean separatists actually turned out to be unmarked Russian special forces.
They seized towns like Sloviansk and Donetsk, in the eastern region known as Donbas, ostensibly in outrage against the protests that had toppled Ukraine's pro-Russia President Viktor Yanukovych, himself from that same eastern region.
That feeling of disenfranchisement among eastern Ukrainians is real, and the rebels likely do have some organic, local support.
One of the most important rebel leaders, Igor ""Strelkov"" Girkin, is a Russian citizen and military veteran who retired from Russia's internal security services just weeks before he began leading the rebels, who are widely thought to include unmarked Russian special forces.
Thousands of Russian troops massed on the border just across from the rebellion.
Putin had not-so-subtly hinted that, if they did, he would blame the Ukrainian government for any deaths and invade to protect the Russian-speaking citizens of eastern Ukraine, whom he implicitly considers to be more Russian than Ukrainian.
Things got bad in early July, when the Ukrainian government launched an offensive to push out the rebels once and for all.
Ukraine redoubled its offensive, the rebels looked on the verge of getting overrun, and in mid-August Russia escalated from covertly supporting the rebels to overtly invading with Russian military troops.
The Russian military is one of the largest in the world and is pushing back the Ukrainian forces fairly quickly.
It is not clear whether they plan to occupy and annex eastern Ukraine as they did in Crimea, or simply to defend the rebels against getting overrun — if Putin even has a strategy at all.
The United States and Europe, while clearly outraged and punishing Russia with economic sanctions, have no plan to intervene, as putting Western troops into direct combat with Russian troops could make the risk of World War Three too great.
Though President Vladimir Putin insists that Russia is not invading eastern Ukraine, Russian soldiers, tanks, and self-propelled artillery have been crossing the border since mid-August in what can only be described as a hostile invasion.
Putin is trying to overturn to the rebels' losses because he wants something from Ukraine On the surface, the Russian invasion looks like it is meant to bolster the pro-Russia rebels in eastern Ukraine, who began losing ground in early August when the Ukrainian military began a renewed offensive against them.
In this thinking, Russian troops are there to keep the rebels from being entirely overrun.
Putin has been backing the rebels for months and fomenting violence in eastern Ukraine.
He's doing this either because he wants to maintain a perpetual separatist crisis so that he has leverage over the Ukrainian government to keep it from crossing him, or because he wanted to give himself an excuse to invade on the premise of saving eastern Ukrainians, then annex that territory as he did in Crimea.
Another possibility is that he wants to force some concession from the Ukrainian government and/or from the West.
In any case, the thinking here is that Putin is after some immediate strategic goal, and will stop once he feels he's achieved it.
Putin was sucked into an irrational invasion he didn't want by his own rhetoric and propaganda Since taking power in 2000, Putin governed through an implicit deal with the Russian people: he delivered high economic growth, and Russians accepted curbs to political and individual rights.
But after the economy slowed and some Russians protested his sham reelection in 2012, Putin shifted strategies, focusing on stirring up old-school anti-Western paranoia and imperial-style Russian nationalism.
So when the Ukraine crisis started, Putin's state media spun up a narrative that the Ukrainian protests were an American conspiracy to isolate Russia and that the new Ukrainian government is run by secret Nazis bent on expansion.
Sponsoring the rebels and saving Ukraine — which in the Russian nationalist view is really part of Russia — became a matter of national pride, of asserting Russia's defiance of the West.
Sure enough, when Putin invaded and annexed Crimea in March, his slouching approval rating skyrocketed.
Putin, addicted, has played up the nationalist cause in eastern Ukraine, the heroism of the rebels, his own heroism in backing them, and the threat of Ukraine's ""fascist"" government.
Were he to sit idly by while the rebels were defeated, it would show that his rhetoric was a lie and leave him without the nationalist cause on which he now bases his political legitimacy.
Putin is not crazy, but he may have created a crisis with an internal momentum so great that it has broken beyond his control.
Yes, the way that Russia seized Crimea by force from Ukraine this March was hostile and extremely illegal — there is no doubt about this.
But the more abstract question of whether Crimea is deep down Russian or Ukrainian is much less clear.
There are three ways to think about this question, and they all contradict.
Probably Ukraine Crimea has technically been part of Ukraine since 1954, when Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev transferred it from the Russian Soviet Socialist Republic to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
The reasons for this are esoteric and it didn't actually do much since both ""republics"" were part of the Soviet Union.
In 1991, when the Soviet Union broke up, everyone expected Moscow to demand Crimea back.
A slight majority of Crimeans voted for independence from Russia, and when Crimea formally joined the newly independent Ukraine , Russia promised to honor and respect this.
It was not shocking when, in February, some Crimeans held pro-Russia rallies.
It's not clear Since the crisis began, some Crimeans have been holding pro-Moscow rallies calling to rejoin Russia.
In mid-February, a poll found that 41 percent of Crimeans wanted the region to become part of Russia.
Crimea's March referendum on leaving Ukraine for Russia ostensibly garnered 97 percent support, but it occurred in a rush, without international monitors, and under Russian military occupation.
Had the referendum been held in a transparent and legal manner, it's not clear which way the vote would have gone.
The first, surface reason for the protests was that President Yanukovych had rejected a deal for greater integration with the European Union, taking a $15 billion bailout from Russia instead.
Lots of Ukrainians had wanted the EU deal, partly because they thought it would help Ukraine's deeply troubled economy, and partly because they saw closer ties with Europe as culturally and politically desirable.
The second, deeper reason for the protests was that many Ukrainians saw Yanukovych as corrupt and autocratic and as a stooge of Russia.
So his decision to reject the EU deal felt, to many Ukrainians, like he had sold out their country to Moscow.
Over the months that followed, Yanukovych tried to break up the protests, first by sending in the dreaded ""berkut"" internal security forces to crack down, and next by passing a series of laws that severely restricted Ukrainians' basic rights of speech and assembly.
In February, the parliament turned against Yanukovych, first voting to remove lots of his powers and end the crackdown, and then voting to remove him outright.
Not all Ukrainians supported the protests or their agenda; many had wanted the Russia bailout and wanted Yanukovych to stay.
Euromaidan also included a number of far-right ultra-nationalist groups, some of whom have been violent.
This is why the Russian government and some Ukrainians, particularly in the more Russian-speaking east, see the protests as effectively disenfranchising Russian-speaking Ukrainians.
But he was ousted by popular protests and his own parliament in February 2014.
The protests succeeded in blocking him from taking office, but he ran again in 2010 and appeared to win legitimately.
Yanukovych alienated many Ukrainians, including his supporters, with his mishandling of the economy and especially his crackdowns on the Euromaidan protests.
While lots of Ukrainians were happy to see him go, others saw his ouster as illegitimate and undemocratic.
This is particularly true in Ukraine's Russian-speaking east and in the heavily Russian region of Crimea.
Since declaring independence in 1991, Ukraine has been divided, and this crisis is an extension of that.
About two-thirds of Ukrainians speak Ukrainian as their native language, mostly in the country's west; about a third are native Russian-speakers, mostly in the east.
And language is really just a shorthand for describing a much more complicated political and ideological division.
This all becomes clearer if we look at how Ukrainians have voted in national elections.
Ukraine-map-composite People in the west of Ukraine tend to regard Russia with suspicion, see themselves as European, and want to break away from Russia's orbit to join Europe.
In every election, this half of the country has voted overwhelmingly for pro-European political candidates.
The eastern half of Ukraine, on the other hand, has voted overwhelmingly in favor of political candidates who are more sympathetic to Russia, including Yanukovych, who is from the east.
They tend to look more fondly on Russia and see their two countries as more historically linked.
There are still lots of statues of Soviet founder Vladimir Lenin in the east.
Ukrainians never really resolved the national identity crisis between its Russia-facing east and pro-European west that was sparked by its 1991 independence from the Soviet Union.
The current crisis is, in many ways, an extension and perhaps culmination of that internal — and external — dispute about their country's identity.
It is also the culmination of some Russians' belief that eastern Ukraine — or even all of Ukraine — is not actually a separate country, but rightfully part of Russia.
The east and west of Ukraine disagree so fundamentally about what sort of country they want to have, about what it means to be Ukrainian, that a big, internal political battle may have been quite likely.
For example, the EU trade deal that sparked all this only had about 43 percent popular support, mostly in the west; another 31 percent of Ukrainians said they wanted a trade deal with the Russia-led Customs Union instead.
When Yanukovych rejected the EU deal, many western Ukrainians saw it as a betrayal, but eastern Ukrainians may have regarded a different decision the same way.
Some Russian-speaking Ukrainians in the country's east and south, particularly in Crimea, have not quite reconciled themselves to being citizens of Ukraine over Russia.
Ideas that their region should be absorbed into Russia are very much alive.
Even though Yanukovych was removed from power by protesters, mostly in the west, this has not resolved the nation's deeper identity crisis.
All it did was shift power from a pro-Russian, eastern-based political party to a pro-European, western-based political party.
That's upset pro-Russian Ukrainians in the country's east and south, including in Crimea, where pro-Russian demonstrators marched against the new government.
The Kremlin quietly backed those protests, including by sending in unmarked Russian troops, which took over government buildings in Crimea and in eastern Ukraine.
In Crimea, that ended with a Russian military occupation and annexation.
In eastern Ukraine, it's led to ongoing fighting between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian security forces, and in August with the Russian military overtly invading.
You have to remember that Ukraine's present-day borders are very new and that its historical ties to Russia are very old.
So the distinction between Ukraine and Russia is a bit blurrier than the distinction between, say, France and Germany.
That line started blurring in the 1700s, when Russian leader Catherine the Great began a process of ""Russifying"" Ukraine — making it Russian — that continued right up through the 1950s.
This meant shipping in ethnic Russians, imposing laws that required schools to teach the Russian rather than Ukrainian language, and stationing lots of Russian troops in the area.
At some points in the 1800s, the Ukrainian language was banned outright.
In the 1930s, Soviet leader Josef Stalin caused a famine in Ukraine that killed several million Ukrainians, mostly in the east.
In the 1940s, Stalin forcibly relocated the ethnic Tatars who dominated Crimea's population, replacing them with Russians as well.
For most of this process, Russia focused overwhelmingly on the east, which has vast coal, iron, and some of the most fertile farmland on earth.
Ukraine's linguistic dividing line matches up almost perfectly with the line between its farmland in the east and forestland in the west.
The effect of all this history is that lots of Ukrainians, very understandably, despise Russia and want nothing to do with it.
But there's also a significant proportion of Ukrainians whose families have substantial connections to Russia, who may remember the Soviet era fondly, and do not want to break away quite so fully as does the west.
This national identity crisis has been centuries in the making, and it is a big issue today.
On the surface, it's because Ukraine has a lot of native Russian-speakers and ethnic Russians, many of whom voted for Yanukovych in 2010 and did not support the Euromaidan protests that led to his removal.
So when Russian leaders talk about intervening to protect the rights of Russian-speaking Ukrainians, they might be myopically ignoring the very valid reasons that Yanukovych was ousted, but they do mean it.
Russians have long felt a special historical connection to Ukraine, which plays a central role in Russian national mythology.
Tsarist leaders cultivated the idea that Russia's cultural roots go back to ancient Greeks who settled on the Crimean peninsula, in modern-day Ukraine.
While this is mostly made-up, it is true that Russia's first iteration as a great empire had its capital in present-day Ukraine.
The idea of a special, ancient connection to Ukraine is especially important for Russian nationalists, who see it as a vital and eternal component of the greater Russian empire.
Russian nationalism has seen a dramatic rise in the last few years, cultivated by Russian nationalist numero uno President Vladimir Putin, who has used this to distract Russians from their sinking economy and his tightening authoritarianism.
A special bond with Ukraine, and perhaps even the reacquisition of Ukraine, is in the Russian nationalist view not just about historic links but about reacquiring Russia's rightful place as a great power.
It is also about righting the injustices of the Soviet Union's collapse, which they see as having left Russian territory and many Russians under the control of an unworthy Ukrainian government.
From the beginning of the Ukraine crisis, Russia's meddling has been about preventing Ukraine from breaking away from Russian influence and falling under what Moscow sees as an ever-encroaching Western conspiracy to encircle Russia with hostile governments.
Russia may well have seen this crisis as a make-or-break moment for its special connection to Ukraine and wanted to intervene lest it lose Ukraine permanently.
Since then, though, Putin's overheated nationalist rhetoric, and his state media's insistence that the Ukrainian government is a US-backed Nazi regime that threatens the world, has forced Putin to escalate far beyond what he probably wanted.
There are three different ways to think about President Vladimir Putin's decision to annex the Ukrainian region of Crimea, to support separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine, and ultimate to invade.
In March 2014, he used these ideas as justification for annexing Crimea — which sent his popularity skyrocketing.
Since the crisis began, Putin has also been cracking down severely on dissent within Russia, something it's easier to get away with while the world is distracted by Ukraine.
Russia's far-right is more powerful than ever, and, with the economy on the verge of sanctions-imposed recession, Putin is so reliant on maintaining the nationalist fervor that he invaded eastern Ukraine even though this will clearly make things worse for him.
Putin likely saw a chance to quietly seize Crimea on the pretense of protecting it from Ukraine's chaos and serving the wishes of Crimeans to rejoin Russia.
The United States and Europe are doing a lot to punish Putin for annexing Crimea and invading eastern Ukraine.
But they are not doing anything that will physically force Putin to turn back his tanks, or return Crimea to Ukraine, which means that if he wants to keep invading Ukraine, despite those punishments, he can and will.
The United States and Europe are primarily punishing Russia by imposing several rounds of very tough economic sanctions, which are meant as punishment and to deter Russia from invading further.
While the sanctions initially targeted Putin and his inner political circle, they have since broadened to include the larger Russian economy, which was already at the edge of a recession.
The sanctions are working in that they're hurting the Kremlin and the larger Russian economy, and it's possible that they have kept Putin from escalating even further than they would have otherwise, but they have definitely so far not gotten him to back down or withdraw from Crimea.
The burden of imposing these sanctions falls on the European Union, which is heavily reliant on Russian natural gas exports and will hurt its own economy by sanctioning Russia.
Still, even normally cautious German Chancellor Angela Merkel has been supporting broad economic sanctions since Russian-backed rebels shot down Malaysian Airlines flight 17 in July and Russian troops overtly invaded in August.
The United States and Europe are also isolating Russia diplomatically, for example by booting Russia from the Group of Eight , an annual conference of the world's leading industrialized, democratic nations.
And NATO has suspended all practical cooperation with the Russian military.
Still, this has not been enough to turn back Russian troops, and it probably won't succeed in getting Crimea back for Ukraine.
The United States and Europe have made clear that they do not see any sort of military response as an option; directly fighting against Russian troops would present a very serious risk of escalation, given that Russia has one of the world's largest armies and thousands of nuclear warheads.
The United States and Europe have no mutual defense treaty with Ukraine, so the Ukrainian military is largely on its own.
What the United States and Europe can do is make a big show of committing to the defense of other eastern European countries along Russia's borders, so as to deter Putin from invading those countries as well.
The Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania are understandably concerned that they could be next; they are members of NATO, and so Western European countries are publicly committed by treaty to defending them.
The Cold War was a global struggle for hegemony between two, roughly co-equal powers.
It divided Europe between west and east and then divided much of the world.
It included bloody proxy wars on just about every continent, and raised a very serious risk of global thermonuclear war.
The United States is many times more powerful and influential than Russia; neither America nor the Western world nor democracy itself are at any real risk.
More to the point, almost the entire world opposes Russia's annexation of Crimea.
President Obama has described Russia's actions as the behavior of a weak country.
He is broadly correct, although Russia is clearly still strong enough to annex neighboring territory.
Russian President Vladimir Putin is certainly acting as if his country is in geopolitical competition with the West.
Putin clearly wants to reclaim some of Russia's past greatness, which in practice has meant asserting Russian power and positioning himself as a legitimate competitor to the Western world.
Still, this competition is limited to former Soviet republics and Syria.
The US-Russia reset is — was — an American effort first championed by then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in 2009 to ""reset"" relations with Russia, which had deteriorated during the Bush administration.
The idea of the reset was that the United States and Russia might not like one another very much, but the two countries have enough shared interests that they're both better off if they cooperate.
Russia supported US-led efforts to sanction Iran over its nuclear program, the two countries signed a big treaty on nuclear disarmament, and they cooperated on the Afghanistan War.
The reset began collapsing in 2012 with disagreements over the Syria conflict, as the two countries are backing very different sides.
Both American and Russian domestic politics are becoming less predisposed to good relations, partly because of rising nationalism in Russia and partly because of growing American concern about Russian human rights abuses, particularly against LGBT people.
And the simple truth is that the United States and Russia just don't have as many shared interests anymore.
The reset became unofficially dead in March 2014, when the United States imposed some pretty tough economic sanctions against Russia over its annexation of Crimea.
It's a user-generated, meme-based series of political cartoons that focus on international relations.
They began in 2009 on a German Web forum and have became popular across Europe, but have no defined authors or home; anyone can make one.
Polandball's jokey simplicity, its nerdy love of history, and its focus on current affairs have made the form well suited for the Ukraine crisis.
What is disputed is whether Putin looked at this and calculated that he could get away with annexing Crimea.
The strongest data point in favor of this case is Obama's threat to launch air strikes against Syria in September 2013, which was ultimately held back by domestic political opposition and a Russia-brokered deal to disarm Syria's chemical weapons instead.
The strongest data point against this case is that the United States is objectively much stronger than Russia and Putin would not be so paranoid about ever-encroaching American influence if he thought the United States were weak.
Former United States Ambassador to Russia Michael McFaul, an Obama supporter, has suggested some truth to both of these arguments.
But McFaul also thinks that Putin ""believes that President Obama — the United States —is seeking to foment revolution around the world against regimes that are unfriendly to the United States.
Putin has repeatedly justified Russia's annexation of Crimea by comparing it to Kosovo's Western-backed 2008 independence from Serbia.
In 1999, the now-gone southeastern European nation of Yugoslavia fought a civil war.
It was between the Serbian government and ethnic-minority rebels in the autonomous region of Kosovo.
The Serbian forces committed major abuses, including violence against civilians, and the Western countries of NATO launched air strikes against the Serbs to make them withdraw.
Kosovo and Serbia tried for nine years to reconcile, but in 2008 Kosovo declared independence, which the West supported and Russia opposed as illegitimate.
Putin's comparison is not really valid for several reasons that you can read here.
But the point is that he sees Russia as in conflict with a hostile and untrustworthy West, that he believes Western countries hold Russia to an unfair double standard, and that there is a conspiracy to remove any government that is friendly to Moscow rather than the West.
The reason Moscow wants this is that, in the current system, Ukraine's pro-Western government might not be very inclined to cooperate with Moscow.
In a federal Ukrainian system, regional governments will have much more autonomy and power, meaning that Moscow can get what it wants by simply calling up pro-Russian regional governors in Ukraine's typically pro-Russian east.
These eastern regions have lots of important natural resources, such as coal.
They also have factories that produce essential military equipment for Russia.
So if Russia can count on keeping them solidly pro-Russian by forcing Ukraine to adopt a federal system, that may well be enough to appease Moscow.
This could ultimately worsen Ukraine's already-severe political divide between west and east, by allowing the country's pro-Russia and pro-Europe socio-political factions to move even further apart rather than finally coming together.
Russia had recently supplied the rebels with a sophisticated, long-range surface-to-air missile system known as Buk or SA-11.
The rebels had shot down two other high-flying airplanes — both Ukrainian military planes — in the previous week.
It appears most likely that the rebels misidentified flight 17 as a military craft and shot it down.
The conflict had already been worsening, as Ukraine had recently retaken several rebel-held towns and Russia had been supplying weapons to Ukrainian rebels.
The shoot-down led the United States and Europe to impose even tougher sanctions on Russia and led the Ukrainian military to accelerate its campaign to finally defeat the rebels.
When it looked like the rebels would be overrun, Russia responded in mid-August by overtly invading in support of the rebels.
