Russia’s Annexation of the Crimean Peninsula and City of Sevastopol The extensive presence in Crimea of the Russian Black Sea Fleet, as well as a large percentage of the population loyal to Russia made the Kremlin’s decision to start its invasion of Ukraine from the peninsula quite logical.
The apparent alert of a probable Russian intervention to Crimea appeared on February 20, 2014.
On that day the Speaker of the Supreme Council of Crimea, Vladimir Konstantinov, was in Moscow.
He announced the possibility of secession of Crimea from Ukraine and welcomed Moscow’s intervention into Ukraine’s internal affairs.
Three days later, on February 23, pro-Russian separatists started demonstrations in Crimea.
These led to skirmishes with the pro-Ukrainian demonstrators in the streets of Simferopol.
Taking advantage of the turmoil on February 27, Russian special forces seized Crimean government buildings in Simferopol.
That night, the Crimean parliament’s web portal announced that lawmakers had appointed new Crimean leadership and voted to hold a referendum on independence from Ukraine.2 During the next few days, Russian troops seized governmental buildings, objects of critical infrastructure, and besieged Ukraine’s military facilities stationed on the peninsula.
On March 1st, the President Putin got authorization form Russian parliament to use force against Ukraine “to protect Russian interests,” marking the date when the Ukrainian government lost its control over Crimea.3 On March 16, Russia conducted a direct referendum in Crimea where voters had a choice only between joining Russia or obtaining independence from Ukraine.
Russia and its local separatists were widely spreading the ideas of a “fascist coup” taking place in Kyiv; they trumpeted the necessity to protect the Russian-speaking population from farright Ukrainian radicalism to justify Russia’s military intervention in Crimea.
Besides, the process of the referendum and its results were quite controversial, as it showed a significant percentage of votes in favor of Russia, suggesting that the referendum was not conducted in a free and fair manner.
In two days Russian President Vladimir Putin signed the “treaty of accession” formalizing incorporation into the Russian Federation of Crimea as a republic and the city of Sevastopol as a federal district.
Much of the International community strongly condemned Russia’s occupational actions.
Furthermore, the UN General Assembly adopted the resolution, with one hundred countries voting in favor, declaring the Russian-backed referendum in Crimea as illegal and affirming Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
Eventually, Russian armed formations stormed Ukrainian military bases and seized Ukrainian Navy vessels deployed in the Crimean Peninsula.
On March 26, Russia’s Chief of Defense announced that the Russian armed forces succeeded to subjugate all Ukrainian military facilities in Crimea.8 2.
Russia’s Invasion of Donbas Yanukovych’s removal from the Presidential Office and his retreat to Russia triggered waves of pro-Russian protests in the eastern and southeastern regions of Ukraine.
Most of the protesters were local Ukrainians, but there is evidence of the presence of Russian citizens participating in the demonstrations as instigators and agitators.
Russia used the rhetoric of Novorossiya to justify the invasion, establish separatistcontrolled enclaves, and create an “alternative political geography” for eastern and southeastern Ukraine.
The strategy included the consolidation of massive troops on Ukraine’s borders, recruiting and dispatching armed combatants and weaponry to eastern Ukraine, and the use of special forces and mercenaries to seize government buildings and suppress pro-Ukrainian opposition.
During March and April of 2014 anti-Ukrainian protesters and armed separatists took over government buildings in major cities in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
In April 2014, the pro-Russian separatists proclaimed the creation of the People’s Republic of Donetsk , the People’s Republic of Luhansk , and Novorossiya as a confederated Union of these two People’s Republics.
On May 11, 2014 leaders of selfproclaimed DPR and LPR held illegal “referendums” and subsequently declared themselves as “independent states” from Ukraine.4 In response to the insurgency in Donetsk and Luhansk regions, Ukraine’s government launched an “anti-terrorist operation” aimed at regaining government control over occupied territories.
The operation was conducted by the Ukrainian army and volunteer battalions that became a part of Ukraine’s National Guard.
At the same time, the Russian Federation was supplying the armed insurgency in eastern Ukraine with mechanized equipment, armored vehicles, tanks, artillery, air-defense assets, and other advanced munitions.
This weapons system belongs to the 53rd Russian Kursk Anti-aircraft Brigade and was operated by a professional Russian military crew.8 Over the summer of 2014, Ukraine’s military gained some success in pushing Russian proxies out of Ukraine’s territory.
In response, Russia launched an offensive operation that subsequently changed the character of conflict by transferring it into fullscale inter-state warfare.
The operation was accompanied by massive cross-border artillery shelling of Ukraine’s army positions from Russia’s territory.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine with its regular troops cost Ukraine’s government forces severe losses and allowed the DPR and LPR to expand their control over Donbas territory.
Major defeats of Ukrainian forces where Russian regular troops reportedly were involved included the battles for Ilovaisk , Donetsk Airport , and Debaltseve .340 After the Ukrainian Presidential elections in May 2014, the new government sought to use diplomacy to stop the violence in Donbas.
In addition, the international group known as the Normandy Four, which includes German, French, Ukrainian, and Russian political stakeholders, has participated in Ukraine’s peace-seeking processes.
The first package of Minsk agreements was signed by the TCG in September 2014.
The documents outlined de-escalation measures, including a bilateral ceasefire, area demilitarization, and their monitoring and verification by an OSCE Special Monitoring Mission; withdrawal of illegal armed formations and military equipment from Ukraine’s territory; decentralization of power in Donetsk and Luhansk regions, giving them a separate status; and other measures.
However, the Minsk Protocol failed to achieve a diplomatic resolution of the conflict.
In February 2015 the leaders of the Normandy Four states met in Minsk to negotiate another solution to mitigate the conflict.
After 16 hours of talks, they agreed on a new package of measures known as Minsk-II.342 This package was a more detailed version of the previous agreements and included specific timelines.3 However, many of the Minsk-II measures remain unfulfilled to date.
In 2015 and 2016, two additional Normandy-Four format meetings failed to produce significant results in conflict resolution.
In 2019, newly elected Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyi attempted to renovate the Normandy-Four meetings to resolve the Donbas conflict.
On December 9, French President Emmanuel Macron hosted German, Ukrainian, and Russian leaders to negotiate further steps to resolve the war in Donbas.
This meeting facilitated some success in a hostage exchange, establishment of new disengagement areas, and implementations of humanitarian and demining programs.
At the time of February 2020, according to the UN report, the number of conflict-related causalities in Donbas ranges between 41,000 and 44,000.
This force is under the command of the 8th Army headquarters of Southern Military District of the Russian Armed Forces.
The latter uses occupied Ukrainian territories as a training ground to test Russian military equipment and personnel.
Despite Russia’s total denial of its involvement in the Donbas turmoil, the Kremlin’s impact on conflict dynamics, as well as military, political and economic life within the occupied territories is apparent.
CONCLUSION In 1991, after gaining independence and international recognition of its borders, Ukraine embarked on its autonomous path.
It included closer cooperation with the Euro and Euro-Atlantic community.
Moscow was constantly trying to influence Kyiv’s domestic and foreign policies.
At the same time, Ukraine became an influential factor in Russia’s relations with the West.
Since the 2000s, these relations suffered significant turbulences and possessed apparent features of both confrontation and cooperation.
Finally, the consequences of that relations became reflected in Russia’s perceived threat to its security, status, or regime, which subsequently generated its assertive foreign policy choices towards its neighboring states, first in Georgia, then in Ukraine.
Since independence, Ukraine has experienced two pro-European revolutions—the Orange Revolution in 2004 and the Revolution of Dignity in 2014.
The latter event created an opportunity for Russian aggression, which resulted in Russia’s annexation of Crimea and invasion of Ukraine’s eastern provinces.
Ukraine’s discourse in Russia highlighted multiple sets of reasons why the Kremlin aggressed in Ukraine.
It touches deep historical, cultural, ethnic, and geostrategic importance of Donbas and Crimea for Russia.
In turn, it generates material, ideational, or regime survival factors which could serve as primary reasons for Russian aggression.
Which of these factors were more influential during Kremlin's decision-making with respect to Ukraine the subsequent chapters, analyzing Crimea and Donbas cases, add clarity to this issue.
