Perspective C O R P O R AT I O N Expert insights on a timely policy issue Russian Foreign Policy in Historical and Current Context A Reassessment Olga Oliker, Christopher S Chivvis, Keith Crane, Olesya Tkacheva, and Scott Boston R ussia’s annexation of Crimea in March 2014 took the world simply a matter of Putin himself, divorced from Russia’s interests by surprise.
Moscow’s consistent with historical Russian thinking about security subsequent support, both open and covert, for a separatist moveinterests and foreign policy, not only over the past decade but going ment in East Ukraine has been no less shocking; Western leaders back some three centuries.
But while the historical patterns of Russian continue to debate what Russia’s goals are, what is behind them, and foreign policy are an important starting point for understanding what what should be done to mitigate the dangers of further violence in has happened in the last year, they are insufficient by themselves to Europe. fully explain Russian actions.
Was it fear of been marked by unnecessary actions that have limited, rather than the potential economic repercussions of Ukraine’s partnership agreeenhanced, its ability to attain those goals.
Alternatively, is this Ukraine, and the implications of both for his own country.
It was a decisive player in the Seven Years War, the land power Since the end of the Cold War, leaders of NATO and EU nations that vanquished the Napoleonic Army, and a leading member of have rejected the very notion of strategic or geopolitical competithe Concert of Europe.
Russia was the main protagonist in the tion between Russia and the West, arguing that Moscow could Crimean War and subsequent crises that arose from the collapsing enjoy a positive-sum relationship, marked by cooperative security Ottoman Empire in the later 19th century.
Russia’s alliance with institutions and economic integration, with all European countries France in the 1890s is widely viewed as one of the first steps on as well as the United States and Canada. the road to World War I, just as its defense of Serbia in 1914 was a This was an ambitious worldview.
While Russia has by no principal action in the rolling march toward war that fateful summeans been consistently opposed to the rest of Europe, its long, mer.
After that conglorious, and sometimes tragic history as a European power has flict was over, Moscow ruled much of Europe through the Soviet been one of vacillation between integration with the rest of the Union and the Warsaw Pact for half of the 20th century. continent and rejection of it.
It has been invaded on several occaLike all countries, Russia also has unique attributes.
The most sions by rising European powers and repeatedly sought to protect obvious is its size, stretching across not only Europe but also Asia. itself by dominating the nations on its borders—including those This geography has made it easier for Russia to vacillate between of Central and Eastern Europe.
Many Russian leaders—but none periods of engagement with Europe and periods of relative retreat. more than Putin—have pointed to these patterns when they While Russia has been part of the European system, it has also claim Russia’s historical right to dominate its periphery.
The Russian Empire and the Soviet Union The nation has many potential enemies, and has faced marauders Russia today, with its current borders, is historically unique, and and invaders.
The border also creates an inherent internal security, Russia’s borders have changed greatly over the course of the nation’s administrative, and governance challenge.
Russian Geography Since 1914 The Russian Empire, 1914 The Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact until 1989 Warsaw Pact Russia since 1991 until present RAND PE144-1 Imperial expansion was Russia’s way of defending itself against Unlike the empires of other European states, however, invasion.
This is not to say that the Russian appetite for imperial Russia’s was continental.
Russia did not participate extensively in the conquest was unique in the 19th century.
On the contrary, it was in carve-up of Africa, the Americas, the Middle East, or Asia; instead, line with the imperialist trends of the era, as well as the dominant it expanded by incorporating neighboring territories.
While some practices of Realpolitik in Prussia, France, England, and elsewhere. differences and divisions were accepted, newly acquired land was If Russia did not enlarge its empire, the logic went, other states viewed as Russian for the most part, and ruled accordingly.
From would do so at its expense. the perspective of Moscow, Russia did not so much have an empire 3 as it simply was an empire, state and empire being the same thing. states were at risk.
In the aftermath of World War II, it are now Ukraine, Finland, Belarus, Poland, and Lithuania, as well as was Soviet incursions into Iran and divisions territories along the Black Sea.
In later decades, Russian forces conover the disposition of states in Eastern Europe that drove a wedge quered the Caucasus and parts of Central Asia.
The There were, however, two substantial differences between Soviet Union would reconquer all that it had lost and more in World pre-revolutionary Russian patterns of behavior and Soviet patterns.
It did not, however, annex all the areas held by the Red Army First, the Soviet Union was a superpower.
Instead, it established a tightly controlled had substantial interests in Asia, its fundamental security focus sphere of influence in Eastern Europe through links with the ruling tended to be on Europe.
Second, although both were insecure about their relationship Echoing Kennan, many Western scholars have argued that with the West, Russia under the Tsars did not view its conflicts Russian expansionism was driven by insecurity. with other European great powers in existential terms.
Russian Insecurity also contributed to a tendency to view other states as leaders, like most of their contemporaries, saw conflict as being in threatening, regardless of whether they had hostile intentions, and the nature of the international system.
Russia advanced its intersometimes even despite limited capability against Russian or Soviet ests with military force, especially along its borders.
Russia and the USSR tended to view the greatest threats Union’s leadership, by contrast, NATO’s liberal democratic world as those on their periphery.
In doing so, they defined this attitude was seen as an existential threat to Communism , as largely defensive.
Although Soviet military planners consistently and thus the leadership’s hold on power.
Interestingly, according to polls, Russian public Moscow’s relationship with the West since the end of the Cold War opinion at the time was generally opposed has been ambivalent, just as it was under the Tsars, with strong to military involvement in Russia’s neighborhood.
The Russian economic and cultural ties developing even as distrust continued Duma echoed the sentiment, rejecting a peacekeeping mission in in the security sphere.
The collapse of the Soviet Union willingness to fight for the near abroad never fully disappeared. increased the Russian sense of insecurity by leaving many states Russia’s insistence on maintaining its military presence in Moldova that had historically been under its influence outside it—in addiand Georgia led to its suspending implementation of the Convention to diminishing Russian power overall on the world stage. tional Forces in Europe agreement in 2007.
As a result, many of the patterns found in both Russian rhetoRussia’s continued insistence on a sphere of interests and influric and Russian actions since the breakup of the Soviet Union echo ence in the near abroad was crystallized in a speech by President those of both the Imperial and the Soviet past.
This was less indicative of the intent to protect a five-day war with Georgia over two breakaway regions that had emigrant communities around the world than a reference to the been supported by Moscow since the 1990s.
It was therefore clear large ethnic Russian populations which had found themselves sudthat “privileged” interests meant that Russia insisted on the right denly and unexpectedly living outside the Soviet Union as minorito use force in its neighborhood.
This reflected 13 turned violent, Russia rejected the interim government’s request for continuing unrest in the neighborhood (including, by 1994, within peacekeeping troops.
Western-leaning Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev articulated a need for Russian peacekeeping in the “near abroad” (as Russia Many of the patterns found in both Russian termed its fellow post-Soviet countries) and stated Russia’s intenrhetoric and Russian actions since the tion to defend its interests in order to maintain influence.
Russian troops remained deployed throughout its neighborhood in the breakup of the Soviet Union echo those of 1990s, and indeed still remain in many places, including Georgia both the Imperial and the Soviet past.
On the one hand, official Russian statements have included States and NATO as prospective adversaries whose capabilities avowals of an absence of enemies since Moscow’s first draft military should drive planning requirements.
Russia signed the framework agreement on NATO members’ decreased defense spending and the implications NATO-Russia relations in 1997 and joined in creating the NATOthereof for its military power, it avoided saying so.
It signed a partnership cooperation agreetrary, Russian analysts have been more likely to combine United States and ment with the EU in 1994 and began negotiating a more compreNATO spending and characterize it as growing.
And regardless hensive partnership in 2008. of whether NATO was explicitly described as a threat, there is no On the other hand, references to the dangers of “states and question that Russians, including those in government, saw existcoalitions” that “seek dominance,” and their prospective enlargeing security institutions in Europe as poorly aligned with their own ment, have been no less prevalent.
There is no question that these 18 interests and their expansion as dangerous, if not always directly statements—which also date back to the early 1990s, when Russia threatening to Russia.
This view was crystallized in Medvedev’s was seeking to build solid relations with the West—referred to the 2008 call for a new European security architecture.
These references became more explicit The proprietary feelings toward Russia’s neighborhood already as the 1990s went on.
NATO’s enlargement into what had been mentioned converge with distrust of the United States to shape the Soviet sphere of influence over the next decade was met with Moscow’s view of democracy movements throughout the former published documents and statements by Russian officials that freSoviet Union, in which the Kremlin consistently sees a Western quently described NATO as offensive, dangerous, and unreliable. hand.
Moscow believes that the United States, especially, is actively They claimed that NATO had destabilized governments, interfered seeking to undermine Russian influence by supporting democratic in the internal affairs of other states, and abrogated treaties (cerforces.
Statements by officials in the George W Bush and statements by Russia’s leaders also took pains to point out that administration lauding the spread of democracy played into that NATO did not pose a real threat to Russia.
But other commen19 perception. tary, including by senior military leaders, took another tack.
NATO’s enlargement trade with the European Union or Russian tourism to Western was threatening, and the United States and NATO were seeking to European countries.
Moreover, before the Ukraine crisis, Russia weaken Russia, undermine its pursuit of its interests, and prevent it also did not seem particularly threatened by its neighbors’ grow6 As a result, Russia has viewed Western attempts to integrate it more closely into Europe’s political and security institutions as at best inconvenient, and at worst hostile efforts to straitjacket and limit its power. ing ties to the European Union.
But the specifics of the Russian intervention in Ukraine relationships with most European states—presumably because it in 2014 and since were still surprising.
Russia’s conflict with Georcould negotiate with individual countries from a position of greater gia in 2008 was the endgame of many years of skirmishes and conrelative strength.
Relations with the EU were further stunted by flict, with most in Moscow predicting an eventual military clash. disputes over visa policy, trade, and Europe’s Third Energy PackFew inside or outside Russia predicted near-term military action age.
There was no evidence that the had previously been resolved without violence.
Ukraine’s plans Kremlin saw it as a threat. to sign the EU Association Agreement had been in the works for Thus, just as Moscow sought to control its periphery and years, and Russia had not protested them prior to 2013. viewed its neighbors in the West as both attractive and somewhat 2013 marked a sea change in Russia’s attitude toward the Euromenacing during the years of Russian empire and the Soviet Union, pean Union.
That year, Russian government officials and experts this same pattern has repeated through the last quarter-century.
Some Russian closely into Europe’s political and security institutions as at best academics and policymakers had characterized the expanding role inconvenient, and at worst hostile efforts to straitjacket and limit of the EU, especially prospects for EU enlargement, as threatening its power.
Despite the loss of significant parts of its empire in 1991, Russia’s economic interests—first in former Warsaw Pact countries Russia’s geopolitical circumstances, and its perceptions of them, and then in the former Soviet republics.
But until 2013, these had have not fundamentally changed. been minority views.
The 2014 Crisis Despite this shift in rhetoric, however, the idea that Ukraine Although Russia’s proprietary attitude applies to many other states signing an EU Association Agreement could spark a chain of on its borders, Russians historically have tended to view Ukraine, events culminating in a Russian invasion seemed far-fetched even more than most other post-Soviet states, as fundamentally at the time.
Given Ukraine’s long history of failing to fulfill 7 the conditions to which it has agreed with Western donors and History argued that any western shift by Ukraine would be slow partners, Russia could easily have concluded that its influence and filled with reversals.
Russia could attain its goals mainly by with Kyiv was not at risk from the EU association agreement and waiting and seeing. the protests in Ukraine’s Maidan Nezalezhnosti (Independence But Russia did not wait and see, surprising most at home and Square) that began in late 2013 to support EU association and, abroad.
This means that while Russia’s history of insecurity and eventually, demand the ouster of Ukrainian President Viktor its tendency to dominate its periphery is an essential backdrop for Yanukovych.
Historically, all Ukrainian governments, includunderstanding contemporary Russian foreign policy—and what ing those described as “Western-leaning,” had made mutually may lie in the minds of at least some Russian policymakers—it lucrative deals with Russia.
Russia’s is insufficient to explain Russia’s decision to use force in Ukraine and Ukraine’s close economic links, including in their mutuand willingness to risk the destruction of two decades of coopally dependent defense sectors, had all-but-guaranteed continued eration with Western countries.
Past regimes had threatened a factors. change in attitude, raising questions about the future lease for the Black Sea Fleet in Crimea, for example, but none followed The Role of the Russian Economy in Russian through.
Foreign Policy While a second overthrow of Russia’s preferred Ukrainian Russia’s more-aggressive foreign policy under Putin has had subleader in a decade surely must have rankled, and the Russian stantial economic consequences.
Russia’s recent economic growth government and media were quick to blame subversive Western has been an important underpinning of Russia’s new assertiveinfluence for the protests, Russian politicians were not, initially, ness.
From a political economic perspective, the crony capitalism anywhere close to calling for blood.
Indeed, the outright annexain which Putin and his allies engage has done nothing to limit tion of the Crimean peninsula clearly surprised many Russian Russia’s sense that it has a right to dominate its periphery.
Russia’s Parliamenironically, Russia’s economic growth has been driven in great part tary speaker was insisting that Moscow had no designs on Crimea by the very integration that its most-recent actions have rejected until just before and undermined.
It was, after all, flows of finance and people the Duma voted to accept the peninsula into the Russian fold.
Those high omy, although membership failed to stem the balance-of-payments prices for Russian exports of oil and natural gas provided a criticrisis of 1998.
Russia began negotiations to enter the World Trade cal impetus to growth unconnected to institutional and financial Organization in 1994; because of opposition to lowering integration with the global economy.
Revenues from these exports tariffs on the part of important Russia companies, especially in provided substantial resources for the Russian government and agriculture, Russia only became a member on August 21, 2012, 18 greater freedom of action. years after negotiations began.
Russia was invited to participate on The present crisis has inflicted severe damage on Russia’s fiscal the sidelines of a Group of Seven meeting in Naples, Italy, and economic health, because of both sanctions and investor skiton July 8–10, 1994.28 Subsequently, it was invited to become a full tishness.
Meanwhile, the coincidental decline in export prices for member of the renamed G8 in 1998, shortly before that year’s RusRussian oil and natural gas has exacerbated these effects. sian economic crisis.
Growth Through Integration In addition to having a venue in which to pursue Russian Putin’s terms in office as both president and prime minister with economic interests, Russian leaders have seen membership in the exception of the recession in 2009 oversaw record economic these international organizations as validating Russia’s role in the growth for Russia, which raised the country to the ranks of the world.
This is demonstrated by Putin’s attendance at the Group of upper middle–income states.
Along with social and political 20 in Australia in 2014, stability, economic growth has been a key element of Putin’s high even as his fellow participants condemned his policies in Ukraine. approval ratings.
Russia’s middle class has grown and, in the proConsistent participation by Russia’s senior leadership in the Peterscess, has become accustomed to regular vacations abroad and sushi burg Forum, which foreign CEOs and investors attend, is another and coffee bars at home. example of continued outreach.
Historically, Russia’s foreign economic policy has focused on Russia’s most important economic partner by far is the EU. creating favorable conditions for Russia in the global economy, in In 2012, the EU purchased 52 percent of all Russia’s exports and part by ensuring Russia has a seat at the various international fora. accounted for 42 percent of its imports.
Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1992, policymakers recognized the importance of foreign trade and free trade with and investment from the EU have been key to Russian flows of investment for economic growth.
Russia has exported oil, natural gas, steel, and chemicals tives, Russia joined the International Monetary Fund on June 1, to the EU and has imported machinery and equipment, food, and 1992, and the World Bank on June 16, 1992.
The EU has been the largest the member states directly, as the Russian government felt it had recipient, as Russian investors have put funds into bank accounts more leverage when dealing with the member states on an individthere and purchased EU stocks, bonds, and real estate.
Russia was especially put out by the EU’s Third Energy especially in Cyprus, have also been handy for Russians to bring package, which was directed in great part at diversifying EU back untaxed funds to invest in their businesses.
Russians may sources of supply of natural gas and also at eliminating Gazprom’s prefer EU bank accounts because they see them as more secure ability to engage in price discrimination, thereby reducing profits than Russian banks.
As a consequence, Russia and Russians have from its natural gas exports to EU member states. integrated their finances with the European financial system.
As Russian capital flowed out of the country, EU companies, Economic Ties with the Neighbors banks, and other investors poured money into Russia, financing As already discussed, the Russian government sees its fellow postthe development of financial services, retail and wholesale trade, Soviet states as within housing construction, and telecommunications, sectors that had its sphere of influence.
But if Russia sometimes used force (e.g., languished under the Soviet system.
They have also financed large peacekeeping forces as well as the troops sent into Georgia) to investments in energy and infrastructure.
As important as the ensure that its security interests were upheld, it had less success in capital inflows has been the know-how and management skills insisting on its economic prerogatives.
Russia’s economic relations these investors have brought to the Russian economy.
Much of with Azerbaijan, Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzthe rapid productivity growth in Russia between 1998 and 2008 stan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan stemmed from direct foreign investment by these companies, or have diminished over the last two decades relative to ties with the skills learned by Russian entrepreneurs in working for these corEU—and more recently, China—and other developing countries. porations.
The reluctance of Russia to expropriate the holdings of Between 2000 and 2012, the share these countries held in Russia’s foreign investors—even through 2014, as sanctions took hold— total imports fell from 35 percent to 13 percent.
Russian exports to reflects the importance of foreign investors for Russian economic these states dropped from 19 percent to 14 percent after the 1998 growth. crisis and never recovered to their precrisis level.
Russia’s near neighbors have not been an important treaty was enacted, most foreign economic issues had to be dealt source of foreign investment for Russia, although Russian firms are with through the European Commission.
In addition, the treaty often important investors in these countries. increased the European Parliament’s authority over trade policy.
For example, Russia slapped anti-dumping suits and higher ing economic role in its neighborhood.
Since the breakup of the tariffs on imports of Ukrainian steel pipe in 2007.34 These types Soviet Union, Russia and its neighbors—with varying degrees of actions are often undertaken in response to domestic political of enthusiasm—have taken a number of legal and institutional pressures, including by oligarchs with influence on their respective steps to try to keep economic ties strong.
The first was the Comgovernments. monwealth of Independent States , created December 8, Russia’s initiative to create a Eurasian Customs Union, and 1991, just after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
Its founding later Eurasian Union, with states in the region does little to members were Russia and all other former Soviet republics except improve on agreements already on the books.
Although the CIS has taken positions on other 33 Union seems to be more a reactive device to prevent members from matters, it was primarily designed to assist with issues pertaining to negotiating free trade or association agreements with the EU than trade, currencies, economic statistics, labor mobility, and financial a mechanism for increasing economic integration between Rustransactions, as well as other economic concerns.
There has been surprisingly little discussion countries hoped to preserve traditional trade ties.
Since then, Rusby Russian academics or policymakers on the potential economic sia and its fellow Soviet successor states have experimented with a effects of the customs union on the economies of Russia or other number of agreements concerning free trade, common tariffs, and member states.
A handful of studies forecast gains in the medium other economic arrangements.
These have been helpful in reducing run through reductions in transaction costs and the subsequent barriers to trade, albeit not as much as they might have been.
After arrangements have differed crucially from approaches taken by, for joining the customs union, Kazakhstan has had to increase tariffs example, the EU and its predecessor organizations.
Whereas the on about 50 percent of its imports, which is likely to result in losses EU is fundamentally a rules-based organization, the CIS and other on interregional trade that will not be fully offset by the gains in efforts to foster economic ties in the post-Soviet space consistently intraregional trade.
Because the tariffs required by the union have run aground on the refusal of members, including Russia, to are already in place in Russia, Russia should enjoy some net gains abide by their rules.
But given the history of implementation of than allowed or other barriers to trade forbidden by these agreepast economic agreements among post-Soviet states, it is hard to 11 imagine that the authors of the Customs Union expect high levels elites, including by providing opportunities for them to resell lowof compliance with its terms.
Indeed, as of July 2015, the Kazakh priced Russian natural gas at higher prices to EU member states, Ministry of Investment and Development had introduced licenses pocketing the difference.
On the other hand, when states such as for car imports from member states of the Eurasian Economic Ukraine and Georgia pursued policies that Russia frowned upon, Union to protect Kazakh car dealers from competition with RusRussia punished them by asking Gazprom to raise prices to levels sian cars, which had become much cheaper following the sharp fall higher than those paid by Western European states. of the Russian ruble.
But if its economic benefits are elusive, it is clear that the Protectionism as Counterweight to Integration Customs Union makes it difficult for members to sign Association In terms of overall economic policy, the central thrust of Moscow’s Agreements with the EU without Russian consent.
This means approaches over the last two decades has focused on liberalizing the that members will be forced to forgo substantial opportunities to economy and integrating it into global markets.
However, officials enhance ties with EU states and bolster economic growth.
This fits and private interests have simultaneously pushed in the other direcwell with the general opposition to integration, for itself and its tion, seeking more state intervention in the economy and more neighbors, that has been a hallmark of more recent Russian policy protection for local industries.
Over the past decade, Putin, many and makes it difficult to see the Customs Union as anything other in his inner circle, and managers of state-controlled companies have than a political mechanism, geared to limit EU influence rather resuscitated policies focused on protecting Russian businesses and than enhance the economies of Russia or its neighbors. promoting state-controlled champions.
For control in natural gas , and develop and promote state many years, Russia provided its neighbors with natural gas and, arms manufacturers, such as United Aircraft Corporation.
Preferential sales were seen as supporting technology parks, such as the Skolkovo Innovation Center, it seems the economies of these countries during difficult times, hopefully highly unlikely that this initiative would have gone forward without damping unrest.
The destruction of the Yukos oil company and the arrest and incar12 ceration of its CEO, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, in 2003 not only sent a clear signal to potential rivals of Putin among the oligarchs, it The transfer of privately owned assets back also shifted oil fields and assets from a private-sector company into to state control has imposed costs on the state-controlled Rossneft.
Yukos, although the most prominent, Russian economy. was not the only company Putin took over.
Kahka Bendukidze, a Georgian businessman, felt pressured to sell his company, Obedinennie Mashinostroitelnie Zavody , to Gazprom at a the basis of patronage and loyalty instead of performance has led marked-down price when he took the Minister of Economy posito a sharp decline in the rate of growth in productivity, especially tion in his native Georgia.
As companies are mismanaged and state control of key components of Bendukidze’s portfolio—for capital is squandered, Russia has entered a period of slow growth instance, nuclear power plant production. , partly Russian managers of state-controlled companies and adminisbecause of this shift toward greater state intervention in the Rustration officials have benefited from these sales, as they are able to sian economy. use state-controlled companies to provide patronage and, in some cases, siphon money into their own pockets.
In addition to presEconomics and the Ukraine Crisis sures from these groups on the Russian government, private-sector Joining the WTO, opening up previously protected sectors, and interest groups have pressed the Russian government to adopt providing protections to Western businesses are all ways by which policy measures beneficial to them.
For example, private-sector the Kremlin has pursued integration and growth.
At the same time, agricultural interests, such as Cherkizovo, have pushed to block it has occasionally veered from those goals to please economic elites such competing imports as chicken or other agricultural products, and maintain its capacity to distribute rents.
However, both the using concerns about food quality and sanitation as a rationale.
Customs Union generally and Ukraine policy specifically do not Thus, it does appear that on economic issues, in sharp contrast to appear to be driven by national or parochial economic interests. security issues, some private-sector elites have had some influence Russia’s actions in Ukraine undercut both by damaging economic on policy through both open and covert mechanisms.
Ukraine has been government has also insisted on local content clauses and provided an important supplier to the Russian arms industry.
The Southern special tax benefits for foreign investors in industries considered Machine Building Plant Association in Dnipropetrovsk, strategic, such the automotive sector. which designs, manufactures, and services rockets and missiles, has The transfer of privately owned assets back to state control has been an important source of components, as has Zaporozhye-based imposed costs on the Russian economy.
The current conflict on skimming money from companies and promotes employees on puts an end to these relationships, possibly for good, and thus 13 damaging Russia’s defense sector.
Financial and other economic alignment with what it perceives as its broader strategic interests. sanctions imposed by the EU and Russia’s embargo of imports of Russia has also shown that it is willing to incur substantial ecoselected foods from countries that have imposed sanctions have had nomic costs in pursuit of its goals in Ukraine and elsewhere.
While Russia may not have expected it appears that Moscow has come to see economic integration in the these developments, it has accepted them, and has not taken steps same light as political integration—as a political danger, despite the to reverse the situation. many economic benefits it has brought Russia to date.
Crimea’s primary economic activities The Role of Elite and Public Opinion in Russian have been tourism and hosting the Russian Black Foreign Policy Sea fleets.
As incomes rose in the last decade, Crimea has struggled It is difficult to argue for any group or individual’s influence to compete with Turkey, Egypt, and other tourist destinations. being decisive in a system as Russians and Ukrainians, a strong traditional tourist base for centralized as Russia’s has become.
Puzzlingly, however, Putin the peninsula, have found these new destinations provide better seems to care a great deal about what the Russian public, if not its services and lower prices.
After the annexation of Crimea, Ukraielite, thinks, and will go to some lengths to shape those thoughts. nians no longer frequent Crimean resorts.
Despite patriotic pleas, This is largely because it is easier to control the country if public Russians have also shown no more interest, so this component of views are favorable to the regime.
Ukraine has also restricted trade nor public views on specific issues appear to drive Russian policy, across the new de facto border, so costs of food and other products but the regime is deeply fearful of elite and public opposition to has risen, as Crimeans have had to transport substitute supplies its actions. from Russia over longer, more expensive transportation routes.
Russia now also covers pensions for the large Well before Putin’s third term, the Russian constitution had tilted population of elderly Crimeans, estimated at $1 billion per year. the balance of power in favor of the president by so much that some Russia has also promised to build a $7 billion bridge to Russian terscholars characterized the Russian system as “hyperpresidential.”40 ritory.
Following the Beslan hostage crisis, elected goverThus, Russia today seems to see economic policy as one more nors were replaced by appointed representatives.
Perhaps as a result, actual decisionmaking, 42 preferred, and preferential, treatment for themselves. according to most observers, has since devolved to an ever-tighter There are a few possible counters to this view that are worth and smaller group (or, perhaps, different groups that are consulted examining individually.
While these agencies’ budgets have Influence on Foreign Policy risen, there is no evidence that they are propounding specific 7 policies.
Although 3.45 3.90 3.82 3.23 3.68 3.61 military leaders’ statements align with those of foreign policy 3 3.25 3.01 3.23 2.94 leaders, this is usually the case in most states, absent a significant 2 rift.
Rather, it seems at least as plausible to argue that the Putin 1 administration has much to gain from supporting these institutions and has done so for that reason, rather than due to lobbying 0 1995 1999 2004 2008 2012 on their part.
President Minister of Ministry of The Russian Orthodox Church has benefited from growing Business elite Foreign Affairs Defense Public opinion State Duma Regional leaders ties with both Putin and Medvedev.
Valdai Discussion Club, Russian Elite—2020, Moscow, ideology of conservative values and, according to some, as part July 2013.
RAND PE144-2 of the logic for closer ties between Russia and other post-Soviet 15 countries.
In domestic policy, a case can be made that the church suspect that both the protests and the dropping poll ratings reflect has affected approaches to health and education.
While the church has spoken out on attend public protests to show their anger, others may have become both Ukraine and Syria, these comments have followed, rather less supportive of the government in a quieter way, causing Putin’s than led, Kremlin policy.
In our view, church-state relations bear 48 polling numbers to drop into the high 60s. watching.
For now, however, we remain skeptical that the church is While Russians clearly have views, however, it is not clear affecting Russian security policy rather than being used by the state that these views constrain their government or cause it to adjust to justify it. foreign policy.
If that were the case, Russian foreign policy would consistently change to accommodate the polling numbers and Shaping Public Opinion demonstrators.
In the months following its neighborhood in the early 1990s, as already discussed.
In conthe annexation of Crimea in March 2014, President Putin’s domestrast to foreign policy, it is possible to point to examples of where tic approval ratings were consistently above 80 percent.
This is high demonstrations and popular discontent led to changes in domestic even for Putin, whose approval rating has rarely dropped below 70 economic policy.
Instead of adapting to public viewpoints, the Kremlin has The 2011 downturn in public support for Putin coincided made substantial efforts to shape public opinion to ensure continuroughly, if imperfectly, with two factors.
Putin’s polling numbers dropped istration, it seems, cares what the electorate thinks, but rather slightly in 2009, although they remained in the high 70s or betthan adjusting approaches and pleasing more people that way, it ter until the end of 2010.
One might, therefore, conclude that instead seeks to generate approval by swaying more people to supeconomic pressures led some Russians to have less faith in their port what it planned to do anyway.
The other is a series of protests in which urban Russians concerted efforts to delegitimize the opposition, increase limits took to the streets starton press freedom, and promote conservative, “Russian” values as ing in the winter of 2011–2012.
Russia’s government is also not on flawed parliamentary elections, which many saw as rigged, and above misrepresenting its policies to maintain support, as shown by then the imminent return of Putin to the presidency through an continuing denials of Russian troops in Ukraine, and the effort to election that offered no other viable candidates.
Although never directly linked to the government, the Delegitimizing the opposition has involved crackdowns and beatings and murders of Putin critics (including, most recently, the arrests of critics of the government.
With Mikhail Khodorkovsky February 2015 killing of Boris Nemtsov, a former Deputy Prime the most obvious and prominent example from the early days of Minister turned opposition leader) also contribute to an environPutin’s leadership, the most notable recent instance may be that of ment in which those who seek to speak out have excellent reasons nationalist activist Alexei Navalny, who was tried and convicted of to fear for their safety. embezzlement and fraud.
Other prominent trials have included that Another component of the campaign against opposition forces of three members of the performance art collective Pussy Riot and is a concerted strategy to suggest that groups and individuals who 17 opposed Russian government policies are foreign-backed, especially law and organizations with any connections to the United States by the United States.
This applies beyond Russia and, of course, are increasingly under pressure. aligns with the broader view of Western intentions and influLimiting opposition views also means limiting press coverence discussed above.
Putin and others in his administration have age critical of the government.
Constraints on media freedom accused the United States of orchestrating the so-called Color Revin modern Russia have a long history.
Early in Putin’s first term olutions, in which mass protests led to government overthrows in as president, the regime took over NTV, at that time the only Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan in the 2000s.
Since then, state encroachment was also portrayed as being behind the “Arab Spring” protests of on freedom of the press has been documented by both Western 2010 and, most recently, the “Euromaidan” movement in Ukraine, and Russian scholars.
Freedom House, for example, has rated the which led to the fall of the Yanukovych government in February media environment in Russia as “not free” every year since 2002.54 2014.
While it might be an exaggeration to say that the mainstream Legislation enacted in 2012 requires all nongovernmental organizaRussian press is state-controlled, it certainly fair to describe it as tions to disclose sources of their funding and register as “foreign state-aligned.
A 2014 law limits foreign 52 care since 2000 not to criticize the president and to limit critiques ownership of Russian media outlets.
Various legal pretexts have of the government more generally. long been used to harass and intimidate organizations with foreign In recent years, the effort to ensure that alternative views are ties.
In its milder manifestations, it continues to is partially funded by Western donors and foundations, was shuttake more traditional forms, such as government discussions with, tered for six weeks in early 2008 for alleged violations of fire safety and suggestions to, journalists regarding what to cover and how. regulations.
Organizations such as the Soldiers nalists critical of the government increasingly have trouble keeping Mothers’ Committee and the human rights organization Memorial their jobs and businesses.
Laws prohibiting “obscene” and “extremhave faced substantial harassment under the 2012 “foreign agents” ist” content have targeted journalists critical of the government.
Cable carriers reported that Segodnya, which replaced RIA Novosti and also includes the Voice government pressure was a factor in their dropping the Dozhd’ of Russia radio station.
Kiselev’s off-hand homophobia and crititelevision channel in early 2014, which by the end of that year was cism of Western culture fit well with the narrative of Russian traforced to broadcast from a private apartment, having been evicted ditionalism and of Russia standing up to the bullying West.
In this context, it is not surprising that access to independent Much of her staff resigned in protest and the new Lenta.ru toes a media may well lower support for the ruling party in Russia. much more government-friendly line.
However, historically, even when the press was freer, Russian public The result is that while varied perspectives can still be found opinion on foreign policy issues has tended to side with government on the Internet and in a few newspapers, most independent voices positions during times of crisis.
U.S.-Russian relations have consistently led to more negative views In addition to limiting access to nongovernment-controlled of America—although these views have reversed themselves when media and delegitimizing the opposition, the Kremlin has helped the crisis eased. ensure that the mass media that do reach most Russians put It would be a mistake to think that Russian opinions are creforward an explicitly progovernment message, as well as a nationated by Russian media or other mechanisms (such as the increasing alistic one.
Leitmotifs of Russian pride and readings of history to role of the Russian Orthodox Church in society), including the support that pride are prevalent in a storyline of a resurgent Russia. military and schools.
Like anyone else, Russians make up their This applies not just to media; the pattern can also be found in own minds.
But—also like most populations—they are affected by government statements and school textbooks.
For example, when Russian Orthodox Church, and family values are other key themes the media and political environments were more open in the 1990s, that allow for a storyline in which conservative Russia is a bulwark Russians appear to have paid attention to media messages but voted against a more liberal, decadent West.
Russia’s glorious history, 59 for those presidential candidates whose positions were closer to both Tsarist and Soviet (in the latter case, victory in World War their policy preferences.
More recently, with less access to varied II is particularly important), is consistently invoked.
Individuinformation, it appears that less-informed Russians are more recepals who voice these views most effectively have enjoyed success tive to pro-regime political coverage while better-informed Russians in recent years, the best example perhaps being Dmitry Kiselev. are less receptive.
RAND PE114-4 its own views both of events in Ukraine and of Western fault in limiting alternative viewpoints and putting forward a nationalistic those events to its public, and to have those views be accepted. storyline, particularly in a time of crisis.
The Russian public’s continuing support of its government in At the same time, the substantial effort that goes into molding the foreign policy sphere is thus likely a result of both a general prepublic opinion and ensuring support means that public support dilection to support the government on such issues and the appeal is important for the Putin administration.
The escalation of such of the specific messages that the Kremlin has used.
Nationalism efforts since 2011’s protests and the slight drop in Putin’s public and rebirth are appealing concepts.
As the economy deteriorates, opinion numbers in that year speaks to a government view that nationalism may provide some social cohesion and support for the such things could get worse if left unchallenged.
The Russian government knows what it is doing by both may not shape foreign policy in Russia directly, but it is, evidently, very important to the Kremlin.
However, the close cultural and linguistic ties argument holds that hybrid governments such as Russia’s, which between the two countries, as well as their shared history, mean have elements of both democracy and authoritarianism, benefit that there are many parallels.
Russian officials may well have from retaining democratic elements, and thus will take pains to feared that the Ukrainian example, if successful, could spur imikeep them in place and avoid outright repression.
Another, related 65 tation at home. argument lies in the concern expressed by the Russian government regarding “Color Revolutions,” as already discussed.
Whatever the The Putin Factor actual degree of foreign backing for protest movements around the Some analysts argue that, with Russian foreign policy so centralworld, there is no doubt that such movements have often been sucized, policy toward Ukraine is simply the result of the preferences cessful in ousting regimes from power.
Proponents of this outlook point place in neighboring post-Soviet countries that have much in comto the somewhat more accommodating line Russia took toward the mon with Russia politically and socially is not lost on the Kremlin.
They argue, in particular, that Putin’s view Thus, one way of looking at the broad effort we have described here of foreign policy is deeply shaped by his own experience, including as an approach to shaping public opinion is as “diffusion-proofing” as a former KGB officer, and that a zero-sum, strictly realpolitik Russia against a possible overthrow of its current leadership by view of the world permeates all his interactions with the West. means of popular protest.
As already noted, decisionmaking in Russia is highly centralized Returning to the current crisis, we find that the same things and has become more so under Putin’s rule.
The the opposition may well have influenced its response to events personal image that Putin has sought to project aligns well with the in Ukraine in early 2014.
The popular protests on the Maidan overall narrative of a reborn Russia.
Most Russians credit him with force—and the subsequent failure of the international commuthe economic growth Russia enjoyed in the early 2000s and Mosnity to broker a lasting arrangement due to Yanukovych’s flight cow’s increased influence on the world stage.
Putin’s image has been from Ukraine must surely have been a nightmare scenario for carefully orchestrated from the time of his anointment as Yeltsin’s the Kremlin.
In time, traditional masculine attributes were emphaconsistently poor governance, and much lower living standards, sized.
Putin does not flinch at strong language (recall his promise to annihilate terrorists in the outhouse) and maintains great vigor 21 (communicated through judo tournaments, tagging tigers, and ridfor the fears of instability.
This appeal to both conservative standards a state against which its citizenry might revolt, is clearly not strong of manhood and to strength of both body and purpose is reflected in and will not succeed or survive. the spin that is put on his policy actions at home and abroad.
Analysts have also argued that Putin’s personal views about The historical narrative, and the concept of Russia as a tradihistory, relations with other European powers and with the United tional, conservative bulwark against “Western liberalism” is also States, and even whims and emotional responses have driven tied to Putin personally.
In a system as centered on the presidency himself as a churchgoer who has close ties with the Patriarch of the as Russia’s, this is certainly plausible, although more difficult to Russian Orthodox Church, which has been very supportive of his demonstrate.
Even historical pride—for instance, in the victory of World center of decisionmaking and that the decisions he made in 2014 War II—is tied to Putin personally.
In these ways, Putin embod69 are a product of both historical Russian strategic perspectives and ies this new Russian ideal.
His is the key voice for all elements of his regime’s concerns about maintaining his power in Russian policy, foreign and domestic, from standing up to Western the future.
Moreover, while the specific choices made in 2014 and bullying to rejection of Euro-Atlantic integration for both Russia since may have been Putin’s, they are now a part of Russian policy. and its neighbors.
This means that as long as Putin’s successors seek to continue the In this context, Putin is not only both decisionmaker and authoritarian regime he has built, they are likely to be prone to the embodiment of Russian policies, he is also, in a way, the embodisame foreign policy patterns we have seen in recent months.
Differment of the state, an image strengthened first by his designating ent personalities may lead those responses to manifest in different Medvedev to take over as president at the end of his second term ways, but the core themes will be similar. and then by his taking it back in 2012.
This indicates a perspective that 72 cal science hardly provides a crystal ball.
However, understanding sees the state as crucial and involved in much of society, playing the likely sources of Russia’s behavior in Ukraine can help decisiona leading role in guiding that society, as differentiated from more makers formulate policy regarding Russia in the future.
This statist philosophy fits with United States and its allies interpret Russian foreign policy today the concept of a strong executive, of course, and the two reinforce has important implications when it comes to questions of how to one another, even as Putin has worked to ensure that both continue restore and maintain security in Europe. to become stronger.
This view of state stability, and thus leader73 Our assessment enables us to reject several of the hypotheses ship stability, as critical to the country’s survival provides fodder presented at the start of this analysis.
Russia’s actions do not appear 22 to have been significantly motivated by fears that Ukraine’s Assoiary nation), they might happen in Russia as well.
Coming against ciation Agreement with the EU would be costly for the Russian the backdrop of the 2011–2012 protests in Moscow, they seemed economy.
The seizure of Crimea and the war in Ukraine also do all the more menacing to Putin’s grip on power.
Putin took action not appear to have been driven by an effort to court Russian public not simply to counter what he saw as Western activity on Russia’s opinion, although a concerted and successful effort has kept the border and to maintain influence in Ukraine.
Rather, Russia has Russian public firmly behind the government. annexed Crimea and helped maintain a conflict in eastern Ukraine Instead, at its core, Russia’s foreign policy is rooted in longto prevent this overthrow of the existing order from leading to a standing beliefs about its rights within its region, beliefs that are successful, functioning government—or even a semi-successful, but rooted in Russian history and geopolitical circumstance.
The threat to the Russian state, seen as one are exacerbated by a consistent post-Soviet view of a continued with the Russian government—not to the status quo in Ukraine— competition with the United States, in which western efforts at is what led Russia to risk incurring substantial economic costs. integration were seen, at least partly, as a mechanism of controlling Putin’s personal leadership style and viewpoints were likely and weakening Russia.
In addition, and drawing in part on the critical to the specific actions that were taken, although not to the latter factor, the current regime harbors deep fears about the effects attitudes that drove them.
Indeed, the initial confusion about Rusof pro-democracy or pro-European forces that have increasingly sia’s intentions toward Crimea seem to indicate that the decision surrounded it since the end of the Cold War.
Russia, in general, to annex the peninsula (as opposed to simply foment unrest and and Putin, specifically, see Ukraine as unquestionably belonging in protest against the Kyiv government, as was done in the East), was Moscow’s strategic orbit, not the EU’s.
The Kremlin was therefore quite probably a decision taken by Putin with little consultation. angry at what it saw as Western “interference” in Ukraine, to which At the same time, there was likely an evolutionary and responsive it attributed the Maidan protests and, indeed, most opposition to quality to Russia’s actions.
The Kremlin could not have predicted the Yanukovych regime. the exact effects of its actions in Crimea.
It is certainly plausible These protests were also a challenge to Putin’s personal belief that the success of that operation spurred increased activity in in a strong state at the vanguard of society, a belief shared by those Eastern and Southern Ukraine.
For one thing, the last year and a half should keeping military forces in Ukraine is.
This could lead Moscow to make all wary of efforts to predict Russian policy and actions. withdraw its troops—regular and irregular—and most of its supRather, it behooves Western governments to prepare for a range of port from the Donbass, while holding on to Crimea and settling possible outcomes, both good and bad.
Ongoing unrest there could be or behave in ways that other states see as irrational and counterprosufficient for Russian leaders to point to as a ductive, or it may seek what seems a more rational path.
Regardless, cautionary tale of the risks of seeking Western support for demoeven if the current crisis cools, future Russian governments will cratic reform. likely remain paranoid about Western intentions, both within RusThe worst possibility is one in which Moscow escalates sia itself and on its borders.
It will see Western efforts to weaken conflict with the West in Ukraine or elsewhere.
In this context, and undermine it in most United States and NATO member actions—even while NATO and the European Union should not rely on Rusmany that are not, in fact, related to Russia at all, and it will sian economic weaknesses alone to preclude further aggression tend to place any disagreements or conflicts into a narrative that on Moscow’s part, they should recognize that Russia’s capabilities juxtaposes Russia and the United States, downplaying the role of are limited.
Meanwhile, Moscow will almost certainly insist on tially over the past decade, particularly in the wake of reforms holding on to Crimea regardless of what else happens.
This means instituted in 2008, but they remain best suited for limited local that some level of sanctions—and tension—will remain whether conflict.
While Moscow has touted grandiose plans for continued the situation in Ukraine overall escalates or not. military development, these are already well behind schedule.
ConAlthough the Kremlin insists it is prepared to continue military tinuing European and United States efforts to put economic and politiinvestment as planned, the tightening of Russian federal budgets cal pressure on Russia in the hopes of changing its policies seem in the wake of continued economic crisis and lower export prices unlikely to be sufficient to force the Kremlin to withdraw from for crude oil and natural gas limit resources for defense.
The financial over, if Russia might have failed to predict the response of both and military costs of occupying parts of Ukraine will eventually the West and Ukraine itself to Moscow’s actions over the past two begin to take a toll, however.
It is important to note that Russia years, it now knows better what results aggression will reap, and does not seek Ukraine’s territory, so much as its acquiescence to must recognize that a lengthy occupation of a hostile neighbor, Russian domination.
If Russia does not back down, both it and whether Ukraine or one of the Baltics, would soon turn Ukraine will surely suffer further economic and human losses in very ugly. the coming years.
Thus, while true acceptance of the government Collectively, these factors diminish, but do not eliminate, put in place by the Maidan is probably unlikely for some time to the risk of further Russian aggression in the near future.
It will seek, within its capabilities, to keep them at a up on Russia in the long-run or foreclose potential new opportunidistance, and, provided the opportunity, weaken and undermine ties for cooperation should they arise.
These policies are in keepWest has embarked upon a new era in relations with Russia, one ing with long-standing historical Russian patterns. that calls for greater vigilance, new strategic vision, and a consisWhatever happens in Ukraine, Russia will, sadly, pose a chaltent, long-term effort to rebuild the stability that has been lost in lenge for the United States and its allies for years to come.
Voennaia Doktrina Strany I Mezhdunarodnaia Bezopasnost,” Krasnaia Zvezda, January 14, 1994.
A Comparison of Nicholas I and Vladimir Putin,” Journal of Eurasian Studies, Vol., 2014.
Keith Crane is director of the RAND Environment, Energy, and Economic Development Program as well as a professor at the Pardee RAND Graduate School.
