From the legally subversive methods human rights; state of it employed to orchestrate the annexation to the rhetoric of exception anti-extremism with which it has continually justiﬁed its occupation, the Kremlin has inaugurated a new “state of exception” in Crimea, invoking the prerogative to circumvent normative legal and juridical procedures in response to a perceived emergency.
While Crimea’s state of exception resembles those initiated elsewhere by some Western states and Russia itself as part of the global War on Terror, the state of exception has provided the pretext for a particularly severe degree of repression, persecution, and human rights violations in occupied Crimea.
In conjunction with the Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group, this article discusses the theoretical groundings of the state of exception, its broader applications within the Russian Federation, and its troubling repercussions for residents of Crimea.
Casting the Kremlin’s actions as belonging to a state of exception helps draw attention to its alarming human rights violations, and may bolster resistance to the creeping normalization of the Russian occupation of Crimea.
The international community has broadly condemned the Kremlin for its subversive violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity with the annexation of Crimea in March 2014; many Western states have responded with sanctions against key agencies and individuals involved in the annexation and occupation of the region, while the vast majority of UN member states continue to recognize Crimea’s de jure status as Ukrainian sovereign territory.
Indeed, as Kuzio notes, many Western pundits continue to employ and legitimize imperialist narratives of Russian history that subsume Crimea and Ukraine as a whole into an essentially Russian space.
Even more problematically, accepting Crimea as intrinsically Russian requires that its indigenous peoples – chieﬂy the Crimean Tatars – be erased from the region’s history, and that their opposition to Russian irredentism be disregarded.
Defenders of the justness – if not the legality – of the annexation may also point to the results of the contentious referendum on 16 March 2014 that suggested Crimea’s “reuniﬁcation” with the Russian Federation represented the will of the Crimean people to an overwhelming degree.
But perhaps the most worrisome consequence of perceiving Russia’s sovereignty over Crimea as just or “natural” is the cover it lends to Russian authorities to curtail freedoms and commit egregious human rights violations within the occupied region in the name of this contested sovereignty.
Enabled by the liminal sovereign status they have imposed, Russian authorities operating within Crimea have aggressively targeted opponents of the occupation through censorship, intimidation, extra-legal prosecutions, and state violence cynically justiﬁed by rhetoric of anti-extremism and counterterrorism.
While several Ukrainian and international organizations are committed to documenting the mounting human rights abuses perpetrated in occupied Crimea under the guise of anti-extremism measures, broad recognition of the scope of these 30 H COYNASH AND A CHARRON violations – and necessary action taken in response – remains elusive as Russia’s possession of Crimea is gradually normalized.
First articulated in the 1920s by German political theorist Carl Schmitt and further theorized by Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben, the “state of exception” denotes a political condition in which a sovereign power, in response to a perceived threat or emergency, paradoxically suspends the rule of law in the name of preserving the very socio-political order that upholds it.
Recently, the concept of the “state of exception” has proven a powerful tool for theorizing the extra-legal and extra-territorial methods of combat and detention employed in the U.S.-led War on Terror, with applications also extending to Russian contexts.
Although few have yet drawn from the theories of the state of exception to frame the Russian occupation of Crimea, we argue that this is nevertheless an appropriate framework and an eﬀective strategy for focusing attention on the troubling human rights situation established under the contested sovereign order imposed by Russian authorities in occupied Crimea.
Facts and details concerning human rights conditions in Crimea are presented here in conjunction with the Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group, an organization committed to investigating, monitoring, analyzing, and reporting on human rights abuses in Ukraine, along with human rights advocacy and education.
Among its many ongoing activities, the Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group has actively monitored and reported on the deteriorating human rights conditions in Crimea since its annexation to Russia in 2014, and regularly issues extensive and authoritative reports on the latest developments from occupied Crimea.
In other words, Schmitt argues that sovereignty rests in the hands of those with the authority to declare unilaterally the suspension of the juridical order, to determine when circumstances require the exceptional circumvention of normative legal procedures.
While it represents a disruption of the established EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 31 legal order, the state of exception as theorized by Schmitt does not exist outside of the rule of law, as the authority to declare the exception is an inherent prerogative of the very sovereignty under which the legal order is established.
Taken from an obscure provision of Roman law, homo sacer referred to an individual legally stripped of all rights as a citizen, rendering their lives valueless and therefore ineligible for sacriﬁce to the gods on the one hand, while also permitting their murder without legal consequence on the other.
Reduced in this way to “bare life” without political qualiﬁcation, yet deriving this status through legal decree, homo sacer is paradoxically included as an object of the juridical order only through his exclusion from it.
For Agamben, the power to declare a state of exception is therefore equivalent to the power to symbolically reduce human life to the status of homo sacer, for the normal rights and protections guaranteed to citizens by the rule of law may be summarily voided as deemed necessary in accordance with “exceptional” circumstances.
While Agamben’s work initially relied on Nazi concentration camps as the most salient example of “the camp” as inductive metaphor, the United States’ initiation of, essentially, a permanent “state of exception” with the War on Terror after the terrorist attacks against the United States on 11 September 2001 revealed the true prescience of his analysis.
Following Agamben, numerous social scientists have deployed the “state of exception” and its associated concepts as a powerful analytical lens for theorizing discourses and practices of sovereignty after September 11.
Others have endorsed 32 H COYNASH AND A CHARRON while further nuancing Agambian perspectives of the camp (Diken and Laustsen 2005) and the state of exception, alerting us to their gendered and racialized , neoliberal , and postcolonial (Biswas and Sheila 2010) underpinnings.
Political geographers have been especially active in engaging with Agamben’s ideas and their relevance to the War on Terror; however, many caution against applying his theories too generally and without careful consideration for their discrete geographies, emphasizing that “states” of exception are fundamentally “spaces” of exception.
In particular, many political geographers have argued against viewing the spatially unbounded pervasion of the camp system as the essential modern paradigm (Gregory 2004b, 2006; Minca 2007; Elden 2009; Jones 2009; Ramadan 2009), pointing instead to particular sites where biopolitical spaces of exception – or “campscapes” in Martin’s formulation – have been produced and where extraterritorial state violence is carried out in the name of counterterrorism.
Russia, Crimea, and the state of exception Indeed, much of the recent scholarly literature concerning the proliferation of states/spaces of exception have primarily addressed American discourses and practices undergirding the War on Terror; however, this framework has also been employed to make sense of the increasingly illiberal and authoritarian tendencies of sovereign discourse and practice in post-Soviet Russia, especially under President Vladimir Putin.
Empowered by the new global rhetoric of counterterrorism targeting Islamic extremism and tacitly blessed by its Western allies, the Kremlin similarly invoked its power to declare a state of exception in its brutal assault against Chechen separatists, eﬀectively rendering them – and anybody else impeding the struggle2 – homines sacri.
Explicitly linking the Second Chechen War to the state of exception, Rigi characterizes the emergent form of Russian sovereignty as “chaotic” and “post-hegemonic,” where the rule of law is transactional and may be overridden through force.
In subsequent works, Rigi also reﬁnes his analysis to describe a postmodern “corrupt state of exception” in Russia , in which legal norms are recursively restructured to accommodate and further legitimize the state’s exceptional powers – an EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 33 observation echoed by Makarychev and Medvedev in their discussion of Russia’s “biopolitical turn” during Putin’s third presidential term.
But perhaps the most signiﬁcant application of the state of exception is toward Russia’s 2008 invasion of Georgia and subsequent recognition of Abkhazia’s and South Ossetia’s independence, coming a year after Putin voiced his vitriolic anger at Western policies towards Russia during his speech at the Munich Security Conference.
Prozorov identiﬁes the brief Russo-Georgian War as the moment when the Russian state of exception spilled over into the rest of the post-Soviet space, when the Kremlin invoked a heretofore unexercised sovereign prerogative to unilaterally redraw the borders of the former Soviet states according to its own security interests – thereby inducting, according to Prozorov, a new post-Soviet nomos characterized by a permanent state of exception.
Artman further considers the exceptional statuses of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, arguing that they are made doubly exceptional by, on the one hand, the process of “passportization” that bestowed Russian citizenship to the regions’ residents and thereby extended Russia’s sovereignty beyond its borders, and their de facto independence on the other hand, placing them in a liminal zone with respect to the global nation-state system.
In light of these works, Russia’s annexation of Crimea must also be viewed through the prism of exception, although surprisingly few (Uehling 2015; Makarychev and Yatsyk 2018) have yet drawn this connection.
Moreover, in another clear parallel to its own War on Terror, the Kremlin has also evoked the threats of terrorism and extremism to justify the annexation and its exceptional use of violence in occupied Crimea.
Indeed, from the very beginning of the occupation, Russian 34 H COYNASH AND A CHARRON state media and the Kremlin’s own oﬃcial rhetoric proclaimed violent far-right Ukrainian nationalism boiling over from the Euromaidan to be an imminent threat requiring intervention to protect ethnic Russians and Russophones in Crimea.
As we will demonstrate below, Russian authorities have continued to cite Ukrainian nationalism – and, increasingly, Islamic fundamentalism allegedly emanating from the Crimean Tatar community – as internal threats further requiring the exceptional use of quasi-legal prosecution, state violence, censorship, and other repressive measures in Crimea.
Furthermore, the exceptional nature of Russian rule in Crimea should come as no surprise considering the Kremlin’s increasingly brazen tendencies to invoke its sovereign prerogative to exceptional measures, as referenced above.
Yet even within this Russian context, there appears to be something rather exceptional about the state of exception in Crimea – where the population’s ﬁgurative transformation into homines sacri is exceptionally stark.
Thus, following the example of Gregory and Minca , our intention in evoking the state of exception in Crimea is not “to transform the victims of the new geographies of exception into the objects of theories conceived merely as academic capital” , but to contextualize and focus attention on the very real EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 35 dangers, suﬀering, and oppression experienced by Crimeans living under Russian occupation.
In this spirit, we now turn to a discussion of the deteriorating human rights conditions in occupied Crimea and their distressing repercussion.
Crimea prior to Russia’s annexation The human rights situation in Crimea before the annexation was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from that of the rest of Ukraine.
The country had experienced a particularly sharp degradation of all law enforcement bodies and the judiciary after four years under President Viktor Yanukovych.
Nevertheless, there were regular and unobstructed protests, pickets, and civic campaigns against corruption, illegal construction, or environmental issues.
In Crimea, there were few of the same formal restrictions on press freedom as in Russia, although the situation had sharply deteriorated under Yanukovych.
Independent media, including the popular Crimean television channel Chernomorska, came under considerable pressure.
There were, however, other media outlets and many civic activists highlighting and campaigning against the monopolization of the media.
The lingering problems – particularly concerning housing – that the indigenous Crimean Tatars faced had never been properly resolved since they began returning to Crimea in the late 1980s after their mass Deportation in 1944 , and under Yanukovych there was no pretense of even engaging in a dialogue.
Questions regarding what arrangements Yanukovych had made with President Putin on the eve of the Euromaidan protests, and the eﬀorts Russia took in order to assist Yanukovych remaining in power, are beyond the scope of this article.
While these messages may have been intended ﬁrstly to bolster support for Yanukovych over the protesters in Kyiv, they served equally well to begin building the argument for the Kremlin’s exceptional use of force in Crimea in defense of its Russian and Russophone population.
Much as it had stoked fears of a terrorist threat emanating from the North Caucasus in the early 2000s to bolster support for the Second Chechen War (Oates 2006), Russian state media reported heavily on the supposed threat of Ukrainian nationalism during and after the Euromaidan in a coordinated eﬀort to portray the Russian authorities as saviors of the Crimean people.
The discontinuation of broadcasts from mainland Ukraine was preceded by the forced closure of Ukrainian television networks based in Crimea, including the Television-Radio Companies Krym and Chеrnomorska, the latter of which also sustained a distributed denial of service attack prior to its closure on March 3.
The illegitimate Crimean referendum The fact that the vast majority of Crimeans received only inﬂammatory misinformation regarding the new government in Kyiv, the alleged danger it posed to the peninsula, and the resultant need for Russian intervention is EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 37 suﬃcient enough to question the validity of the referendum held on 16 March 2014, but there were many more alarming irregularities.
The referendum was a transparent attempt to validate a violent coup of the Crimean government, and was accordingly held under hostile occupation by the military of a foreign state aided by Russian and pro-Russian paramilitary forces.
What’s more, the ballot used in the referendum itself oﬀered no possibility to vote for maintaining Crimea’s status quo; voters were permitted to choose only between Crimea’s “reuniﬁcation” with Russia and the restoration of a short-lived 1992 Crimean constitution – which had granted the region unilateral power to secede from Ukraine – with most voters unlikely to understand the implications of the latter option.
There are also strong grounds for doubting the validity of the referendum’s reported results and voter turnout rates, which dubiously put support for Crimea’s “reuniﬁcation” with Russia at 96.77% in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and 95.6% in the separately-administered city of Sevastopol, and voter turnout at 83.1% and 89.5%, respectively.
While Crimean Tatars form only a minority of Crimea’s population, it is also crucial to note that their national representative body, the Mejlis, declared a boycott of the referendum that likely contributed to a lower voter turnout rate than was oﬃcially reported.
Given the glaring problems surrounding the referendum, it is concerning that so many reputable scholars have accepted the Russian ﬁgures as though they are valid (Sakwa 2015, 2017; Kent 2016; De Ploeg 2017; Hahn 2018), thereby legitimizing the annexation and the narrative of Crimea’s inherent Russian-ness, and normalizing the declared state of exception in occupied Crimea.
Following Rigi’s model of a “corrupt state of exception,” the revocation of freedoms of speech and press in Crimea were backed by Russian legislative maneuvers.
In one example, a law requiring Crimean companies and organizations to re-register as Russian entities has served as a pretext to outlaw several Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian-language media outlets, with registration frequently denied on the spurious grounds that required documents were not included in the application.
This was the fate of ATR, a popular independent Crimean Tatar television network forced oﬀ the air on 1 April 2015 , and which was later resurrected – along with other shuttered Crimean media outlets – in mainland Ukraine.
Russia’s control over the Crimean media landscape extends to the internet as well.
Alarmingly, Russian authorities have also targeted individuals in Crimea for their social media activity, including that which occurred years before the annexation.
Perhaps the Kremlin’s most insidious legislative tool against free speech in Crimea is Article 280. of the Russian criminal code.
Taking eﬀect only in May 2014, the law punishes “public calls to action aimed at violating Russia’s territorial integrity” – which, according to Russian law, includes Crimea as of 18 March 2014 – with ﬁnes up to 30,000 rubles, and/or up to four years imprisonment.
Andriyevskaya’s article on Crimean Tatar volunteers ﬁghting for Ukraine in the Donbas prompted Russia’s Federal Security Services to bring charges against her under Article 280.1, although she had already relocated to Kyiv.
The oﬀending text contains only the assertion that Russia’s occupation of Crimea should end and that steps should be taken toward achieving this goal.
The article landed Semena on Russia’s “List of Terrorists and Extremists” and resulted in his bank accounts being frozen.
Clampdown on peaceful assembly Along with freedom of the press, freedoms to peaceably gather, demonstrate, and protest in Crimea have also suﬀered grave deterioration under Russian occupation.
One of the ﬁrst major instances of Russian authorities cracking down on a peaceful gathering in Crimea occurred shortly after the annexation; on 3 May 2014, roughly 5,000 Crimean Tatars amassed on the newly-imposed checkpoint between Crimea and mainland Ukraine to receive 40 H COYNASH AND A CHARRON their political leader, Mustafa Dzhemilev, who was attempting to enter Crimea in deﬁance of a recently-issued 5-year ban.
The crowd was confronted and intimidated by large contingents of police, riot squads, and paramilitary groups , and fearing bloodshed, the veteran Crimean Tatar leader and Ukrainian MP decided not to attempt crossing the checkpoint into Crimea, and instead returned to Kyiv.
Even more egregiously, this incident was soon followed by an outright ban on all public demonstrations in Crimea just days before the 70th anniversary of the 18 May 1944 Soviet Deportation of the Crimean Tatars, which they have commemorated each year since Ukraine’s independence with a large gathering of remembrance on Simferopol’s central Lenin Square.
To circumvent draconian restrictions on assembly, many Crimean Tatars have taken to voicing their grievances through solitary demonstrations, which are legal under Russian law, and yet they are still met consistently with intimidation and prosecution.
In one example, 76-year-old Server Karametov was detained and held for several hours without access to a lawyer for holding a solitary picket in commemoration of the Deportation on 18 May 2017.
He was again detained and held on August 8 for his one-man demonstration in support of jailed Crimean Tatar leader Akhtem Chiygoz, whose trial was then underway.
Russian authorities have further harassed and persecuted Crimean Tatars and others for overt displays of loyalty to Ukraine.
On 9 March 2015, following denied requests to hold a gathering in front of the Simferopol memorial to Taras Shevchenko in honor of the Ukrainian poet’s 201st birthday, the commemorative event was instead held in a city park, where four of the gathering’s Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian organizers were detained for holding Ukrainian ﬂags and ribbons.
While bans or restrictions on peaceful assembly have mostly targeted Crimean Tatars or others sympathetic to Ukraine, even supporters of the Russian annexation are likely to be detained for holding unsanctioned demonstrations.
In one noteworthy example from June 2016, approximately ﬁfty residents of the resort town of Alushta attempted to protest against the appearance of carnival attractions and commercial stands blocking access to the beach.
Political prisoners and degradation of the rule of law While in some cases the Kremlin and local authorities in Crimea have weaponized the law to legitimize their repressive policies, in other cases legal norms are simply ﬂouted altogether, with numerous examples of politically-motivated detentions and prosecutions.
These political prosecutions typically hinge on unfounded accusations of extremism, terrorism, or other threats to Russia’s national security; for example, Russian authorities in Crimea have charged at least ten Ukrainians for unsubstantiated plans to commit acts of “sabotage,” including four men tried in August 2016 after oﬀering televised confessions to plotting attacks on Crimea’s infrastructure with the assistance of Ukrainian military intelligence.
In certain examples, Russian authorities in Crimea appear to have fabricated evidence of violent extremism as a pretext for silencing and persecuting those who openly oppose the annexation or display loyalty to Ukraine.
Balukh was arrested on criminal charges in December 2016 after another search of his home dubiously uncovered ammunition and explosive devices, although no such items had been found during previous searches and Balukh had no history of violence.
Certainly the most high-proﬁle of Crimean political prisoners is ﬁlmmaker Oleg Sentsov, who was arrested along with three other young men in May 2014 for allegedly plotting to commit “terrorist acts” against Crimea’s infrastructure and monuments.
Chyrniy and Afanasyev’s testimonies were used to convict all four men of terrorism, although Afanasyev was released in June 2016 as part of a prisoner exchange.
Sentsov was sentenced to 20 years in prison while the fourth man, Oleksandr Kolchenko, received 10 years in the same trial, and Chyrniy and Afanasyev each received a reduced sentence of 7 years for having “cooperated” in the investigation.
The “show trial” of Sentsov in particular was meant to bolster the Kremlin’s narrative of dutifully protecting Crimeans against the threats of Ukrainian extremism, although his active involvement in the Euromaidan Revolution and eﬀorts to support captive Ukrainian military personnel shortly after the Russian invasion of Crimea are clearly at the root of his political prosecution.
Indeed, at least two other Ukrainian political prisoners held by Russian authorities – Oleksandr Kostenko and Andriy Kolomiyets – were similarly tortured and imprisoned over their involvement in the Euromaidan in Kyiv.
In another high-proﬁle case, prominent Crimean Tatar leader Akhtem Chiygoz was similarly charged by a Russian court for crimes alleged to have occurred under Ukrainian jurisdiction.
Chiygoz, the Deputy Chairman of the Mejlis, was arrested in January 2015 for helping organize a “mass riot” in front of the Crimean Supreme Council building in Simferopol on 26 February 2014 – the day before unmarked Russian troops ﬁrst appeared in Crimea, when even the Kremlin still recognized Crimea as Ukrainian territory.
The “riot” in question was a widely-televised standoﬀ between hundreds of pro-Russian and proUkrainian demonstrators – the latter composed primarily of Crimean Tatars – that had remained largely non-violent despite heated rhetoric.
In spite of the timing of the demonstration and the lack of any proof of the charges against Chiygoz, he was nevertheless sentenced to eight years imprisonment in September 2017, but was unexpectedly released and returned to Ukrainian territory one month later in a prisoner exchange arranged in part by Turkish President Recep Erdoğan.
Persecution and violence against Crimean Tatars Although there are examples of persecution against other ethnic and religious minorities in occupied Crimea – including followers of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church-Kyiv Patriarch, the Orthodox Church of Ukraine , and Jehovah’s Witnesses – the Muslim Crimean Tatars have fared the worst by far.
The Crimean Tatars’ commitment to Ukraine may be surprising given that they had never held an allegiance to Kyiv prior to their post-Deportation return to Crimea, which had been transferred to the Ukrainian SSR in their absence.
For these reasons, Crimean Tatars command the largest and most legitimate front of resistance against the annexation within Crimea itself, making them the most frequent targets of Russian measures aimed at silencing, suppressing, and intimidating the opposition.
However, justiﬁed through accusations of extremism and terrorism under the rubric of Crimea’s state of exception, measures taken against the Crimean Tatars have proven far more devastating and, indeed, lethal.
The Kremlin and its proxies in Crimea have crippled the Crimean Tatar leadership, beginning at the very top with the Mejlis and its members.
Russian courts in Crimea directly charged and sentenced Mejlis members Akhtem Chiygoz and Ilmi Umerov on highly dubious grounds related to “extremist” activities before their surprise release from prison in October 2017, while others – including Mejlis chairperson Refat Chubarov along with former chairperson and de facto Crimean Tatar leader, Mustafa Dzhemilev – have been banned from Crimea altogether.
But the Mejlis itself came under immediate threat after the annexation, beginning with the seizure of its headquarters in Simferopol in September 2014.
Following months of threats and antagonizations, in April 2016 Crimea’s Russian-installed Prosecutor General declared the Mejlis an “extremist organization” in a ruling later upheld by the Russian Supreme Court in September of that year, oﬃcially dissolving it under Russian law and banning its operations.
In deﬁance of international condemnation – including an injunction from the International Court of Justice – Russia has thus denied the Crimean Tatars their right to representation and political organization through cynical invocations of a nebulous “extremist” threat.
Russian authorities have further persecuted and intimidated individual Crimean Tatars through frequent armed raids of homes, mosques, religious centers, and other establishments as part of a repressive campaign against Islamic “extremism” and the spread of more traditional forms of Islam EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 45 prohibited by the state.
The primary targets of this campaign are alleged members of Hizb-ut-Tahrir, a conservative pan-Islamist organization with no history of terrorism that operates legally in many countries including Ukraine, but which was labelled a “terrorist organization” and outlawed in Russia in 2003.
Raids carried out against Crimean Tatar under the pretext of combating “extremism” have had deadly consequences in at least one case.
While Kashka’s death is indeed tragic, Crimea’s state of exception has had far more lethal and, frankly, sinister consequences for the Crimean Tatar community.
These murders, abductions, and disappearances remain unsolved and eﬀectively uninvestigated, signaling at the very least that violence against Crimean Tatars is tolerated in Russian-occupied Crimea , but the circumstances surrounding one particularly gruesome murder suggest that agents of the Russian state may be directly involved.
On 3 March 2014 – just days after the arrival of Russian troops in 46 H COYNASH AND A CHARRON Crimea and two weeks before the referendum was held – 39-year-old Reshat Ametov held a solitary protest against the occupation on Simferopol’s Lenin Square.
In broad daylight, three unidentiﬁed men in military fatigues abducted Ametov in the middle of the square and shoved him into a car, after which he was never again heard from or seen alive.
No thorough investigation into Ametov’s death has been made despite footage of his abduction, suggesting that local authorities were likely involved in perpetrating or covering up this egregious act of murder.
This warning was indeed prescient, as Russian authorities in occupied Crimea have since implemented both legislative and extra-legal tactics to impose oppressive restrictions and outright prohibitions on speech, the press, and peaceful assembly.
Far more alarmingly, in pursuit of silencing voices of opposition – particularly those of indigenous Crimean Tatars – Crimea’s occupiers have thus far taken dozens of political prisoners and remain complicit in the abduction, disappearance, or murder of many more.
In fact, this degree of repression and breadth of human rights violations has led many to declare the level of fear, distrust, and lawlessness in occupied Crimea far graver than during the Soviet era – including Crimean Tatar leader Mustafa Dzhemilev , who personally suffered for over ﬁfteen years in Soviet prisons and labor camps for his activism.
From the degradation of human rights and legal norms to the act of annexation itself, the Russian occupation of Crimea must be understood in the context of the state of exception, wherein a sovereign power acts upon an implicit prerogative to declare when extenuating circumstances – typically framed as a state of emergency – necessitate circumventing its own normative legal restrictions and procedures.
As we have demonstrated, the Kremlin pointed to the specter of violent Ukrainian nationalism as a rhetorical pretext for illegally seizing and annexing Crimea, while Russian authorities there have continually invoked this and the invented corresponding threat of Islamic extremism to justify the violent and draconian suppression of their pro-Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar critics.
Both practically and rhetorically, the Kremlin’s actions in Crimea clearly parallel those of many Western states operating under the logic of their own EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 47 declared state of exception in the War on Terror, and furthermore follow Russia’s own patterns of exceptional force as an ally in this global conﬂict.
Just as it has in Chechnya, Georgia, and other corners of Russia and the postSoviet space, the Kremlin has exploited this quirk of sovereignty in Crimea to evade legal restrictions – both domestic and international – while still claiming to act within its own self-ascribed legal parameters.
In another alarming parallel, China has recently taken similar yet far more extreme measures by interning roughly one million of its Muslim citizens and lauding their “reeducation” as part of its contribution to the War on Terror.
As Elden argues, the state of exception is nothing new or novel, yet neither is it an all-pervasive paradigm of modernity as Agamben has characterized it.
It is imperative to recognize that the state of exception is inherently geographical, productive of spaces and distinctive topographies of exception that ebb and ﬂow with time.
With this in mind, it appears that Crimea has been transformed into a space of exceptional exception, where the Kremlin has upended the juridical order in order to harshly and lethally suppress its opponents in an eﬀort to maintain its grip on territory seized illegally from another state.
Oﬃcial reports indicated that voter turnout was 83.1% in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and 89.5% in Sevastopol’, with 96.77% and 95.6% voting to join Russia, respectively.
The assassinations of Russian journalist Anna Politovskaya in 2006 and political opposition leader Boris Nemtsov in 2015 – avid critics of Putin, the Second Chechen War, and Russian military aggression against Ukraine – serves as potent examples of how non-combatants have also been targeted during these conﬂicts.
Stepan Bandera was an early 20th century Ukrainian nationalist political and military ﬁgure who had allied with Nazi Germany in 1939–1941 against the Soviet Union.
Council of the President of the Russian Federation on the Development of Civil Society and Human Rights, April 22.
EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 51 Gronskaya, N., and A Makarychev.14.
Politika priznaniia korennykh narodov v mezhdunarodnom prave i v zakodatelstve Rossiiskoi Federatsii.
