Ukrainians as a nation are almost absent from Austrian informational space, cultural and public life, and the materials in mass media dedicated to the dramatic events in Ukraine are either very superficial or demonstrate the unpleasant mark of the Kremlin propaganda.
The author is convinced that answers to these questions will help Ukraine develop the strategy of relations with the West.
Vienna is the capital of a small European country with an impressive imperial history, home to wonderful music; after World War II, it became the headquarters for many international organizations, the centre for making major geopolitical decision and territory for absolutely all European intelligence services.
Today, it may be literally called the outpost of diplomatic and informational war for the independence of Ukraine.
Another round-table discussion on cooperation between Ukraine, Russia, and the EU was held in Vienna on January 20.
The future of this cooperation was discussed by former Czech President Vaclav Klaus, former President of Ukraine Viktor Yushchenko, and Othmar Karas, Member of the European Parliament and Head of the Delegation of the EU-Russia Parliamentary Cooperation Committee, just to name a few.
Claus’ recommendation to the EU to refrain from interfering in the ""internal conflict"" in Ukraine caused loud applause.
The same day, one of the leading Austrian newspapers, Die Presse, published his interview, in which he declared that it was the EU that was responsible for escalating the conflict.
The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry declared in early December that, despite the scepticism of our fellow citizens, we were not losing the world informational war.
It is vexing, but it should be admitted that the public opinion in the EU countries is experiencing most severe pressure of the Russian propaganda and is largely shaped under the influence of anti-Ukrainian messages.
Creation of the Ministry of Informational Policy is evidence to the fact that the leaders of our country finally came to grips with the problem after many years of passive contemplation of the aggressive informational policy of the neighbouring country.
I would like to see job descriptions and qualification requirements put forward to new figures.
Indeed, broad masses have demand for a simplified world image, in which, relatively speaking, everything is either white, or black.
Hence, for example, identification of ethnic Russians with Russian-speaking people, Orthodox believers with pro-Russian citizens, etc.
In order to promote the necessary ideas, authors of the informational materials appeal to public opinion leaders – well-known and respected ""experts"", influential figures of culture, science, and show business.
Such repeated messages explaining economic and political events and social phenomena are usually called narrative.
Broad masses are not particularly eager to verify misinformation fed to them – they swallow the finished product.
The changing political and economic situation leads to the fact that the Kremlin propagandists gradually change the narrative.
The last statement has altogether become the favourite slogan of the top management of the country, including the Federal President Fischer and the Federal Chancellor Faymann; it is mentioned in all their interviews.
The general tendency for the Austrian society is to insist on non-interference in the ""Ukrainian crisis"" Generally, these ideas can be called neither consistent nor logical.
Conductors of these ideas are different ""experts"" and other opinion leaders.
The experts mainly include representatives of academic circles involved in research in the field of political science and sociology.
Economic issues are mainly commented by representatives of Austrian business and industry.
Politicians and diplomats are another group of regular participants of various public debates.
Scientists are the group that is most resistant to the temptation to be ""in trend"" regarding interpretation of the situation in Ukraine.
They try to explain events objectively, owing to their academic affiliation they do not juggle with facts, they do not manipulate with figures, they try to give rational rather than emotional arguments for their points of view.
They understand that Russia is waging war against Ukraine, they are aware of the Maidan values, multiculturalism, multi-ethnicity, tolerance and bilingualism of Ukrainian society.
However, the criticism expressed by them is well supported and justified.
The general trend for the Austrian society is to insist on non-interference in the ""Ukrainian crisis"", on recognizing ineffectiveness of sanctions and their lifting, on explanation and justification of Putin's policy , on emphasizing the advantages of preserving good relations with Russia.
This trend is followed by the representatives of business and politics.
Politicians must say what their average voter wants to hear, driven by the stereotypes and prejudices towards Ukraine and Ukrainians.
However, these are real public debate with decent audience capable of civilized discussion.
Virtual communication in social networks alarms with its aggressive and openly Ukrainophobic sentiments.
Anti-Ukrainian hysteria is unfolding against the background of anti-American hysteria.
Scepticism and criticism against the EU and its policy can be added to it.
The interest to the Internet community has not arisen out of idle curiosity.
It is well known that the governments of developed countries allocate large budgets for analysing users’ behaviour on the Web.
Research has proved that social networks are a powerful tool for shaping public opinion.
I can refer to the Facebook page of the ""Journalist of the Year"", the correspondent of ORF in Ukraine Christian Wehrschütz.
The virtual identity of Mr Wehrschütz is somewhat different from his television image and is sometimes characterized by biased coverage of Ukrainian events.
For example, it is very amusing when he publishes a fake from ""Russia Today"" on his page without any comments.
His virtual commentators spread it all across the German-language Internet and curse the inhuman junta.
There are ""experts"" in this community of amateurs, too – those who frequently come to Ukraine and are ""eyewitnesses"" of the events due to personal or professional reasons.
According to his statements, ""Merkel sponsors neo-Nazis in Ukraine,"" the government's refusal to pay pensions in the occupied territories is ""a classic theft"", ""people in the Donbas are fighting because they were attacked by right-wing radicals from the National Guard,"" ""neo-Nazis from Svoboda"" were in the government for several months, and now there are ""neo-Nazis from the Right Sector"" there.
Mr Pridnig emphasizes that he has been living in Kiev for many years, so he knows exactly what is going on there and has every right to educate his countrymen and help reporters.
However, the new agency has not fulfilled the predecessors’ promise, which enraged Mr Pridnig because he did not even know who to claim the money from, and even gave an interview out of rage.
I think that, perhaps, one should ask the management the State Cinema to give Klaus money, maybe, he will tell the truth.
It is against the backdrop of misinformation from different sources – not just Russian, as we can see – that the spiral of lies and delusions unwinds.
Austrian print media is weak in covering our events with only a few exceptions.
They do not have their own correspondents in Ukraine, the quality of journalism is moderate.
Therefore, Wehrschütz, who was mentioned above, has complete monopoly on reporting information, including that from places of military actions.
I personally doubt his desire to tell the truth and nothing but the truth, given his personal acquaintance with the terrorists Zakharchenko and Khodakovsky.
These are Die Presse, Kurier, Profil who have professional, experienced and knowledgeable political analysts.
In this propagandist war, we are supported either by Austrian citizens who know and truly love Ukraine , or a few activists of the Ukrainian diaspora acting as individuals.
Unfortunately, the Ukrainian Embassy in Austria is still extremely passive in the information war.
Nobody has worked with the public opinion in terms of coverage nor in terms of interpretation of events.
After all, the human resources of the embassy are so weak that it was mentioned even by the most loyal observers.
Well, there is no ambassador, but there is officially appointed acting ambassador.
There are employees who must deal with public relations according to their official duties.
As the diplomats themselves claim that this system exists to employ relatives and develop indifference and irresponsibility in people.
Even Ukrainian journalists working in Vienna speak about it with disappointment.
Of course, in terms of information blitzkrieg, which the Russian Federation has carried out against us since February, the time lost cannot be recalled.
Ukraine has been mainly present in the informational space as a subject of discussions for all these months.
At the same time, the Russian ambassador, Austrian top managers of Russian companies and other Putin-Versteher were honoured guests in almost all TV programs and debates.
There was neither reaction to these statements or debates on the part of the embassy.
However, the new Ambassador of Ukraine has finally arrived in Vienna in December and declared his readiness to actively work in the media and other public venues.
As a matter of fact, it is thanks to their efforts for the last 13 months that it was possible to draw public attention to the blatant violation of human rights and freedoms in Ukraine – first by the government of Azarov and Yanukovych, then by the secret services of the Federal Security Service and the Kremlin leaders.
Events organized by public organizations were primarily aimed at the Ukrainians.
They were not interesting for the younger and more active part of Austrian society.
The oldest and most respected organization – Austrian-Ukrainian society – seems to be inanimate.
Diplomats must mobilize themselves and consolidate efforts of active citizens, to organize the work to promote the Ukrainian culture, and to lobby Ukrainian ideas and Ukrainian business.
We need to convince EU partners that Ukraine has great potential for Europe.
Their efforts united under the auspices of the embassy or non-governmental organizations will help Ukraine to integrate in the common European space – at least from the cultural and informational point of view.
In the context of the protracted armed conflict, Ukraine needs the support of the free world – from financial aid to the supply of arms.
Therefore, we just have to win the ""cold war"" on the Western Front, the war of ideas and information; our struggle must be fair in the eyes of the citizens of the states helping us.
And we will win to the accompaniment of the sounds of the beautiful Viennese waltz.
