John MacDougall/AFP/Getty ImagesProtesters in Berlin hold a giant figure of Vladimir Putin swallowing a map of Ukraine on Sunday.
Nato has encircled Russia, directly threatening Russian security, despite assurances that it would notSince 1991, Nato has absorbed 11 eastern European countries and three former Soviet republics.
Even before Vladimir Putin became president in 2000, Russia took a dim view of this.
Some say assurances were given to the last Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, that Nato wouldn’t move an inch farther east after German reunification in 1990.
Not really, said Kristin Bakke, a professor in political science at UCL. “For a long time, support for Nato membership in Ukraine was about 30 to 40%,” she notes, adding that far more people wanted simply to remain neutral.It wasn’t until last year that surveys showed more than half of Ukrainians wanting Nato membership.
The west orchestrated the removal of a democratically elected Ukrainian president in 2014, which deepened the crisisIt was the startling flight of Viktor Yanukovych from office, after weeks of demonstrations in Kyiv by pro-western protesters in 2014, that accelerated the crisis in Ukraine.The then president of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych chats to Vladimir Putin in Moscow, 17 December 2013.
Kommersant Photo/Kommersant/Getty ImagesYanukovych favoured closer ties with Russia.
The Ukrainian side was responsible for the failure of the Minsk peace processAfter Russia seized Crimea and supported a secessionist war in eastern Ukraine in 2014 after Yanukovych’s removal, a peace deal of sorts was hammered out in Minsk, under Franco-German mediation.The agreement provided for a ceasefire, withdrawal of heavy weaponry, and constitutional reform granting a measure of autonomy to the Donbas republics seeking secession.But implementation was patchy, with violations on both sides.
International monitors had a hard time accessing the separatist republics.
Kommersant Photo Agency/Rex/ShutterstockBut she added that the Minsk agreement also provided for all foreign military forces to be removed from the area. “Russia never did, but continued to deny that its forces were there.”Claim: Donbas residents needed saving from a ‘genocide’“It smells of genocide,” Putin said in 2015, remarking on the unresolved conflict in the east.
Right up until last month’s invasion, Putin insisted that Donbas residents needed military intervention to prevent their annihilation.There is no evidence for this.
The Russian language and cultural heritage was being erased from modern-day UkraineIt is a misunderstanding of Ukraine to imagine it split into two with Russian speakers in the east, and Ukrainian speakers in the west.
And there are a multitude of other tongues protected by law as well.A new law introduced in 2019 requiring use of Ukrainian in public life and secondary education was seen as anti-Russian in Moscow.
Ukraine is run by drug-addled neo-Nazis, and needs to be denazified“There are neo-Nazis in Ukraine but they are not in power, just as there are neo-Nazis in Germany but they are not in power,” said Gessel.
The president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, is a Russian-speaking centrist of Jewish origin.The neo-Nazi concern almost certainly stems from the reputation of some of the volunteer brigades who fought the separatists in the 2014 war, such as the Azov battalion, which had far-right affiliations.
These have since been folded into the Ukrainian national guard.Volodymyr Zelenskiy is a Russian-speaking centrist of Jewish origin.
Ukrainian Presidential Press Service/ReutersPutin’s theme of fascists running wild in Ukraine is almost certainly a ploy to revive glorious memories of the “great patriotic war”. “The second world war is a very important part of Putin’s narrative,” Bakke said. “He uses the victory to mobilise people.
In Ukraine at the time, there were nationalist groups fighting for Ukrainian independence against the Soviets.
When it comes to invading sovereign countries, the west cannot lecture RussiaThe Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, used words to this effect on the eve of the Ukraine war, fulminating at western hypocrisy.“It’s an awkward position for the west,” said Ries. “It is true that the United States and Nato have used force when they felt they needed to.
Sometimes it was justified, as in the Balkans in 1995, but sometimes it very dodgy like in Iraq.
From the Russian perspective, I can see how they can make that argument.”Of course, two wrongs don’t make a right.
