This article has been accepted for inclusion in International Journal of Nuclear Security by an authorized editor.
However, experts argue that when Russian president Vladimir Putin cut cooperative efforts to safeguard nuclear materials, he endangered the future of all international efforts for promoting global nuclear security.
We argue that Putin’s decision not only detrimentally erodes the third pillar of nuclear security, but Russia’s recent actions in Ukraine also bring to bear more threatening ramifications.
Russia’s aggression in Ukraine and the international community’s lack of willingness to exert sufficient pressure on Russia to honor the promises made to Ukraine (in exchange for giving up nuclear weapons in the 1990s ) work against nonproliferation objectives and reach far beyond the geographic boundaries of the current conflict.
In addition, they may disrupt both further nuclear disarmament and stimulate proliferation of nuclear weapons.
The inaction and/or inability of the international community to resist or reverse Russia’s illegal actions must alarm the government of any country who—acting on their trust in the international agreements—resists the push toward nuclearization.
If binding diplomatic agreements are seen to only bind one party— the weaker party—that party will understandably hesitate to entrust any diplomatic document short of a binding treaty with clear and required enforcement mechanisms.
This is especially true when a country’s national security and ultimately its sovereignty is at stake.
Introduction Over the past several decades the world community, with few nation-state exceptions, has diligently strived to implement national and international agreements, protocols, treaties, and cooperative programs that support each of the three fundamental pillars of global nuclear security.
According to experts , in 1992 about 50 countries had in their possession weapons-usable nuclear materials.
Due to successful international cooperation, by 2015 that number was cut in half.
Australia, South Korea, and Taiwan had all pursued nuclear weapons programs in the past, but they abandoned the nuclear path in exchange for international agreements guaranteeing their security.
Today, these three countries are signatories of the Non Proliferation Treaty as non-nuclear weapons states.
South Africa was the first state to join the NPT after voluntarily abandoning its nuclear weapons program in 1991.
This was a crucial first step in setting a clear course in realizing global nuclear threat reduction.
Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, newly independent countries found themselves in possession of a large portion of the former Soviet nuclear arsenal, materials, and infrastructure.
Almost overnight three new nuclear weapons states were born possessing thousands of nuclear weapons.
The global community found itself in need of repeating the South African success story, but it was challenged by a much less stable geopolitical environment.
It was in this difficult environment that an intense multinational diplomatic effort produced what was later considered a hallmark in cooperative global nuclear threat reduction.
Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan agreed to give up their nuclear arsenals in exchange for a set of explicit security assurances and economic assistance measures.
The example set by these countries, who chose not to pursue their national security with nuclear arsenal, but chose instead to rely on international law for their ultimate security, was inspirational.
The proliferation of nuclear weapons around the world has been curbed by such international agreements and also by the underlying trust that countries place in international law and collective security through cooperation.
Today, experts on nuclear security argue that recent the actions and policies of Russian president Vladimir Putin are placing in peril the future of international efforts to promote global nuclear security.
We argue that in addition to the clear erosion of the third pillar of nuclear security, there are more threatening ramifications resulting from the recent actions of Russia in Ukraine.
Both further nuclear disarmament and prevention of the proliferation of nuclear weapons around the world are placed in jeopardy by Putin’s actions in the escalating conflict with Ukraine.
The ramifications from this crisis may disrupt each key pillar of global nuclear security.
In reaching this conclusion, we review the history of the denuclearizing of Ukraine, examine the Budapest Agreement and its consequences, and examine the ongoing Russian-Ukrainian conflict and the issues of nuclear weapons that have been brought to life during the conflict, as well as the reaction of the international community to these events.
The consequences of these factors are detrimental to nonproliferation objectives, reaching far beyond the geographic boundaries of the current conflict.
Nuclear Ukraine and the Budapest Agreement In late 1991 when the Soviet Union collapsed, the newly independent country of Ukraine found itself in possession of the third largest nuclear weapons arsenal in the world.
With the encouragement of the international community, Ukrainian leadership made a historic decision to denuclearize in exchange for security assurances, economic assistance, and technical assistance through the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction program.
Ukraine's actions were not without significant commitments, however, by the other three signatories.
That means ensuring that Russia, who has a history of bad relations with Ukraine, does not move to reconquer it.
Ukraine cannot defend itself against nuclear-armed Russia with conventional weapons, and no state, including the US, is going to extend to it a meaningful security guarantee.
However, the skeptical voices were overpowered by the advocates of denuclearization within the Ukrainian government and abroad.
During a two-year operation, all 1900 warheads were removed from Ukrainian territory.
The Budapest Agreement and the removal of the nuclear arsenal from the territory of Ukraine was widely considered a major success both for the international efforts to strengthen global nuclear security and for Ukraine’s self-interest.
Ukraine At The Fulcrum In 2014, however, this evaluation was called into question.
Russia’s aggression toward her sovereign neighbor, eventual annexation of the territory of Crimea, and subsequent indirect and direct destabilization that led to armed conflict in Eastern Ukraine belied not only a value of the particular memorandum, but also the broader confidence in diplomatic security assurances and the guarantees of international law.
This unexpected and unpopular decision led to protests by a large part of Ukrainian population who hoped for stronger ties with the West.
West-leaning politician Petro Poroshenko was elected president in May 2014.
The new government of Ukraine that was formed after presidential and parliamentary elections has been repeatedly called “illegitimate” by the Russian authorities.
The Crimean crisis that led to the annexation of the Crimean peninsula by the Russian Federation took place in the aftermath of the revolution.
The referendum was not recognized by the majority of the international community—including the United States and the EU countries.
After the revolution in Kiev, Putin has been consistently proclaiming Russia’s right to protect its interests as well as protecting rights of the Russian-speaking population of Eastern Ukraine.
From February 2014, major anti-government and pro-Russian protests took place across Eastern Ukraine bordering with Russia.
Protests in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions turned into an armed separatist insurgence calling for separation from Ukraine.
The Ukrainian government responded with a military counter-offensive against the insurgents.
The United States and German intelligence services claimed that that plane was shot down by mistake by the pro-Russian separatists.
The clashes between the separatists and the Ukrainian military turned into an ongoing armed conflict in the eastern region of Donbass.
A temporary ceasefire, signed in Minsk, Belarus in September 2014, was repeatedly violated and eventually collapsed in early 2015 with an escalation of fighting.
Another ceasefire was agreed upon in February 2015 with assistance from Germany, France, and Belarus.
Despite the agreement calling for unconditional ceasefire, at the time of the writing of this article, fighting continues in Eastern Ukraine.
One key consideration in understanding the full contextual landscape of the crises is the direct or indirect role the Russian Federation played in the conflict.
The Ukrainian military reports intensive movement of troops and equipment from Russia to aid the separatists.
Ukraine At The Fulcrum During a recent visit to Ukraine, the United States Army's top commander in Europe, Lt.
The armed conflict between the Ukrainian Army and the pro-Russian separatists in Eastern Ukraine continues, causing heavy civilian and military casualties.
The use of such rhetoric might indicate Russia’s groundwork to justify future involvement of the Russian troops in Ukraine and the possibility of open fighting between the Russian troops and Ukrainian forces.
Nuclear weapons discussions in Ukraine As a response to the escalating conflict with Russia, some within the Ukrainian political circles started to look beyond an immediate call for western help and toward a more proactive means of guaranteeing their national security,e. regaining its nuclear weapons status.
In an interview with USA Today in March, Ukrainian MP Pavlo Rizanenko has expressed similar ideas, “here’s a strong sentiment in Ukraine that we made a big mistake.
In the future, no matter how the situation is resolved in Crimea, we need a much stronger Ukraine.
A bill calling for the termination of the membership in the NPT and for the restoration of the nuclear weapons program was introduced in the Ukrainian Parliament in February 2014.
Experts argue that the chances of Ukraine making a decision to regain its nuclear weapons status despite the recent heated rhetoric are very doubtful , pointing out that the economic price of acquiring nuclear weapons would be too great a financial burden for Ukraine to bear.
Of primary concern, however, is not whether or not Ukraine may withdraw from the NPT and reacquire a nuclear arsenal.
The primary concern is what may be the ramifications of the violation of the Budapest Agreement and the West’s inability to keep its stated commitments on future nuclear negotiations.
International reaction to the conflict From the beginning of the conflict in Crimea in February 2014, Russia’s actions in Ukraine were heavily criticized by the international community.
Despite strong international condemnations, sanctions, and repeated public statements of disapproval, Russia’s territorial gains remain intact and there have been few indications that Western opposition has impacted Putin’s policy regarding Ukraine.
On March 17, as the pro-Russian protesters together with the Russian military were taking over administrative buildings and gaining control over government in Crimea, President Obama condemned Russia’s actions and warned of the consequences, “we’ll continue to make clear to Russia that further provocations will achieve nothing except to further isolate Russia and diminish its place in the world.
The vast majority of the international community has not recognized Crimea as part of Russia.
Only 7 member states of the UN have made public statements recognizing it.
Russia, Syria, Venezuela, North Korea, Cuba, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua.
Various world leaders have publically called the Russian annexation of Crimea illegal.
The first round of sanctions against Russia was introduced by the US, EU, and Canada in March 2014, and included travel bans and an asset freeze.
Japan, Australia, and several other countries have proclaimed similar sanctions.
The most impactful third round of sanctions was a response to the escalation of fighting between the Ukrainian military and the Russian backed separatists in July 2014.
The EU and the US jointly expanded the sanctions, targeting vital sectors of the Russian economy including finance, energy, and defense.
A number of countries soon followed the lead of the United States and EU and joined the expanded sanctions.
Vladimir Putin, however, has publicly discounted claims that Russia breached the Budapest Agreement.
In addition, Russian officials have repeatedly called the new Ukrainian government “illegitimate”, thus relieving themselves from following previous diplomatic agreements.
Further, regardless of the strong comments made by various Western politicians denouncing Russia for breaking its obligations under the Budapest Agreement, the current crisis in Ukraine has revealed a serious problem with international security agreements.
Doug Lamborn, this argument was reinforced by the assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs, Victoria Nuland, while briefing members of Congress in March 2014.
The future actions of any nation cannot be predicted with certainty and a plethora of variables would certainly shape the calculation of whether or not one chose the path of nuclearization.
The fact, however, that doubts now cloud the assurances which have been effective in containing proliferation to date is reason enough to cautiously consider the possibilities.
The first primary pillar of nuclear security is the difficult diplomatic push toward disarmament.
Until the events in Crimea, Ukraine’s voluntary disarmament along with that of Kazakhstan and Belarus were hallmarks of this endeavor.
This sentiment was echoed by Alexander Lukashenko, president of Belarus, a former Soviet Union country that also relinquished its nuclear weapons arsenal in the mid-1990s.
And that we all (I emphasize) will remain independent states within those boundaries that existed at that time.
Disturbingly, a recent public opinion poll conducted by an independent pollster in Belarus demonstrated public support for this attitude.
Taking into consideration the fact that Belarus has been heavily affected by the Chernobyl disaster and was known for strong anti-nuclear attitudes, a third of its population today supporting acquiring nuclear weapons proves that the ongoing crisis has an effect on public views about nuclear weapons and national security beyond the borders of Russia and Ukraine.
Although 36% is not a convincing majority, in a country scarred by the legacy of history’s most devastating nuclear accident, it must be considered noteworthy.
Between 2003 and 2009, six party talks took place aimed at finding a way to move North Korea away from its pursuit of nuclear weapons.
According to the Nuclear Threat Initiative , North Korea has also expanded its centrifuge program and restarted its previously shut down plutonium reactor at its Yonbygon site.
North Korean leader Kim Jong Un has indicated his intention of increasing the country’s nuclear deterrence and has even added its nuclear status to that country’s constitution.
While likely another in a long series of diplomatic false flags, the United States has indicated cautious willingness to return to the six party talks.
Many of these including Japan, South Korea, Turkey, and Saudi Arabia have chosen to not pursue a nuclear course because of the security guarantees afforded them under international agreements such as the NPT and bilateral security agreements.
As intense negotiation between the United States and Iran move toward a yet-to-be defined future, and as a series of meetings between Iran and some of the six powers—the US, Russia, China, Britain, France, and Germany—is pending, Iran is being asked to rely on the assurances and guarantees of the world community, assurances it now must view through the prism of broken and ignored assurances made to Ukraine.
If Iran chooses to proceed on the nuclear path, other countries in the region will be obliged to either trust security agreements from the international community or pursue a weapons program of their own.
The key element to this choice is the degree of confidence they have in, again, the assurances that have been found impotent in the case of Ukraine.
More broadly, it is not beyond the scope of reason to expect, at a minimum, discussion at significant levels of a number of governments about whether or not relying on the promises of a nuclear umbrella is sufficient for national self-preservation.
If any one of these nations moved toward nuclear status, the atomic dominos would surely begin to tumble, and the delicate nuclear equilibrium that defines global nuclear security today would be a status of the past.
In addition, the risk of increased state-sponsored nuclear programs leads inevitably to increased opportunity for non-state acquisition of nuclear material.
Further proliferation of nuclear weapons among nation-states will raise the threat of non-state nuclear terrorism, nuclear smuggling, and other related issues to a level that will seriously threaten the security of the United States and its allies.
Conclusions No international effort to reverse the annexation of Crimea or to stop Russia’s continued destabilization of the broader Easter Ukraine region has been successful.
In fact during a March 8, 2015 meeting of EU foreign ministers, it was decided that despite Russia’s refusal to withdraw from the illegally acquired Crimea region and despite its refusal to admit to or cease its destabilizing efforts in Eastern Ukraine, the EU will refrain from imposing additional sanctions on Russia.
The basis of this decision is that the recently signed Minsk ceasefire agreement has resulted in a slowing of fatalities.
To the government of any country who has resisted the push toward nuclearization based on international agreements, the inactions and/or inability of the international community to resist or reverse Russia’s illegal actions must cause great concern.
If binding diplomatic agreements are seen to only bind one party—the weaker party—that party will understandably be very hesitant to place full faith in any diplomatic document short of a binding treaty that has clear and required enforcement mechanisms.
This is especially true when the stakes are a country’s national security and, ultimately, its sovereignty.
Today, non-nuclear weapons states see an international community wherein aggression is contained not by international law and agreements, but only by the restraint that the possession of nuclear weapons demand.
These states read the logic suggested by Putin in his previously mentioned opinion piece to the American public that having nuclear weapons assures a nation’s security more than international law, and they see this logic played out through Russia’s actions in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.
Although many factors may dictate that these states remain non-nuclear, the very possibility that they may attempt nuclearization should be considered as part of the broad global nonproliferation dialogue.
Some experts may say that this possibility is too remote to be considered a factor when discussing future endeavors and/or strategies supporting nonproliferation.
However, when examining a matter that if realized would lead to the erosion of nuclear global equilibrium, logical possibilities, even those considered remote, should be carefully examined and monitored.
For this reason it is incumbent on the international community to diligently and pro-actively work to see that this possible eventuality does not rise into reality.
Ukraine At The Fulcrum In order to achieve this, the international community should consider the development of a systematic three-level monitoring endeavor: Technical monitoring: As more and more nations develop nuclear power programs, the challenge of effectively safeguarding against weapons proliferation becomes even more difficult than the current regime.
The IAEA is responsible for monitoring civilian programs in NPT signatory states through their safeguards agreements, yet the tools the inspectors can bring to bear are limited and have weaknesses in detecting the diversion of materials.
This is especially important in the uranium enrichment industry where essentially all enrichment has transitioned to gas centrifuge enrichment plants which are smaller, more difficult to detect, and easier to reconfigure for proliferation than the older gaseous diffusion technology.
One of the key challenges for the international community is early detection of proliferation activities.
While it would be ideal if the IAEA could be the agent of those discoveries, the reality is that the IAEA will likely never have the resources or authority to conduct the sort of information gathering necessary to fully meet that mission.
Intelligence organs of nation-states will continue to play an important role in detecting possible proliferant activities as well as potential transfers/losses to sub-state actors.
IAEA member states may or may not choose to share some of that information with the IAEA, which then puts a burden of veracity assessment on the Agency that also requires better technical capabilities both in terms of assessing the information provided as well as any inspections that are warranted.
In addition to the need for enhanced technical monitoring, there exists a need to more systematically track policy discussions and public discourse relating to nuclear policy and security threats taking place within those states capable of moving toward nuclear status.
The rise in discourse among non-nuclear weapon states centering on the “humanitarian consequences” does not negate the possibility of a shift in debate toward assuring self-preservation through nuclearization rather than international agreements.
Increased monitoring and analysis of related public policy dialogue would aid in recognizing such shifts at their onset.
Benchmarking the current opinions of policy makers and elected officials from the various NNWS would further clarify any future trends that differ from the status quo.
This monitoring would include statements by elected officials and policy makers as well as news coverage of the nuclear proliferation and security issues in countries of interest recognizing that such discussion must be analyzed as either being meant for purely internal rhetorical consumption or meant for actual policy implementation.
Research on state behavior has demonstrated that there are external and internal pressures that compel governments to make choices both in foreign policy realm and on national security issues.
Domestic public opinion is creating boundaries within which national governments operate; thereby, it restrains political options for decision makers.
At the same time, in order to generate support for policies and to boost popular support, governments can manipulate domestic public opinion.
As the example of the Pakistani nuclear program has demonstrated, popular support for certain policy choices that the government presents to domestic publics under the auspices of enhancing national security (obtaining nuclear weapons to guarantee security from outside threats in the Pakistani case) can overrun external pressures that run counter to these policy choices.
Thus, maintaining the present global security equilibrium based on current international agreements depends—to a great extent—on domestic public opinion in key countries; specifically, it depends on attitudes about national security and outside threats.
Monitoring international public opinion in countries that have the capability to alter the global nuclear security equilibrium will allow for better understanding of the public opinion climate in the selected countries, and it will give an opportunity to predict situations where the governments of those states can choose an option of going nuclear.
As stated in the beginning of this paper, the success of global nuclear security rests on the strengths of three primary pillars.
The decision by a single, currently non-nuclear state to start a nuclear weapons program based on the erosion of these pillars could trigger a domino effect in which other nations seek security assurance via nuclear weapons rather than through international agreements.
The resulting furthering proliferation of nuclear weapons would greatly increase the risk of eventual nuclear conflict and also raise the threat of non-state nuclear terrorism, nuclear smuggling, and other related issues to a level that will seriously threaten the security of the US and its allies.
As the global community looks toward the next chapter in its nonproliferation efforts, it should recognize that the actions and inactions of that community in relation to the trustworthiness of its international agreements can serve to weaken those primary pillars thereby jeopardizing global security.
It is the hope of the authors, however, that the three levels of monitoring discussed above would serve as harbingers, if regrettably, of a sliding away from the stable and secure path of nuclear nonproliferation that is essential to our future global security.
S Nunn, R Lugar, The United States and Russia must repair their partnership on nuclear security.
K Lally, W Englund, Putin says he reserves right to protect Russians in Ukraine The Washington Post.
B Bennett, United States officials believe attack against Malaysian plane was mistake.
G Baczynska, A Vasovic, Pushing locals aside, Russians take top rebel posts in east Ukraine.
S Gutterman, Crimean Tatar leader tells Putin secession would break post-Soviet pact.
If Ukraine does not get help, it is necessary to produce nuclear weapons Ogrizko.
United States levels new sanctions against Russian officials, companies World.
Her research interests are in global security and public policy with special focus on nuclear security, mass media, and public opinion.
He is also an adjunct faculty member at the UT College of Communication and Information.
He has spent the past 20 years moving among federal legislative positions, political consulting, and teaching.
As a legislative aide for both the United States Senate and the House of Representatives, Rice focused on issues relating to energy, science and technology, and national defense.
His research interests include global security and democratic development and sustainability in transitional societies, including post-Soviet countries and the Middle East.
He is a member of the national advisory board for the Syrian Emergency Task Force and an alumnus of the American Council of Young Political Leaders.
In 2013, Rice received the Society of Universal Dialogue’s Atlantic Institute Peace Award in recognition of his efforts in intercultural engagement and dialogue.
He is appointed as the UT and Oak Ridge National Laboratory Governor’s Chair Professor of Nuclear Security and serves on the faculty of both the Department of Nuclear Engineering and the Bredesen Center For Interdisciplinary Research and Graduate Education.
Hall is also a Senior Fellow in Global Security Policy at the Howard H Baker Jr.
Center for Public Policy, where he directs the Baker Center’s Global Security Programs.
