Ukraine's new government called Russian president Vladimir Putin a threat to the whole world after he added Crimea to the map of Russia on Tuesday.
Ukraine's interim president Oleksandr Turchynov compared Putin to 20th Century fascists.
Prime minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk then said that Russian soldiers are turning a political conflict into a military one.
In an emotional 40-minute speech televised live from the Kremlin, Putin said Crimea has always been an integral part of Russia.
He dismissed Western criticism of Sunday's Crimean referendum, in which residents of the strategic Black Sea peninsula overwhelmingly backed breaking off from Ukraine and joining Russia, as a manifestation of the West's double standards.
But the Russian leader has insisted his nation has no intention to invade other regions of Ukraine.
World War 2 started with the annexation of the territory of other countries by fascist Germany.
Ukrainian military spokesman Colonel Andriy Lysenko said on Friday that Russia-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine were deploying in the direction of the towns of Debaltseve and Vuhlehirsk in the Donetsk region, and were likely to carry out further attacks on Ukrainian troops.
A day earlier Russia-backed separatists carried out heavy shelling in Avdeevka, which lies 20 kilometres north of the rebel-stronghold of Donetsk, itself the scene of heavy fighting between the opposing sides.
Ukraine's military acknowledged on Thursday that Russia-backed separatists had overrun the town of Vuhlehirsk in their onslaught against government troops in the east of the country.
The town, also known as Uglegorsk, is a strategically valuable railway hub which lies about 15 kilometres west of Debaltseve and around 60 kilometres northeast of Donetsk itself.
The loss of the town would make it even more difficult for the government to hold onto Debaltseve, a nearby railway hub that sits between the two main rebel-held cities of Donetsk and Luhansk.
Debaltseve has been the scene of some of the fiercest fighting since the rebel offensive began this month after weeks of relative quiet.
Meanwhile on Friday, German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier underlined the importance of EU efforts to tackle the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine.
At an extraordinary session in Brussels on Thursday, the EU's foreign ministers showed a united front at the announcement of new sanctions and a six-month extension of existing sanctions against Russian and pro-Russia separatist officials.
Last March, the EU imposed the first visa bans and asset freezes against officials linked to Russia's annexation of southern Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula.
The measures had been due to expire in March, before the extension was announced.
Since Russia's annexation of Crimea, the EU has steadily increased restrictive measures.
Terrorists are making reconnaissance to find Ukrainian positions and carry out further artillery attacks."" "" is not under rebel control, the fight is still going on, counter-artillery fights.
Scuffles broke out in the Ukrainian parliament on Thursday as violence intensified on the streets of the capital.
Once order had been restored, opposition leaders Vitali Klitschko and Arseniy Yatsenyuk addressed the parliament and debated ways to end the conflict.
Video footage on Ukrainian television appeared to show protesters being cut down by gunfire, lying on the pavement as comrades rushed to their aid.
Trying to protect themselves with shields, teams of protesters carried bodies away on sheets of plastic or on planks of wood.
Protesters were seen on Thursday leading police officers with their hands held high around the sprawling protest camp in central Kiev.
An opposition lawmaker said they were being held in Kiev's occupied city hall.
Secretary of State John Kerry is urging Russia to commit to a diplomatic solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine by halting its military aid for the separatists and backing a negotiated peace.
Calling it a ""very critical moment in our history,"" Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko warmly welcomed United States Secretary of State John Kerry to Kiev, the Ukrainian capital, on Thursday.
The leaders of France and Germany announced Thursday they were heading to Kiev and Moscow with a proposal to end the fighting.
The surprise move appeared designed to head off United States considerations of giving Ukraine heavy weapons, something Europeans oppose out of fears of sparking an arms race.
In Moscow, President Vladimir Putin's aide welcomed the new European initiative and said the Kremlin was ready for a constructive discussion.
In Brussels, NATO foreign ministers prepared to boost the military alliance's forces Thursday in response to the fighting and Russia's increased military forcefulness.
At least three people were killed in overnight shelling in the rebel stronghold of Donetsk, local officials said Thursday.
A Ukrainian military spokesman said five servicemen died and 29 others were wounded in fighting in the east in the last 24 hours.
Fighting between Russia-backed separatists and Ukrainian government forces surged in January.
The United Nations has sharply criticized both sides for indiscriminate shelling and urged a temporary truce to halt the fighting that has killed over 5,300 people since April.
We want a diplomatic resolution, but we cannot close our eyes to tanks that are crossing the border from Russia and coming in to Ukraine.
A report released on Thursday by the United Nations' human rights arm strongly criticised both sides in Ukraine's fighting for the killing of civilians in indiscriminate shelling, as well as the summary killings of both combatants and civilians.
Released by the UN's High Commissioner for Human Rights office, the report said up to 2,000 civilians have died in the two-year conflict in eastern Ukraine between government forces and Russia-backed rebels, nearly 90 percent of them in shelling of residential areas.
Speaking in Kiev, a senior UN official told the Associated Press that the report was varied, and reiterated that it condemned actions on both sides of the conflict.
The report noted that no arrests had been made in the shooting deaths of thirteen policemen in the capital Kiev during the final days of the massive street protests that drove Ukraine's Russia-friendly president Viktor Yanukovych to flee.
The human rights office also said it was concerned that authorities hadn't conducted an effective investigation into the deaths of 48 people in the city of Odessa on a day of clashes in 2014 between supporters of the new pro-Western Ukrainian government and their opponents.
Forty-two of those died in a fire at a building where anti-government demonstrators had taken shelter and many believe the blaze was started by firebombs thrown into the building.
Various of smoke rising from shelling in the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk that saw heavy bombardment in the struggle between pro-government forces and pro-Russia separatists.
The conflict-wracked eastern Ukraine city of Luhansk held its city day on Sunday, which it marked with a special outdoor church service, while Russian aid was doled out to queues of local people.
Signs of life were gradually returning to the city, which suffered extensive damage in a weeks-long government shelling campaign aimed at uprooting separatist rebels based there.
A cease-fire agreement signed earlier this month has largely halted the unrest in eastern Ukraine, although there were still exchanges of rocket fire in some areas, such as the suburbs of the main rebel-held city of Donetsk.
Luhansk city day opened on a sombre note as priests led hundreds of residents in an open-air prayer service in commemoration of those killed during the violence.
Speaking at the service, held outside the Mother of Sorrows Church, local separatist leader Igor Plotnitsky mourned the dead, and in an unusually conciliatory public statement called for forgiveness for those responsible.
Around much of Luhansk, smashed windows, burned-out buildings and craters in the road are testimony to the shelling campaign.
Damage to basic infrastructure has left much of the city without power and running water since early August.
A Russian aid convoy arrived on Saturday in Luhansk, and on Sunday men in camouflage handed out chocolate, drinking water, soap, toilet paper, nappies and other basic items to a large crowd of local people patiently waiting in line.
A rebel official, a Muscovite who gave his name only as the nom de guerre Makhra, told the AP the aid was from Russia.
Lilya Miroschenkovo, a 73-year old woman waiting in line, said that she had not received her pension since May.
I borrow money to live because it has already been three months,"" she said.
Because people here have been starving for almost two months, we have decided to make a celebration dedicated to the Day of Luhansk.
Shakhtar Donetsk, the talented Ukrainian football team that finished at the top of the country's Premier League last year, has been displaced from its home in Donetsk.
The team has a sleek stadium, the Donbass Arena, built six years ago and host to some of Europe's biggest football matches, but the squad hasn't played there since May 2.
It is too dangerous in Donetsk to hold matches, and the stadium itself has come under attack.
In one incident, footage captured by the club's CCTV cameras last October showed the moment when a girl almost got crushed by a falling glass panel from the stadium, as shock waves from a nearby explosion rocked the building.
There are no crowds and no players, just the eerie sound of explosions in the background as the conflict goes on.
It sits in the middle of the city of Donetsk, a war zone controlled by pro-Russian separatists battling Ukrainian troops.
Shakhtar team captain Darijo Srna said the bloodshed in the east both saddens and inspires the players.
Although he is from Croatia, Srna has spent the last 12 years with Shakhtar and considers Donetsk to be his home.
In November, he arranged for 20 tons of fruit to be delivered to children in Donetsk via the team owner's charitable foundation, as part of efforts to ease the humanitarian crisis brought on by the fighting.
Nine months ago, player 22 year-old Ivan Ordets and other team members originally packed light for what they thought would be a short trip away from home, living in the Ukrainian capital Kiev and travelling by bus to football games in nearby Lviv.
But with the war dragging on through failed ceasefires and nearly 5,800 people killed, the players have rented apartments in Kiev and are starting to build new lives there.
Ordets, a centre, is one of the few native Ukrainians in Shakhtar Donetsk, a team that includes 13 Brazilians, more than half its members.
He comes from Volnovakha, a small town near Donetsk, but on the Ukrainian government side of the lines.
Last month, a passenger bus in Volnovakha was hit by a shell, killing 13 people.
The Ukrainian government accused the Russia-backed separatists, who denied responsibility.
Although his mother has moved with him to Kiev, other relatives remained behind.
The team takes its name, ""Shakhtar,"" from the coal miners who work in the industrialised region of the Donbass or Donetsk Basin of eastern Ukraine.
Most of the residents in the east speak Russian and want closer ties to Moscow, regarding the government in Kiev with suspicion.
By contrast, western Ukraine tilts more towards Europe, and the city of Lviv is a stronghold of Ukrainian nationalism.
Shakhtar Donetsk is owned by billionaire Rinat Akhmetov, an industrialist who is Ukraine's richest man.
His companies employ thousands in the Donetsk area, he built Donbass Arena, and he has publicly opposed the separatists.
Last week, Shakhtar held German champion Bayern Munich to a scoreless draw in Lviv, with the stadium decked out in a show of Ukrainian unity.
Fans from eastern Ukraine travelled more than a day by bus to support their team, whose nickname is the ""Pitmen"" after their coal-mining roots.
The city is home to an under-achieving club called Karpaty Lviv, and there have been some tensions between its fans and those of the richer, more talented squad from the east that is temporarily using the stadium.
But there was no sign of ill will at the Bayern match, with many local fans wearing the Shakhtar colours.
What the future holds for Shakhtar is as uncertain as the outcome of the conflict.
For now, the team and its fans are focused on letting the game give them some respite from the bloodshed.
Sport unites,"" said Pavel Borschev, a Shakhtar fan from Slovyansk, in the Donetsk region.
TONYA MERGAUT MANDATORY CREDIT ""TONYA MERGAUT"" Hundreds of miners marched in eastern Ukraine on Wednesday calling for both sides of the civil unrest in the country to come to an agreement.
The miners marched through Donetsk and held a rally in the city centre, demanding that the government meet with the Donetsk People's Republic and find a peaceful solution to the conflict.
We want them to sit down and make an agreement,"" said Sergei, a miner from Donetsk who refused to give his last name.
Ukraine's President said on Wednesday that government forces will unilaterally cease fire to allow pro-Russian separatists in the east of the country a chance to lay down weapons or leave the country, a potentially major development to bring peace to the country.
Petro Poroshenko's plan, announced following conversations with Russian and German leaders, aims to end two months of fighting in eastern provinces that form the nation's industrial heartland.
This is a peaceful protest, we do not want war, we don't support either side in the conflict.
Ukraine's parliamentary elections on Sunday promise to usher in a fresh class of politicians, but for millions of Ukrainians change is no promise of improvement.
Since the revolution this year that toppled a despised president, dreams of many who fought in Kiev's Maidan for a better future have been blunted by war and near economic collapse.
Election apathy is pervasive in the east, where the military conflict between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian troops has concentrated over the past few months.
At the northern entrance to Mariupol a smog-plagued port city only a few miles away from rebel lines soldiers at checkpoints express no great interest in the elections.
Across the city, campaign posters have to be replaced frequently as they are often pelted with paint.
The election indifference is a symptom of a deeper lack of interest in who ultimately wins the war raging nearby.
Some argue that the conflict and the threat of Russian aggression have drawn attention away from a much-needed reform agenda.
In areas under separatist control, where hundreds of thousands live, no voting will take place at all as the self-appointed authorities there no longer accept they are part of Ukraine.
Instead, they plan their own elections on 2 November which they hope will lend them authority they have so far only managed to establish through force.
Rebel leader and Prime Minister of self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic , Alexander Zakharchenko, who has put himself forward to become an elected head of his would-be state, has no contenders for the highest post.
Many Donetsk residents, like Lena Alexandrova, believe the Donbass region, which includes Donetsk and Luhansk areas, will remain under pro-Russian separatists's control.
Others, who also believe the elections will not achieve or change anything, are frustrated about the money being spent on campaigning, rather than aiding cash-strapped residents of warn-torn areas.
The upcoming elections for local legislators and heads of the DPR as well as the LPR will not be recognised by Kiev or any other country.
Russian President Vladimir Putin however said on Friday, the self-proclaimed republics should be allowed to hold their own elections as planned.
All this political commotion, this jostling for positions when people are dying, I don't even know what to call it.
Because those who are making PR for themselves, who run around and worry about the elections, are talking total nonsense.
In any case I don't think we will come back to Ukraine again after what happened and is happening now.
The money that they spent on the elections would be better given to people for pensions and social payments for mothers.
They can imagine everything they want, but their elections will not happen here.
We can do our elections in Kiev, though, all the way to the Polish border.
Russia plans to eliminate Ukraine as an independent state and could spark a new offensive in the east to achieve that aim, Ukraine's prime minister told The Associated Press on Friday.
Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk claimed that Russia was uninterested in de-escalating Ukraine's conflict with separatist forces, despite its commitment to maintain a peace deal made in February.
Ukraine and the West accuse Russia of being directly involved in the separatist conflict in eastern Ukraine which has left over 6,000 dead in the last year.
The ceasefire agreement reached in February requires both Ukraine government and rebel forces to pull back their heavy weapons.
It also envisions Ukraine granting its rebellious eastern territories some measure of self-rule.
So, he'll do everything, starting with a new offensive operation in the East of Ukraine and then with a triggering of unrest and riots in Ukraine.
Five years after a deadly separatist conflict broke out in eastern Ukraine, the front line between the warring sides has become all but a de-facto border, cutting off a generation of first-time voters from Sunday's presidential election.
Only their peers who left their homes to live in areas under government control will be able to cast their ballots for Ukraine's new president.
A separatist war in Ukraine's industrial heartland of Donetsk and Luhansk has killed more than 13,000 people and has prompted many to seek the relative stability of government-controlled areas.
Last time residents of Donetsk and Luhansk were able to vote in May 2014 when Petro Poroshenko was elected president.
Election officials and voters were intimidated by the separatists who shut down some of the polling stations but many stayed open.
This year, the Ukrainian government has no presence there, and anyone wanting to vote would have to cross the front line to do so.
There is no credible statistics on how many people have left the separatist-held areas.
Both the Donetsk and Luhansk regions were home to more than 6. million before the war, and the statistical agencies in the separatist-held areas earlier this year put their current population at 3. million.
Hostilities here died down after peace accords in 2015 but never fully stopped, meaning that thousands of people like him have to man the front line positions.
After annexing Ukraine's Crimean peninsula, Russia threw its weight behind separatists in eastern Ukraine but stopped short of annexing it.
There has been no indication that the Kremlin may want to annex Donetsk and Luhansk which are too economically depressed and are nowhere near predominantly Russian-speaking as Crimea.
Ivan who asked his last name to be withdrawn for fear of repercussions for his relatives in Luhansk is eager to vote in the upcoming election because he is convinced that an individual choice can make a difference.
Many eastern Ukraine natives who left feeling that it would be too dangerous for them to come back even for a visit because of their pro-Western views like Kateryna Savchenko who works on the radio in Kiev and plays in a theatre collective mostly made up of internally displaced people.
Savchenko, who left her native Horlivka in 2014, is optimistic about her future in Ukraine.
Some think that we have no prospects on own or as part of Russia, only as part of Ukraine.
We stand out from countries where everything is predicted for next 10 years, everyone knows who will become next president so people do not have reasons to vote.
Addressing reporters in Kiev, Hodges said there was evidence of Russia's hand in the conflict. "" believe that Russia is providing direct military aid, equipment, ammunition, intelligence, and some of the equipment that is being provided also requires technical assistance,"" Hodges said.
Hodges commended the European Union stance on sanctions against Russia for its perceived role in the conflict raging in eastern Ukraine.
Russian, Ukrainian, French and German diplomats were converging on Berlin later on Wednesday for talks on a recent escalation of fighting between Ukrainian government forces and Russian-backed separatists. "" believe that Russia is providing direct military aid, equipment, ammunition, intelligence and some of the equipment that is being provided also requires technical assistance.
A vigil was held in Kiev on Friday to commemorate those who lost their lives in the fighting in eastern Ukraine.
Dozens gathered at a makeshift memorial in Independence Square to lay flowers and light up candles for the victims.
More than 5,300 people have been killed in the conflict, according to a United Nations count.
The vigil was taking place as the leaders of France, Germany and Russia were holding talks in Moscow on a new proposal to try to bring an end to the deaths and start the long process of finding a lasting peace in the region.
A ceasefire deal was reached in September, but both sides violated it and the fighting has risen sharply in the past two weeks.
Ukraine's leader said on Thursday that he hoped his suggested major political and economic reforms would make the country ready for membership in the European Union by 2020.
Speaking at a news conference in Kiev, Poroshenko outlined a six-year plan for Ukraine, which includes reforming all major government agencies in the country.
But Poroshenko spent much of the news conference fielding questions about a conflict in the east of the country, where fighting between government and rebel forces has killed at least 3,500 people since mid-April.
They thought they could just push us, and the entire southeast of the country would dissipate.
In the beginning, the cease-fire, which was called three weeks ago, was repeatedly violated.
In recent days, reports of violations have decreased notably, although on Thursday the city council of Donetsk, the largest rebel stronghold in the region, said that artillery fire and other explosions could be heard throughout the city during the day.
I'm confident that we leave in the past times when we were disunited with issues such as NATO, language, west and east.
US Secretary of State John Kerry, standing with Ukraine's president after their talks in Kiev, on Thursday urged Russia to show its commitment to a peaceful, diplomatic solution to the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
Kerry called on Russia to demonstrate its commitment by ceasing military support for the separatists and helping to bring them to the negotiation table.
We cannot close our eyes to Russian fighters in unmarked uniforms crossing the border and leading individual companies of so-called separatists in battle,"" he said.
Kerry made no mention during his comments of the possibility of the United States providing Ukraine lethal military aid.
Several European nations oppose giving Ukraine heavy weapons, including Germany and France, whose leaders were heading to Kiev and Moscow with a proposal to end the fighting.
We are not seeking a conflict with Russia, no one is, not President Poroshenko, not the United States, not the European Community.
We are very hopeful that Russia will take advantage of our broad-based, uniform acceptance of the notion that there is a diplomatic solution that is staring everybody in the face.
Two Ukrainian troops have been killed in the country's industrial east as both government forces and rebels reported shelling on their positions overnight, Ukraine's government said early on Thursday.
Intensified fighting in the country's industrial heartland has entered its fifth day.
The emergency services of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic carried out the evacuation of civilians who live in the areas caught up in shelling.
A few hundred residents were accommodated in a dormitory in another district of Donetsk.
On Wednesday, Oleksandr Turchynov, Chairman of the Ukrainian Security and Defence Council, visited the most active position of the Ukrainian Armed Forces in the Avdiivka industrial area.
Both pro-Russia separatist rebels and the Ukrainian government in 2015 committed to cease fire and withdraw heavy weaponry including Grads.
At least 10 people have been killed in eastern Ukraine since Monday and dozens wounded including civilians on both sides of the front line.
