September and October saw a fresh wave of house searches, arrests and increasing oppression of regime critics on the Russian-occupied Crimean peninsula.
But last week , two Crimean Tatar political prisoners, Akhtem Chiygoz and Ilmi Umerov, were freed and extradited to Turkey after Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan brokered a deal with Russia’s President Vladimir Putin for their release.
During their first press conference, at the Ukrainian embassy in Ankara, the two activists stated that, on October 25, they were taken from Simferopol in different cars and the two did not see each other until they boarded a plane bound for the Russian city of Anapa.
Chiygoz stated that when two Federal Security Service agents picked him up from Simferopol’s pre-trial detention center without any explanation, he initially thought he was being sent to Siberia.
Over the past month, Erdoğan met with both Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and Putin.
According to Chiygoz and Umerov’s lawyer, Nikolai Polozov, a great deal of legal, diplomatic, and political negotiations took place for their release, which was finally accomplished by Turkey’s President Erdoğan.
Chiygoz is the deputy chair of the Mejlis, the representative body of the Crimean Tatars.
He was detained in January 2015 for allegedly organizing a February 26, 2014, mass rally of thousands of Crimean Tatars in front of the Crimean parliament, in Simferopol, to prevent the extraordinary session that was about to decide Crimea’s future.
Since Chubarov was declared persona non-grata in Crimea, he had to leave for mainland Ukraine.
Chiygoz on the other hand, still lived in Crimea and became the Russian court’s scapegoat.
On September 27, 2017, the Simferopol District Court found him guilty of promoting separatism, stating that Umerov’s words violated the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation.
Over the past year or so, Putin and Erdoğan have been normalizing relations between their countries, which hit a critical point when Turkish forces downed a Russian jet, in November 2015, that had strayed into Turkish airspace from Syria.
Moreover, they are about to implement two large-scale projects—the Turkish Stream natural gas pipeline along the bottom of the Black Sea and the first Turkish nuclear power plant, in Akkuyu.
Ankara has reportedly already paid out the first installment for the S-400.
As the release of the two Crimean Tatar prisoners last month highlights, Erdoğan—who met with Putin five times and held ten phone conversations in 2017—is a key player in regional security, including in Syria.
Crimean Tatars all over the world rejoiced collectively at the release of their two jailed leaders.
But the Turkish-Russian rapprochement that allowed Umerov and Chiygoz’s emancipation to occur is posing a real challenge to the unity of the broader Euro-Atlantic community.
