A timeline Tensions escalated following a United States intelligence assessment in December 2021, which suggested that Russia could be planning an invasion of Ukraine in early 2022.
A timeline 1 November 2013 – April 2014: Annexation of Crimea Key events 21 November 2013: Ukraine’s President Yanukovych suspends trade and association talks with the EU, opting to revive economic ties with Russia.
President Yanukovych meets Russian President Putin for talks, to lay the ground for a new “strategic partnership” between the two countries.
President Yanukovych and opposition leaders sign an EU-mediated peace pact that includes plans for presidential elections before the end of the year.
Ukraine’s parliament votes to impeach President Yanukovych and he flees the country.
Dozens of pro-Russia gunmen seize government buildings in the Ukrainian peninsula of Crimea and raise the Russian flag.
The move comes a day after President Putin put Russia’s military on high alert.
Russia’s parliament approves President Putin’s request for Russian forces to be used in Ukraine.
President Putin signs a law formalising Russia's takeover of Crimea from Ukraine.
A timeline Several hundred Ukrainians gather in Kyiv’s Independence Square to protest.
Yulia Tymoshenko, in prison, begins a hunger strike in solidarity with the protestors.
Dozens are injured as police respond with tear gas, batons and flash grenades.
A timeline 15 December 2013 The EU freezes attempts to revive a political and trade pact with Ukraine.0,000 people rally in Kyiv.
The Russian president agrees to buy $15 billion of Ukrainian debt to allow the former Soviet republic to return to economic growth.
The protest later turns violent, with hundreds of activists storming a police cordon, attacking riot police with sticks and chains in an attempt to push their way towards the Ukrainian parliament.
The police respond with stun grenades, leaving a dozen protesters injured.
A three-hour meeting between President Yanukovych and the three main political opposition leaders ends without a deal.
A timeline constitutional amendments during a special emergency session of parliament.
The opposition reacts cautiously, rejecting these initial proposals but indicating they are open to further negotiations, including early elections.
In a written statement, the UK’s Minister for Europe urges the government and opposition in Ukraine to find a compromise acceptable to all sides.
An estimated 30,000 protesters gather in Kyiv, renewing calls for the president to step down.
Russia accuses the United States of trying to foment a coup in Ukraine.
The foreign ministers of Germany, France and Poland meet with President Yanukovych, hoping to agree a roadmap with the Ukrainian government and opposition.
Yulia Tymoshenko is released from custody and urges the opposition to continue their protests.
A timeline 24 February 2014 Ukraine issues an arrest warrant for President Yanukovych, on charges of “mass murder” of protesters.
Russia declares the situation in Ukraine a “real threat” to its interests.
Russia puts it military on high alert and President Putin orders major military exercises, as concerns grow about unrest in Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula.
Acting president Oleksandr Turchynov warns Russian forces not to venture out from their naval base in Crimea.
Ousted President Viktor Yanukovych resurfaces in the southern Russian city of Rostov-on-Don, denouncing the “bandit coup” in Kyiv, and reiterates that he remains the legitimate president of Ukraine.
He calls on Russia to act decisively, saying he is “surprised” by President Putin's restraint.
UK Foreign Secretary William Hague speaks to Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov to urge steps to calm the situation and summons the Russian Ambassador to register the UK Government’s deep concerns.
Crimea’s pro-Russia regional government votes to join Russia and announces it will hold a referendum on 16 March to determine whether the region should officially join Russia.
The Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe reports no injuries.
G7 leaders issue a statement calling on Russia to cease all efforts to change the status of Crimea.
Russia is believed to have amassed a force of several thousand troops close to Ukraine's eastern border.
Three people are killed when Ukrainian security forces fend off a raid on a base in Mariupol, the first violent deaths in the east.
He also announces a further £1 million to support the OSCE monitoring mission.
Pro-Russia separatists shoot down a military transport plane in eastern Ukraine, killing all 49 Ukrainian service personnel on board.
A 15-month investigation by the Dutch Safety Board later finds the plane was hit by a Russian-made Buk missile.
Ukraine’s government and pro-Russia rebels sign a truce in Minsk (referred to as the first Minsk Agreement) to end almost five months of fighting.
A series of rocket attacks leave 30 people dead and many more injured in the city of Mariupol in eastern Ukraine.
The Ukrainian Parliament votes to restore NATO membership as the country's strategic foreign policy objective.
Ukraine's association agreement with the European Union enters into force.
A timeline 15 May 2018: President Putin opens a 12-mile bridge between the Russian mainland and Crimea, tightening Russia’s hold over the annexed peninsula.
The UK Government joins calls for Russia to stop delaying or preventing access for ships to the Sea of Azov.
Restrictions on freedom of passage have been accompanied by an increase in Russia’s military presence in the sea.
An amendment to Ukraine’s constitution, setting NATO membership as a strategic foreign and security policy, enters into force.
Volodymyr Zelenskyy is elected president of Ukraine in a landslide victory.
Russia and Ukraine exchange dozens of prisoners captured in the wake of Moscow's annexation of Crimea and intervention in the Donbas.
Russia announces the start of mass military drills, raising tensions with Ukraine amid Western concern over the risk of renewed fighting.
Ukraine’s defence minister says 110,000 Russian troops are massing on the border in 56 battalionsized tactical groups.
A timeline 11 May 2014 “Self-rule” independence referendums are held in Ukraine’s easternmost areas, Donetsk and Luhansk.
Ukraine calls the vote a “criminal farce” and Western countries also condemn the vote.
The head of the de facto electoral commission says 89% of voters in Donetsk and 96% in Luhansk voted for self-rule.
In a statement, Ukraine's defence ministry says “terrorists” have “cynically and treacherously” fired on the aircraft.
A timeline towns, in the north of Donetsk region, to concentrate on the battle for Donetsk city.
A timeline prime minister of the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic in November 2014.
Russian media reports 17,600 soldiers on training exercises in the Rostov region would be pulled back.
Most countries banned cluster munitions under a convention that became international law in 2010, but Ukraine did not sign up to it.
Russia had cut off Ukraine’s gas in June as the conflict in eastern Ukraine escalated.
A timeline 2 November 2014 Pro-Russia separatists hold elections in the two self-proclaimed people's republics in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in eastern Ukraine.
Ukraine blames pro-Russia rebels, but the separatists say Ukrainian forces are behind the attacks.
A timeline provides further detail on other measures being taken by the West.
A timeline 21 March 2016 On the second anniversary of Russia’s annexation of Crimea, the Foreign Secretary again calls for Russia to return Crimea to Ukraine and condemns Russia’s continued breach of international law.
In a statement, the parliament announced it had passed the bill “to amend the Ukrainian laws on national security and internal and foreign policies.
The new laws hereby enact Ukraine's commitment to achieve NATO membership strategically by having made it legally binding,” 11 June 2017 Ukraine's association agreement with the EU is ratified by all signatories, promoting deeper political ties, stronger economic links, and respect for common values between the two.
The Ukrainian church had been under the jurisdiction of the Moscow patriarchate since 1686 and the move is predicted to heighten geopolitical tensions in the region.
It is a landslide victory, with Zelenskyy taking over 70% of the votes.
Both countries free 35 prisoners as part of the exchange, the first since 2014.
There is controversy, however, over Ukraine’s decision to hand Vladimir Tsemakh over to Moscow, a separatist commander thought to be involved in the downing of Malaysia Airlines MH17 in July 2014.
UK Armed Forces personnel deployed on Operation Orbital have trained over 17,500 members of the Armed Forces of Ukraine since 2015.
To mark the seventh anniversary of the annexation, the UK Government announces funding for a new project to improve access to vital services for Ukrainians living in Crimea.
A timeline 6 April 2021 Russia announces the start of mass military drills, raising tensions with Ukraine amid Western concern about the risk of renewed fighting.
Ukraine’s defence minister, Andrii Taran, says 110,000 Russian troops are massing on the border in 56 battalion-sized tactical groups, citing Kyiv’s latest intelligence.
A timeline 3 Current crisis: November 2021 – 23 February 2022 Key events 13 November 2021: President Zelenskyy says nearly 100,000 Russian troops have massed on the border with Ukraine.
Russia presents a list of security demands in order to defuse the crisis over Ukraine, including a legally binding guarantee that Ukraine will never be accepted as a NATO Member State and that NATO will give up any military activity in eastern Europe and Ukraine.
In a rare reference to intelligencegathering, the Foreign Office exposes evidence of a plot to install a pro-Russian government in Ukraine.
The United States places 8,500 troops on heightened alert to deploy to Europe as NATO reinforces its eastern borders with warships and fighter jets.
Russia launches what is being called its largest military exercise since the Cold War, holding joint manoeuvres with Belarus, close to the Belarus/Ukrainian border.
President Putin recognises the independence of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic.
This is the first UK-Ukraine Strategic Dialogue, part of an agreement signed by the Prime Minister and Ukrainian President Zelenskyy during his visit to London a year earlier.
A timeline 10 January 2022 United States and Russian diplomats hold a day of negotiations in Geneva over the fate of Ukraine.
The talks are later described as “useful” and “very professional”, but no progress is made towards resolving fundamental disagreements.
Western allies, including the Head of the UK delegation welcome the proposal to use the OSCE as a forum for revitalised European security talks.
Former Ukrainian MP Yevhen Murayev is identified as being the potential candidate under consideration to lead this pro-Russian government.
A timeline “lightning” attack by Russia to seize the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv.
The United States rules out Russia’s demand to halt NATO’s eastward expansion, but says it is open to talks on arms control.
The Kremlin lists Russia’s principal concerns as avoiding NATO expansion, not deploying offensive weapons near Russia’s borders and returning NATO military capabilities and infrastructure to how they were before former Warsaw Pact states in Eastern Europe joined the alliance.
The Foreign Secretary announces the UK is supplying Ukraine with defensive, anti-tank missiles, and deploying a training team of British personnel.,000 members of the Ukrainian army have already been trained through Operation Orbital.
The UK will also increase investment in Ukraine’s future, ramping up support for trade up to £3. billion, including £1. billion to boost Ukraine’s naval capability.
A timeline 1 February 2022 Prime Minister Boris Johnson and President Zelenskyy hold a joint press conference in Kyiv.
In a joint statement released by the Kremlin, Putin and Xi call on NATO to rule out expansion in eastern Europe, denounce the formation of security blocs in the Asia Pacific region, and criticise the Aukus trilateral security pact between the US, UK and Australia.
A timeline sides need to work quickly to avoid the risk of an escalation.
Meanwhile, six Russian warships and a submarine pass through the Dardanelles strait, heading towards the Black Sea from the Mediterranean.
Russia’s Defence Ministry describes the deployment as a pre-planned movement of military resources.
The White House denounces the operation as yet another escalation of tensions along the Ukraine border.
The UK Prime Minister travels to Brussels and Warsaw, calling on international partners to demonstrate their solidarity with those NATO allies who will bear the brunt of Russian aggression.
During a visit to Moscow, the UK Foreign Secretary meets her Russian counterpart, Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov, and condemns Russia’s build-up of forces on the border with Ukraine.
A timeline 11 February 2022 UK Defence Secretary Ben Wallace holds talks with his Russian counterpart, the Minister of Defence of the Russian Federation, General of the Army Sergei Shoigu.
This is the first time the two nations’ defence ministers have met since General Shoigu visited London in 2013, and the first time a British Defence Secretary has visited Moscow since 2001.
The leaders pledge to redouble diplomatic efforts in the coming days to deescalate the Russia-Ukraine crisis.
The UK Government updates its travel advice to Ukraine, advising British nationals against all travel to Ukraine.
British nationals currently in Ukraine are urged to leave immediately while commercial means are still available.
In an interview with NBC News, United States President Biden again tells American citizens to leave Ukraine, saying there are no plans for a military operation to rescue them.
It is reported that Russia has now amassed some 140,000 troops close to the border with Ukraine and in annexed Crimea.
A timeline Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg says there is no immediate sign of a withdrawal.
The Duma, Russia’s lower house of parliament, votes to ask President Putin to recognise the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic as independent.
Russia expels the United States deputy chief of mission to Russia, Bart Gorman, the US’s second most senior diplomat in Moscow.
UK Foreign Secretary Liz Truss criticises the Duma’s request for President Putin to recognise the Ukrainian regions of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent, saying it shows a “flagrant disregard” for Russia’s peace process commitments.
The Defence Secretary, Ben Wallace, announces a substantial UK contribution to NATO’s uplift in Eastern Europe, doubling the number of personnel in Estonia and sending additional equipment, including tanks and armoured fighting vehicles.
A timeline Ukraine, but says there is still time for diplomacy to avert war.
Foreign Minister Liz Truss tells the conference that Ukraine could face the “worst-case scenario” of a Russian invasion as soon as next week, and Europe faces one of its most perilous security situations since the early 20th century.
The Kremlin says Russia successfully test-launched hypersonic and cruise missiles at sea and land-based targets during the exercises.
The United States administration signals its willingness to work towards a diplomatic solution, but reiterates its view that Russian forces have been ordered to proceed with an invasion of Ukraine.
Satellite images appear to show new deployments of Russian troops and armoured equipment, with some just 15 kilometres from the border with Ukraine.
A timeline leaders condemn the move, calling it a violation of the Minsk peace deal.
In a statement to the House of Commons, Defence Secretary Ben Wallace updates Members on Russia's actions towards Ukraine.
In the evening, Prime Minister Boris Johnson speaks to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy to discuss the deteriorating situation in and around Ukraine, and warns an invasion is a real possibility in the coming hours and days.
The UN Security Council meets in the evening for an emergency session, at the request of Ukraine’s Foreign Minister, Dmytro Kuleba.
In a statement to the House of Commons, the Prime Minister updates Members on the situation in Ukraine and condemns President Putin’s violation of the Minsk peace agreements in recognising the so-called people’s republics of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent.
A new guarantee of up to $500 million of Development Bank financing is also announced.
The United States and EU also impose sanctions on Russia, and Germany announces it will halt certification of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline.
Airports in the eastern Ukrainian cities of Kharkiv, Dnipro, and Zaporizhzhia close their air space, and the nearly 3 million Ukrainians still in Russia are told to leave the country as soon as possible.
President Putin says Russia is ready to look for “diplomatic solutions” over Ukraine, but stresses his country’s interests are nonnegotiable.
Denis Pushilin and Leonid Pasechnik, the respective heads of the so-called People’s Republics of Donetsk and Luhansk, request help “in repelling the aggression of the Ukrainian armed forces”, according to the Interfax news agency, quoting Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov.
Several analysts suggest these requests could be the pretext Russia uses to launch an attack on Ukraine.
The UN General Assembly meets to discuss the Ukraine crisis, with several member states calling for Russia to deescalate and spelling out the consequences of an invasion.
A timeline 4 Current crisis: 24 February 2022 present Key events 24 February 2022: In an early morning address on Russian state television, President Putin announces Russian forces will carry out “a special military operation” in Ukraine.
Ukraine’s President Zelenskyy introduces martial law and closes Ukraine’s airspace.
The UN Security Council rejects a draft resolution intended to end Russia’s military action after Russia uses its veto.
President Zelenskyy announces Ukraine has filed a lawsuit against Russia to the UN International Court of Justice at the Hague.
President Putin orders Russia’s nuclear deterrence forces to be put on high alert.
Russian forces launch rocket attacks that kill “dozens” of civilians in Ukraine’s second city, Kharkiv, and begin a renewed assault on the capital Kyiv.
President Zelenskyy signs an official request for Ukraine to join the EU immediately under a special procedure.
President Zelenskyy urges Western nations to enforce a “no-fly zone” over Ukraine.
Russian forces in Ukraine move to tighten their siege of key cities, including the capital, Kyiv, and the southern port of Mariupol.
The UN General Assembly votes overwhelmingly for a resolution deploring Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and calling for the immediate withdrawal of its forces.
A fire breaks out at a nuclear power plant in Zaporizhzhia, after shelling by Russian forces.
Ukraine rejects an offer from Russia to create “humanitarian corridors”, after it emerges most of the routes lead directly to Russia or its ally, Belarus.
The UK announces sanctions against seven Russian businessmen, including Roman Abramovich.
The leaders of Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovenia travel to Kyiv on an EU mission to show support for Ukraine.
The International Court of Justice orders Russia to stop its invasion, saying it has not seen any evidence to support the Kremlin’s justification to attack Ukraine.
President Putin addresses a large crowd at Moscow’s Luzhniki stadium, marking the eighth anniversary of Crimea’s annexation.
The number of people fleeing Ukraine in the past five weeks passes 4 million.
A timeline 24 February 2022 In an early morning address (just before 3am, UK time) on Russian state television, President Putin announces Russian forces will carry out “a special military operation” in Ukraine.
Ukraine’s President Zelenskyy then makes an urgent national address, introducing martial law, while urging people to remain calm.
Zelenskyy decrees a full military mobilisation against the Russian military action, as he criticises the West and says Ukraine is being left on its own to fight Russia.
In a statement to the House of Commons on the situation in Ukraine, the Prime Minister updates Members on Russia’s “onslaught” and announces a further package of sanctions and asset freezes on Russian entities and individuals.
The Home Secretary, meanwhile, announces visa concessions for Ukrainians.
The UN Security Council rejects a draft resolution intended to end Russia’s military action against Ukraine.
The draft, submitted by Albania and the United States, wins support from 11 member states but Russia’s veto ensures the draft resolution falls.
The leaders of NATO Member States meet to discuss Russia’s attack on Ukraine; additional deployments to the alliance’s eastern flank are announced.
In a third wave of sanctions in four days, the UK Government announces Russian President Vladimir Putin and Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov will be hit with an assets freeze.
The Prime Minister addresses a NATO leaders’ meeting in the afternoon, to update allies on the UK’s next steps following Russia’s bombardment of Ukraine.
President Zelenskyy rejects a United States offer to evacuate him from the Ukraine’s capital.
The US, Canada and key European countries agree to remove “selected Russian banks” from the Swift payment system.
A timeline describes the country as a staging ground for Russia’s invasion.
The UN Refugee Agency says the number of people fleeing Ukraine has reached 368,000, and more than 4. million more could follow if the fighting spreads.
There are also reports of tens of thousands on the move within the country itself.
President Putin orders Russia’s military to put the country’s nuclear deterrence forces on high alert in response to “aggressive statements” by NATO countries.
A referendum in Belarus reportedly approves a new constitution renouncing the country’s non-nuclear status.
The move theoretically allows Russia to place nuclear weapons on Belarusian soil for the first time since the country gave them up after the fall of the Soviet Union.
The UN Security Council votes to call for a rare emergency special session of the UN General Assembly the following day, to discuss Russia’s military operation in Ukraine.
The vote follows the veto of the draft Security Council resolution by Russia on 25 February.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson announces £40m of additional aid will be released to provide vital medical supplies and other help to Ukraine.
A timeline 28 February 2022 Forty Ukrainian civil society groups come together to call on the West to establish safe zones for refugees inside Ukraine, and provide technology to help document Russian war crimes as part of a plan to make Russia’s President Putin and his inner circle face justice at the International Criminal Court.
The first round of Ukraine-Russia talks aimed at ending the fighting between Russia and its neighbour conclude with no immediate agreement.
The prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in The Hague announces he will launch an investigation into possible war crimes or crimes against humanity in Ukraine.
The move comes amid mounting evidence of Russia’s use of indiscriminate cluster munitions on Ukrainian cities.
President Zelenskyy signs an official request for Ukraine to join the European Union immediately under a special procedure.
Turkey, a NATO member with good ties to both Russia and Ukraine, pledges to implement parts of an international pact that would potentially limit the transit of Russian warships from the Mediterranean to the Black Sea.
Russia’s defence ministry warns Kyiv residents to leave their homes as it plans to strike targets in the Ukrainian capital.
President Zelenskyy urges Western nations to enforce a “no-fly zone” as a measure to stop any further bombardment by Russia, but the United States rules out such a measure.
A timeline humanitarian crisis and announces further sanctions against Russia, including banning Russian ships from UK ports and additional economic measures.
The Foreign Secretary also unveils the first tranche of sanctions against Belarusian individuals and organisations, in response to Belarus’ role in supporting Russia’s military action against Ukraine.
The five countries voting no were Russia, Belarus, North Korea, Eritrea and Syria.
Filippo Grandi, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, says more than one million people have fled Ukraine since Russian forces invaded the country a week earlier.
Karim Khan, chief prosecutor for ICC, says he will begin work “as rapidly as possible” to look for possible crimes against humanity or genocide committed in Ukraine.
In a second round of talks, Ukraine and Russia agree to create humanitarian corridors to evacuate civilians.
UK Foreign Secretary Liz Truss announces sanctions against Russian oligarchs Alisher Usmanov and Igor Shuvalov, with a full asset freeze and travel ban imposed.
The International Atomic Energy Agency puts its Incident and Emergency Centre in “full 24/7 response mode” due to the “serious situation” unfolding at Zaporizhzhia.
A planned evacuation from Mariupol and Volnovakha is thrown in chaos as Russia continues to attack despite agreeing a humanitarian corridor.
David Arakhamia, one of Ukraine’s negotiators, says his country is not willing to compromise on its territorial integrity in talks but Russia, but is open to discussing “nonNATO models” for its future.
The International Committee of the Red Cross says the safe passage of civilians from Ukraine’s besieged eastern port city of Mariupol is “halted” for a second consecutive day.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson announces the UK will provide $100 million to Ukraine’s government through the World Bank.
Ukraine’s Foreign Ministry says Russian shelling is preventing the evacuation of civilians from Kyiv, Mariupol, Sumy, Kharkiv, Volnovakha and Mykolayiv.
Josep Borrell, the EU’s top diplomat, estimates as many as five million Ukrainians will flee the country if Russia’s bombing campaign continues.
The UN’s refugee agency notes more than 1.7 million Ukrainians have already crossed into central Europe.
The third round of Russian-Ukrainian talks end with the delegations reporting some positive signs but no breakthrough.
The United States Ambassador to the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe , Michael Carpenter, accuses Belarus of “stabbing neighbour in the back”, and describes Belarus as being a “co-aggressor” in Russia’s military action in Ukraine.
The UK Ambassador to the OSCE, Neil Bush, calls out the Russian government for lying about their plan to invade Ukraine and expresses UK solidarity with the Ukrainian people.
Ukraine’s Infrastructure Minister, Oleksander Kubrakov, says Ukraine has suffered about $10 billion in damage to infrastructure since Russia launched military action against the country.
At a joint press conference in the UK, Prime Minister Boris Johnson makes a statement alongside Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte and Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.
A timeline the international community in providing long term, unwavering assistance.
Russia reportedly opens humanitarian corridors from Kyiv, Cherhihiv, Sumy, Kharkiv and Mariupol so that civilians can be evacuated.
The number of refugees fleeing Ukraine reaches two million, according to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Filippo Grandi.
Ukraine’s ministry of foreign affairs reports 12,000 Russian personnel have been killed in its latest assessment of their losses to date.
Chinese President Xi Jinping calls for peace and “maximum restraint to prevent a massive humanitarian crisis” in Ukraine, but stops short of criticising Russia or its president directly.
In an unprecedented address broadcast live to the House of Commons, President Zelenskyy echoes Winston Churchill as he asks the UK to do more to help Ukraine.
Russia accuses the United States of declaring an economic war on the country and warned it is working on a broad response to Western sanctions.
President Zelenskyy says the international community will be responsible for a mass “humanitarian catastrophe” if it does not agree a no-fly zone to protect Ukraine.
Ukrainian authorities say Russian bombs have “completely destroyed” a children’s and maternity hospital in Mariupol, as shelling again halts mass evacuations from several cities.
In Washington, UK Foreign Secretary Liz Truss meets United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken and United States National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan to discuss what more the UK and US can do to support Ukraine on security, intelligence, and humanitarian issues.
Sergey Lavrov and Dmytro Kuleba, the foreign ministers of Russia and Ukraine respectively, meet in Turkey.
The meeting is notable in that the Ukrainian side indicate they are prepared for an alternative to NATO membership, provided the country is given security and economic guarantees underwritten by the West and Russia.
The UK announces sanctions against seven Russian businessmen, including Roman Abramovich and Oleg Deripaska.
A timeline pledges to streamline the online visa application system for Ukrainian refugees.
This includes $13.6bn in emergency aid for Ukraine for humanitarian, defence and economic assistance, and for sanctions enforcement.
On 28 February 2022, exercising the right of Ukraine to choose its own destiny, the President of Ukraine submitted the application of Ukraine to become a member of the European Union.
The Council has acted swiftly and invited the Commission to submit its opinion on this application in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Treaties.
Pending this and without delay, we will further strengthen our bonds and deepen our partnership to support Ukraine in pursuing its European path.
President Putin gives the green light for up to 16,000 volunteers from the Middle East to join Russian-backed rebels fighting in eastern Ukraine.
The UN Security Council meets, at Russia’s request, to discuss Moscow’s claims that the United States is funding “military biological activities” in Ukraine.
A timeline the UN is not aware of any such biological weapons programmes.
In a 75-minute phone call with President Putin, the French President and German Chancellor call for an immediate ceasefire.
A French official says the Russian president showed no willingness to end the war.
In recent days, we have heard absurd claims about chemical and biological weapons laboratories.
Now that these false claims have been made, we must remain vigilant because it is possible that Russia itself could plan chemical weapons operations under this fabrication of lies.
They are the first Western visitors to the city since Russia’s military operations began three weeks earlier.
The Kremlin announces it has put the US President, Secretary of State and other top officials on a “stop list” that bars them from entering Russia.
The ban comes in response to sanctions imposed by Washington on Russian officials.
The number of Ukrainians fleeing abroad passes three million, data from the UN Refugee Agency shows.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy addresses the United States Congress, remotely from Kyiv.
Zelenskyy calls on President Biden to be a leader for peace and repeats his calls for a no-fly zone to be imposed over Ukraine.
Only the Russian and Chinese judges on the court vote against the order.
A timeline 17 March 2022 In an address to Ukrainian citizens, President Zelenskyy cautions Russian troops by drawing a comparison to hostilities back in 2014: The occupants thought they were going to Ukraine which they had seen before, in 2014-2015, which they corrupted and were not afraid of.
And it allows us to defend ourselves against a full-scale attack for 22 days.
Russia establishes a no-fly zone over Ukraine’s Donbas region, according to a separatist official from the self-proclaimed Donetsk republic.
The real death toll is likely to be higher as the OHCHR, which has a large monitoring team in Ukraine, has not yet been able to verify casualty reports from badly hit cities such as Mariupol.
In a phone call with China’s President Xi Jinping, United States President Joe Biden lays out the consequences for China if it supports Russia against Ukraine.
President Biden outlined the views of the United States and our Allies and partners on this crisis.
He described the implications and consequences if China provides material support to Russia as it conducts brutal attacks against Ukrainian cities and civilians.
The end of freedom in Ukraine will mean the extinction of any hope of freedom in Georgia and then Moldova.
It will mean the beginning of a new age of intimidation across the whole of Eastern Europe from the Baltic to the Black Sea.
Among the responsibilities of those who wage war, everywhere in the world, is the suffering inflicted on civilians who are forced to flee their homes.
The war in Ukraine is so devastating that 10 million have fled either displaced inside the country, or as refugees abroad.
A timeline Kremlin of carrying out indiscriminate attacks as part of an intentional strategy in the conflict.
He urges an immediate ceasefire and a diplomatic solution to the crisis.
A senior United States defence official says Russia’s combat power in Ukraine has declined below 90% of its pre-invasion levels for the first time since its attack began, suggesting heavy losses of weaponry and growing casualties.
NATO estimates that between 7,000 and 15,000 Russian soldiers have been killed since it commenced military operations against Ukraine a month earlier.
By way of comparison, Russia lost about 15,000 troops over 10 years in Afghanistan.
In a statement, Blinken repeatedly raises the brutality in the Ukrainian city of Mariupol and compares it to similar Russian campaigns against Grozny in the Second Chechen War and Aleppo during the Syrian civil war.
The UK Government announces it will double the number of missiles it sends to Ukraine and urges western allies to step up provisions of lethal aid to the country.
And we have proved that we deserve to be a full member of the European Union.
President Zelenskyy also addresses the NATO summit in a pre-recorded video address, appealing to leaders to increase military support for his country against Russian forces.
Zelenskyy warns Russia wants to expand further and would next target Alliance members in eastern Europe, including Poland and the Baltic states.
In The Hague, the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court asks a coalition of countries to back his war crimes investigation in Ukraine, saying “things can get worse” if the international community fails to act now.
Russia and Ukraine exchange prisoners in the first swap of soldiers since Moscow ordered troops into Ukraine one month earlier.
Dmitry Medvedev, a former Russian president who is deputy chairman of the country’s security council, says Moscow could strike against an enemy that only used conventional weapons while Vladimir Putin’s defence minister claims nuclear “readiness” is a priority.
Speaking to Russian journalists in a 90minute video call, President Zelenskyy says Ukraine is prepared to discuss adopting a neutral status as part of a peace deal with Russia, but that it would have to be guaranteed by third parties and put to a referendum.
Russia announces it is preparing to restrict entry for citizens of “unfriendly” countries, which would include the US, the UK, and all EU countries.
A senior UN official says they have seen videos purporting to show the abuse of prisoners of war on both sides in Ukraine.
A further six-and-a-half million people are internally displaced within the country.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov hails China as part of a new world order, ahead of a meeting with his Chinese counterpart, Wang Yi.
A timeline In response to EU sanctions against Russia, the Russian Government announces many senior EU figures are barred from entering Russia.
EU officials, lawmakers, public figures and journalists are among those sanctioned.
