Ukraine's incumbent is lagging behind in polls, but he still has time to manipulate political events to his advantage.
Accused by Ukraine's progressives of corruption and hampering reforms, Poroshenko can hardly be described as someone who bears the torch of the 2014 Maidan revolution.
Tymoshenko's entire career is mired in corruption scandals; Zelenskiy is rumoured to be backed by oligarch Ihor Kolomoyskyi, who has been accused of syphoning billions of dollars from a Ukrainian bank; former Defence Minister Anatoly Hrytsenko is a proponent of enlightened authoritarianism, and; Yury Boyko formally represents the Russia-friendly anti-Maidan opposition.
With this line-up of candidates, the March vote invites parallels with Boris Yeltsin's desperate effort to retain office at the backdrop of the disastrous Chechen war in 1996.
He eventually succeeded, but only at the cost of undermining democratic procedure.
In Ukraine, like in the rest of the former USSR, incumbents can manipulate the political agenda to boost their ratings and improve the chances of getting re-elected.
In the post-Soviet era, no one has excelled more in such political manipulation than Russia's Vladimir Putin.
In 2014, after suffering an historical slump in popularity due to the 2011-2012 wave of protests in Russia, the Russian president sent his ratings soaring to 89 percent by annexing Crimea in the aftermath of Ukraine's revolution, launching a war in the Donbas region and unleashing an unprecedented wave of chauvinism in the country.
Poroshenko is taking a page out of Putin's playbook, but he's applying it on a modest scale and within the constraints of democratic procedures.
His aim is to rally nationalist-leaning voters in the Ukrainian-speaking regions of central and western Ukraine by resorting to the same right-wing populism currently dominating politics in neighbouring Hungary and Poland.
Large billboards with his campaign motto ""Army, Language, Faith"" were lining almost every avenue in the country for most of 2018, months before he officially announced his decision to run for re-election.
Millions of Ukrainians use Russian as their first language and prior to the Maidan revolution, Russian-speaking regions of Ukraine were free to proclaim it as the second official language in their territory.
The nationalist wave that swept through Ukraine in the aftermath of Russia's 2014 military aggression brought the question of national language to the fore and the far right started rallying for curbing language rights of the Russian-speaking population in the country.
In 2017, the Ukrainian president oversaw the adoption of a law, which promotes the Ukrainian language by effectively phasing out secondary education in Russian.
That didn't give the desired boost to his ratings but instead led to a diplomatic spat with neighbouring Hungary because the Hungarian-language schools were affected in the same way as Russian.
By supporting a low-intensity trench war in the Donbas region with the help of its hybrid forces, Russia has made Ukraine bleed drop by drop something that inevitably affects the popularity of the current president, who was elected in 2014 on the promise to end the war soon.
Poroshenko needed to be seen as proactive as possible, even though Ukraine is not capable of overcoming Russia's war machine militarily.
In the last couple of years, Ukrainian forces have been advancing into the buffer zone which divides the warring sides as per the Minsk agreements of 2015.
Another front was opened at sea, when in March 2018 the Ukrainian border patrol seized a Russian fishing boat, threatening to do so with each vessel that leaves or enters ports in Crimea.
Russia responded by beefing up its presence in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov, prompting Ukraine and its Western allies to talk about a renewed Russian aggression.
Ukraine continued testing Putin's patience by sending small naval vessels under the newly built bridge over the Strait of Kerch, linking Crimea to Russia.
Moscow's paranoia was further inflamed by an article in Washington Examiner, an obscure United States newspaper, suggesting that Ukraine should blow up the bridge.
Claiming that a large-scale Russian invasion was imminent, the Ukrainian president went to parliament and after overcoming strong scepticism among MPs, managed to push through a month-long martial law period, which lasted till the end of December.
It remains unclear what that measure, which theoretically gave the president sweeping powers, entailed beyond fomenting patriotic fervour among Ukrainian voters.
It had no visible effect except for the severe restrictions imposed on Russian nationals visiting the country.
As soon as the announcement was made, Poroshenko set off on a tour of central and western Ukraine, where the bulk of his electorate is based, showing Bartholomew's edict, known as Tomos, to large gatherings in cathedrals and churches.
He successfully touted this achievement as Ukraine's great victory over Russia, even though it remains incomplete since the largest number of parishes remains under Moscow patriarchate's control.
There are still almost two months left till the election and Poroshenko's spin doctors will certainly need to devise more drama to secure his election victory.
A freshly adopted law requires all parishes aligned with the Moscow Patriarchate to reregister a measure designed to coerce church communities into switching to the newly created Ukrainian Church.
If this measure is successful, Poroshenko would surely use it to boost his popularity on the campaign trail.
Meanwhile, as Aleksandr Turchynov, the head of Ukraine's National Security Council, told the BBC on December 19, Ukraine is preparing to send more naval ships to exercise its right to free passage through the Strait of Kerch.
Set up at the right moment, a new dramatic standoff at sea may give Poroshenko a decisive edge over the rivals.
