When I read about the black, sabotage operations against Russia, I really have to admire Mr Putin’s restraint and long-game patience.
How he can put up with these sorts of attacks all over the world and not want to retaliate is beyond me.
Their patience is generated in part by their practice of the Maharishi Transcendental Meditation technique.
I challenge anybody to find this information, in the depth it is presented, anywhere else on the planet except in an intelligence file.
It is a living thing as it brings people and economies together on a higher level than would be attained simply by the movement of cargo and electricity.
Just learned that this song was written by a driver and amateur song writer from Ivanovo, Russia, together with his children.
They wrote and performed the song at their traditional wooden country dacha.
According to competition rules, the winning song ‘Krimsky Most’ was presented at the New Wave Music Festival by one of the best known Russian singers, Oleg Gazmanov, also a judge of the Crimean Bridge Song competition.
Out of curiosity I googled, “US media on Russian Crimean Bridge” and got 2,690,000 links.
I know it’s probably low vibration & low calibration on my part, but I got to say I thoroughly enjoyed the sour grapes juvenile shock on display.
One might think the MSM would at least update their narrative from Russia “annexed” Crimea to Russia “attached” Crimea.
No wonder the majority of humans, esp, in the West, are so screwed up — they listen to such drivel day and night.
They actually stopped doing their own reporting and research — too lazy.
Then, they flush down all that excrement onto hundreds of millions of their citizens.
It wouldn’t surprise me if millions of Ukrainians start settling into Crimea in the near future.
I don’t think, this bridge will be only for supplies and turism in Crimea, but for Russian imports and exports of goods as well.
Russia is building new ports to replace those of baltic states and they will use Crimean ports to replace transportation through Ukraine as well as Novorossiysk port is not enough big in Black Sea.
Northern Italian regions Veneto, Lombardia and Toscany already recognize Crimean referendum and they quietly cooperate with Crimea.
When the Crimean bridge will be finnished, that those Italian Merchant ships will take a nice share of transportation of goods between EU and Russian ports in Crimea.
