State Duma deputy Konstantin Zatulin spoke and admitted that Russia had made a military invasion on Donbass in 2014.
Japan has refused Putin's proposal to sign a peace agreement with Russia.
Now Russia has taken a wait-and-see position and will not make new attempts to peacefully settle the situation on the Donbas.
United States Special Representative Volker declared illegitimacy of the ""elections"" announced on Donbas.
Ukraine blocked the speech of Russian representatives from the annexed Crimea at the OSCE meeting.
The Supreme Court of the Russian Federation recognized the legal sentence for 12 years imprisonment for political prisoner Sushchenko.
The court continued arrest of Ruban suspected of treason and terrorism by the end of October.
UN-led mission mandate in Donbas should be robust enough to actually control security there United States Envoy Volker.
Russia tries to use the situation with the Crimean Titanium to promote this issue Klimkin.
Russian military expert Paul Felgengauer is convinced that the teachings of Russian President Vladimir Putin are ready to deploy a full-scale military operation in the Donbas, provided that the North Stream 2 is successfully launched.
The Cold War on the Central European The front has always been combined with the so-called proxy wars in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
Now proxy wars are taking place in Syria and the Donbass, and much will depend on the launch of the North Stream 2.
Then it will turn out to completely shut off gas through Ukraine and fight on its territory.
They will shut up Europe gas, they will shout, so it's time to carry out only limited operations,"" he says.
According to him, ""East-2018"" is preparing for a large-scale military operation on the part of Russia.
They want to check the ability of the troops to mobilize, move and so on, that is, mass preparations for a high-probable war,"" the expert said.
His words have been published in the Twitter account of Phosphorus Gorlovka.
As previously reported, Russia recently sends alcoholic and drug addicts to the occupied Donbas, so the DPR fighters stop recruiting mercenaries from the Russian Federation.
Donbas is threatened by a dangerous scenario: the estimated dates are already known.
Russian President Vladimir Putin said that the Russian Federation should diversify the currency of settlement in international trade and ""stop solely relying on"" the United States dollar.
Putin said this during a press conference on September 12, reports Reuters.
As it is noted, the Russian central bank has already begun to significantly reduce its reserves in United States dollars.
At the same time, there is an increase in reserves in gold and in Chinese yuan.
This may indicate that the RF could soon switch to settlements in the Chinese currency during the import and export, as the Chinese yuan was listed in the three main reserve currencies of the world.
The move by the Russian authorities to abandon the United States dollar as a means of settling in international trade can be seen as a way to stay away from potential United States sanctions that may be imposed against the Russian Federation in the future.
By increasing its reserves in gold, Russia is trying to minimize the potential financial damage from the introduction of tougher United States sanctions, which, in particular, may relate to Russian dollar settlements with the Russian Federation.
We remind that in July it was reported that the Central Bank of the Russian Federation massively sells United States debt bonds because of fears that they could be confiscated through United States sanctions.
Over the past few months, Russia has sold about 80% of all United States government debt held by it.
Earlier it was reported that United States Senators proposed to impose sanctions on Russia's government debt securities operations for her involvement in armed conflicts in Ukraine and Syria.
Earlier, he reported that the draft of his new sanctions against Russia would be ""hellish punishment"" of Russia.
As noted, the restrictions on transactions with public debt in Russia can significantly affect the economy of the Russian Federation, since about a third of all government debt securities of Russia belong to foreigners.
On July 19, Republican Senator John Barrasso announced that he had registered a bill on the imposition of sanctions against North Stream-2.
On July 18, Montenegro, Albania, Norway, Georgia and Ukraine joined the decision of the Council of the European Union on June 18 to extend the period of sanctions by June 23, 2019 through the annexation of the Crimea.
On July 5, the European Union for six months extended economic sanctions against Russia they will operate until January 31, 2019.
Japan did not agree to a peace agreement with the Russian Federation ""without any preconditions"" proposed by the Russian President Vladimir Putin on September 12.
With the proposal to conclude a peace agreement by the end of 2018 in order to resolve the dispute over the Kuril Islands, Putin spoke during a meeting with Japan's prime minister Sinzo Abe at the Eastern Economic Forum in Vladivostok.
At the same time, Secretary of the Cabinet of Ministers of Japan Yasuhiro Cahn told the journalists that Japan has no intention to conclude a peace agreement with Russia to resolve the territorial dispute over the Kuril Islands.
Southern Kuriles became part of the USSR after the end of World War II, but Japan considers its territory four islands from the Kuril group Iturup, Kunashir, Shikotan and Habomay.
Recall that on June 11, Japan expressed a protest by Russia and China through Moscow's plans to pave the way for a link to the Kuril Islands with the help of a Chinese company.
As reported, Japan has expressed Russia's protest because of the names of the Kuril Islands.
Earlier, Russia has placed the newest rockets on controversial Japan Kuriles.
Special Representative of the United States Department of State to Ukraine Kurt Volcker doubts that in the near future progress will be made in negotiations on the settlement of the situation in eastern Ukraine.
As informs censor.NET, he said this in an interview with Deutsche Welle.
They have hardly done anything in the last few years to try to bring the region peace and security, but they continue to blame Ukraine, reminding that the conflict is taking place in the Ukrainian territory ""But Ukraine did not come to Russian territory Russians are in the Ukrainian territory,"" he said, answering the question whether the negotiations in the ""Norman format"" with the participation of Germany, France, Ukraine and Russia have come to a standstill.
As a result, we do not see anything new, except for constant accusations against others and leaving negotiations"", said Volker.
Recall that on July 26, the heads of the political departments of the foreign policy departments of the ""Norman four"" countries in Berlin agreed to continue work on the definition of the basic principles of the peacekeeping operation in the Donbas. pecial Representative of the United States Department of State for Affairs Kurt Volker stated that the decision to hold elections in self-proclaimed ""Luhansk People's Republic"" and ""Donetsk People's Republic"" is illegitimate.
Volker stressed that the announcement of the November 11 elections in the occupied territories was a violation of the Minsk treaties.
Therefore, the conduct of the elections in itself, is illegitimate, given the security conditions, but also because they are not the ones that should exist.
When there will be security then and there should be elections, ""he said.
After the assassination of Zakharchenko in the so-called DNR, the elections of the ""head of the republic"" were scheduled for November 11, 2018.
Temporary executor of the duties of the leader of the ""republic"" was chosen by Denis Pushilin.
Recall that the EU stated that holding ""elections"" in the ""DPR"" and ""LNR"" is a violation of the Minsk agreements.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine called on international partners to intensify sanctions against Russia because of the election of militants.
On August 31, after the explosion in the restaurant ""Separ"", the leader of the ""DNR"" militants Alexander Zakharchenko died.
As a result of an assassination attempt on the leader of the so-called ""DNR"" by Alexander Zakharchenko, 12 people were injured and the guard Zakharchenko died.
In the ""republic"", too, they complained and abolished classes in schools.
Russian President Putin called the assassination of Zakharchenko destabilizing and appealed to the residents of the Donbas.
The office of the Ukrainian ombudsman was informed that in Donetsk they were released from confessions of 4 detainees for the murder of Zakharchenko.
The government agreed with the proposal of the Ministry of Defense and instructed to carry out all further steps to obtain boats.
The main obstacles that prevented Ukraine from obtaining military boats from the United States as a gift were their transportation and payment of accompanying expenses.
Let's remind that for the first time about the possibility of transferring to Iceland Island spoke in 2014 after the annexation by Russia of Crimea.
At the end of August this year, the Cabinet of Ministers allowed the Ministry of Defense to pay a 100% advance payment of related expenses related to the preparation for the delivery of two patrol boats of the class of Iceland to the United States in the framework of military assistance to Ukraine in 2019.
The summer of 2019 in Baltimore is also planned to train Ukrainian crews. -Recall that on May 3, the State Border Guard Service of Ukraine warned that Russia resorted to stopping and inspecting ships that are heading to Ukraine.
On May 4, it became known about the arrest of Russian border guards of the Ukrainian fishing vessel YAMK-0041 with 5 Ukrainians aboard. -On July 9, it became known that the Russian FSB detained 7 merchant ships in the Sea of ​​Azov , which traveled from or to Mariupol and Berdyansk.
UK insists that Russian secret services were behind nerve agent attack in Salisbury.
Britain’s attempts to get an explanation from Russia over the poisoning of a former Russian spy in Salisbury have always been met with obfuscation and lies and that hasn’t changed, Prime Minister Theresa May’s spokesman said on Wednesday, Censor.NET reports citing Reuters.
The government has exposed the role of the GRU, its operatives and its methods, this position is supported by our international allies,"" the spokesman told reporters.
Russia adamantly denies involvement in the poisoning, which had added to severe strains in ties between Russia and the West.
Putin's declaration came seven days after British authorities announced that they had charged two Russian men, identified as Aleksandr Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov, with carrying out the poisioning on March 4.
They accused the pair of smuggling the Soviet-designed nerve agent Novichok into Britain in a fake perfume flask and smearing some of the substance on the front door of Sergei Skripal's home in the English city of Salisbury, where the former GRU officer settled after being sent to the West in a Cold War-style spy swap in 2010.
The attack left Sergei Skripal, 67, and Yulia Skripal, 34, in critical condition, but both have recovered after weeks in the hospital.
British authorities have said that a European arrest warrant has been issued for the two Russians, who they suspect were using aliases.
We have found them,"" Putin said at an economic forum in the Far Eastern city of Vladivostok on Sept., Censor.NET reports citing Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
Putin gave no indication that Russia would help Britain pursue the suspects, and his poker-faced remarks appeared to indicate that it would not.
British Home Secretary Sajid Javid said on September 9 that Britain will catch the two men and bring them to prosecution if they ever step out of Russia.
The poisoning led Britain, the United States, the European Union, and others to carry out a series of diplomatic expulsions and financial sanctions against Moscow.
It has further damaged already severely strained relations between Russia and the West and has been a cause for solidarity at a time when Western officials accuse Moscow of seeking to cause rifts in relations between Western countries.
Two delegates of Russia from the annexed Crimea were not allowed to speak at a meeting on media freedom at the annual OSCE summit.
The delegate from Ukraine indicated that they were speaking of non-existent organizations.
At a meeting on media freedom on September 12, members of the so-called public chamber of the Crimean republic and representative of the Crimean Tatar channel Millet were to be represented as representatives of the annexed Crimea.
The Ukrainian delegate Andrew Chesnokov drew attention to the violation of the established rules of the meeting and pointed to the inadmissibility of the speeches of representatives of the RF from the annexed Crimea.
Chesnokov explained that, according to international law, the peninsula is a territory of Ukraine, which means that these persons are acting from non-existent organizations, which is a violation of the OSCE standards.
The moderator of the session agreed with the arguments and, despite the Russian delegation's protest, banned the speech of Russian representatives from the annexed Crimea.
It should be noted that in Warsaw, a two-weekly meeting of the OSCE began in Warsaw, in which human rights and freedoms would be discussed.
About 1,500 officials and civil society representatives from OSCE and partner countries take part in the event.
On September 11, the United States at the OSCE conference called on Russia to dismiss Sentsov.
On September 10, at a meeting of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, public activists supported the Ukrainian director , political prisoner Oleg Sentsov.
The Supreme Court of Russia recognized the legal decision of the Moscow City Court for 12 years imprisonment for a Ukrainian political prisoner, journalist Roman Sushchenko.
Such a decision was announced by a judge of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, UNIAN reports.
Sushchenko stressed that he did not agree with the court's decision and would continue the struggle for his release.
He noted that he would lodge a complaint with the European Court of Human Rights.
In June, the Moscow court denied the Ukrainian ombudsman Lyudmila Denisova at a meeting with Sushchenko.
Recall, the correspondent of the Ukrainian news agency ""Ukrinform"" in France, Roman Sushchenko was detained in Moscow in September 2016, when he arrived in Russia to visit his relatives.
In October of that year, the FSB of Russia put Sushchenko on an official allegations of espionage.
On June 4, the court in Moscow found guilty of ""espionage"" and sentenced to 12 years of the colony of a strict regime of Ukrainian journalist Roman Sushchenko.
Convicted Sushchenko in the last word did not admit guilty and asked for release.
On April 24, Feigin, who defended a Ukrainian journalist Roman Sushchenko in court, reported that he was deprived of the status of a lawyer.
He told that the case of journalist Sushchenko will be led by another lawyer.
Since then, Feigin has been in the case of Sushchenko as a public defender.
He also did not exclude that Sushchenko could exchange for the leader of the ""RIA Novosti Ukraina"" Kirill Vyshynsky, detained on suspicion of treason.
President Petro Poroshenko said in February 2018 that Ukraine is ready to exchange Russian soldiers caught on Donbas hosted by Russian hostages in Russia, in particular for journalist Roman Sushchenko.
The Kyiv Court of Appeal arrested the shares of Ukrainian ""daughters"" of Russian banks, VTB, Prominvestbank and Sberbank to enforce the Hague arbitration a lawsuit against the former head of PrivatBank and other Ukrainian companies that lost their assets as a result of the annexation of the Crimea.
As noted, the arrest was imposed on shares of Ukrainian subsidiaries owned by Russian state-owned banks operating in Ukraine.
Recall that the Hague Court of Arbitration ordered the Russian Federation to compensate a number of Ukrainian companies for damages for the annexation of the Crimea.
Russia was found responsible for the violation of the rights of Ukrainian investors, starting March 21, 2014, when Vladimir Putin signed a decree on the annexation of the Crimea.
The lawsuit against Russia was filed by 18 Ukrainian companies, as well as by one individual.
Earlier it became known that the national energy company Ukrenergo launched an investment dispute with Russia on the property and profits of the company lost due to the annexation of the Crimea.
Volodymyr Ruban, an ex-head of the Center for the release of captives ""Officers' Corps"", suspected of attempting terrorist attacks in the center of Kiev, continued the custody measure until the end of October.
According to Censor.NET, referring to the Espero TV, his lawyer Valentin Rybin, known for his pro-Russian views and sympathy for Donetsk terrorists, said it.
The next meeting of the suspect in preparation for the terrorist attack was held on August 30.
The Standing Committee unanimously voted and recommended the Verkhovna Rada to support the submission of the Prosecutor General.
The same dayThe Council revoked the immunity , as well as granted the detention and arrest detention of Nadiia Savchenko.
Commissioner for Human Rights Lyudmila Denisova exercises personal control over the observance of constitutional rights of Hope Savchenko.
On July 14, Savchenko again declared an eternal hunger strike through an arrest.
According to the Prosecutor General's Office, Savchenko was a member of Volodymyr Ruban, who was detained on March 8 at the KPVV ""Mayorskoye"" during an attempt to transport large quantities of weapons from the territory of the Donetsk region under the control of the Russian occupation administration.
Ruban is suspected of illicit handling of weapons and preparation of terrorist acts, including armed attacks on state officials and political leaders, including President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko, Interior Minister Arsen Avakov, former Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk and NSDC Secretary Oleksandr Turchynov.
The United Nations peacekeepers should be able to gradually control security throughout the entire Ukraine's Donbas region.
United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker told DW ahead of his visit to Kyiv on Sept., Censor.NET reports.
According to the diplomat, the mandate of a possible U.N.-led peacekeeping mission in the Donbas needs to be robust enough to actually control security throughout the contested area.
I don't have a number to throw at you, but it would have to be robust enough to be able to handle that,"" Volker said.
We have increased sanctions, we have increased our support to Ukraine, and we've done all of this together as a trans-Atlantic community, with close coordination with France and Germany, which lead the Normandy format, as well as Canada, the UK, Sweden and many others,"" he stressed.
On Sept., 2017, Russian President Putin said deployment of United Nations peacekeepers in the Donbas was quite appropriate for solving of the conflict in the region, but only along the line of contact and with the aim of protecting the OSCE mission.
On Sept., 2017, President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko delivered a speech at a meeting of the United Nations Security Council, in which he stressed the need to deploy peacekeepers in the occupied area of the Donbas.
Ukraine's representative in Humanitarian subgroup of the Tripartite contact group in Minsk talks, deputy speaker of Ukrainian parliament Iryna Herashchenko commented on Putin's statement and said the Kremlin scenarios will fail; peacekeepers must be introduced across all Russia-occupied territories.
On Jan., 2018, Volker said Russia had shown more ""openness"" to United States suggestions on a possible UN peacekeeping mission in the Donbas, but Washington and Moscow remained far from striking a deal.
The head of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine emphasized that in connection with the release of poisonous substances at the Crimean Titan plant, Russia tries to manipulate the situation with the non-supply of water by Ukraine to the peninsula.
Foreign Minister of Ukraine Pavlo Klimkin stresses that Ukraine will never sign a contract for the supply of water to the occupied Crimea, which will indicate the membership of the peninsula of Russia.
In the occupied territory, the water under the contract, which says"" Crimea, Russia, will never be delivered, ""the minister said.
Recall that in late August there was information that the chemical plant began to evaporate through harmful substances through the heat.
Border guards of Kherson detachment found excess of chemical substances in the air.
Crimean occupation authorities have announced that the Crimean Titan plant will be stopped for two weeks.
Children of preschool and school age are exported massively from the city.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko invited children from Armenian to improve themselves in Kherson region.
This is the first time that the European Parliament has called on the EU Council to oppose a Member State in order to prevent a systemic threat to the fundamental values ​​of the Union.
These values ​​are enshrined in Art. of the EU Treaty and reflected in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights include respect for democracy, equality, the rule of law and human rights.
The European Parliament also recalled that the accession of Hungary to the EU ""was a voluntary act based on a sovereign decision with broad consensus in the political spectrum,"" and stressed that any Hungarian government is obliged to eliminate the risk of serious violation of EU values.
Further proposals on the Council's decision will be directed to member states.
They will determine the existence of a risk of violation of EU values ​​in Hungary.
The council will first have to listen to the Hungarian authorities, and the European Parliament will have to give its consent.
The EU member states can also make recommendations to Hungary on countering risks.
At a later stage, the European Council, unanimously and with the permission of the European Parliament, can determine the existence in Hungary of a grave and persistent violation of democracy and fundamental rights.
This may eventually lead to suspension of voting rights in the Council. -Recall that on September 11 deputies of the European Parliament discussed the possible violation of Hungary's fundamental principles of the EU. -Prime Minister of Hungary Victor Orban called the report of the European Parliament an insult to the Hungarian nation.
