No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner without the express written consent of the publisher, except in the case of brief excerpts in critical reviews or articles.
Skyhorse Publishing books may be purchased in bulk at special discounts for sales promotion, corporate gifts, fund-raising, or educational purposes.
Skyhorse® and Skyhorse Publishing® are registered trademarks of Skyhorse Publishing, Inc.®, a Delaware corporation.
It seems that al-Qaeda, ISIS, North Koreans, Mexican “bad hombres,” and various other bogeymen were insufficient to the task of terrifying Americans.
So now the United States war machine —that vast complex of weapons manufacturers, Wall Street speculators, saber-rattling Washington politicians, armchair generals, and the media industry that thrives on boom and bang (or the “beautiful pictures of our fearsome armaments” in the unforgettable words of MSNBC’s Brian Williams)—has revived the tried and true Red Scare.
Day after day, night after night, the United States citizenry is bombarded with scare stories about the evil machinations of Vladimir Putin and his Kremlin henchmen.
How they stole our democracy and are scheming to conquer the entire NATO alliance.
How they are building a military machine and nuclear arsenal that threaten to eclipse our own.
How they are subverting the global free press with its lowratings Russia Today network and army of hackers and trolls.
How they are blocking peace in the Middle East with their machinations in Syria.
This massive anti-Russian propaganda campaign is one of the biggest fake news operations in United States history.
Ever since World War I, war has been America’s lucrative “racket,” in the mordant observation of Major General Smedley Darlington Butler, the most decorated marine of his day.
Without the constant specter of a foreign enemy, there is no American prosperity.
President Donald Trump couldn’t find the money to rebuild our collapsing infrastructure, but he could burn through $93 million to hurl fifty-nine Tomahawk missiles at a Syrian airfield to send a message that he was no Putin puppet.
Trump promised to ease growing East-West tensions by finding common ground with Moscow.
But the United States national security state—and its numerous media assets—soon convinced him of the folly of peace.
Putin is doomed to become the baddest hombre in the Trump shooting gallery.
Independent journalists and dissident leaders are constantly at risk there.
But while the Kremlin casts a shadow over Russia’s own freedom and democracy, its ability to project power and influence abroad is wildly overstated by the United States war lobby.
Russia’s economy has shrunk so much that its GDP is roughly that of Spain.
The United States military budget is bigger than that of the next seven countries combined, while Russia spends less than Saudi Arabia on defense.
Russia’s intervention in the sovereign affairs of other nations pales in comparison to the massive intrusions of the United States security juggernaut.
Over the past century, the United States military and the CIA have overthrown democratically elected governments in Guatemala, Iran, Congo, Chile, and Indonesia; assassinated, jailed, or exiled leaders in these and other countries; subverted governments and elections in even allied countries like France and Italy; and hacked the phones of friendly leaders in Germany and Brazil.
When United States covert operations prove unable to impose our will on foreign affairs, Washington puts boots on the ground, invading and occupying nations from Vietnam to Afghanistan.
Accusations of Russian interference from a country that routinely big-foots the rest of the world surely rank as some of the biggest displays of chutzpah in history.
Despite its diminished stature in recent years, Russia is the only country capable of even marginally standing in the way of Washington’s vast imperial ventures.
Therefore, it must be turned into a pariah state by the dependable media servants of the United States security complex.
Certainly not the interests of the American people, who are sick and tired of endless war and foreign intrigue and yearn for a leader who will truly put their well-beings first.
Unlike our war-obsessed media, human rights lawyer Dan Kovalik does understand that peace and diplomacy are in the best interests of the American and Russian peoples.
His book is an urgently needed counterassault against the propaganda forces that are trying to push us over a precipice that is too terrifying to even contemplate.
The hubbub relates to allegations that Vladimir Putin somehow attempted—though no one really thinks to great effect—to influence the outcome of the 2016 elections in support of his “friend” or “dupe” or “puppet,” Donald J Trump.
This harkens back to the 1962 film , The Manchurian Candidate, in which a man unwittingly becomes an assassin for the communists who have brain-washed him.
Of course, the current invocation of The Manchurian Candidate makes perfect sense given that we are now in the throes of a new, and I would argue equally dangerous, Cold War.
A curious, but I believe relevant note about The Manchurian Candidate, was that it starred none other than Frank Sinatra.
For his part, Abel, who most famously wrote “Strange Fruit” for Billie Holiday, was also persecuted during the McCarthy period and went on to adopt the two sons of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg after they were executed for alleged Soviet espionage in 1953.
It is generally-accepted today that Ethel, maybe the most emblematic victim of the McCarthy period, was certainly innocent of the charges against her, was prosecuted to put pressure on Julius to talk, and was put to death anyway.
Indeed, her two sons are still trying to pursue justice for Ethel to this day.
He went on to aggressively campaign for John F Kennedy for president, and indeed his song, “High Hopes” became Kennedy’s campaign anthem.
By the time he starred in The Manchurian Candidate, however, Sinatra had turned his back on the left, resentful of how the Kennedys had turned their back on him over his ostensible ties to the Mafia.
Sinatra would become an arch-conservative, as many from that era did, ultimately supporting Ronald Reagan for President.
The McCarthy trials effectively diminished the influence that the left, both Communist and otherwise, had on our society, and that was of course their intent.
What is shaping up to be a new McCarthy period, in which people are accused of being dupes for Russia for simply questioning the prevailing anti-Russian discourse, is obviously different from the old one, but with essentially the same intention and effect—to curb dissent, particularly in regard to United States foreign policy, which, by any rational measure, is incredibly destructive for our country and the world at large.
It is also intended to distract Americans from the real crimes that its own country is committing.
According to the United Nations, the greatest humanitarian crisis in the world today is happening in Yemen.
I doubt that you would know this from the mainstream media because they do not talk about it very much, and certainly not with the frequency with which it deserves.
Simply put, Yemen, one of the poorest nations on earth, is being brought to the brink of famine by a one-sided war which Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries are waging against the largely Shia population there.
The support for the Saudi war effort began under Obama and seems to be intensifying under Trump.
And yet there is near-silence about this conflict and the United States role in it from our mainstream press.
Instead, the press would have you spend all of your emotional energy worrying about what Vladimir Putin may be up to in Ukraine, or in Syria or, allegedly, in Trump’s White House.
At the same time, there appears to be little concern over the bizarre hold that the retrograde, repressive monarchy of Saudi Arabia has over United States foreign policy, or even that Hillary Clinton, as Secretary of State, approved a $29 billion shipment of fighters to Saudi Arabia—some of these jets are certainly being used against Yemen right now—after both Saudi Arabia and the maker of the jets made donations to the Clinton Foundation.
Thus, for arguing that maybe we should reconsider whether Russia and Vladimir Putin are truly threats to our democracy and freedom as some are arguing, I was accused by some of being a Russian “agent” or at least a “useful idiot” of the Kremlin—the latter slur deriving from a quote usually attributed to Joseph Stalin.
I expect such attacks, and worse, after this book is published, as it is now quite fashionable to go around accusing people of working in the interests of Vladimir Putin and Moscow.
For example, I received an email from Ray McGovern, a man I had never spoken with before, but who I discovered had served as an analyst for the CIA from 1963 to 1990, chaired National Intelligence Estimates in the 1980s and received the Intelligence Commendation Medal upon retirement.
McGovern is now an outspoken critic of many of the CIA’s practices, including torture, and is very skeptical of the current claims about Russia hacking.
First of all, the fact that a long-time CIA analyst tured critic thought I was on track with my message, and bothered telling me while he was on a trip half way around the world, gave me great encouragement.
Truth be told, it has been others just like Ray—others who left the CIA in disgust and became activists against the war machine—who have played probably the biggest role in helping me to view the world as I do today.
There was a veritable cottage industry of these guys writing and speaking at that time, and we couldn’t get enough.
Our interest was sparked at that time by what was a pretty big national movement to protest CIA recruitment on college campuses, and the CIA did indeed recruit at our school every year.
We thought this was particularly inappropriate at a Catholic school like ours.
I myself was particularly interested in Agee because his background was a lot like mine—he was a devout Catholic who went to Catholic schools his whole life, eventually graduating from Notre Dame in 1956.
He actually overlapped with my dad, who also went to Notre Dame and graduated shortly after Agee.
Just to give a little context here, my dad used to gleefully recount how a priest at Notre Dame would organize football players to go out and beat up Communists on campus.
This was, after all, in the 1950’s, during the McCarthy Period, when a Communist was seen lurking in every closet.
Maybe, in fact, these “Communists” were merely unionists or civil rights activists or Democrats, or others who represented the main evil Senator McCarthy was trying to wipe out—President Roosevelt’s New Deal.
In any case, whomever these poor folks were, they got a good ass-whooping.
While he joined the Company, as I assume most people do, out of a sincere belief that it was an institution necessary to protect the United States from various evils around the globe, most notably from those inspired and/or supported by the USSR, he soon became disillusioned by the evils that he and his fellow agents perpetrated.
In particular, Agee became quite upset by his being a party to the torture of people in Uruguay, some of whom, as the agents were quite aware, knew nothing and had done nothing.
Rather, they were simply guinea pigs taken off the street at random to try various torture techniques out on.
As Agee would say later, these people couldn’t even say anything to stop the torture because they had no information to give to stop it.
I don’t remember how we came into possession of it, but my friend Jon and I listened over and over to a cassette tape which contained a speech by Stockwell.
Stockwell too tells how he joined the CIA for all the right reasons and then became disillusioned by what he witnessed in Angola, where he was stationed.
At that time, the United States and South Africa were supporting the UNITA counterrevolutionary forces against the revolutionary Angolan government, which in tum was being bolstered by Cuban ground forces.
Stockwell explained how the CIA manipulated the news about the Angolan conflict.
He related that it was in fact easy to do so because the press, both gullible and lazy, was willing to publish any story they put out, no matter how outlandish.
For example, Stockwell explained how he and his CIA team submitted fake stories about one particular Cuban military unit, all of which were dutifully published in the papers.
This unit was attacked and wiped out by UNITA forces, only to then miraculously return from the dead to continue more mayhem.
He assured the listener that such CIA tales continue to be passed along as news by the media.
He also explained how he ended up deciding that it was the Cubans who were the good guys in the Angolan conflict.
Agee at that time was travelling under Cuban and Nicaraguan passports, his United States passport having been stripped from him long before.
Soon after we met Agee, he would go into self-exile in Cuba, where he would peacefully die at the age of 72.
I guess this is a long way to explain why Ray McGovern’s email message about my Russia piece meant so much to me, and also triggered long-held feelings about the evils of United States foreign policy, the lies told to make us go along with this policy, and the particular role the CIA has in both the policy and the lies.
All of this is quite relevant to the current discussion about alleged Russian hacking and the greater story being weaved about Vladimir Putin.
Of course, the character of Vladimir Putin, and I call it “the character,” or really “the caricature” of Putin that the press is feeding us, is important because he is being thrust before us as a symbol or proxy for a revived Russia, which we are being encouraged to hate and fear again, just as we did during the first Cold War.
This process of fear-mongering has been going on for some time, but is now being even further exaggerated by the Democrats, who are desperately looking for anyone but themselves to blame for their seemingly impossible loss to Donald Trump in the 2016 elections.
First of all, what immediately struck me about the story was that NPR was transparently seizing on an event which happened almost a decade ago to fan the flames of anti-Russian sentiment.
You know, one thing you can say about Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin—when he spots an opportunity, he grabs it.
I mean, here’s just a list—alleged cybermeddling in last year’s United States presidential election; sending his military into Syria, into Crimea, into Ukraine.
And it takes us to the former Soviet Republic of Georgia and a renegade province called South Ossetia, which sits right on Russia’s southern border.
This Putin opportunity came in 2008 when Georgia tried to put down South Ossetia’s drive for independence.
At least to me, the way this story was framed was so obviously meant to keep the NPR listenership wariness about Putin at a fever pitch.
Greene is obviously just trying to stack up as many of Putin’s misdeeds as he can, for example stretching Crimea and Ukraine into two conflicts when they are arguably one given that Crimea is a disputed territory between Ukraine and Russia.
The problem for people like Greene, of course, is that as bad as Putin might be, he just isn’t involved in that many conflicts beyond Russia’s borders, certainly not when compared with the US, which certainly outdoes him in this respect by leaps and bounds.
Moreover, the simplistic way in which “journalists” like Greene paint such conflicts as the 2008 Russia-Georgia conflict—with clear good guys and bad guys—simply does not fairly take into account the reality that the countries and peoples of the former Soviet Union are still suffering the growing pains of the tumultuous collapse of the USSR in 1991.
To lay this all of this on the feet of Vladimir Putin is overly simplistic, one-sided and simply bad journalism, again, if you could even call what people like David Greene do journalism.
Thus, Putin was not President at the time that Russian troops were sent into South Ossetia, and he consequently did not order this invasion.
So, just to connect the dots here, Greene pulls out an event from nearly a decade ago to try to tarnish Putin with, and it turns out that Putin wasn’t even behind this event.
And not from Fox & Friends, but really from the Fox & Friends for liberals—National Public Radio, which must be trustworthy, because they talk in a soft voice and play jazz and classical music between news segments.
Still, their apparently liberal bona fides do not prevent the good folks at NPR from cheerleading every United States intervention, threatened or ongoing; minimizing the cruelties of these interventions and over-emphasizing the misdeeds of our adversaries.
Our bombs just don’t hurt as much, apparently, because of the loving intentions behind them.
To analyze the current anti-Putin/Russia hysteria, we must do what the mainstream press will not.
First and foremost, we must honestly analyze our own role in the world.
This is more difficult than it may seem at first blush, given our seemingly unshakeable belief in the myth of “American Exceptionalism”—that is, the belief that the United States is a uniquely benign actor in the world, spreading peace and democracy wherever we go. | think when we objectively look at the US’s actions—even when compared to Russia’s over the past fifty or so years—and the reasonably foreseeable results of those actions, we shall see that this belief is wholly unwarranted.
Of course, that this is true, as I believe, would certainly not excuse any meddling by Putin in our democratic process.
My answer to this would be that the spreading of “fake news” has been much more effectively done by those in our own country (most notably the CIA itself, which is pushing the “Russia-gate” issue so hard) who are so invested in the waging of eternal war, and by the subservient press which is complicit in this.
I would also say that the “fake news” component of the Russia-bating is much more damning of us than the Russians.
Thus, if the US democratic system is so fragile and brittle that it could be impacted by the machinations of “internet trolls” (which the Senate Intelligence Committee spent a whole day talking about) or by RT News broadcasters, this says volumes about the poor state of our own democratic institutions.
And indeed, these institutions are in a poor state, and this has many reasons, none of which can be blamed on Russia, though it may make us feel better to do so.
A final, related issue before we dive in is whether, by writing this book, I am somehow apologizing for the misdeeds of Vladimir Putin.
In the end, others will have to, and I’m sure will, be the judge of that, but I would submit that what I am trying to do is not to apologize for Putin or to deny his own wrongdoings, but to explain them; to put them in some context, particularly in the context of United States conduct, which has been seen, many times quite reasonably, as hostile to Russia and its interests, and which have helped bring us to the point where our two countries now stand in relation to each other.
I think what often happens when we talk about the types of issues raised in this bbok—for example, human rights, or the rightness of military action —there is a very strong tendency to focus on the failures of others rather than of ourselves.
While this may be comforting, it is largely useless, because we have much more control over the conduct of our own country than we do over others.
In addition, it is the essence of morality to meditate on one’s own wrongdoing, to try to find ways to make up for it and to be resolved not to repeat it.
That is, as the Bible tells us, we are called to refrain from picking a speck from our brother’s or sister’s eye when we have a plank in our own.
In that spirit, this book focuses on the sizeable plank in our own eye with the hope that we can pull it out ourselves.
Such thoughts gave me a very warm feeling of comfort and moral superiority.
Of course, what this meant was praying for Russia to be “converted” from its then-current state as the Communist Soviet Union to some type of “free,” “democratic” and free-market nation, like the United States.
If this conversion took place, I certainly believed, the world would find itself at peace, and free from the threat of a nuclear holocaust which I was otherwise certain was forthcoming.
As I grew older, I came to find that life and geo-politics were much more complicated than originally thought.
It began to gnaw at me that the United States was arming and training quite repressive military forces, in the case of El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, against the peoples of much weaker and poorer countries than ourselves.
My interest in Central America began in the fall of 1979, when two new students entered my small, and hitherto all-white middle school of St.
Andrew’s in Milford, Ohio, about a 30-minute drive to downtown Cincinnati.
Juan and Carlos were huge kids, much taller and heavier than any other student at the school.
Indeed, Juan ended up playing center for our middle school’s basketball team.
As anyone who has visited Nicaragua would tell you, the large size of these two boys was quite unusual for a country which, especially back then, was so poor and undernourished.
Now, even I knew that the leader toppled in Nicaragua was named Somoza—Anastasio Somoza.
However, it is certainly possible that Juan and Carlos had taken on different, and quite common, names to hide their notorious identity.
This seems to me even today to be far-fetched, and my research has not borne fruit on this topic.
In any case, the presence of these ostensible Somocistas at my school triggered a life-long curiosity about Central America.
Then, one evening at the age of 12, I was sitting alone in my parents’ room with their tiny TV, watching one of my favorite shows—60 Minutes.
On this particular night, 60 Minutes focused on the rape and murder of four Catholic Church women in El Salvador and on the subsequent murder of the Salvadoran Catholic Archbishop, Oscar Romero.
Shockingly, the gist of this segment was that those responsible for these crimes were not in fact the left-wing guerillas in El Salvador the United States was fighting, but rather, rightwing forces, known as “death squads,” aligned with the government and military which the United States was funding and arming.
There must have been some sort of mistake or accident, I thought, as I squirmed at this revelation.
This was quite troubling to me, though I tried to slough it off, excusing our possible excesses as an unfortunate and accidental consequence of our otherwise righteous fight against Communism.
And, when I studied the case of El Salvador further, as I did at that time for a school paper, my doubts only grew.
From my reading of history, the United States appeared to be on the wrong side of every conflict in El Salvador dating back to 1932—-supporting the few rich landowners over the vast poor who were struggling for what seemed to be a fair share of the land and resources.
The Genocidal Democracy, by Father Javier Giraldo , the violence inflicted against the Salvadoran population by the army trained and funded by the United States was “religious” in nature—many of us would say, though he does not, satanic—but was hardly ever covered in the United States press.
Daniel Santiago, a priest working in El Salvador, reported in 1990 the story of a peasant woman who returned home one day to find her mother, sister and three children sitting around the table, the decapitated head of each person placed on the table in front of the body, the hands arranged on top ‘as if each body was stroking its own head’ The assassins, from the Salvadoran National Guard, had found it hard to keep the head of an 18-month-old baby in place, so they nailed the hands to it.
A large plastic bowl filled with blood stood in the center of the table.
Two years earlier, the Salvadoran human rights group that continued to function despite the assassination of its founders and directors reported that 13 bodies had been found in the preceding two weeks, most showing signs of torture, including two women who had been hanged from a tree by their hair, their breasts cut off and their faces painted red.
Such macabre scenes, which rarely reached the mainstream in the United States, are designed for intimidation.
Father Santiago writes that “People are not just killed by death squads in El Salvador—they are decapitated and then their heads are placed on pikes and used to dot the landscape.
Men are not just disemboweled by Salvadoran Treasury Police; their severed genitalia are stuffed in their mouths.
Salvadoran women are not just raped by the national guard; their wombs are cut from the bodies and used to cover their faces.
When confronted with the fact that my own government was behind such horrors, my response was muddled.
I concluded that though possibly mistaken in its historical support for those who oppressed the poor in El Salvador, the United States nonetheless had to stay the course against the greatest evil in the world—the Communist menace which, as I recognized, was awakened in El Salvador as a direct consequence of the US’s prior bad policies.
My complete and final break with my once-held belief in the inherent goodness of American foreign policy came with the realities I learned about the war in another Central American country—Nicaragua.
During my freshman year of College, still under the sway of my anti-Communist ideology, I had very mixed views about Nicaragua.
On the one hand, I understood that the Contras were filled with ex-members of the brutal Somoza regime, and that, true to their roots, they were gross human rights abusers.
At the same time, I was skeptical of the Sandinistas for what I was told was their strong ties to the Soviet Union and its “client state,’ Cuba, and for what I was led to believe was its own human rights abuses.
This was an ad placed by the Nicaragua Network which hosted regular delegations to Nicaragua.
I thought to myself that joining such a trip was what I needed to deal with my ambivalence over Nicaragua.
Reading opposing narratives of the Nicaraguan experience was simply not helping to resolve the conflict I was having within me over the war in Central America as well as the greater question of the real role of the United States in the world.
Professor Pat Donnelly, Chair of the Sociology Department, gently warned me before my trip that the enthusiasm which was motivating my adventure, though admirable in some ways, was also potentially dangerous.
He strongly suggested that my enthusiasm bordered on gullibility (which was probably true to some extent) and cautioned me to be careful lest I fall under the sway of the Sandinistas too easily.
It is said of the ground-breaking rock and roll band The Velvet Underground that while they only sold 25,000 albums in their career, everyone who bought an album started their own band as a result.
A similar thing can be said of the relatively few who travelled to Nicaragua during the 1980s—they would carry the impression of Nicaragua and the revolution for the rest of their lives and would be life-long activists against United States intervention abroad.
For a guy whose only foreign trip was to the Canadian-side of Niagara Falls, Nicaragua was a jarring experience.
The first night my delegation of about 12 landed in Managua, there was a black-out in the part of town where we were staying.
This was a part of the daily rolling blackouts which were a consequence of the Contra war.
While the Contras never controlled one centimeter in Nicaragua, and never gained anything but the most marginal support amongst the population, they were able to succeed at their chief mission—they wreaked havoc in Nicaragua, completely undermining the economy and sewing seeds of fear among the population.
Pretty early on into the war on Vietnam, the United States determined that it could not “win” the war by vanquishing the liberation forces, so it instead adopted a program through which the United States would bomb Vietnam back to the Stone Age, leaving the liberation forces with a pile of rubble to govern over.
Similarly, the United States determined that in Nicaragua, the only realistic option was that of terrorism.
The goal was not to overthrow the Sandinistas—they were simply too popular and too organized to allow for that.
Instead, the United States would try to turn Nicaragua into an economic and social basket case—as an example of what other would-be revolutionaries in the region and around the world had to look forward to should they prevail.
Speaking to us in a small restaurant by candle-light, the Nicaragua Network representative based in Managua gave us an introduction to our journey.
She explained to us that we would be travelling by bus to Ocotal, a small town on the border with Honduras.
While this was technically a “war zone,” the Sandinistas had things well in hand.
She gave us a bit of background on the revolution and what the Sandinistas were trying to accomplish—including battling the huge illiteracy problem they inherited from the Somoza years, as well as bringing health care and a better standard of living to the remotest parts of the country.
She explained how, in trying to accomplish these goals, the Sandinistas had made mistakes.
For example, they had tried to bring development to the Mosquito coast of Nicaragua, inhabited by Englishspeaking members of the Mosquito Indian tribe, where they met resistance by the residents who believed that they were unduly interfering with their region and culture.
The Sandinistas reacted in a heavy-handed way, which ended up backfiring.
A number of those in the region ended up supporting the Contras in reaction, though the Contras proved to be so violent and abusive that much of this support had, by then, dissipated.
Tomas was infamous in the United States at that time, labeled as enemy number one by President Reagan who portrayed him as a hard-line Marxist-Leninist who would usher Communist reign into Central America if not stopped.
You could say that Tomas served the same role, though on a smaller scale, as Putin does today—as the bogeyman under the bed we needed to be afraid of.
In truth, he was a communist, but a Christian as well, and he was also one of the founding members of the Sandinistas back in 1962, earning his credentials as a life-long fighter against the Somoza dictatorship which the United States supported until the bitter end.
Tomas was also, as I learned, “the most tortured man alive” according to Amnesty International.
During the Somoza years, Tomas had been caught and captured, along with his wife, by the notorious National Guard.
As they were wont to do, either as National Guardsmen or as their later incarnation as the Contras, the soldiers raped and killed Tomas’s wife in front of his eyes.
They then turned to physically torturing Tomas himself, castrating him in the end.
However, they made the mistake of leaving Tomas, who vowed vengeance against these soldiers, alive.
Tomas not only survived, he went on to help topple the Somoza regime in 1979.
Shortly after the “triumph” over Somoza, Tomas learned that some of his torturers had been captured and were in prison.
Tomas Borge’s Theology of Life: “fter having been brutally tortured as a prisoner, after having a hood placed over my head for nine months, after having been handcuffed for seven months, I remember that when we captured these torturers I told them: ‘The hour of my revenge has come: we will not do you even the slightest harm.
Borge then approached the man and hugged him, telling him that, for his punishment for torturing not only he and his family, but many of his fellow Nicaraguans, he was to be let free—free to see the Nicaraguans he had kept down for so many years learn to read and write and prosper.
With tears streaming down his face, as well as that of the prisoner, Borge swung the gate of the cell open and ushered the man to walk out free into the streets.
It was this act of forgiveness and humanity by the “hardliner” Tomas Borge which characterized the Sandinista revolution.
The Sandinistas, having studied and learned from the lessons and mistakes of the Soviet, Chinese and Cuban revolutions, and being motivated by the radical Christianity of Liberation Theology, were resolved to be different.
Rather, one of the first acts of the Sandinistas was to abolish the death penalty altogether.
The United States would take advantage of the decency and benevolence of the Sandinistas to undermine them.
Right after the fall of the Somoza dictatorship, then-President Jimmy Carter airlifted hundreds of National Guardsmen to Honduras.
These would later be organized by the CIA under Reagan as the Contras, a terrorist organization which would plague Nicaragua for years to come.
While I was in Octotal, a young man in the town was ambushed and murdered by the Contras, and my delegation was invited to the funeral.
I stood by the father of the slain man near his grave, and as we put our arms around each other, I apologized for his son’s death, which was just as surely the fault of my country as anyone’s.
I knew then that I would never think of the world quite in the same way again.
The few Sandinsta soldiers I did see were armed with guitars as they serenated the community from a balcony in the town square.
I also recall after seeing him, I asked a Nicaraguan in a community meeting we attended in Ocotal, “Aren’t you afraid of the Cubans taking over Nicaragua; of the ‘Cubanization’ of Nicaragua,” as Reagan termed it.
This question was not only prompted by my encounter with the Cuban soldier but also what I had been taught by my dad and my government to fear in Nicaragua.
They don’t try to influence our country; they just give us aid that we otherwise would not have.
This made a huge impression on me, and I began to wonder if in fact I had been hoodwinked about the true nature of my country’s role in the world.
And, indeed, the much-maligned Cuba continues to offer its “brotherhood” throughout the world, providing medical assistance to over 70 countries.
As the whole nation watched, the repressive National Guard—a force created by the United States to keep the Somoza dictatorship in power—surrounded the hideout of a group of top-level Sandinista insurgents, including the legendary Comandante Julio Buitrago.
We saw the barrel of Julio’s submachine gun at the balcony window, and the smoke of the gun bursts when he fired back.
Then he was at the basement window, or at another window on the first floor, or at the door of the second floor that opened onto the street.
Then suddenly Julio wasn’t anywhere to be seen, and the Guard wasn’t moving, and nobody was firing.
Our eyes practically popped out of our heads when the tank shattered the wall, exploding it to pieces.
Nobody answered from inside, and when the Guardsmen got really close, Julio started shooting.
And the Guardsmen turned tail again, and the tank opened fire again, and it was the same thing all over.
And people without a set saw it too, because Somoza was stupid enough to keep showing it for several days on television.
They saw the Guardsmen shaking in their boots; they heard them screaming through megaphones for Julio to surrender.
It was such a heroic act, a true example of David versus Goliath, that helped to galvanize the Nicaraguan people against the Somoza dictatorship —a dictatorship which the United States had installed and supported even beyond the dictatorship’s end.
The David/Goliath myth is maybe one of the most over-used and misused myths, especially by the United States.
I cannot emphasize too much how the US, despite its many times claiming to be a David fighting in the face of Goliath, has, with very few and quite remote exceptions, never in fact been, or even supported, the David in biblical battles.
Rather, as in the case of Nicaragua, it was clear to me that the US, which always portrays itself as the underdog in a world of bullies set upon its destruction, has been the Goliath trying to crush David by sheer, overpowering violence.
Sometimes the United States is the Goliath wielding the club, and other times, it is supporting mini-Goliaths, like Somoza, in attempting to vanquish the Davids.
In Nicaragua, David, in the form of everyday people, sometimes wielding only bricks and stones against National Guardsmen armed by the United States with machine guns and tanks and airplanes, was the victor.
And the United States simply could not tolerate such a result—thus, its support of the murderous Contras.
Of course, the strong implication being that the Soviet Union, which was supporting the liberation struggles we were trying to suppress, was on the right side.
A speech that I heard Hugo Chavez give at a meeting in Caracas in July of 2010 comes to mind.
I would soon come to realize that the Cold War, at least from the vantage point of the US, had little to do with fighting “Communism,” and more to do with making the world safe for corporate plunder.
And, the United States would do so all in the name of fighting communism and protecting democracy.
One bit of evidence that the casus belli of the Cold War was mere pretext was that the United States was up to the very same type of Third World interventions even before Russia’s 1917 Revolution.
As Major Smedley Butler, the commander of a Marine unit landing in Nicaragua in 1909 and 1912, opined after his years of United States military service, I spent years being a high class muscle man for big business, for Wall Street and the bankers.
I helped purify Nicaragua for the international banking house of Brown Brothers in 1902-1912.
I brought light to the Dominican Republic for American sugar interests in 1916.
I helped make Haiti and Cuba a decent place for National City boys to collect revenue in.
I helped in the rape of a half a dozen Central American republics for the benefit of Wall Street.
This struggle to make the world safe for American business pre-dated communism and has continued well after it—the “enemies” justifying this struggle have shifted and changed, but the goal has always remained constant.
John Perkins, in his book Confessions of An Economic Hit Man, would indeed reiterate almost an identical story to Smedley Butler’s in his modern recounting of his years working for the consulting firm of Chas T Main, acting jointly with the National Security Agency.
He explains how he and other Economic Hit Men helped pave the way for corporate penetration of the Third World through all sorts of chicanery, including financial manipulation, rigged elections, sexual extortion and even murder.
As Perkins relates, if such tactics failed, it was then up to the “jackals” of the CIA to come in and actually forcibly overthrow the target government.
I began to seriously question which side I should be rooting for in the Cold War struggle.
I was impressed with the Soviet support of Nicaragua, for example its sending huge ships of humanitarian aid and then leaving the ships as well for the Nicaraguans.
Of course, the Soviet support of Nicaragua would come at a huge price, for it would be just the justification the United States needed to support a counter-revolutionary war there.
And, indeed, Fidel Castro had warned Daniel Ortega of just this problem shortly after the Sandinistas took power.
He told Ortega, from his own very difficult experience, not to cozy up too close to the Soviets.
While Ortega tried at first, it became impossible at some point, for, as was the case in Vietnam, the United States began to destabilize Nicaragua—mining its harbors, engaging in targeted assassinations, and cutting it off internationally—even before Nicaragua turned to the Soviets for help.
And the United States continued such destabilization efforts well after the Soviets cared anymore about such far-flung nations.
A classic case of this was Vietnam which, as I detail further below, would have gladly partnered with the United States in lieu of the Soviet Union to throw off French Colonialism, but was unpleasantly surprised when the US, true to MLK’s words, intervened on the side of the French, and then took over for the French, to prevent Vietnamese independence.
In the end, the Contras managed to do much damage to the Nicaraguan people, with around 50,000 Nicaraguans killed during the Contra war (out of a population then of less than 3 million), along with much civilian infrastructure—which the Contras specifically targeted—destroyed.
I don’t mean to abuse you with verbal violence, but you have to understand what your government and its agents are doing.
With the children forced to watch they castrate the father, they peel the skin off his face, they put a grenade in his mouth and pull the pin.
With the children forced to watch they gang-rape the mother, and slash her breasts off.
Reagan was even willing—after Congress pulled the plug on funding to the Contras through passage of the Boland Amendment in 1982, and then again in 1984, based upon concerns over the Contras’ horrible human rights practices—to continue funding them illegally.
His Administration hatched the brilliant plan of selling arms to Iran in return for cash which could then be used to fund the Contras.
This was a particularly cynical move given that Reagan claimed Iran was a terrorist state and a threat to national security.
Moreover, during the period in which this exchange took place, Iran was at war with our ally Iraq, under Saddam Hussein, whom we were also arming.
In other words, the United States ended up arming both sides of a brutal armed conflict for the purpose of supplying arms for another brutal armed conflict in Central America.
Pursuant to this Doctrine, the USSR took the position that it had the prerogative to intervene militarily in any Communist bloc country in order to keep the government in power, and consequently, to preserve the security of the Warsaw Pact countries as well as the Soviet Union.
This Doctrine was most famously put into action in 1968, when Brezhnev sent troops into Czechoslovakia to put down the reform government there and to nip the “Prague Spring” in the bud.
Brezhnev feared that if this sentiment spread, the whole East Bloc might fall.
In the end, the Soviet invasion of 1968 probably did more to quicken the end of the East Bloc than it did to prevent it.
Given that I am Slovak and happened to be born in 1968, these events were always of great interest to me.
In the end, Poland, Hungary and East Germany peacefully left the Soviet orbit entirely by 1989, with Gorbachev making no move to keep them in.
In light of the fact that the Soviet Union would not even intervene to protect its interests in Eastern Europe, it was obvious that they would not do so in Central America either.
Therefore, the whole basis for the Contra War— fighting international Soviet aggression—seemed to be just a mere pretext for a cruel policy of keeping a poor country from pursuing its own path to liberation and development.
I should note that my feelings about the Nicaraguan conflict have now been validated, as the Sandinistas whom we were fighting are now in power, and we get along with them just fine.
The US, believing that international law is only for the weak and not for great countries like itself, did not even deign to show up to defend itself.
The ICJ therefore proceeded with a hearing and rendered a judgment against the United States in absentia, finding that the United States had engaged in an unlawful act of aggression against Nicaragua, without any valid claim to self-defense or any other proper justification.
The ICJ therefore found the United States in violation of international law, including its bi-lateral treaty obligations with Nicaragua itself.
Soon after the judgment against it, the United States withdrew from the jurisdiction of the ICJ altogether, making it clear to the world that while it would enforce its own version of justice throughout the world, and violently when it decided to do so, it would not be subject to any form of justice itself.
While it may not seem so at first blush, the Nicaraguan Contra War is very relevant to many aspects of the current discussion of the Russian hacking claims, which has now blossomed into a full-blown scandal.
First of all, the Contra War demonstrated how much United States government officials—particularly in the CIA, which is one of the chief protagonists in the current “Russia-gate” saga—are willing to debase themselves, to lie and to undermine the security and well-being of American citizens, to pursue their own agenda.
In the case of the Contra War, this agenda was greatly motivated by the old Cold War, while the current claims about Russian hacking are motivated by the new Cold War.
And so, in the case of the old Contra War, what we have known for a long time is that, to support terrorists in order to undermine a tiny, poor country in Central America, the United States government was willing not only to illegally sell weapons to Iran, but was also willing to play a role in selling drugs to our fellow citizens, particularly poor and Black citizens.
Many will remember—and a recent Hollywood movie called Kill The Messenger, made by and starring everyone’s least favorite Avenger, Jeremy Renner, reminds us—that this Contra cocaine scandal was most famously brought to light by the very brave journalist Garry Webb in his 1996 series, Dark Alliance.
However, as Greg Grandin points out, Webb was not the first person to reveal these allegations.
Earlier, in the 1980s, Robert Parry and Brian Berger reported on the story for the AP, and the allegations were then picked up by then-freshman Senator John Kerry, who in 1988 released an “extensively documented committee report” which demonstrated the truthfulness of these allegations.
This is a relevant part of the story as well, for the new Cold War—or Red Scare —and the Russian hacking story that is a small part of it, is being pushed hard, and nearly unanimously, by the mainstream press, which, for reasons that I do not fully grasp, is heavily invested in it.
Vladimir Putin is a demon; Russia is a rising giant set out to dominate the globe; Hillary Clinton lost the election because of Putin; and the US—the eternal victim of Russia —is just doing its level best to spread freedom and democracy around the world despite the best efforts of countries like Russia to stop it.
But again, like the Contra cocaine story, the truth has been so submerged in lies that it is hard for it to see the light of day.
And, as in the greater Nicaraguan Contra story, it is Russia that is again assigned its typecast role as the bad guy in this story, and the foil on whom we can feel free to blame all of our collective failings.
By raising the specter of Russia and the new Cold War, the government and media are tapping into deep-seated feelings that were hammered into us during the first Cold War, and that is why it is so easy to get people on board the latest Russia-baiting campaign.
I came to the understanding at a pretty young age that the old Cold War fears and hatred allowed the United States to get away with the worst of crimes.
Thus, after WWII, the United States decided that, in order to gain advantage in its struggle against the Soviet Union and the East Block, it would partner with the most unsavory forces in the world—tright-wing dictatorships, terrorist groups, and even neo-Nazis.
And, of course, the United States courted the possibility of nuclear conflagration in this struggle as well, continuing to press forward with planning and building the capacity to launch a nuclear first strike against the USSR while still being able to “win” the war.
Reagan’s “Star Wars” program—the idea for which apparently came from the Death Star in the Star Wars films—was greatly feared as, in fact, a means to have such first strike capability.
This program, which was developed by Edward Teller, the father of the hydrogen bomb and one of the inspirations for Stanley Kubrick’s Dr.
Of course, even if such a project worked, the United States would still suffer great casualties.
But, as a recent article on recently-declassified documents shows, United States officials were willing to take this risk.
The current demonization of Russia under Vladimir Putin, which has now broken out into a revived Cold War, is again putting the United States and the world at equally great risk.
As was widely reported earlier this year, the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists moved the “Doomsday Clock,” the symbol created in 1947 to illustrate the danger of nuclear annihilation, ahead to two-and-a-half minutes to midnight.
Given the high stakes implicated by the new Cold War, and the subsidiary Russian hacking story, some rational thought on these issues, which I at least hope to give here, is certainly in order.
Even more importantly, Russia is a much-weakened nation postSoviet collapse, and, as I shall detail more below, the US, particularly under the Clinton Administration, did much to help weaken it.
As Wood explains, “n terms of military might, economic weight and ideological reach, Russia is no match for any of the larger NATO member States,” with a GDP still smaller than Portugal’s and a military budget 8% of NATO’s.
For his part, Dmitri Trenin explains in his must-read Should We Fear Russia , Russia has neither the resources nor will to re-create its former empire or to militarily challenge NATO member states.
Indeed, he mocks the US’s fear of Russia, stating, quite correctly, t is truly an irony of history that the United States should be overtly challenged by a party such as today’s Russia—a country whose GDP is a small fraction of America’s, whose share in global trade is a mere 1 percent, and even whose defense budget is a tenth of the Pentagon’s.
As for the smallness of Russia’s military budget compared to that of the US, I note that, as I write this book, the mere increase in the annual military budget that Trump is proposing is equal to over 80% of Russia’s total annual military budget.
In a recent interview in Counterpunch, Noam Chomsky echoes such sentiments, saying that “most of the world is collapsing in laughter” at the very notion that Russia could have effectively intervened in the US’s elections.
However, I believe history shows that Russia is correct in opposing the US’s attempt at a unipolar world, in which the United States is able, and quite willing, to run wild on all sorts of military adventures which are harmful both to the US and the world at large.
And indeed, my view is very much in line with the rest of the world, which, according to a recent poll of 66,000 people in 65 countries, believes the United States is by far the greatest threat to world peace, with “just under a quarter nam Uncle Sam as the greatest threat to world peace.
Indeed, I heard Keith Richards once take credit for helping bring down the Berlin Wall, and he was probably not too far off on that point.
Russia simply has no analogous cultural influence in the West, though, of course, this doesn’t stop some United States pundits from trying to claim that it does.
It’s a way of twisting a narrative or questioning a narrative that puts the United States at a disadvantage on an important issue.
There is in fact nothing “subtle” or “nuanced” about this, and I truly doubt that RT has much real influence in the United States as a consequence.
While Lansing tried to claim that the United States is somehow being outgunned because it is not funding the VOA anywhere near the level at which the Russians are financing RT, it is this type of claim which is in fact pure propaganda.
I recall an apt quote I heard one time from someone from who had been an activist in the Polish Solidarity movement of the 1980s.
He was asked, after Solidarity was successful in ousting the Communist government there, how they were able to hold together for so many years and finally prevail given the fact that the press had been so tightly controlled by the state.
His response was that this was precisely how they were able to succeed.
They did not believe what the press was saying BECAUSE it was state-run, so they relied on communications between themselves to know what was really happening.
They also continue to stir up fear and distrust of countries like Russia and China.
We don’t need an official government voice or organ to do that when we have outlets like these that will do it for free, and do it much better precisely because they pose as news outlets independent of the government.
Finally, while Russia, as the Soviet Union, did wield sizable political and ideological influence in the world for some time, due to the appeal of its socialist message as well as its critical role in winning WWII, Russia is no longer socialist and the memory of its role in WWII has greatly subsided.
However, it was the USSR’s socialist system and message that the United States claimed to despise and to be fighting against during the first Cold War.
And that is the reason the United States has had to focus so much on the personality of Vladimir Putin, imbuing him with a level of power, reach and craziness that he just doesn’t have.
And so the hand-wringing continues over a perceived foe whose bite is certainly much less than its bark.
Rather, I wring my hands over my own country, which seems more out of control and dangerous than any other in the world, and which is tapping into old Cold War fears to justify its permanent war footing.
Possibly, if we saw ourselves as the rest of the world does, we would stop being taken in by another manufactured scare story designed to manipulate us, and we’d actually have a chance of making much needed change in our own country.
He indeed mocks the very idea, which certainly would be a poor tactic if he wanted to convince others to go along with a project of reconstruction.
The current chaos reigning in the Ukraine, which I shall detail later, would certainly preclude that, in any case.
This brings us to the first part of this quote, which I find more interesting —as I write this book during the Centennial year of the Russian Revolution —and frankly more persuasive.
I certainly endorse the view that the passing of the Soviet Union was a sad event.
I was sad when it was clear, in August of 1991, that the Soviet Union was going away, and I grieve its passing still.
First of all, while we are currently being urged to fear a return of the Iron Curtain, many of those who lived in the USSR, and even in many of the Soviet-dominated East Bloc nations stretching from East Germany to the Russian frontier, really don’t share our fear.
Indeed, a recent poll showed that a majority of Russians view the fall of the USSR negatively, and that an even stronger majority dream of its restoration.
Similarly, in Hungary, Bulgaria, the former Yugoslavia and even in the former East Germany, the majority of the people pine for the good old days of communism.
While at the time the demise of socialism in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe was proclaimed as a great victory for humanity, not least by leftist intellectuals in the United States, two decades later there’s little to celebrate.
The dismantling of socialism has, in a word, been a catastrophe, a great swindle that has not only delivered none of what it promised, but has wreaked irreparable harm, not only in the former socialist countries, but throughout the Western world, as well.
Countless millions have been plunged deep into poverty, imperialism has been given a free hand, and wages and benefits in the West have bowed under the pressure of intensified competition for jobs and industry unleashed by a flood of jobless from the former socialist countries, where joblessness once, rightly, was considered an obscenity.
The collapse of the Soviet Union was the worst thing that ever happened to the United States.
The two main consequences of the Soviet collapse have been devastating.
One consequence was the rise of the neoconservative hubris of United States world hegemony, which has resulted in 14 years of wars that have cost $6 trillion.
The truth is that many Western countries reacted to the Russian Revolution, and the gains that workers had in the Soviet Union in terms of social benefits, by feeling compelled to grant their own workers some of these concessions.
Once the Soviet Union was gone, these governments no longer felt such pressure.
In our own country, it was Democrat Bill Clinton, elected just after the Soviet collapse, who quickly destroyed “welfare as we know it,” even though it was the Democrats who had created the modern welfare system which had helped lift millions out of poverty.
Clinton ended the entitlement to cash benefits which the poor had been given by prior legislation and replaced it with legislation that put a 5-year lifetime federal limit on cash aid to the poor and allowed states to set even shorter limits.
Clinton’s “reforms” have ended up knocking around 10 million people off the welfare rolls, many of them children, and have been particularly disastrous for the poor during economic crises such as the 2008 Great Recession.
As Roberts alludes to, Clinton would also take advantage of the disappearance of the Socialist Bloc to enter into horrible trade deals—for example, the infamous NAFTA of 1994 and the PNTR agreement with China in 2000—which allowed major capital flight away from the United States and therefore a massive loss of jobs in this country, while also creating a general downward pressure on wages world-wide.
Meanwhile, this process had the effect of depressing wages in the US—by 20% for 2/3 of the displaced manufacturing workers.
And, for its part, Mexico suffered greatly from the agricultural provisions of NAFTA, which allowed the United States to dump cheap food into Mexico, thereby destroying the livelihoods of 2 million small farmers, who were forced to move to the cities and compete for low-paying, dangerous jobs, or to migrate to the United States altogether.
While the US’s shining examples of NAFTA are hollowed-out cities like Detroit, the city which was to be Mexico’s model NAFTA city—Ciudad Juarez— became famous for crime rates at war zone levels and rampant “femicide” in which hundreds of women and young girls were raped and murdered.
Hillary Clinton, who was not only associated with Bill Clinton’s policies by name and marriage, but also aggressively lobbied for NAFTA herself, simply had no credible position on this issue.
This did not go down so well, especially in places like the former mining communities of Appalachia, which have suffered so much under neo-liberalism, and which feel alienated by a culture that seems to be laughing at them and their plight.
It is a telling fact that the welfare system which was created in the Kennedy/Johnson years—the very one dismantled by Bill Clinton—was created in response to a book by socialist Michael Harrington entitled, “The Other America,” that detailed the suffering of the Appalachian poor.
The left, which at one time thought about issues of class and poverty, actually cared about these people once, but seemingly no more.
Trump, on the other hand, capturing the desperate spirit of large swaths of de-industrialized America, was able to take great advantage of this issue, and most likely won the key swing states of Ohio, Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania as a consequence of this.
While I have no doubt that these voters will be greatly disappointed by the actual policies of Trump, any autopsy of the Clinton loss has to take this reality into account, rather than wasting time pointing fingers at Vladimir Putin.
Meanwhile, as Paul Craig Roberts touches upon, the counterweight to United States foreign policy initiatives disappeared with the collapse of the USSR, and this was not good in many ways.
As just one example, history shows that the US, though trying to claim otherwise now, supported and protected apartheid in South Africa for decades—including, of course, during some of the period of the US’s own apartheid system—while the USSR consistently opposed this system, both diplomatically and eventually militarily.
As for the military effort, the Soviet Union supported the efforts of the Cubans in Angola against counter-revolutionaries in that country, who were being backed both by the United States and Apartheid South Africa, with the Cubans eventually confronting and routing the South African military in the legendary battle of Cuito Cuanavale.
Finally, there were intangible benefits that “real existing socialism” brought with it.
The citizens of the USSR and former East Bloc felt a much closer kinship with one another, and, if you’ll forgive me, comradeship, than they do now.
In the end, while the Russian Revolution and the USSR certainly fell short on many of the goals they had promised, and while they were marked by periods of great repression which undermined the project they claimed to be building, they delivered on many of their promises, and against great odds.
And, they helped force a rise in the standard of living of all working people, even in the West, in the process.
In any case, the goals of the Russian Revolution—equality, worker control of the economy, universal health care and social security—were laudable ones, even if not fully realized.
And it was sad when the people of the USSR seemed to have given up on these goals, only to trade them in for the handful of magic beans that the capitalists offered them.
One of the reasons that the West continues to dance on the grave of the Soviet Union, and to emphasize the worst parts of that society and downplay its achievements, is to make sure that, as the world-wide economy worsens, and as the suffering of working people around the world deepens, they don’t get any notions in their head to organize some new socialist revolution with such ideals.
Even when the United States seemed to realize its chief goal of the USSR’s demise, this was not enough.
Instead, it decided to force the worst economic policies down the throats of Russia, making the transition to capitalism certainly much worse than it had to be; to encircle it with troops and military bases even after promising not to; and to insist that it take this awful medicine with a smile.
And now, to add insult to injury, we angrily begrudge the Russian people every attempt their country makes to stand on its feet again and to reclaim some of its former self-esteem, and maybe even a little of its past glory.
Now that we appear to own the whole world, we resent the Russians (and Chinese too) for striving for security and say-so in the little slice of the world they live in.
I suspect that a lot of the anti-Russian sentiment in this country is motivated by such sentiments, and I simply cannot jump on that bandwagon.
Every other country, especially adversaries like Russia, are motivated by the worst and most selfish motives, the philosophy goes, and therefore are inherently more dangerous than the United States The truth is, however, that “American Exceptionalism” is a false religion and is not borne out by even a cursory examination of United States history, particularly post-WWII, and even compared with Russia for the past half a century.
Indeed, President Trump, much to the chagrin of many, especially members of the liberal establishment, dared to touch upon this fact when he queried, in response to the suggestion by Bill O’ Reilly on Fox News Sunday that Putin is a killer, “There are a lot of killers.
The mainstream press could not believe that Trump would have the temerity—especially on our most hallowed of days }— to stray so far from the required script for American presidents.
However, what Trump said in response to O’Reilly’s statement was undeniably true.
Let’s start with the easier premise—that the United States has its own killers.
A good place to begin is with the only President we have ever had (with the possible exception of Lincoln) who is also apparently viewed as a saint by many, and that is Barack Obama.
Those who now believe in the holiness of Obama—who himself deported 2. million people ** with barely a whisper of protest from anyone—simply were not paying attention.
In addition to being the Deporter-In-Chief, Obama was also a killer, and an avowed one at that.
I think it is fair to say that Obama was also the Bomber-In-Chief, greatly expanding the US’s heroic campaign of bombing poor villagers safely from above.
Indeed, during Obama’s first weekend in office, he got busy killing people, ordering two drone strikes on two villages in Pakistan which killed nearly 20 innocents, including women and children.
Meeting with one of my liberal lawyer friends after this massacre, I remarked how Obama killed more people than Charles Manson before his first full week in office.
Of course, what she meant was that my statement was “harsh”—not that Obama’s wanton murder was harsh.
This just illustrates how inured we have become in this country to the horrible crimes of state, especially if we happen to like the person occupying the highest office at the time.
All told, Obama’s bombing spree greatly exceeded that of George W Bush.
This means that every day last year, the United States military blasted combatants or civilians overseas with 72 bombs; that’s three bombs every hour, 24 hours a day.
While most of these air attacks were in Syria and Iraq, United States bombs also rained down on people in Afghanistan, Libya, Yemen, Somalia and Pakistan.
As people rightly protest Trump’s attempts to ban immigrants from six to seven Muslim nations—and, by the way, I have participated in such protests —it is worth recalling the near-silence which greeted Obama’s manic bombing of seven Muslim nations.
Recall that Obama even turned these bombings into a fun weekly ritual on Tuesdays—dubbed something like “Terror Tuesdays” apparently because that’s when Obama got to inflict terror on others—in which Obama would personally order drone attacks upon unsuspecting people.
I say simply “people,” because Obama did not only target militants, but indeed all males of a certain age in certain regions of the world.
Literally, this was a case of killing first and asking questions later, and this was a method that even George W Bush refused to embrace.
In addition, Obama became well-known for his “signature strike” in which he would target areas for drone attack based upon “suspicious activity” there without even knowing the identity of the individuals there.
Such attacks clearly violated the Geneva Conventions which requires warring states to take all necessary measures to protect civilian non-combatants, and certainly made Obama a war criminal many times over.
Moreover, Obama’s policy of treating every male over a certain age in some areas as legitimate military targets may even have amounted to genocide, at least as judged by another event which is considered genocide and which was used as a justification for NATO’s seventy-eight-day bombing of Serbia.
Indeed, one study showed that 90% of the victims of drone strikes in Afghanistan were not militants at all or even the intended target of the attack, and that this awful rate was probably even greater in Yemen and Somalia.
No valid reason has ever been given for the second drone strike which killed a child.
What we do know is that whatever numbers the Administration gave for civilians killed were way too low.
Trump is also greatly increasing ground forces in Syria, from “a couple hundred to at least 1,000” at the time of this writing.
And I agree wholeheartedly with Gessen’s assertion that “the Russia card is not just bad politics, it is intellectual and moral bankruptcy.
What’s more, the Russia card is being played with more fury than possibly ever, even during the height of the old Cold War.
Moreover, he explained that he himself, and other intellectuals like himself, have never been so maligned and marginalized for urging rationality about Russian discourse as he is now.
And yet, in spite of being oft ridiculed as some type of “pawn of the Kremlin,” Cohen persists, arguing forcefully for a peace with Russia which he believes, and I agree whole-heartedly, is long overdue.
Quite to the contrary, I mean we saw Eisenhower and Krushchev, two veterans of World War II, meet warmly with each other.
Meanwhile, Cohen explained, the vilification of Putin has “become an actual political institution in the United States.
Indeed, when you watch Cohen in an interview or debate— no longer on major networks but on some fringe news program—he looks haggard and beaten down, himself labeled some type of Russian (or, in a case of anachronism, a Soviet) agent because he won’t jump on the antiPutin bandwagon.
So, with that, let’s analyze the claim that Putin is a killer, or at least more of a killer than any United States President, including Obama.
As an initial matter, a commentary in the Chicago Tribune noted from the outset in trying to answer this question that we must at least start from the premise that “Putin is not a bloodthirsty, Stalin-like dictator.
As the commentary explains, Putin takes this position against the death penalty on the grounds that there is no proof that the death penalty is a deterrent of crime.
As he notes, those with any familiarity with the famous cases of Russian “Journalists and _ political opponents’” being killed—notably Boris Nemtsov in 2015 and Anna Politkosvskaya in 2016—believe they were most likely killed upon the orders of “the violent dictator of Chechnya,” Ramzan Kadryrov.
Indeed, one might recall the case of Anna Politkosvskaya, who wrote critically of both the Russian and Chechen governments in their prosecution of the Chechen war.
Five men, including four from the same Chechen family, were convicted and sentenced for the shooting that killed her.
Again, this may not exonerate Putin, but it does show that he possesses some awareness of how killing an opposition journalist may not be in his or Russia’s best interest, and why, therefore, he might not be inclined to order such a killing.
Five Chechens are also being tried for the killing of Nemstov, an opposition leader shot dead in Moscow while he was working on an expose of what he claimed to be Putin’s involvement in the Ukrainian separatist movement.
Maybe more importantly, this is not the type of action that should cause Americans to lose one ounce of sleep for fear that the Russians are coming.
Indeed, how the approval of the murder of a former KGB agent who went into exile, and who is at least fairly viewed as a traitor of his country, is worse than Obama ordering the drone killing of a 16 year-old boy whose only sin was having the wrong father, is simply beyond me.
Moreover, while not successfully killing whistleblowers like Bradley Manning—the individual who supplied the lion’s share of Wikileaks’s very first trove of documents—Obama did aggressively pursue prosecution of her for blowing the whistle on horrible crimes like the murder of innocents in Iraq and Afghanistan.
This prosecution led to her being placed in such horrible prison conditions, which included solitary confinement, that she was driven to twice attempt suicide.
And while Obama did commute Manning’s sentence as he was leaving office, Manning is not set to be freed until May 2017—which leaves more than ample time for her to be tortured, possibly to death.
In light of the foregoing, it is hard to see how Putin, at least with respect to allegedly being a “killer,” is worse, or even as bad, as our beloved Barack Obama.
The other significant allegation against Putin is that he has waged “aggressive wars,” specifically in Ukraine and Syria.
Much more on this later, but suffice it to say that if we assume the very worst of Putin in regard to these wars (which I do not think the facts wairant), they pale in comparison to the wars of aggression that the United States has and continues to wage in many more countries throughout the planet.
To name just some, the United States has recently been involved in major wars in Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya, and has also been in major military efforts in Syria, Yemen and Somalia.
I still get goose bumps when I see the famous photo of the Russian soldier raising the Soviet flag over the Reichstag in Berlin.
The last time I was in Paris , there was still a Metro Stop called “Stalingrad,” in honor of the heroic battle that took place there and which all regard as the positive turning point of the war.
For a great movie on the Red Army liberation of Auschwitz, check out Truce, with John Turturro, which is based upon the memoirs of Primo Levi, who was, in fact, liberated and treated quite kindly by the Soviets.
Indeed, one cannot even truthfully say that the United States has been more benign than Russia, at least in the past 50+ years.
The truth is that the United States escalated its cruel foreign policies as Russia, beginning with Nikita Khrushchev’s soul-searching 1956 “Secret Speech” about the crimes committed during Stalinism, was ending its worst forms of repression.
This disparity is particularly great as between ourselves and the peoples of Asia.
In this situation, we cannot fail to be the object of envy and resentment.
In the face of this situation we would be better off to ... cease to talk about vague—and for the Far East—unreal objectives such as human rights, the raising of the living standards, and democratization.
The day is not far off when we are going to have to deal in straight power concepts.
However, the United States has needed the perceived threat of the USSR, or other like enemy, to justify this.
Indeed, even when the Soviet Union existed, its threat had to be exaggerated in order to justify the unjustifiable.
As just one example of this, 42-year CIA veteran Melvin A Goodman, examining a declassified study by a Pentagon defense contractor, explains that policymakers in the United States intentionally exaggerated both Soviet nuclear weapons capacity as well as their desire to use it, willfully ignoring evidence, particularly during the Brezhnev years of the 1970s and thereafter, that the USSR was scaling back its military preparedness, deathly feared a nuclear war, and had no plans for a first strike.
As Goodman notes quite correctly in this piece from 2009, this Pentagon study begs serious questions about the current United States exaggeration of ‘threats’ emanating from Iran, North Korea, and Afghanistan,” and, I would argue now, Russia as well.
Indeed, given the CIA’s unreliability about threats emanating from other countries—its claims about Iraq’s non-existent WMDs comes to mind—its current crusade against Putin and Russia must be looked at with great skepticism.
Now that the USSR is gone, the United States has to continue to invent enemies in order to justify its bloated military—by far the biggest in the world.
If Trump is truly the “Manchurian Candidate,” he certainly doesn’t appear to be acting like one.
The US’s outsized military exists not only to ensure the US’s quite unjust share of the world’s riches, but also to ensure that those riches are not shared with the poor huddled masses in this country through annoying things such as social programs and works projects.
Instead, a disproportionate amount of tax revenue (about 54% of the US’s discretionary budget®’) is sucked right back into the military-industrial complex, a form of welfare for the rich, while the working class and poor are left on their own to suffer.
One commentator correctly described this as “Redistributive Militarism’—that is, the process by which income is redistributed from bottom to top through the escalation of military spending.
And so, the need to vilify countries like Russia and leaders like Vladimir Putin, conflating them with our former Soviet nemeses, is so critical to the social order which our leaders have so carefully constructed over decades.
The blindness of Americans, particularly of liberals who claim to care and to know better, to the evil of United States wars abroad may equal or exceed the irrationality of their hatred for Vladimir Putin and Russia.
And indeed, their hatred of Putin is a distraction from what they should be focusing on—the unjustifiable reach of their own military in ways that no other country in the history of the world, even the greatest of empires, has even attempted.
While there are differing views as to when the Cold War actually began, it is fair to say that it began in 1945 when the United States decided to drop two atomic bombs upon Japan.
William Blum, former State Department employee as well as former anticommunist, explains this well, quoting, amongst others, General Dwight D Eisenhower in support of the proposition that, contrary to popular belief even today, Japan was thoroughly defeated by the time the bombs were dropped and was actually trying hard, but unsuccessfully, to surrender.
World War II and a battlefield alliance with the Soviet Union did not bring about an ideological change in the anticommunists who owned and ran America.
Imagine the cynicism of deciding to vaporize tens of thousands of innocent souls in Japan to send a message to Russia.
Of course, the next shots of the Cold War, which still reverberate today, as sO many do, is the Korean war, or “police action” as it has been called.
And, the truth is that most in the United States would like to forget the Korean war because the US conducted itself in an unforgivable way during that conflict, carrying out what a number of scholars believe was genocide against Korean civilians.
This paper, published in the Journal of Genocide Research, and entitled, “Forgotten War, forgotten massacres—the Korea War as licensed mass killings,’ challenges long-held beliefs in the United States that the Korean War was somehow a good and righteous war that the United States fought.
According to the witnesses, United States air and ground forces shot at children, women and aged people who were easily distinguishable as unarmed civilians.
North Korean authorities have long accused American troops of ‘criminal acts’ before and after the outbreak of the Korean War.
They maintained that the United States army killed more than a million innocent civilians by bombing, shooting, and the use of napalm and chemical weapons.... the facts on the ground force us not to discount their veracity.
Professor Kim quite rightly concludes that the wholesale atrocities committed by the United States during the Korean War foreshadowed, and help us to understand, the US’s countless atrocities in later wars, such as in Vietnam and in Latin America as well.
A History, fully supports the conclusions of Professor Kim, and opines that the United States was engaged in a racist, genocidal campaign in Korea.
As Cummings poignantly notes, What hardly any Americans know or remember ... is that we carpet-bombed the North for three years with next to no concern for civilian casualties.
Yet when foreigners visit North Korea, this is the first thing they hear about the war.
The air assaults ranged from the widespread and continual use of firebombing to threats to use nuclear and chemical weapons, finally to the destruction of huge North Korean dams in the last stages of the war.
It was an application of the air campaigns against Japan and Germany, except that North Korea was a small Third World country that lost control of the air to the United States within days of the war’s start.
In light of this history, it is hard for me to feel anything but sorrow and sympathy for North Korea.
While it is fashionable to mock that country, and while the Trump Administration seems to be considering bombing it off the map, I cannot join in this chorus either.
The wounds of this war, however, have been harder to forget than those of Korea.
When I drove to Nicaragua in 1988 from Dayton, Ohio, I travelled with the Veterans for Peace, which, at least at that time, was made up mostly of Vietnam War veterans who, regretting what they had seen and what they had done in Vietnam, had become some of the best peace activists our country has ever seen.
The Veterans for Peace organized the convoy I participated in to bring humanitarian aid to the Nicaraguan people, who were suffering from the US-backed Contra War at the time.
Many of these vets ended up risking more for peace than they had in waging war, but monuments are very rarely erected in this country to peacemakers.
It is not an exaggeration to say that I fell in love with those guys, and probably learned more on that trip from them than I learned in all of college.
One veteran I met on that trip was dying of cancer from the war that, unbeknownst to he and his fellow United States servicemen at the time, was waged by the United States against them in the interest of testing out nuclear weapons.
These nuclear tests, 23 detonations in all, were done periodically over the period from 1946 to 1958.
Another Vietnam veteran I met on the trip was S Brian Willson (not of The Beach Boys), who, by then, had lost his legs lying down on train tracks to stop a shipment of arms bound for the United States war in Central America.
What I didn’t know until later was that Willson had written about the connection between the American war on Vietnam and the early days of the United States Republic.
In the end, General Sullivan followed Washington’s orders faithfully, as did many United States military leaders to come, committing possibly one of the greatest genocides in history, certainly involving the slaying of tens of millions of indigenous persons.
It is always more convenient, of course, to pull the speck from your brother’s eye than the plank from your own.
In any case, all of these elements of the slaughter of the Native Americans were surely an integral part of the United States war in Vietnam, as Willson and the other vets knew all too well.
Before getting to the conduct of the war in Vietnam, it is important to consider the actual reasons the United States was there, as contrasted with the stated goals.
Thus, the United States did not send tens of thousands of United States soldiers to kill and die in Vietnam in order to defend democracy and freedom, as we are meant to believe.
Rather, after World War II (in which the United States had received significant help from Ho Chi Minh and his Viet Minh guerilla fighters to fight off Japan) the United States initially entered the fray in Vietnam in order to defend French colonialism there.
And, as has been quite typical of the US’s willing collaboration with fascists and even Nazis after WWII, the United States allied with recently-defeated Japan in helping to defeat the Vietnamese independence effort against the French.
Marciano notes that this aroused the very first anti-war protests against the American intervention in Vietham—this time by United States sailors who could not stomach the hypocrisy of what the United States was doing and whom they were doing it with.
Ultimately, of course, the Viet Minh triumphed against the French in the heroic battle of Diem Bien Phu on May 7, 1954.
One might believe (and Ho Chi Minh in fact did at one point) that the US, in the Spirit of ’76, would welcome and support such an independence victory.
Of course, the painful reality is that the US, despite its lofty rhetoric, has been quite consistent in its conviction that colonial independence is only for itself, and that other peoples must be punished for seeking an independent path to development.
And so, in 1956, as elections scheduled pursuant to the Geneva Accords to unify Vietnam approached—elections which the United States government knew would be won handily by the popular Ho Chi Minh with an anticipated 80% of the vote—the United States acted quickly and decisively to scuttle these elections and to support the Diem dictatorship it had installed in South Vietnam to brutally repress, through murder and imprisonment, thousands of Vietnamese who sympathized with the Viet Minh.
In other words, far from supporting democracy in Vietnam, the United States effort at this point, and for the next 20 years, would be to prevent it by any and all means necessary.
The American War in Vietnam had now begun in earnest, and it was not pretty.
Indeed, Charlie Company met no armed adversaries that day—just women, children and the elderly.
And so, the Americans “gunned down old men sitting in their homes and children as they ran for cover.
Indeed, he cites a January 21, 1971 letter from a Vietnam veteran named Charles McDuff to President Nixon in which he expressed his disgust over the war in Southeast Asia, saying that My Lai was merely the tip of the iceberg.
One other notable example of such crimes is the operation for which the baby-faced Bob Kerrey, who would later become Democratic Governor and then Senator of Nebraska, would be awarded the Bronze Star.
Kerrey’s command had surveilled the night before, finding no Viet Minh combatants.
The day of the action, the unit predictably encountered no resistance, and so decided to fire at the only living targets they could find— namely, twenty civilians, including women and children.
For good measure, they slit the throats of some of these civilians and even heroically located and killed children hiding in a drain pipe—a drain pipe now forever remembered in a war museum in Vietnam.
Kerrey would later be awarded the Medal of Honor for his exceptional service in Vietnam, and go on to have a stellar political career.
Incredibly, this stirred a bit of controversy in Vietnam where some have the audacity to believe that Kerrey, rather than being given an academic sinecure, should be rotting in jail or even brought before a firing squad.
But, as we all know, our war criminals are never held to account for their crimes.
We instead obsess on everyone else’s misdeeds, real or imagined, to help us sleep better at night.
The United States even bombed Catholic Churches throughout South Vietnam.
All told, according to Nick Turse, the US, with its superior air and fire power, killed approximated 3. million Vietnamese (8% of its total population), and created over 14 million refugees.
Meanwhile, Vietnam continues to feel the effects, in terms of environmental degradation and horrible birth defects, from the “millions of gallons of chemical defoliants, millions of pounds of chemical gases, endless canisters of napalm” which the United States dumped on that country.
Meanwhile, even as Obama was drawing “red lines” on Syria in regards to the use of chemical weapons, babies in Iraq were being born—and continue to be born—with horrifying birth defects from the white phosphorous used by the United States there during the Second Gulf War.
And MLK did not even live long enough to see Richard Nixon expand the war in Vietnam to neighboring Laos, reducing about a quarter of the population of about three million to refugees and subjecting another third of the population to the most intense bombardment in history.
The war was also expanded to the then-very peaceful country of Cambodia, creating one million refugees out of six million inhabitants, thereby radicalizing some of the population and leading directly to the “killing fields” of the Khmer Rouge—a force which the United States would first oppose but then support when the Vietnamese, having defeated the United States , invaded Cambodia, thus freeing the Cambodians from the viscious Khmer Rouge.
Of course, as we well know, being the United States means never having to say you’re sorry, even when you’ve visited horrendous atrocities against a country that has never, and could never, attack you.
Then, to add insult to injury, we in the US, even after such an event, will find a way to paint ourselves as the victim.
It is clear that Ho Chi Minh, who had worked with the United States during WWII, and who looked to the Declaration of Independence for his inspiration, would have willingly worked with the US, allowed United States investment—as communist Vietnam, now an ally, allows now—and most likely would not have entered the Soviet orbit.
It was the US’s decision to defend the French occupation of Vietnam, and then to bomb Vietnam to the Stone Age after the French were driven out by a popular uprising, which forced Vietnam to seek help from and to become dependent upon the USSR until its collapse.
And, far from promoting democracy in Vietnam, the United States did everything it could, just short of nuking Vietnam off the map (though Nixon and Kissinger had considered that too), to prevent it.
And, because the pretexts for preventing Soviet expansion and defending democracy were so weak, another lie was needed to justify the intensification of the war effort in Vietnam.
Thus, in 1964, the Johnson Administration claimed that American ships had been preemptively fired upon by Viet Minh forces in international waters in two separate incidents, that this was an act of war and that the United States must therefore attack Vietnam accordingly.
As it turns out, much of this story was fabricated, with the truth being that the United States ship had fired first—just warning shots—to scare off the Vietnamese boat in the first incident, while the second incident most likely did not occur at all.
However, by the time the United States press got around to questioning it, the United States Congress had already authorized major military force against Vietnam based on this “fake news” in the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution.
As we now enter the new Cold War, it is important to judge the US’s assertions about rivals such as Russia, and to judge the US’s conduct abroad, by these experiences, which have been repeated time and time again.
This disintegration was best symbolized by the fall of the Berlin Wall on November 9, 1989.
However, the peace we had been promised upon Russia’s “conversion” and the end of the Cold War did not come, nor did the promised “peace dividend”—the monies which were supposed to flow into education, medical care and other social programs once this war was won.
As Eric Hobsbawm succinctly explained, “Jince the fall of the Berlin Wall, we once again live in an era of genocide and compulsory mass population transfers, as in parts of Africa, southeastern Europe and Asia.
It is estimated that at the end of 2003 there were perhaps thirty-eight million refugees inside and outside their country,”’° and that figure has of course grown since.
Meanwhile, as noted above, the UN has announced that it is facing its worst crisis since WWII, with 20 million people in Africa now facing starvation.
And this disaster is being presided over by the only superpower in the world, the United States, which is largely unchecked and unchallenged.
Those who believed that a unipolar world with the United States as that one power would usher in a new and better world order were wrong, which may call into question things about the nature of the United States that few dare to contemplate.
Events like these made me start to wonder why we were not also praying for the “conversion” of the United States as well.
I must also note the quite interesting fact that while the “secrets” of Our Lady of Fatima—who, it is claimed, visited three children in Portugal in 1917 (note the significance of this date)—were not revealed until 1942, there seemed to be a glaring omission from what these “secrets” called upon us to do.
Thus, while we were told to say the Rosary to stop Russia from “spreading her errors,” the main “error” Russia was spreading at the time was the liberation of Europe from the Nazis.
During the waning days of the Soviet Union in 1990, the United States also invaded Iraq in the First Gulf War, which was ostensibly carried out in retaliation for Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait.
This invasion was carried out, moreover, with the reluctant assent of the Soviet Union which—under Mikhail Gorbachev, who was, and remains, quite popular in the West, but not in Russia—voted in favor of the Security Council Resolution authorizing force to expel Irag from Kuwait.
The ability of the United States to carry out such an action in the Middle East would have been much more difficult during the days in which the USSR was stronger and more resolute—a time in which the Soviet Union would have certainly vetoed the UN Security Council authorization of force in such an instance.
In the case of Iraq, the United States had helped install and then backed Saddam Hussein even during his most brutal years, such as when he famously gassed the Kurds living in Iraq.
By the time of the first Gulf War, the United States had grown tired of Hussein, who had become less and less compliant.
Bush shunned those opportunities, instead opting for what he believed would be a quick war to boost his anemic polling numbers.
This was a case of “fake news” if there ever was one, and nearly every war we wage depends upon “fake news,” willingly peddled by our “free press,” to generate public approval.
In any case, the United States did invade Iraq, and did prevail easily with its far superior air power, which it was able to use at will, and Iraq did leave Kuwait.
However, regardless of how one viewed the rightness of the US’s decision to attack Iraq, its prosecution of the war was brutal and unforgivable, though you wouldn’t know it by watching the evening news at that time.
In short, the United States violated the Geneva Conventions and the rules of war on a massive scale by targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure necessary to sustain human life.
Before the assault was over United States planes flew more than 109,000 sorties, raining 88,000 tons of bombs, the equivalent of seven Hiroshimas, and killing indiscriminately across the country.
What was visible was a nation with thousands of civilians dead; without water, hospitals, or health care; with no electricity, communications, or public transportation; without gasoline, road and bridge repair capacity, or parts for essential equipment; and with a growing food crisis.
Because of the nature of American weapons, Iraq was being crippled from afar and left to a painful struggle for survival.
As NPR would later report, this war “became a cause célébre for Osama bin Laden and one of the factors that led to al-Qaeda’s attacks against the United States on September 11, 2001.7"" The suffering inflicted upon the Iraqi people during the First Gulf War would continue to be exacerbated by President Clinton, who continued to bomb Iraq periodically (usually when he needed to distract the American public from some scandal), and who imposed sanctions upon Iraq which only increased their inability to feed themselves and obtain necessary medicines.
The result would be the death, according to the UN, of about 576,000 Iraqi children.
Of course, this led some to wonder if, quite possibly, Albright has a special place in hell reserved for her much more serious crimes.
When the United States decided to attack Iraq again in 2003 based upon even more flimsy pretexts, Russia under Vladimir Putin would not go along with this second war, and that appears to be one of Putin’s unforgiveable sins.
In any case, despite the fact that the end of the Cold War was supposed to usher in a new period of peace and prosperity for the US, it did not, and it did not because the United States never wanted peace, nor did it really want prosperity, except for the very few on top.
However, it has always needed a good alibi for its wars, and Vladimir Putin right now is a convenient one.
Meanwhile, the prosperity the West promised to Russia if it would only give up its silly notions of socialism did not come either, and Bill Clinton and his cronies made sure of that.
As Russian Scholar Stephen F Cohen explains in his important work Soviet Fates And Lost Alternatives,''* post-Soviet Russia suffered a major economic collapse, with investment in the economy falling by 80%, and 75% of the population falling into poverty.
And, of course, Yeltsin was a darling of the United States and the Clinton Administration which backed him to the hilt.
In other words, regardless which side one was on in this debate, there was no questioning the fact that the course supported by the United States was “painful” for the Russian people.
And the man to continue Russia’s pain and unraveling was Boris Yeltsin.
Richard Dresner, who had helped with Bill Clinton’s electoral victories for Arkansas Governor, was one of the chief consultants who aided Yeltsin.
Dick Morris, who was then Clinton’s chief Presidential campaign advisor, was also involved.
Through the United States consultants’ help, however, Boris was in fact rescued.
Finally, widespread bribery, voter fraud, intimidation, and ballot stuffing assured Yeltsin’s victory in the runoff election.
It is worth re-visiting what this “catastrophe” was, as it illustrates what kind of “democrat” Yeltsin really was, and reveals just as much about the US, which continues to hold Yeltsin up as a pillar of democracy.
In short, “the Duma catastrophe” began with a political stand-off between the Duma—the Russian legislature, and at the time the most powerful branch of Russian government—and Boris Yeltsin.
The Duma, which still had a large contingent of Communists who were resistant to the market changes which were, by all accounts, wreaking havoc in Russia, was refusing to approve Yeltsin’s pick for Prime Minister, Yegor Gaidar.
In other words, the legislators were being asked by their constituents to resist an unpopular President, just as the Democrats are now being urged to resist Trump.
In response, Yeltsin tried to dissolve the Duma, but the Duma declared this action to be unconstitutional.
They then proceeded to remove Yeltsin from office and to install the Vice-President in his stead.
Yeltsin responded by shutting off electricity and water to the White House, which then housed the Duma.
As I remember quite vividly from that time, the actions of Yeltsin in bombing his own legislative building and assuming greater power was applauded by both Washington and the United States media as a triumph for Russian democracy.
Of course, given that Venezuela has a tiny population (around 30 million) compared to that of China , these numbers are proportionately much greater.
But of course, the Caracazo massacre deserves no commemoration by the United States government or media, because these killings were carried out by a government—that of President Carlos Andres Perez—that was aligned with the United States at the time, and because the Caracazo was an important factor in the rise of our perceived nemesis, Hugo Chavez, who stood up against this repression.
The result was that the path was laid for the pillaging of the country and the rise in Russia” of Putin.
Meanwhile, it is worth remembering, as United States officials and media fret about Vladimir Putin’s conduct in the former Soviet Republic of Ukraine, that the Clinton Administration also showed no tangible concern for Yeltsin’s prosecution of a brutal war in the Chechnyaen Republic.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin ordered 40,000 troops to Chechnya on December 11, 1994, to stop that republic’s bid for independence.
But within one week Russian forces began bombing Grozny, Chechnya’s capital, in a campaign unparalleled in the area since World War II for its scope and destructiveness, followed by months of indiscriminate and targeted fire against civilians.
Russian Human Rights Commissioner Sergei Kovalyev, who remained in Grozny through much of the bombing, bore personal witness to the destruction of homes, hospitals, schools, orphanages and other civilian structures.
To the contrary, as noted above, Clinton prevailed upon the IMF to give a massive infusion of money to Russia in the year this Helsinki Watch report was written in order to guarantee Boris Yeltsin’s re-election.
In the end, there was nothing very democratic about the Yeltsin regime, and the US, beyond some lip service, did nothing to coax Yeltsin into being democratic.
Indeed, given that the communists in the mid-1990’s had much popular support, real democracy in Russia was anathema to the United States goal of making sure that Russia was subject to the cruelties of unfettered capitalism.
The US’s indifference to such measures proved once again that it is not repression per se which is a problem—not even Soviet-style repression—as long as the West’s free market goals are advanced by the repression.
And, in the end, what galls the United States the most about Vladimir Putin is not how authoritarian and un-democratic they view him to be (though polls do show that he is wildly popular in Russia), but that Putin has helped Russia rise from its knees and become an independent nation and world actor again.
Juring the long Cold War, the Soviet Union, which is Russia in most people’s minds, was demonized effectively.
Remember, the initial collapse of the USSR worked very much to the West’s advantage.
They could easily manipulate Yeltsin, and various oligarchs were able to seize and plunder the resources of the country.
They are proud of Ronald Reagan’s contribution to ending the Cold War , and are very troubled about the rise of the new Cold War.
One might think that their views should count for something, and yet their views are notably absent from the mainstream debate about current US-Russia relations.
Moreover, as the Democrats and the holdovers from the Hillary Clinton campaign aggressively push the Russia-gate issue, this issue must be considered in the context of Bill Clinton’s meddling in Russia in the 1990’s.
Thus, even if we accept everything the Democrats are saying about alleged Russian meddling in the United States election, it pales quite greatly in comparison to Bill Clinton’s role in propping up the terribly unpopular Boris Yeltsin, with very real impacts on the Russian people, including widespread suffering and premature deaths due to the economic policies imposed upon them by Clinton’s economic team.
Forgive me if I find their current protestations particularly galling and hypocritical in light of this history.
Indeed, while it is very true that the Clintons have been the victim of all sorts of untrue and vicious “fake news” hit pieces and conspiracy theories, I would submit that this is more than made up for by the conspiracy of silence around the very real misdeeds the Clintons have committed around the world.
One can start in a number of different places to analyze the nature of the US’s foreign policy in Latin America, but I think a fine place to begin is with the U.S intervention in Guatemala in 1954.
It is now generally accepted that the United States engineered the overthrow of the democratically-elected President, Jacobo Arbenz, in that year.
This coup was carried out at the behest of the United Fruit Company (now Chiquita Brands International), which opposed Arbenz’s land reform program, pursuant to which the government would buy United Fruit’s land at the fair market rate as determined by their own tax records.
The Dulles brothers— Allen, who was head of the CIA at the time, and John Foster, the Secretary of State—both had financial interests in United Fruit and were therefore happy to protect its interests in Guatemala from such an affront.
While many have written off the coup as simply dirty tricks by the CIA, the Guatemalans, thousands of whom lost their lives during and in the immediate aftermath of the coup, see this event quite differently.
The United States installed a military dictatorship in the place of President Arbenz that would rule Guatemala, with support and funding from the US, for almost 40 years.
This military dictatorship was responsible for the murder of approximately 200,000 civilians, many of whom were “disappeared” by the regime.
Indeed, as the United States complains about migration from countries like Guatemala, and is even considering building a wall to keep refugees like them out of the country, it may behoove us to consider the ways in which our government’s policies have created the violence and suffering they are now fleeing from.
I would go so far as to say that we owe these people entrance to our country as some measure of remediation for our crimes against them.
Instead, we not only try mightily to keep such migrants, many of them unaccompanied children, out of the country, our ICE officials often subject them to sexual violence and other unmentionable abuses, victimizing them all over again.
For example, in recent days it was reported that ICE officials sexually assaulted two migrant girls who waved them down for help, and another group of ICE officials forced a young migrant to consume the blue meth he was carrying with him, thereby killing him.
Possibly, instead of worrying about what Putin is doing over there, we could begin thinking about the crimes our people are committing at our own borders.
Charity starts at home, after all, though of course it is much more convenient and comforting to think of others’ lack of charity.
As with many such interventions, the United States claimed that it was fighting Communism in Guatemala, when in fact Arbenz was a social democrat, like Bernie Sanders.
The Cold War gave continued cover for such actions, which were inherently undemocratic.
I must add that I began travelling there in 1999 as the Clinton Administration was pushing for Plan Colombia , the major military aid package pursuant to which we have provided the Colombian military with about $10 billion since Plan Colombia’s passage in the year 2000.
The first city I visited was Barrancabermeja, an oil town which, at that time, was quite progressive in many ways, including being the site of the wonderful Popular Feminist Organization , which was so welcoming to me when I was there.
At the time, the OFP was sponsoring a photo exhibit featuring Che Guevara.
I’m not sure what is particularly feminist about Che, but then again, I find feminists in Colombia to have a much broader idea about what feminism means than folks in our country.
Shortly after I left Barranca, as it is known, the paramilitary death squads took over that town, and they have yet to leave at the time of this writing.
The OFP, which tried to hold out for years despite the paramilitary threats, did end up leaving, along with a lot of other good people I met there.
By the way, I don’t recall any outcry in the US, which claims to be the protector of women’s rights around the world, when the OFP was driven out of Barranca, but I guess that’s how it goes.
I still have a small momento of my trip to Barranca—a replica of the “Oil Jesus” statute which stands in the Magdalena River near the oil refinery.
I was told that it represents Jesus being crucified by the oil interests that govern much of Colombia.
It is also an appropriate symbol for United States policy in Colombia, which is aimed at controlling Colombia’s ample resources, such as oil.
In Colombia, it is also about fresh water, gold, emeralds and rich soil for the planting of cash crops like bananas and palm oil.
Not surprisingly, a number of United States companies have themselves sponsored paramilitaries to protect their interests in Colombia, most famously Chiquita Brands International which pled guilty to paying the paramilitaries $1. million between 1997 and 2004 and running them 3000 Kalashnikov rifles.
The idea behind the death squads, as articulated by their intellectual author, United States General William Yarborough, was to have a force which could carry out dirty jobs, including human rights abuses, without tarnishing the reputation of the regular forces of the United States or its allies.
By 1962, he had brought in United States Special Forces to train Colombian officers in cold war counterinsurgency.
That year, a United States Army Special Warfare team visited Colombia to help refine Plan Lazo, a new counterinsurgency strategy General Ruiz was drafting.
William P Yarborough, the team further recommended that this structure “be used to perform counteragent and counter-propaganda functions and as necessary execute paramilitary, sabotage and/or terrorist activities against known communist proponents.
Judging by the events that followed, the United States recommendations were implemented enthusiastically through Plan Lazo, formally adopted by the Colombian military on July 1, 1962.
While the military presented Plan Lazo to the public as a “hearts-and-minds” campaign to win support through public works and campaigns to improve the conditions that they believed fed armed subversion, privately it incorporated the Yarborough team’s principal recommendations.
Armed civilians—called “civil defense,” “self-defense,” or “population organization operations,” among other terms—were expected to work directly with troops.
These paramilitary groups did go on to work with Colombian troops, as the United States is quite aware, and they do so to this day.
Though, true to their purpose of operating in the shadows to do the dirty work that the United States and Colombian armed forces are not supposed to do, their existence is now denied by both the United States and Colombian governments.
Indeed, when I visited the United States Embassy in October of 2015 with my friend Marino Cordoba, an Afro-Colombian leader who has been threatened by the paramilitaries numerous times and who has lost a son and two other family members to paramilitary violence in recent months, the United States Ambassador, Kevin Whitaker, had the gall to look us in the eyes and claim that the paramilitaries no longer exist.
As I wrote this paragraph, I received an SOS from my friend, Father Sterlin, an Afro-Colombian priest in El Choco Department, who alerted us to the paramilitary incursion of an AfroColombian town.
These paramilitaries, who we are told do not exist, killed several of the residents and “disappeared” a number of others.
For example, a report released by the Fellowship of Reconciliation demonstrates a direct correlation between United States military funding and training, particularly at the School of the Americas , and the incidence of egregious human rights abuses, including “false positive” killings in which over 5,000 civilians were killed and then passed off by the military as guerillas killed in battle.
As he relates, 4.2% of the land in Colombia remains in the hands of 67.6% of the population, while 46.5% of all land is in the hands of a mere .4% of the population.
This unequal distribution of land, furthermore, has resulted in Colombia becoming one of the most unequal societies on earth, with a Gini coefficient of 885.
And of course, the United States has contributed to the root cause of the conflict by siding for many decades with the small percent of the Colombia population that owns most of Colombia’s land, for it is this landed aristocracy who then allow this land to be penetrated and exploited by United States transnational interests.
If this land were left to peasants, indigenous and Afrodescendants, on the other hand, they would insist upon using the land communally and for their own subsistence—something which is simply anathema to the United States and the logic of unfettered Capitalism.
The US—through various means, including through the DEA and CIA— have supported both the right-wing paramilitaries, as well as drug cartels aligned with these paramilitaries, in order to foster the unequal distribution of land in Colombia.
These narco-paramilitaries—which are rarely spoken of, as contrasted with the so-called “narco-guerillas’—began a massive land grab by massacres and mass displacements of the population since the 1980’s, and continuing to the current time.
During the same period, of course, the United States supported the internal war on the side of these groups carrying out the displacements.
The foregoing assertions were strongly supported by a December 21, 2013, story that ran in The Washington Post, entitled “Covert action Colombia,” about the intimate and critical role of the CIA and the NSA in helping to assassinate “at least two dozen” leaders of the Colombian FARC guerillas from “the early 2000s” to and through the date of that story.
Again, this is all according to plan, and advances the interests of the US, which invented, and continues to support, the Colombian paramilitaries in order to make Colombia, Latin America and other far-flung countries safe for maximum corporate penetration and resource extraction.
They have been instead brought to the US, where they have been tried for drug-related offenses only, and given cushy sentences of 10 years in prison on average.
And, even more incredibly, “for some, there is a special dividend at the end of their incarceration.
Though wanted by Colombian authorities, two have won permission to stay in the United States, and their families have joined them.
Mr Giraldo was known as “The Drill” because of his penchant for raping young girls, some as young as 9 years old.
While being prosecuted in the United States for drug-related crimes only, Mr Giraldo too is being shielded by the United States from prosecution back in Colombia for his most atrocious crimes.
While the story does not mention it, the potential confession of paramilitary leaders to their links with the United States government, as well as to United States multinationals, was most certainly another reason for their extradition and treatment with kid gloves.
The fact is that the United States also shares an ideology with both Uribe and his paramilitary friends.
Of course, with the old Cold War against the USSR over, supporting such “freedom fighters” is a bit harder to justify to the American public.
And so we’ve had to come up with other pretexts for our war against social change in countries like Colombia.
With United States backing, the Colombian government launched a scorched-earth counteroffensive against the FARC’s rural strongholds after President Alvaro Uribe was elected in 2002.
Government troops were often followed by right-wing militias that targeted suspected rebel sympathizers and massacred civilians.
More Colombians were driven from their homes during the first stages of Plan Colombia than at any other time in the half-century conflict.
In the aftermath of the Cold War, when Plan Colombia was hatched, revelations of atrocities committed by Guatemala’s genocidal military and the US-backed government of El Salvador had stigmatized the idea of United States military intervention in Latin America.
So the plan’s promoters advertised it primarily as a counternarcotics program.
Indeed, the pretextual nature of the war on drugs became quite evident to me when I visited the United States Embassy in Bogota in March of 2017.
Or, more to the point, this points to the conclusion that something else is afoot with our policies in Colombia.
In the end, the only plausible explanation for the United States partnership in such crimes is its quest for a disproportionate share of the world’s resources, and any countries trying to lay claim to their just portion (whether it be Colombia, or Russia, or China) need to be put in their place.
Many refer to this as the “First 9/11,”and it would be much more devastating than the 9/11 the United States suffered in 2001 in terms of its body count and historical significance for a number of countries.
At the time of the coup, Chile had been the longest-standing constitutional democracy in Latin America—something the United States would claim to support.
Allende, it chose to help foment the coup that toppled his government, and then continued to support the Pinochet dictatorship even as its human rights crimes became apparent.
Two firms that are part of the central nucleus of the large transnational companies that sunk their claws into my country, the International Telegraph and Telephone Company and the Kennecott Copper Corporation, tried to run our political life.
ITT, a huge corporation whose capital is greater than the budget of several Latin American nations put together and greater than that of some industrialized countries, began, from the very moment that the people’s movement was victorious in the elections of September 1970, a sinister action to keep me from taking office as President.
This speech had a huge impact on me when I listened to it, obviously well after the fact, while studying about the evils of United States intervention back in College.
As the CIA relates, it “was working with three different groups of plotters,” all of which “made it clear that any coup would require the kidnapping of army Cmdr.
The CIA, not having any qualms about constitutionality or civilian rule, admits that it agreed with the assessment that the kidnapping (though it claims not killing) of Schneider was necessary, and so it provided weapons for the kidnapping operation.
Not surprisingly, the kidnapping operation ended in the killing of Schneider when he tried to defend himself, and the path was cleared for the military coup.
The CIA continued to assist the coup-plotters through the time Mr Allende was overthrown.
Once the coup took place, the United States continued to support the Pinochet regime, including Manuel Contereras, who served as an agent of the CIA from 1974 to 1977, and went on to head Chile’s intelligence agency, known as the DINA, which played the key role in the human rights abuses carried out in Chile.
The CIA concedes that its friend Contereras “became notorious for his involvement in human rights abuse,” and had a key role in the car-bombing of former Chilean Ambassador to Washington Orlando Letelier and his young American assistant Ronnie Moffit in the middle of Washington D.C. in 1976.
In the end, the CIA claims that it aided and abetted such a historic subversion of democracy and human rights because of Cold War hysteria.
The historical backdrop sheds important light on the policies, practices, and perceived urgency prevalent at that time.
The Cuban revolution and emergence of Communist parties in Latin America had brought the Cold War to the Western Hemisphere.
Thousands of Chilean military officers came to the United States for training, which included presentations on the impact of global communism on their own country.
After Pinochet came to power, senior policymakers appeared reluctant to criticize human rights violations, taking to task United States diplomats urging greater attention to the problem.
United States military assistance and sales grew significantly during the years of greatest human rights abuses.
First, notice that the CIA does not reference any direct Russian involvement in Chile at this time, and this is because the movement supporting Allende was home-grown and not dependent on any outside support, Russian included.
Moreover, while the CIA talks about “global communism,” Allende was not in fact a Communist.
In other words, the United States overthrew a constitutional democracy citing Cold War concerns, but such concerns were not bona fide in this case.
Rather, the Chilean 9/11, as so many United States interventions, was about keeping Chile in a subservient economic role, and the United States trusted that Pinochet was the man to ensure this.
The Chilean coup had dire reverberations throughout the Southern Cone of South America, as the CIA itself recognizes.
More than a “few” political opponents were killed by these regimes, some of them, as in the case of Argentina, openly fascist, if not Nazi.
That is, Colombia has more disappeared people than Chile, Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay combined during the Operation Condor years.
And this is a direct consequence of the US’s continued support—continuing years after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the first Cold War—for a repressive military that colludes with death squad forces in that country.
Bill Clinton, a very intelligent and savvy politician, quickly came up with a plan—we would now go to war and intervene in other countries in the name of defending human rights.
The first known instance of it, that I know of anyway, was practiced by King Leopold II of Belgium, and best described in the wonderful King Leopold’s Ghost, by Adam Hochschild.
As Hochschild explains, during the period 1885 to 1908, King Leopold enslaved, mutilated and killed millions of poor souls in the Congo (all told, possibly 10 million were killed) in order to plunder the Congo of its riches, such as rubber.
He was able to get away with this for so long, moreover, by convincing many in the West that he was actually in the Congo for philanthropic purposes—under the auspices of an altruistic group known as the “International African Association’—and that he was helping the Congolese.
An American plantation owner, General Henry Shelton Sanford, helped promote Leopold’s story in Washington, thus prevailing upon the United States to be the first country in the world to recognize Leopold’s claim to the Congo.
As Hochschild points out, King Leopold’s little game was eventually foiled by such good folks as Mark Twain, one of the co-founders of the Anti-Imperialist League, who helped to expose and petition for an end of Leopold’s atrocities in Africa.
In this vast statement I am well within the mark, several millions of lives with the mark.
Sadly, there are few writers and journalists of Twain’s integrity today.
Instead, we have what a real journalist, John Pilger, refers to as “antijournalists,’ who merely parrot the state’s line in service of the empire.
If there were such journalists, however, they might have things to say about Bill Clinton quite similar to what Twain said about King Leopold.
Clinton, borrowing a page from Leopold’s playbook, and armed with the ideology of “human rights” and the Right to Protect , began to run amok in the world on the pretense that he was doing so to advance the cause of the countrymen with whom he was meddling.
And, quite appropriately, one of the areas Clinton most effectively tried out this practice was in the Congo —which is still uniquely rich in valuable resources—and its neighbor Rwanda.
And, just as King Leopold, his foray was absolutely cataclysmic for the people living there.
Clinton’s first disastrous move was to aid and abet the genocide in Rwanda in 1994.
By April 15, the United States delegation at the UN dropped a “bombshell” on the Security Council’s secret deliberations, arguing for total termination of the mission and pullout of the peacekeepers, only to find they did not have the votes given opposition from the Non-Aligned Movement and others.
Experts and former officials gathered at The Hague last year for a critical oral history conference reviewing the Rwanda tragedy agreed that the UN pullout decision was a turning point, a “green light” for genocide, a “disastrous decision horrendous consequences,” as the Nigerian UN envoy Ibrahim Gambari called it.
As we know, about 800,000 Rwandans lost their lives as a result of Clinton’s machinations, which, according to the National Security Archives, were carried out for the pretty meager quid pro quo of getting the French to agree to send peace keepers to Somalia after the “Black Hawk Down” debacle.
Clinton hailed Kagame as a human rights hero, as he has often been portrayed in such popular films as “Hotel Rwanda,” but he was anything but.
Nonetheless, Clinton would support Kagame in his invasion of what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo under the “humanitarian” pretext of going after the Hutu genocidaires there.
As an excellent report by The World Policy Institute explains, The Clinton administration attempted to make up for its shameful efforts to stop humanitarian intervention into Rwanda during the genocide by sending a hefty shipment of arms and military training to Paul Kagame’s government after the genocide.
The United States sent $75 million in emergency military assistance to Rwanda in 1994, after Kagame drove the government that had perpetrated the Rwandan genocide from power; but when it could have supported efforts to stop the killing, the Clinton administration was instead actively lobbying to withdraw UN forces from the country, 19 Rwanda would use that military assistance, and continued military training from the US, to invade the DRC, along with Uganda, from the East in 1996, and then again in 1998.
With the U.S.’s full backing, Rwanda and Uganda helped Congo rebel Laurent Kabila overthrow the U.S.’s former client the brutal dictator Mobutu Sese Seko who had become less compliant in his old age.
Laurent Kabila, who quickly made sweetheart deals with United States mining interests, took power in 1997.
This became known as “Africa’s First World War,” though it received little press here at the time.
Incredibly, the US, under Bill Clinton, would give military training and hardware to every country involved in that conflict—including to the DRC itself—even as the conflict escalated and the death toll surged.
The troops not only went after Hutus who had fled to refugee camps in the DRC, but also Congolese as well.
And Kagame, along with the US-backed Ugandan military as well, has continued his rampage through the DRC with the knowledge, acquiescence and support of the United States.
All told, nearly six million people have been murdered in the DRC since 1996,'”4 and Bill Clinton bears a large responsibility helping to set this slaughter in motion, with, of course, George W Bush and Barack Obama continuing what Clinton had started and with the plunder of the DRC’s resources continuing to this day.
Bush and former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney), received concessions for mining and mineral resources worth over $157 billion.
Chaos allows resources to leave from the Congo at a cheap price, and of course it’s not actually just leaving, it’s actually being stolen from the Congolese people.
The militaries of Rwanda and Uganda have both been trained by the United States.
Since the era when the American soldier was killed in Somalia in Mogadishu, the United States did not want to have any of the troops in Africa anymore.
So the United States created a system in which they would train all the foreign military missions.
I mean, can you imagine that ... today, we have Ugandan soldiers in Afghanistan fighting the war on terror.
If you are aware, just as we took action to end the Holocaust in Europe, if we know in the Congo millions have died from—estimates take the number to over 6 million, and half of them are children under the age of 5—and we remain silent when we know what is happening, we are really complicit.
And in a very tangible way because we are supporting the two oppressive regimes in Rwanda and Uganda, and in turn these nations are using the support that we are giving them to create, fabricate militia groups which are committing war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Clinton, a modern day King Leopold II, would continue to wage war in support of human rights elsewhere in the world, as detailed elsewhere in this book.
What is instructive about the Rwanda and DRC episodes, however, is that pretexts for war and intervention (whether they be human rights or anti-Russian hatred) must be looked at quite closely and with a critical eye.
On this score, I would argue quite adamantly that it is the very rare instance indeed that any state, including the US, truly acts for altruistic purposes, such as “democracy promotion,” human rights, or freedom.
And, the United States press is all too willing to push any pretext for war that the United States government puts forth, and it will rarely question the claims made in support of armed conflict.
Again, these lessons should be applied to the current claims about Russia and Putin.
Finally, it is worth repeating here that even if we were to accept as true the claims about Putin’s lack of sanity, foreign aggressiveness, and imperialist ambitions, he is not even in the ball park of someone like Bill Clinton in these respects.
But we in the United States have been collectively lulled into accepting our country’s worst and most depraved crimes, and believing them to be acts of mercy and kindness.
This is the greatest propaganda trick ever performed, and it undermines our society more than any alleged shenanigans by Moscow ever could.
To be clear, the Congolese friends I have, some of whom I have assisted with asylum applications in the US, are not fooled.
They know who has been turning the screws on them in the DRC, and they are understandably outraged about it.
And they made it clear to me that they did not want Hillary Clinton to become President, even in lieu of Trump, because of what the Clinton Administration had done to their country.
However, I quite doubt that the Congolese vote made much of a difference in the 2016 elections.
This has left a bitter taste in the mouths of Haitians, and the Haitian immigrant community, whose country is still a basket case post-earthquake.
With that said, I think it’s only fair to point out that this does not distinguish the Clintons from all of the Western NGOs, including the Red Cross, which have largely squandered the ample generosity of the many people who have donated to Haiti relief.
Thus, he admitted after the fact that his trade policies in Haiti, which allowed farmers, including Arkansas farmers Clinton emphasizes, to dump cheap, subsidized food products into Haiti, destroyed the livelihood of small Haitian farmers.
Clinton admitted that those policies undermined the Haitian peoples’ ability to feed themselves, much like Clinton’s NAFTA policies did in Mexico.
Not surprisingly, the FRAPH, in turn, was backed by the US, and in particular the CIA, at the time of the coup and thereafter.
And, quite strangely, Clinton was always playing both sides of the fence, continuing to back the brutal and violent FRAPH before, during and even after Aristide’s return to power.
Clinton did so in order to “balance out” Aristide, in the words of FRAPH leader Emmanuel Constant.
Ultimately, the United States grew tired of Aristide again, and, along with France and Canada, kidnapped him and forced him into exile in the Central African Republic in 2004.
In addition to helping starve the Haitians while also supporting the FRAPH goons who killed and raped them, Clinton was incredibly tough, if not downright cruel, in his treatment of Haitian refugees.
And he did so for two years until a United States federal court, finding this treatment to be “outrageous, callous, and reprehensible,” ordered him to stop.
As a Huffington Post article explains, in light of the Clintons’ abuse of Haiti, and after a successful Trump rally in the Little Haiti section of Miami, Florida, the Haitian Florida community—the second largest voting bloc in Florida—may have shifted significantly enough to Trump to have affected the outcome in that state.
The fixation on Putin at this point is simply a distraction from this analysis, but maybe that is the very point of this fixation.
And we have done so by erasing all such miserable chapters of our country out of our memory.
The United States supported and in many cases engendered every right wing military dictatorship in the world after the end of the Second World War.
I refer to Indonesia, Greece, Uruguay, Brazil, Paraguay, Haiti, Turkey, the Philippines, Guatemala, El Salvador, and, of course, Chile.
The horror the United States inflicted upon Chile in 1973 can never be purged and can never be forgiven.
The answer is yes they did take place and they are attributable to American foreign policy.
The crimes of the United States have been systematic, constant, vicious, remorseless, but very few people have actually talked about them.
It has exercised a quite clinical manipulation of power worldwide while masquerading as a force for universal good.
Something else that never happened, or is certainly not worth mentioning, is the recent overthrow of democracy in Honduras with a little help from its giant neighbor in the North.
Thus, not to be outdone in cruelty by their predecessors, President Obama and Secretary of State Clinton played an important role in the most recent military coup in Latin America—the 2009 coup which deposed democratically-elected President, Manuel Zelaya.
And so, the military took the direct route, kidnapping Zelaya at gun-point in the middle of the night and flying him out of the country to Costa Rica.
Luis Javier Prince Suazo, the head of the Honduran Air Force, who arranged to have Zelaya flown into exile, was also trained at the School of the Americas.
This is important to keep in mind when, as so often happens, Putin is ridiculed for complaining about NED and NGO interference in the affairs of Russia and neighboring states.
Further, as the National Catholic Reporter wrote at the time, while “he Foreign Operations Appropriations Act requires that United States military aid and training be suspended when a country undergoes a military coup, and the Obama administration has indicated those steps have been taken,” those steps in fact were never taken.
Indeed, as the article points out, I, along with Father Roy Bourgeois and other supporters of SOA Watch, personally would witness firsthand the falsehood of Obama’s claim when we travelled to Honduras days after the coup.
Our first stop on this trip was to visit the US’s Soto Cano/Palmerola Air Base northwest of Tegucigalpa, where the United States Southern Command’s Joint Task Force-Bravo is stationed.
The base was humming with activity, seemingly unaffected by the coup which had just happened, and we asked a Sgt.
Reyes at the base point blank whether it was true that the United States military had halted its joint operations with the Honduran military post-coup.
Reyes responded, and I took notes of this at the time, that the United States relationship with the Honduran military after the coup was “stable.
In addition, the United States stood nearly alone in the Western Hemisphere in recognizing the election of President Porfirio Lobo Sosa that followed the coup, though this election took place in the absence of Zelaya being returned to Honduras and able to participate in the election.
President Obama quickly recognized Mr Lobo’s victory, even when most of Latin America would not.
It retains most of the military figures who perpetrated the coup, and no one has gone to jail for starting it.
This chain of events—a coup that the United States didn’t stop, a fraudulent election that it accepted—has now allowed corruption to mushroom.
At least 13 journalists have been killed since Mr Lobo took office, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists.
As Berta was quoted as saying shortly before her death, “We’re coming out of a coup that we can’t put behind us.
The same Hillary Clinton, in her book, Hard Choices, practically said what was going to happen in Honduras.
Leaked court documents raise concerns that the murder of the Honduran environmentalist Berta Caceres was an extrajudicial killing planned by military intelligence specialists linked to the country’s US-trained special forces, a Guardian investigation can reveal.
And the terrible repression unleashed by the 2009 coup continues at the hands of a military the United States continues to support.
As Latin American specialist Greg Grandin recently explained, “hundreds of peasant activists and indigenous activists have been killed.
And Berta Caceres, in that interview, says what was installed after the coup was something like a permanent counterinsurgency on behalf of transnational capital.
While Clinton and her supporters cry foul about alleged Russian hacking, they seem to feel no shame about Clinton’s very real meddling, which has destroyed the democratic system of Honduras and unleashed terror upon that population.
Similarly, while there seems to be mass hysteria in this country about Putin’s conduct in Ukraine and Crimea, there is barely a whisper about the US misdeeds in countries like Honduras.
Moreover, as much concern is expressed about the fate of journalists in Russia, there is very little said about the extraordinary killing of journalists in Honduras post-coup.
The same can be said about journalists in Mexico, who are also being killed in huge numbers with little concern expressed by the United States press.
Indeed, a great example of the selective concern of the United States press again comes from NPR, and its reporting for the day of March 23, 2017.
On that day, and the next one as well, NPR had significant reportage of the murder of a former Russian lawmaker in Kiev'?’—by whom, we don’t know, but all trails always lead to Putin, as NPR would have us believe.
However, to give NPR its due, it did cover a story about a journalist in Mexico on March 21—that is, about Tom Brady’s Super Bowl jersey being found in the possession of a journalist in Mexico.
In the same vein, while gay activists are being killed in Honduras by forces armed and trained by the US, they do so in the almost total absence of criticism by folks in the US, even while Russia is criticized for its comparatively softer anti-gay policies.
Meanwhile, I do not recall that the Russians had much to say about the US role in the Honduran coup, quite possibly because they do not view what happens in this hemisphere as any of their business.
And when Trump goes ahead and builds his wall on the Mexican border, I truly doubt that Putin will be making some Reaganesque speech (recall his admonition to Gorbachev about the Berlin Wall) about the need for tearing down walls.
The selective concern about such issues says much about the hypocrisy and foggy thinking which permeates the discourse in this country.
Possibly, it is worth considering this before such thinking gets us into another world war.
BROKEN PROMISES AND HUMILIATION AS WE ALL KNow, THE USSR and the East Bloc began to disintegrate during the late 1980s.
There were many reasons for this, but one major reason was that the reformer, Premier Mikhail Gorbachev, had decided to voluntarily let the Soviet empire go.
While the USSR had already abandoned the Brezhnev Doctrine—pursuant to which the Soviet Union could intervene to protect its interests in the East Bloc—Gorbachev made this break even more explicit, telling the East Bloc governments that they were now on their own.
Gorbachev made it clear to these governments that if they had trouble holding on to power, they should not expect the USSR to come along to save them.
This process was relatively peaceful, which, as Michael Parenti has pointed out, might say something about the nature of those communist leaders—to wit, maybe they weren’t as repressive and power hungry as they were accused of.
In any case, in 1989, the Berlin wall came down, and it was time to decide about a huge issue for Russia and the USSR—the re-unification of Germany.
Russia, having had two destructive wars with Germany—WWI, which played a giant roll in the rise of the Bolsheviks to power in 1917, and WWI, in which the Soviet Union lost over 25 million lives—was predictably wary of a re-united and powerful Germany.
In early February 1990, United States leaders made the Soviets an offer.
Less than a week later, Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev agreed to begin reunification talks.
Gorbachev acceded to Germany’s western alignment and the United States would limit NATO’s expansion.
Indeed, the one time ever that Russia engaged in an analogous action— putting missiles and advisers in Cuba in 1962—the world was brought to the brink of nuclear war.
And, in the end, Khrushchev agreed within a matter of days to take the missiles out of Cuba in return for the secret promise that the United States would take its missiles out of Turkey months later.
Of course, the part of the deal about the United States removing its missiles from Turkey was secret because the United States insisted that it be able to save face and not be made to look weak by having caved in to Soviet demands.
Of course, the gesture of saving face was not extended to the Russians, who will always be seen as the ones who “blinked” during this crisis.
Though if “blinked” means being the one to back down and lose face so as to ensure the salvation of our planet, that is not something to be too ashamed of.
But, despite Russia’s quick responsiveness to the United States demand to leave Cuba, the US did not relent in its continued milking of the “Soviet threat” to justify its military build-up.
But, as usual, the US, insisting on running the world, can have its way with Russia while not risking, and certainly never tolerating, reciprocal treatment.
And, when Russia dares to even assert itself on its own borders, the United States cries foul and accuses Russia of imperialist ambitions.
I cannot describe such an attitude as anything other than galling, but I seem to be in the minority in this country with such a view.
Meanwhile, the United States continues to hold on to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba—which it acquired by force in 1898 and then obtained a lease through threat of force in 1903—against the Cubans’ wishes, and without apparently seeing any irony in that or feeling any apparent shame.
And Obama’s promises, eight years ago, to shut down the prison there have long been forgotten.
The quick and extensive expansion of NATO to the Russian frontier after the Soviet collapse was not the end of what Russia reasonably viewed as the United States and West’s provocations.
Imagine if, for example, the Russians engaged in major bombing campaigns, lasting weeks at a time, in Honduras or Colombia to halt the horrible human rights abuses there, abuses which include ethnic cleansing on a huge scale.
Indeed, such a scenario seems too absurd to even seriously contemplate.
Moreover, there is cause to doubt the humanitarian intentions of the U.S and NATO in carrying out the Yugoslav intervention.
Indeed, there is good reason to believe, as asserted by commentators such as George Szamuely in his Bombs for Peace, that this intervention was really motivated by the desire of the United States to destroy the last socialist state in Europe and to prime the Western world for a post-Soviet, unipolar world order in which the United States would use NATO to intervene anywhere in the world as it saw fit.
The “humanitarian war” model was a perfect pretext for this goal, and has remained a powerful ideology to justify the multiple wars of the United States to this day, though they invariably cause more suffering than they allay.
In the case of the Yugoslav intervention, Szamuely details how the West worked toward the goal of partitioning Yugoslavia, by first encouraging the secession of Slovenia and Croatia and then the breaking away of BosniaHercegovina—events which would inevitably lead to the brutal internecine violence that followed.
First, the US, through Ambassador Warren Zimmerman, convinced Bosnian leader Alija Izetbegovic to renounce the 1992 Lisbon Agreement, which could have prevented the civil war from breaking out in the first place, and which Izetbegovic had already signed.
In his wonderful Humanitarian Imperialism, Jean Bricmont explains, “of the Lisbon agreements of February 1992, the Canadian Ambassador to Yugoslavia at that time, James Bissett, has written, ‘The entire diplomatic corps was very happy that the civil war had been avoided—except the Americans.
As per usual, the United States was afraid that peace might break out, and did all it could to prevent this.
After the Lisbon accords were intentionally scuttled, the civil war broke out with disastrous consequences for all sides of the conflict.
The major bombing campaign of NATO then occurred in 1999, and lasted for eleven weeks.
As Professor Adam Roberts explains, this “was the first sustained use of armed force by the NATO alliance in its 50-year existence; the first time a major use of destructive armed force had been undertaken with the stated purpose of implementing UN Security Council authorization but without Security Council authorization,” as Russia and China made it clear they would not give such authorization.
Moreover, the Security Council is required by the UN Charter to attempt to use “pacific means” to achieve this goal before authorizing force.
In the case of Yugoslavia, the United States actually prevented any “pacific means” from succeeding.
Moreover, as a number of critics have noted, the NATO bombing seemed to only intensify the human rights abuses against the Kosovars that the bombing was allegedly intended to prevent, with Roberts explaining that, t is not disputed that, in the words of a White House spokesman on 26 March, the situation in Kosovo took ‘a dramatic and serious turn for the worse’ in the day after the bombing commenced.
Within one month of the start of the bombing campaign, over half a million people had fled from Kosovo into neighboring countries, and many thousands were displaced within Kosovo itself.
During the whole period of the bombing, according to NATO figures, almost one million inhabitants left Kosovo, and a half-a-million were internally displaced.
She then expressed the concern for whether the international humanitarian law norm requiring proportionality was being followed.
This is an interesting argument, albeit a possibly callous one, and one that also ignores the fact that in 1999, just before the bombing began, there was another chance for peace that the United States prevented.
Thus, it is pretty clear that Slobodan Milosevic would have accepted an agreement pursuant to which Serbian troops would be removed from Kosovo— allegedly the goal of the bombing that ultimately ensued—but the United States inserted a poison pill in the agreement in the form of Appendix B, which would have required Serbia to essentially give up its sovereignty to NATO occupation.
No self-respecting country, of course, would have accepted such an arrangement.
The other predictably unacceptable portion of the agreement, MacKenzie explains, would have required “a referendum be held within three years to determine the will of those citizens living in Kosovo regarding independence.
In any case, the US/NATO campaign in Yugoslavia, over the objections of Russia, and against Serbia, with whom the Russians were allied, was another humiliating event for Russia, which was simply powerless to do anything to stop it.
In addition to the Yugoslav intervention, the United States has also decided to meddle in the former Soviet Republics, most recently and notably in Ukraine, in quite dangerous ways, which have now undermined the stability of the region.
Of course, the press blames all of the problems in Ukraine on Putin, but the facts are at least more complex than this one-sided account.
First of all, let’s start from the premise that there was an illegal coup d’etat in February, 2014 that overthrew the democratically elected government of Viktor Yanukovych, a leader who was at least favorably disposed towards Russia.
The ouster of Yanukovych, which came under pressure from street protests, some violent, was prompted by his “offense’—or at least the press here considered it an offense—of reconsidering whether to enter an association agreement with the European Union in light of a pretty decent deal being offered from Vladimir Putin to stay economically integrated with Russia—a deal that included Russia buying $15 billion of Ukrainian government bonds and cutting gas prices.
In addition, buried within the EU deal were provisos that would have required Ukraine to submit to NATO military security policy, a controversial requirement indeed.
As NATO gloated thereafter, “[wJe will continue to promote the development of greater interoperability between Ukrainian and NATO forces.
NATO’s enhanced advisory presence in Kyiv is already in place and will continue to grow.
As requested by Ukraine, Allies will continue to provide expertise as Ukraine completes its comprehensive defense and security sector review.
Meanwhile, there can be no doubt that many in Ukraine, particularly in the West, which has strong anti-Russian sentiment, were angered by Yanukovych’s vacillation on the EU deal, and that this anger led to Yanukovych’s undoing.
What was bizarre, however, was how the United States press reacted to Putin’s offer, portraying it as somehow illegitimate for Putin to try to keep Ukraine within Russia’s orbit by offering favorable terms.
Again, while it is obviously understandable that the EU was upset by this turn of events, why this was a major concern for the United States simply does not stand to reason.
No one would care what Russia thought about such goings-on in this hemisphere anyway.
Meanwhile, we seem to begrudge Russia for any assertion of self-interest even at its borders.
It is as if Russia is to have no self-interest anywhere in the world, while the United States should be able to assert its self-interest everywhere.
In any case, as we know, Yanukovych’s backing away from the EU deal proved to be his undoing, with people taking to the streets and his being forced from office.
Many of those protesting were regular folks who had legitimate concerns about the policies of Yanukovych—many of which were quite undemocratic and corrupt, no doubt—while some of those involved in the events of 2013-2014 were quite sinister.
And there are certainly sectors of the United States government who support these forces in Ukraine.
These are undeniable facts, and yet it is rarely reported in the United States press, and few seem concerned about it.
From all appearances, the mainstream United States media would prefer neo-Nazis running amok in Ukraine, and even taking charge, than having a Ukraine integrated with Russia.
As the Euromaidan protests in the Ukrainian capital of Kiev culminated this week, displays of open fascism and neo-Nazi extremism became too glaring to ignore.
Since demonstrators filled the downtown square to battle Ukrainian riot police and demand the ouster of the corruption-stained, pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych, it has been filled with far-right streetfighting men pledging to defend their country’s ethnic purity.
Even if it can be said that Putin overplayed his hand in trying to coax Yanukovych into rejecting the EU deal and accepting a deal with Russia, it is not at all surprising that Putin was nonetheless spooked by the events in Ukraine wherein neo-Nazis seemed to have a role in both the coup which deposed Yanukovych, and in the new government in Kiev.
The fact that the US seemed to have a hand in these events, and to acquiesce in, if not outright encourage, the participation of ultra-nationalists in the Ukraine government, was predictably disturbing to Putin as well.
It is also not lost on the Russians that the United States has had a hand in supporting Nazis in the Ukraine and elsewhere for a very long time.
As an expert on this issue, Russ Bellant, told The Nation magazine back in 2014,°*° “the key organization” in the 2014 Ukrainian coup was the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists , which was founded in the 1920’s, was actively in alliance with Nazi Germany as the “14 Waffen SS Division,” and continues to defend its war-time role today.
This group, which continues to wear the “SS” insignia on its uniforms, openly calls for the purging of Jews, Poles—and, yes, of Russians as well—from Ukrainian society.
The OUN was also a key factor in the 2004 Orange Revolution—which the United States was also behind—and Viktor Yuschenko, who was the Prime Minister of the Ukraine from 2005-2010, was closely aligned with them as they proceeded, among other things, to erect monuments to Nazi leaders throughout Ukraine.
As Bellant explains, “he United States was very aggressive in trying to keep the nationalists in power, but they lost the election” in 2010.
And so the United States pumped millions of dollars into the Ukraine in the intervening period to help these nationalists return to power in the 2014 coup that precipitated the current crisis in Ukraine.
The United States has continued to provide military training to the ultra-nationalist forces post-coup—at first directly, and now, after Congress passed a law forbidding such training, as a consequence of their being so embedded in Kiev’s regular forces.
The taproot of the trouble is NATO enlargement, the central element of a larger strategy to move Ukraine out of Russia’s orbit and integrate it into the West.
At the same time, the EU’s expansion eastward and the West’s backing of the pro-democracy movement in Ukraine— beginning with the Orange Revolution in 2004—were critical elements, too.
Since the mid1990s, Russian leaders have adamantly opposed NATO enlargement, and in recent years, they have made it clear that they would not stand by while their strategically important neighbor turned into a Western bastion.
For Putin, the illegal overthrow of Ukraine’s democratically elected and pro-Russian president—which he rightly labeled a “coup”—was the final straw.
And frankly, the downplaying of the role of neo-Nazis in the current Ukrainian conflict is just baffling.
For example, in the NPR piece I mentioned earlier, in which Steve Inskeep interviewed the CEO of Voice of America, Inskeep mocked what he characterized as the “false flag” conspiracies of some who, apparently, deserve no voice in the Ukraine debate.
The truth is, these alternative viewpoints have little to do with alarm over “false flags,” but over Nazi flags.
One would think this to be a worthy news item, but instead, it is dismissed out of hand.
Moreover, it would be unfair to say that it was only Putin and Russia that were disturbed by these events.
The fact is that Ukrainians of Russian descent in the east of the country, particularly in the Donbass region, were also frightened by the nature of the new government, as were the residents of Crimea.
It was not long before violent tensions began, and the blame for the violence that unfolded cannot be laid solely, or even primarily, at Putin’s feet.
What has happened in Ukraine is the United States organized and financed a coup.
Either from intention or carelessness, the coup elements include ultra-right-wing nationalists whose roots go back to organizations that fought for Hitler in the Second World War against the Soviet Union.
These elements destroyed Russian war memorials celebrating the liberation of the Ukraine from the Nazis by the Red Army and also celebrating Gen.
So this spread a great deal of alarm in southern and eastern Ukraine, which are traditionally Russian provinces.
The other act which alarmed the “traditionally Russian provinces” was the vote in the Kiev parliament, almost immediately after the coup, to ban Russian as the second official language.
The result was that pro-Russian separatists in Ukraine, without any prompting or support from Vladimir Putin—though that support would certainly come later—seized parts of the eastern Donetsk and Luhansk regions in March of 2014—-very shortly after the coup—and declared their own “People’s Republics,” of course harkening back to the old Soviet Union.
In response, the new government in Kiev attacked the separatists in these regions in what they dubbed as “anti-terrorist” operations, and a brutal civil war has broken out.
While the separatists have been vilified in the United States media as pawns of Putin, this is just not the case.
They are homegrown militants who want independence from the Kiev government, which they view as illegitimate and fascist.
Moreover, and quite ironically, while the United States insisted on elections in Kosovo in regards to independence from Serbia as a condition to avoid the 1999 bombing—an insistence that helped derail a possible peace—the United States and E.U. were dead set against elections which the two Donbass regions called in November of 2014 to elect their own governments.
And both the United States and E.U. were critical of Russia’s willingness to honor these elections.
Of course, this goes to show again that it is the United States which decides whether and when people can decide to declare their independence.
But even assuming that the people of the Donbass are not entitled to their Own country, and even assuming that one is troubled that Putin’s government in Moscow ended up following the lead of independent Russian militias in joining the fray in the Donbass, it is still fair to consider the forces on the other side that the Western governments and media are Supporting against these peoples.
While it is rare to hear this in the United States mainstream press, Kiev’s use of volunteer paramilitaries to stamp out the Russian-backed Donetsk and Luhansk “people’s republics,” proclaimed in eastern Ukraine in March, should send a shiver down Europe’s spine.
Recently formed battalions such as Donbas, Dnipro and Azov, with several thousand men under their command, are officially under the control of the interior ministry but their financing is murky, their training inadequate and their ideology often alarming.
How the proliferation of Nazis is not, by all appearances, of concern to the United States press, while the concern about Putin has risen to pathological levels, is simply beyond me.
And, the fact is that the neo-Nazis are winning, with the civilian population of the Donbass taking a very bad beating as a result of the fighting, as well as from the siege being laid to that area by the government in Kiev.
Thus, as UNICEF has recently reported, one million children in East Ukraine are now in grave need of aid to survive.
UNICEF further explains, “Children in eastern Ukraine have been living under the constant threat of unpredictable fighting and shelling for the past three years.
And, it is not the Russians, but the pro-West government in Kiev which is carrying out this destruction, again to the collective yawn of the United States media.
I find it quite ironic that NPR has recently been promoting the film called Bitter Harvest, about the famine in the Ukraine in 1932-1933 which is generally explained as an intentional man-made famine imposed by Joseph Stalin, and yet it has had nothing to say about the current starvation of children in Ukraine.
Similarly, the press has very little to say about the USSaudi imposed famine upon Yemen, which may kill up to seven million people through starvation.**°—about the same as the highest estimates of those who died in the Ukraine famine of the early 1930s.
But, of course, it is always easier to dwell upon the crimes of Joseph Stalin over eighty years ago rather than focus on our own crimes, which are causing people to starve now and which we could actually do something to stop.
Meanwhile, in its same announcement, UNICEF recommends that, in the interest of peace and the end of such suffering, all parties abide by what is known as the Minsk Agreements—the most recent version of which was put together by Germany’s Angela Merkel and France’s Franc¢ois Hollande.
As The Economist explains, the Minsk Agreements offer “a detailed roadmap for resolving the conflict.
However, before he even left Sochi, Kerry was intentionally undermined by the Biden wing of the Obama Administration.
Indeed, Hunter Biden was suspiciously named to the board of a Ukrainian natural gas company in April, 2014—just after the 2014 coup in Ukraine.
In addition to the Donbass conflict, of course, is the question of the Crimea, which I often hear folks talk about as cause to fear Vladimir Putin and Russia.
The facts are largely undisputed that on March 1, 2014, shortly after the coup, Putin, with Russian Parliamentary approval and in the context of much unrest in Crimea provoked by the change of government in Kiev, decided to send troops to secure Crimea, which included a longstanding Russian navy base in the port city of Sevastopol on the Black Sea.
Crimea had been a part of Russia, and then the Soviet Union, from 1783 until 1954 when Nikita Khrushchev voluntarily “gifted” it to Ukraine.
Given this, it is not all too surprising that, in the time of crisis precipitated by the overthrow of Yanukovych, Russia would want to protect its interests, naval base and the Russian speakers in Crimea.
I have little doubt that the US, confronted with a similar situation—and currently occupying foreign territories with at best a dubious right to do so —would do the same thing.
In any case, a couple of weeks after the Russian military intervention, on March 16, 2014, the Crimeans voted overwhelmingly in a referendum to secede from Ukraine and join Russia.
This is not too surprising given that sixty percent of Crimeans are Russian speakers.
And, while both the EU and United States called this referendum a sham and refused to honor it, polls show that the Crimeans themselves believe this referendum to be valid; and that the Crimeans, including the Tartar minority which is reasonably wary of Russia, are happier under Russian governance than Ukrainian.
As the radical, pro-Putin Forbes magazine relates, “he United States and European Union may want to save Crimeans from themselves.
At a minimum, it is not clear to me how Russia’s actions regarding Crimea, especially as they ended up being welcomed by the Crimeans, is any cause for Americans to believe that Russia is somehow a threat to humanity.
Meanwhile, the United States used the collapse of the USSR, which had once put some brakes on United States Empire, to expand throughout the entire globe.
And Russia has no bases outside the former Soviet Union with the sole exception of Syria.
In addition, these bases cause untold environmental degradation, have a huge carbon footprint, and encourage the proliferation of commercial sex zones around the US’s worldwide bases.
As just one example, I’ll never stop feeling shocked, and even quite irate really, when I hear a United States government spokesman and/or news pundit accuse China of military aggression because it is seeking some control over the South China Sea and because it takes some umbrage at the US’s attempt instead to assert control there.
That we clearly do not understand how arrogant and insulting such a position is only reveals the depths of our own psychosis.
Meanwhile, it is Russia and Vladimir Putin who are accused of being the crazy ones.
This explains the antipathy the current Iranian government—which came to power in 1979 after overthrowing this torture state and then immediately proceeded to kidnap 52 Americans at the United States Embassy in retaliation—has toward the United States, and why Iran has instead cozied up to the US’s old Cold War rival, Russia.
Lest one forget, there is very solid evidence that our beloved Ronald Reagan, in order to win the 1980 election, undermined then President Jimmy Carter’s negotiations with Iran to free the hostages, and indeed prevailed upon Iran (with whom Reagan would later sell arms to fund his Contra terrorists) to hold the hostages months longer, until after he was inaugurated in January of 1981.
As Robert Parry, the journalist most responsible for breaking this “October Surprise” story, relates, even if we accept the current allegations against Trump regarding collusion with Russia prove true, they would pale in comparison to Reagan’s treacherous collusion with Iran to win the 1980 elections.
It goes without saying that there has been some terrible blow-back from this operation, blowback which we continue to experience to this day.
What makes this all the more troubling, as we would find out years later, was that the United States began to train, arm and support these fighters—or, if you would allow me, terrorists—-BEFORE the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
According to the official version of history, CIA aid to the Mujahiddin began during 1980, that is to say, after the Soviet army invaded Afghanistan on December 24, 1979.
And that very day, I wrote a note to the president in which I explained to him that in my opinion this aid was going to induce a Soviet military intervention.
Of course, in our post-9/11 world, I would hope that even someone like Brzezinski would have to concede that the calculus as to whether the Afghan escapade was worth it in terms of United States blood and treasure is now much different.
And, for Russia, as Brzezinski himself bragged, the results were devastating, as they were for the poor Afghanis whom the United States willingly sacrificed for their Cold War chess game.
In the end, 15,000 Russian soldiers were killed in the war, while one million Afghanis lost their lives.
As one of my favorite philosophers and writers, Michael Parenti, explains, the United States was in reality fighting modernization efforts of a socialist government, albeit supported by the Soviet Union but not controlled by it.
The government also continued a campaign begun by the king to emancipate women from their age-old tribal bondage.
It provided public education for girls and for the children of various tribes.
As we know, with the help of the US, and despite the invasion of the Soviet Union, which did come, the jihadists were able to overthrow this progressive government, though the government did hold out for six months after the Soviets left.
The jihadist victory ushered in the Taliban, whose retrograde, medieval reign was marked by a return to the repression of women’s rights, religious intolerance and the destruction of ancient historical ruins.
Of course, the United States would intervene against the Taliban government right after the 9/11 attacks, having come to understand that, quite possibly, Brzezinski’s cost/benefit analysis in supporting extremists to throw Afghanistan into chaos was wrong.
In any case, the US’s operations against the Taliban were greatly aided by Russia under Vladimir Putin.
Russia had much to add to the efforts given the substantial assets it continued to have in Afghanistan.
Recall that, just a few months before the 9/11 attacks, Bush had met with Putin and claimed to have become fast friends with him.
Indeed, Bush would famously state of Putin, “I looked the man in the eye.
However, Bush did not show much appreciation to Putin, quickly taking actions which were predictably provocative to Russia.
Thus, Bush backed out of the anti-ballistic treaty which he knew Russia had greatly valued, and posted military trainers in the former Soviet country of Georgia.
And, the US-Putin relationship seems to have gone sideways when Putin did not go along with second Gulf War in 2003.
As long-time Russian analyst Mark Ames recently told Telesur reporter Abby Martin, this was Putin’s unforgivable sin, and it was after this point that the United States started feigning concern about democracy in Russia.
The news leading up to and stoking the invasion of Iraq in 2003 was as fake as a three-dollar bill, with false intelligence being drummed up by the CIA about weapons of mass destruction that didn’t exist.
At least half a million Iraqis were killed as a result of the 2003 invasion of Irag,*°* which many Iraqis view as leaving their country in the worst condition it has been since the Mongol invasion of 1258.
Moreover, Iraq continues to be a breeding ground for jihadists, this time in the form of ISIS, which had no foothold in Iraq prior to the invasion.
Indeed, say what you will about Saddam Hussein, he was a secularist and a mortal enemy of such extremist forces.
The toppling of Hussein and wiping out of his entire Republican Guard only unleashed more terror on the world, when it was claimed it was aimed at doing the opposite.
As Iragis continue to suffer from ISIS terrorism, and as the United States is fighting ISIS in Mosul, it is important to remember that it was the invasion of Irag—a war of choice if there ever was one—that caused this.
One must forgive Putin, then, for having refused to go along with this insanity.
Meanwhile, it must be noted that the invasion of Afghanistan after 9/11, at least to the extent that it morphed into the toppling of the Taliban as opposed to merely attacking the al-Qaeda bases in Afghanistan, was also a disastrous decision.
Over 15 years and counting, the United States is still bogged down in Afghanistan, as should also have been predictable given the Russians’ experience there, and countless Afghanis have lost their lives in the apparently endless war that the 2001 invasion precipitated.
In addition, it must also be pointed out that, for all of their many real faults, the Taliban had, by the time of the invasion, come close to wiping out the heroin poppy fields there.
Nass, noting that there is nearly no public debate about the impact on the United States invasion on heroin supply, raises some thorny questions, such as whether “heroin shipments from Afghanistan are at lower risk of being seized than heroin coming from Latin America.
This is an obvious question, of course, given that the United States has military and intelligence services, like the CIA, swarm all over Afghanistan, and yet the heroin flows out the doors.
Nass makes an appropriate quip about the CIA-ContraCocaine connection in her piece.
One of the few willing to do so, like veteran journalist Douglas Valentine, is certain that the CIA, which also helped to run drugs to support the United States war efforts in Vietnam and to support the Kuomintang’s fight against Mao’s forces in China, is indeed helping smuggle heroin out of Afghanistan.
In any case, when a loved one of yours dies of a heroin overdose, and it’s a good chance one will, given the thousands dying of such overdoses every year—that’s the equivalent of over three World Trade Center attacks per year—know that the United States foray into Afghanistan bears a significant responsibility.
In short, the over $5 trillion and counting the United States has spent on its post9/11 interventions*°° has not appeared to do the world or the United States very much good, as judged by the countless lives lost, the unleashing of only more terror, and the increased proliferation of drugs.
And, just when it appeared that United States foreign policy couldn’t get any crazier, it did.
Thus, as we learned from Seymour Hersh back in 2007, the US began at that time to try to weaken Iran and Syria by supporting Sunni extremist groups to subvert those countries.
It goes on to detail the decades-long interference of the United States in Syrian affairs.
And, it further postulates that the United States actually decided to go so far as overthrowing the regime in Syria in 2009 after Assad refused to allow an oil pipeline which would have allowed Qatar to connect through Syria to Turkey, in lieu of a pipeline allowing Russia to connect a pipeline from Syria through Iran and onward to Russia.
While Kennedy has been greatly maligned for this piece, his argument seems at least plausible, especially given the US’s general propensity to intervene internationally to protect Western interests in such valuable assets as oil.
For me, though, the piece is equally important for Bobby, Jr.’s attempt at soul-searching in light of his father’s assassination.
The piece is a classic case of trying to “love thine enemy,” which I have always believed we are called on to do, but which few dare to put into practice.
In any case, the United States continues to intervene in Syria, as we know, in the most incoherent ways.
But again, I’m sure that this won’t stop the United States media’s “tut-tutting” about Aleppo.
Fisk also relates what many of us already know—that, as Syrian soldiers predicted, the United States has willfully allowed ISIS forces it has pushed out of Mosul, Iraq to cross the border into Syria to fight against the Syrian government.
As Fisk notes, these forces quickly moved in to “seize the beautiful city of Palmyra all over again,” and to continue its destruction of the ancient Roman architecture in that city.
Similarly, while the media fixates on Russia’s alleged crimes in Syria, there is nearly no discussion about the unfolding destruction of Yemen, one of the poorest countries on earth, by Saudi forces armed with United States weapons, including cluster bombs, and assisted by the United States with mid-flight refueling of their bomber planes.
Obama continued to supply such lethal weaponry even as the slaughter in Yemen accelerated, and Trump continues this supply even still.
In addition, the UN has been saying for some time, and it has just reiterated, that Yemen is now on the verge of a massive famine which could kill millions, and this would not be happening but for the US-Saudi war on that country.
And yet this news is being greeted with the sound of crickets chirping.
Again, when you can obsess about the crimes of others, like Putin, you don’t have to worry about your own country’s horrible atrocities.
President after President, Trump included, inexplicably continue to partner with the Saudi monarchy despite its suppression of women’s rights, and _ its authoritarian nature, despite the fact that Saudi Arabia does more than any other country to spread Islamist terrorism, including in the form of alQaeda, and despite the fact that fifteen of the nineteen 9/11 attackers were Saudi.
This is not even to mention the biggest elephant in the room, which is never to be spoken of, and that is Israel and its outsized influence over United States foreign policy.
Meanwhile, Putin’s Russia came much later to the game in Syria, not intervening militarily in that country until late September, 2015.
While the dreaded Putin has been President on and off since 1999, he did not stray beyond the old Soviet borders, and really not all that far, until nearly the end of 2015.
It was the invasion of Libya, moreover, that would ultimately lead to Putin’s decision to intervene in Syria.
This was another case of the West, the United States included, removing a secular leader in Muammar Gaddafi, quite possibly the greatest enemy of al-Qaeda, and allowing the country to be overridden by religious extremists.
Indeed, post-invasion, ISIS itself controls huge swaths of the country, including the once-prosperous town of Sirte, which lies on the Mediterranean close to Europe.
In any case, Vladimir Putin, who had been watching the United States rampage through the Middle East like a bull in a china shop, finally decided that he had had enough, not just because of the ultimately disastrous results of the intervention, but because he rightly felt that Russia was bamboozled by NATO’s act of regime change in Libya.
Thus, Russia, along with China, ultimately abstained from the Security Council resolution which authorized military action in Libya because of its explicitly limited goal of only authorizing a no-fly zone to protect civilians.
Neither Russia nor China wanted regime change in Libya and never authorized it.
And yet NATO wasted no time after setting up the no-fly zone before moving quickly to regime change.
When this became apparent, Putin, then Prime Minister, publicly stated that NATO had no right to engage in regime change,*”® and certainly had no right to kill Gaddafi as NATO was trying to do and ultimately helped to do.
Indeed, Putin ultimately watched the video of Gaddafi being killed, and sodomized in the process, with horror, and this played a big part in his deciding that the same thing would not be allowed to play out in Syria with the similar disruptive results.
Putin publicly described the killing as “repulsive,” and publicly expressed his fear that the West was actively and intentionally moving to destabilize various societies, including Russia.
This is most appropriate, given that Clinton was the real architect behind NATO’s imperial assault against Libya.
And, as usual with such interventions, the Clinton team (Hillary, along with Samantha Power and Susan Rice), with the always-willing support of the media, peddled the most absurd lies to justify the NATO action.
The general lie which led the United States and NATO into Libya, and promoted even by such left-wing sources as DemocracyNow!, was that we needed to intervene to protect the human rights of the Libyan people from Gaddafi.
That is, the US, and Clinton’s team in particular, put forth the nowcommonly used pretext of humanitarian intervention.
However, as Clinton’s own emails show—the ones released by the United States State Department, not the ones allegedly hacked—the Clinton team itself did not believe, by the time the intervention started on March 17, that there was an impending human rights disaster that the Libyans needed protection from.
Based on numerous eyewitness reports, it is the Embassy’s assessment that the government no longer controls Benghazi.
Then, on March 2, a couple of weeks before Resolution 1973 was passed, Harriet Spanos of USAID sent an email describing the relative calm in Benghazi.
In other words, while NATO would go on bombing for another 7 months, Blumenthal is already admitting that there is really no humanitarian basis for continuing the conflict.
And, he explains that the reasons for doing so include, first and foremost, boosting Obama’s then-anemic approval ratings.
Again, the pretext of saving Libyan lives is notably absent from this list.
Moreover, in terms of the alleged goal of promoting regional security, a number of emails reflect the awareness that the bombing campaign, and the toppling of the aggressively anti-al-Qaeda Gaddafi, might very well open a space for al-Qaeda and allied forces to take over many parts of Libya, as they actually have.
For example, one email, again from Blumenthal to Clinton, explains that “raditionally, the eastern part of Libya has been a stronghold for radical Islamist groups, including the al-Qaeda-linked Libyan Islamic Fighting Group.
Given this knowledge, how Blumenthal could then argue that “winning the war” against Qaddafi was somehow necessary for regional security is bizarre in the extreme.
Meanwhile, the emails actually demonstrate a complete lack of concern for humanitarian violations by the pro-NATO rebels.
Now, summarily executing even armed combatants is a clear violation of the Geneva Conventions, but neither Blumenthal nor Hillary demonstrate much concern about such trifles.
Even more concerning, it became known during the course of the NATO invasion that the claims of foreign mercenaries fighting for Qaddafi were false;*°* that, in fact, the alleged foreign mercenaries were really African guest workers.
What was really happening was that the rebels were summarily arresting and murdering people who happened to be black, and doing so in very large numbers.
The most outrageous lie which primed the world for the Libya intervention was that Gaddafi was allegedly handing out Viagra to his troops so that they could carry out mass rape.
I recall thinking when that claim was made with a straight face at that time by then-US Ambassador to the UN, Susan Rice—and of course repeated with equally straight face by Hillary Clinton and the United States press—that this claim was patently absurd and not worthy of belief.
Of course, human rights groups investigating this claim ultimately found no evidence of it.
The Clinton emails reveal one other important fact—that before and during the NATO conflict, Clinton and her team knew very well, and actually feared, that the conflict in Libya might very well have been resolved through negotiations; that indeed, Muammar Qaddafi’s son Saif was actually trying to find ways to do just that.
Remember that, well before the invasion, the Gaddafi government had already been making great efforts in achieving rapprochement with Washington, giving up its nuclear arms, compensating victims of the Lockerby bombing and allowing for more Western investment in Libya.
Consequently, Clinton shunned all efforts by the Gaddafis to avert an invasion, instead preferring a war—as Bill Clinton had preferred a war in Yugoslavia, and as both Bushes had preferred wars in Irag—despite its quite predictably horrible consequences, which would give the United States and its allies the hand they wanted in the future of Libyan and African affairs.
In the end, the welfare of the Libyan people, and of the people of Northern Africa, were sacrificed, not protected, by such a choice.
Indeed, as with all of our supposed “humanitarian interventions,” the cost to those enduring the intervention is always ignored.
In the case of Libya, for example, no one seemed to care that, while NATO allegedly (though not plausibly) intervened to protect Benghazi, it proceeded to level the important port city of Sirte, which also happened to be the city in which the African Union was founded and which Gaddafi hoped would be the capital for a new United States of Africa, with its own currency in lieu of both the US dollar and the Euro.
Meanwhile, Libya, with its advanced social system destroyed, went from being the most prosperous African nation pre-invasion to being the least prosperous.
But, of course, this was all to the good, according to NPR, which reported that the Libyan workers would be coddled no more, and would be forced instead to enter the dog-eat-dog world of the free market that we all love.
Thus, without tongue in cheek, or any note of irony, NPR, in its report, entitled, “Libya’s Economy Faces New Tests After Gadhafi Era,”78° explained that the biggest impediment to the new economic era is the Libyan worker who was simply spoiled by Gaddafi.
But NPR assured the concemed listener that the new regime would see to it that the Libyans would adapt to this new world order and get to work as they damn well should.
Not shockingly, however, other world leaders, such as Vladimir Putin, looked upon these events with grave concern, and even as directed against his country in particular, given that the United States and NATO had demonstrated their willingness to ravage an entire country to keep countries like Russia out of the economic game there.
The United States blocked this resolution because it was now its jihadist friends who were threatening the city, and the US’s “humanitarian concerns,” if there were any, extended only to would-be victims of Gaddafi.
And the jihadists did a very thorough job of laying Bani Walid, and other areas of the country, to waste.
Bani Walid was among the last cities to fall under the control of anti-Gaddafi forces during Libya’s internal conflict last year.
Hundreds of residents from Bani Walid have been arrested by armed militias.
Many continue to be detained without charge or trial across Libyan prisons and detention centres, including Misratah.
The entrance of anti-Gaddafi forces into Bani Walid in October 2011 was accompanied by widespread looting and other abuses.
Thousands of individuals suspected of having fought for or supported the government of Mu’ammar al-Gaddafi continue to be detained across Libya.
The vast majority have yet to be officially charged or brought to trial.
Since the fall of Tripoli and the vast majority of the country under the control of anti-Gaddafi forces in August 2011, human rights abuses by armed militias such as arbitrary arrest and detention; torture or other ill-treatment—including death; extrajudicial executions and forced displacement continued to take place in a climate of impunity.
To date, armed militia seize people outside the framework of the law and hold them incommunicado in secret detention facilities, where they are vulnerable to torture of other illtreatment.
Similarly, the heroic “freedom fighters” supported by the United States (you may be starting to see a pattern here with U.S-backed “freedom fighters”), and spurred on by the Clinton and media lies about “black mercenaries” fighting for Qaddafi, laid waste to the all-black town of Tawergha, again with little attention given in the United States to the carnage.
As it turned out, Libya was just the first of numerous new military interventions the United States would make in Africa.
Still it is argued that it is Russia which is trying to take over the world.
In any case, the US/NATO destruction of Libya had two impacts vis a vis Russia.
First, it undermined then-Russian President Dmitry Medvedev in the eyes of Russians, who believed that he had been tricked by the West in assenting to the NATO intervention.
As Stephen F Cohen explained to me in an interview in 2015, if the West wanted Medvedev, viewed as the more moderate one between himself and Putin, to continue in the more powerful Presidential position, they made a huge error in setting him up as the fool by suckering him into believing that the intervention would merely take the form of a no-fly zone.
And indeed, in a 2015 interview on CNN, Obama claimed that he had wanted a “re-set” with Russia under Medvedev.
And, while Obama then goes on to, of course, blame Putin for subsequently preventing the “re-set” when he became President again, Obama takes no responsibility for his own conduct in undermining Medvedev and paving the way for the return of Putin, nor for his causing Putin to have a different view of the trustworthiness of the United States after the Libya debacle.
Second, as indicated above, the intervention would play a role in leading Vladimir Putin, who would become President again in 2012, to decide to intervene militarily in Syria.
Of course, let us not forget that, before militarily intervening, Putin, notwithstanding his anger at Obama’s Libya foray, pulled Obama’s chestnuts out of the fire in Syria.
Thus, in 2013, Putin brokered a deal over Syria’s chemical weapons which saved Obama from having to greatly up the US’s military intervention in Syria.
But of course, as Putin knows all too well, no good deed goes unpunished.
Incredibly, United States Ambassador to the UN Samantha Power feigned outrage, not in response to this ill-timed mass killing, which ensured there would be no peace soon in Syria, but in response to Russia’s audacity in bringing her into the UN ona weekend to hear Russia complain about who killed whom in Syria.
Thoughts of the foregoing event certainly come to my mind when friends on an almost daily basis talk about how allegedly crazy Vladimir Putin is.
Honestly, it is not fathomable that he is crazier or more reckless than our leaders, who seem to make the most disastrous choices about whom our enemies and friends are, and I might suggest that it is their mental health that Americans should be worrying about.
Indeed, former President Jimmy Carter opined in July of 2015—-well before anyone was concerned about alleged Russian interference—that America is no longer a democracy, but rather, “an oligarchy with unlimited political bribery being the essence of getting the nominations for president or being elected president.
And the same thing applies to governors, and United States Senators and congress members.
As the Washington Post reported in March of 2016, United States elections ranked dead last among Western democracies.
The US’s poor ranking is also due, as the piece relates, to the disenfranchisement of voters, particularly people of color, through voter ID laws, as well as to the unprecedented power that money has in the election process, a problem only exacerbated by the Supreme Court’s Citizens United decision, which removed monetary caps on donations and opened the flood gates for secret PAC funding not subject to reporting requirements.
And, of course, as the United States becomes more economically unequal and disparate, this problem will only grow and magnify.
Other problems include partisan gerrymandering, particularly by the Republicans, and the removal of ex-felons who have served their time—or as we saw in Florida in 2000, thousands of individuals who were mistakenly listed as ex-felons—from the voter rolls.
This is not even to mention the outdated, anti-democratic Electoral College system, which allows someone to win the popular vote but lose the election anyway.
In short, the “land of the free” is not so free, and it is not so democratic.
I was one of those people who voted third party because I truly could not decide who was the lesser of the two evils in this election.
For reasons I believe well-illustrated above, I could not vote for Hillary Clinton, who had a well-established record of maneuvering the United States into destructive wars such as the one in Libya, and who was instrumental in making permanent the destruction of democracy in Honduras.
I also could not vote for Donald Trump, who ran on a racist and xenophobic platform that is simply unconscionable.
The one redeeming attribute I did see in Trump, however, was the one at the heart of this book —that he wanted, for whatever reason, to make peace with Russia, which I sincerely believe is a worthy friend and ally.
In any case, I ended up going to the polls with the belief that both major candidates being offered to us were deeply flawed, but in different ways.
And certainly, at least on the Democratic side, such an awful offering was not necessary, inevitable or desirable.
Thus, as we know specifically from the DNC emails that were either leaked or hacked, , the DNC was dead set against who could have been a more popular, change candidate in Bernie Sanders, from winning the nomination.
We also know that the Clintons ran against the candidate they hoped to run against—Donald Trump—in a terrible miscalculation of his chances of winning.
Even after these historic errors which have now become quite apparent, the DNC just elected the establishment candidate, Tom Perez, as its new leader over the insurgent candidate, Keith Ellison, who was backed by Bernie Sanders, possibly sealing the Democrats’ fate in the next round of elections.
Instead of doing some much needed soul-searching about how they contributed to their own loss in an election they should have been able to win easily, the Democrats have now seized upon a plan which is as dangerous as it is unprincipled, which, in my view unfortunately, appears to be working for them.
If any event seemed to undo Clinton’s campaign in the eleventh hour, it is the infamous letter by FBI Director Comey, who announced, inexplicably to many observers, that the FBI’s investigation into Hillary Clinton’s private email server was still ongoing in light of emails found on the server of one Anthony Weiner—also a Democrat, and the husband at that time of Clinton’s trusted adviser, Huma Abedin—in a separate investigation into Weiner’s sexting with underage girls.
Indeed, at the time, there was an outcry that Comey should be investigated for possible violations of the Hatch Act, which forbids government officials from engaging in conduct which could impact the outcome of an election.
In addition, it also seems quite convenient for Comey to now be pushing the Russian collusion story because it takes all the attention away from his own, greater misdeed , which most certainly influenced the outcome of the 2016 elections.
Indeed, it is just bizarre that he claims his bureau has been investigating the Trump-Russia connection since July 2016, but is only speaking up now.
And, of course, he still isn’t really saying anything, only confirming that the FBI is still investigating the matter.
For their part, the Democrats have largely stopped complaining about Comey’s pre-election publication of the continuing FBI investigation into Clinton’s emails, and for obvious reasons.
While the Comey letter may have doomed Clinton’s election bid, and may have been an error in judgment if not much worse, the letter certainly grew out of wounds self-inflicted by the Democrats themselves.
First of all, Hillary Clinton herself, as she has admitted on several occasions, committed a huge error in judgment by maintaining a private, unsecured email server as Secretary of State.
If she had not committed such a lapse in judgment, the Comey letter obviously never would have come about.
And, of course, you have the ticking time bomb of Anthony Weiner, whose obsessive and bizarre sexting also played a role in this letter being issued.
While it may not be polite to do so, one might also wonder what Huma was thinking by not having thrown Weiner to the curb a long time before, again possibly averting the Comey disaster.
In any case, the Comey letter, as damaging as it was, is an inconvenient fact for the Democrats to focus on for these reasons.
And so the Democrats, having nothing to offer the American people in terms of policies, have now seized upon the allegation that Putin personally ordered the hacking of the DNC, with the knowledge and complicity of the Trump campaign, in order to help Trump get elected, and that the Wikileaks regular release of the product of this hacking was part of this plan.
First, no one really believes the emails did much, if anything, to affect the outcome of the election, and so the “no harm, no foul rule” may properly be invoked here.
Moreover, as I believe I have illustrated in great detail above, such an act on the part of the Kremlin would be mere child’s play compared to the election interventions and even violent coups and regime changes the United States has instigated and/or supported throughout the globe over many decades, including by Hillary Clinton herself in the case of Libya and Honduras.
Basil’s Cathedral (which most people mistakenly believe is the nearby Kremlin) ominously firing a laser down at The White House.
Even this article, whose graphic tells you where they are coming from on this matter, begrudging acknowledges that “he C.I.A., for its part, worked to overthrow regimes in Iran, Cuba, Haiti, Brazil, Chile, and Panama.
But again, the ferocity of the Democrats’ expressions of concern on this issue is inversely proportional to what they have to offer the American people in terms of real policies.
The White House watched for signs that Russian intelligence was crossing what a senior national-security official called “the line between covert influence and adversely affecting the vote count”—and found no evidence that it had done so.
At the time, Clinton was leading in the race, which, the official said, reinforced Obama’s decision not to respond more aggressively.
Let us recall, first of all, how other similar claims have been made in the past about our ostensible foes, only to be seriously questioned, if not debunked, later and then forgotten.
One such alleged plot that comes to mind is the “North Korea hacked Sony” scandal a couple years back.
Thus, in the end, after the FBI quickly pointed the finger at North Korea—impossibly quickly in the minds of many computer experts—and after the media gleefully went along, the press had to sheepishly admit later that the hacking was most likely an “inside job” by a disgruntled Sony employee.
For what it is worth, legendary computer expert John McAfee, who correctly stated at the time that North Korea was not behind the Sony hack, guarantees that Russia was not behind the DNC hack.
One of the things that the CIA said and I’ve been saying for years is that it is virtually impossible to find attribution for any hack because a good hacker can hide their tracks plus make it look like someone else did it.
McAfee believes, as I do, that the Russian hack story is a politicallymotivated ploy being pushed mainly by the Democrats who revile Vladimir Putin, and, in my view, are desperately in need of a scapegoat for their recent election loss.
In addition, let us consider the source of “Russia-gate,”the Russia-Trump conspiracy theory.
And there is indeed some reasonable suspicion that the CIA is, at a minimum, lying about the Russians having hacked the DNC, or even that the CIA was the one who procured and leaked the DNC emails themselves in order to set up the Russians.
To put a finer point on it, the CIA is a nefarious, criminal organization which often misleads the American public and government into wars and misadventures which they would have been much better off to avoid, and it should have been done away with long ago.
Legend has it that, after the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Jack and Bobby Kennedy, who were told wrongly by the CIA that the Cubans would rise up against Fidel Castro during this counter-revolutionary uprising, decided to disperse the CIA to the four corners of the earth.
I do not know if that is truth or apostasy, but what is known is that the Kennedys never trusted the CIA after the Bay of Pigs, feeling that they had been misled about the chances of success of the operation.
In any case, someone should have long ago, and certainly should now, destroy the dreaded institution of the CIA, which, among many other famous crimes, provided much of the bogus “evidence” of WMDs which justified the United States invasion of Iraq in 2003.
And, the CIA has, quite uncharacteristically, shown its cards with regard to its desire that Trump not get any strange notions about ending the new Cold War, and has even publically made not-so-veiled threats against him in the event he does.
As with the CIA’s claims about WMDs, the United States media has been all too willing to accept and regurgitate the CIA’s claims about Russian hacking and Trump’s alleged conspiracy with Russia to steal the election.
Indeed, we may have to continue asking this pointed question, as even a number of Democratic leaders are now warning their base.
As Greenwald continues, “’n the question of the Trump campaign conspiring with the Russians here, there is smoke, but there is no fire at all,’” he said, adding, “There’s no little campfire, there’s no little candle, there’s no spark.
Not only are they looking for it, I would emphasize, but they have been looking for it since July of 2016, and still haven’t found anything.
Similarly, the Senate Intelligence Committee, according to Greenwald, is starting to panic about the real possibility that no evidence of collusion between Trump and Putin will be found.
In addition, the Veterans of United States Intelligence Services find the claims quite dubious.
They believe, in fact, that the DNC emails at issue were leaked , and not hacked by Russia or anyone else.
And, with the technology they have—technology we know about from the leaks (not hacks) of Snowden—these Veterans explain, the NSA should be able to say with certainty who hacked the information, if it were hacked, and to whom that hacked information was sent.
The fact that the NSA cannot do this, as it admits, demonstrates to the Veterans that the information was not in fact hacked at all, but leaked, for example by someone in the DNC copying the emails on a thumb drive and then sharing it from there.
Such a leak—as opposed to a hack—would not have been detected by the NSA, the Veterans claim.
Of course, the other theory is that there was a hack, the NSA knows who did it, but won’t say because the source of the hack is not a convenient culprit.
This brings us to the new revelations of Wikileaks, which have been made as | write this book.
To wit, Wikileaks has released a veritable treasure trove of CIA documents, which justify fearing that organization much more than Putin; and prove that the CIA had the means to hack the DNC itself and make it look like the Russians did it.
If this doesn’t make you feel less secure about your privacy and the safety of your information and communications, I don’t know what will.
But more to the point, the Wikileaks documents show that the CIA has possession of foreign hacking-software tools, including Russian, which they could have used to hack the DNC themselves and make it look like someone else did it.
Another program described in the documents, named Umbrage, is a voluminous library of cyberattack techniques that the C.I.A. has collected from malware produced by other countries, including Russia.
According to the WikiLeaks release, the large number of techniques allows the C.I.A. to mask the origin of some of its attacks and confuse forensic investigators.
I would first suggest that Trump appears to be blackmail proof, as he weathered so many scandals, sexual and otherwise, with ease, and is most likely correct that he could kill someone and still not lose the support of his sizable base.
Moreover, as Greenwald explains in the March 16, 2017 edition of The Intercept, “Obama’s former CIA chief also cast serious doubt on the credibility of the infamous, explosive ‘dossier’ originally published by BuzzFeed, saying that its author, Christopher Steele, paid intermediaries to talk to the sources for it.
More disturbingly, there is in fact good reason to believe that it is not the Russians at all who are blackmailing Trump, but rather, the CIA itself.
Thus, from what we have been given to know, it was not the Russians who came to Trump to tell him that they had incriminating evidence on him, as any blackmailer would do.
This conduct of United States intelligence officials is not only “unusual,” I would contend, but totally improper.
This certainly sounds like the conduct of a blackmailer, and it is incredible that so few in the mainstream press are concerned about the plausible blackmailing operation, by our own government, of a now-sitting United States President.
The same, of course, can be said of the intelligence community’s successful attempt to remove Mike Flynn, another open friend of Russia— friendship with Russia apparently being a high crime these days —as National Security Adviser.
First of all, if it is true that Flynn (whom I otherwise have a lot of concerns about aside from Russia) might have spoken to the Russian Ambassador—after Trump was elected, and when it was Clear that Flynn would have an official role in his administration— about the possibility of easing sanctions against Russia in the future, I don’t see how that it is some crime.
It seems that, in reality, it was not the fact of the communication with the Russian Ambassador , but the substance of it— which somehow threatened that peace might break out between the two countries—that was the problem.
On this point, I am in agreement with Dennis Kucinich, who broke ranks with fellow liberals over this issue, that the real crime here was the United States intelligence community’s spying on Flynn, and then leaking what they found to the press, in a successful attempt to remove Flynn for trying to do something constructive with Russia.
The implications of the coy revelation of the Flynn conversation with Kislyak were far-reaching.
Any interception of a communication by the NSA or the FBI has always been considered one of the most highly classified secrets in the United States intelligence universe of secrets.
And officers have long been under orders to protect the name of any American involved in any such intercepted communication at all costs.
But the senior official who leaked the story of Flynn-Kislyak conversation to Ignatius— obviously for a domestic political purpose—did not feel bound by any such rule.
That leak was the first move in a concerted campaign of using such leaks to suggest that Flynn had discussed the Obama administration’s sanctions with Kislyak in an effort to undermine Obama a23 administration policy.
In addition to the allegations about Flynn’s communications with the Russian Ambassador, the Democrats have tried to portray Flynn as being on the Russian payroll.
As journalist Robert Parry explains in debunking such claims, while the Democrats try to point to Flynn’s receiving payments from “several Russia-related entities, totaling nearly $68,000,” the largest share of the payments came from a speech he made at an anniversary dinner for RT News, for which he received a net of $45,386.
It is such a relationship that should be much more troubling to the American people than the quite paltry one Flynn seems to have had with Russia.
Still, the McCarthyite witch hunt against those who would dare even speak with or to the Russians continues, with Jeff Sessions now under investigation for his possible conversations with the Russian Ambassador before Trump took office.
Again, I am no fan of Jeff Sessions, Mike Flynn or Donald Trump, but at the same time, I take great umbrage at the use of the new Russian Scare to attack them, and again, to attack the one policy of Trump’s that actually makes sense.
That Trump is right on Russia only proves the old adage that a broken clock is right twice a day.
Moreover, even if Trump’s friendliness with Russia may be motivated by his business interests—Obama’s Ukraine policy may have been motivated at least in part by the Ukrainian business interests of Vice-President Biden’s son Hunter, as I explain above**°—this does not in itself make it wrong.
To ally with a country like Russia to confront such challenges makes all the sense in the world.
Obama himself once talked about “our Sputnik” moment—a reference, of course, to the US’s great strides with our space program, motivated largely by Russia’s own strides before us.
Not only did a once-strong Russia propel us to great advances in space travel, and consequently in science, but it is well-known that it also helped shame us into advances in civil rights as well as the creation of the very first human rights institution, the International Labor Organization in 1918.
To shun the Russians now simply makes no sense, and the fact that it is Trump who is pushing a sensible policy towards Russia does not make this policy any less sane.
Trump has enunciated a clear three-part position on Russia, which contrasts strongly with that of most of the United States political elite.
Washington has pursued policies that have ignored Russian interests (and sometimes international law as well) in order to encircle Moscow with military alliances and trade blocs conducive to United States interests.
In short, Trump’s at-least-stated goal of finding ways to cooperate with Russia (though it is never clear exactly what Trump may truly be thinking or intending) is reasonable on its face and should be welcomed.
Conversely, courting a confrontation with Russia, as I believe large segments of the United States government are willing if not eager to do, and as Trump may himself decide to do if he is goaded enough by the media and liberal establishment, who accuse him of being “too soft” on Russia—just as Johnson was goaded into invading Vietnam because he feared being accused of being “too soft” on Communism—is the height of folly.
This not only risks a nuclear conflagration, but it will certainly serve as justification for the US’s continued military expenditures and expansion, both of which are undermining the real security of the United States as well as the lives of thousands of innocents abroad.
As I tried to detail above, though not exhaustively, we have been lied and misled into nearly every war we have been involved in—by both the government and by the press which seems to be captured by it—and the results of these wars, if not the aims, have been the opposite of what we were told they were.
The war in Vietnam, for example, was not about defending democracy, but about destroying it.
The War on Terror quickly morphed into something else which actually spread the very terror, and from the very sources (e.g., Saudi Arabia), which we claimed to be fighting.
And our “humanitarian interventions” have only undermined the human rights and well-being of the peoples for whom we claimed to be fighting.
Meanwhile, the US, in the name of freedom and democracy, has fought against nearly every war of liberation waged by the peoples of the Third World, and has many times partnered with right-wing fascist forces, including in Ukraine at the present.
And up until 1991, the United States has justified such reactionary wars based on claims (usually exaggerated if not absolutely false) that the USSR was somehow behind these indigenous struggles for self-determination.
The current demonization of Russia will be used, and is indeed currently being used in such theaters as Ukraine and Syria, for similar purposes—to justify unjust wars that destroy the lives of poor people abroad; to sacrifice the lives of our poor, who are largely recruited into the armed forces for economic reasons; to deplete this country’s rich resources on the continued build-up of our over-bloated military to the detriment of much-needed infrastructure and social spending; and to greatly increase our carbon footprint.
While the Democrats see the Russia-bating as a way to get rid of Trump, either through impeachment, or in the next election, they must realize that this is a short-sighted gamble that is both unlikely to succeed, and that will do much harm to international relations even if it does.
They would be better to focus on principled fights over health care, infrastructure improvement, jobs, a living wage, and ratcheting down our reliance on the military, rather than pursuing this short-end game.
Even as I write this, President Trump is proposing a massive increase in the military budget, while also proposing to slash federal jobs and social benefits.
He is also doubling down on the US’s involvement in the slaughter in Yemen and upping the US’s aggressive posture towards Iran and North Korea.
This is the exact opposite of what we should be doing, and this must be resisted.
Sadly, those who used to resist such things (liberals, for lack of a better term), have become so inured to ridiculous military spending and adventures when “their guy” is in power that they won’t even resist such things when a Republican is in power.
There is nearly no debate in this society about war and peace—one of the most profound and pressing issues a society must grapple with—and that is one of the greatest tragedies that I can see.
In the end, it is important for American citizens, both liberal and conservative, to stand against such madness, and to stand for a foreign policy based upon reason and facts.
It is worth noting that the United States also had no problem with a similar event which took place in the very same year as the Tiananmen Square massacre.
In other words, the estimates of those protestors killed in Venezuela are identical to the estimates of those killed in Beijing, China.
Of course, given that Venezuela has a tiny population compared to that of China , these numbers are proportionately much greater.
DAVID TALBOT Horsemen of the Apocalypse The Men Who Are Destroying Life on Earth—And What It Means for Our Children Dick Russell Edited and Introduced by Robert F Kennedy Jr.
The planet is heating up at an alarming rate, and the results are everywhere to be seen.
Powerful politicians like senators Mitch McConnell and Jim Inhofe, who receive massive contributions from the oil and coal industries.
Most of these men are too intelligent to truly believe that climate change is not a growing crisis.
And yet they have put their profits and careers ahead of the health and welfare of the world’s population—and even their own children and grandchildren.
Horsemen of the Apocalypse takes a personal look at this global crisis, literally bringing it home.
But Chris Hedges has been shining a light on the most overlooked people and issues for nearly four decades.
Now, he addresses these burning topics in arare, extended conversation with fellow radical journalist David Talbot.
Along the way, Hedges offers his unvarnished views on topics rarely aired by the corporate media, including the hopeless corruption of our political system, the difficulty of challenging the prevailing story lines of elite consensus, the disturbing parallels between current United States conditions and the collapse of Balkans society into fascist violence during the 1990s, and the criminalization of poverty.
All of which is to say, Chris Hedges is unafraid to say what is necessary and true—and has always been.
However, when seventeen-year-old Trayvon Martin was shot by a wannabe cop in Florida; and then Ferguson, Missouri, happened; and then South Carolina hit the headlines; and then Baltimore blew up, it was hard to find any evidence of a new post-racial order.
Now one of our country’s quintessential urban war zones is brought powerfully to life by a rising young literary talent, D Watkins.
He writes openly and unapologetically about what it took to survive life on the streets while the casualties piled up around him, including his own brother.
When black residents of Baltimore finally decided they had had enough—after the brutal killing of twenty-five-year-old Freddie Gray while in police custody —wWatkins was on the streets as the city erupted.
He writes about his bleeding city with the razor-sharp insights of someone who bleeds along with it.
President Trump succeed despite behavior that would cripple any other politician.
And this is what makes The Gilded Rage so important; it provides insight into the forgotten Americans that continue to befuddle pundits and “experts” on CNN and FOX alike.
This grippingly intimate and heart-breaking book provides a portrait of the walking wounded who make up the base of the Trump movement, who have watched their fortunes dwindle with each passing year.
These men and women feel forgotten and screwed over by political, corporate, and media elites ... and they feel that Donald Trump, despite his flamboyant demagoguery, might well be their last chance for salvation.
Alexander Zaitchik in this important book takes us deeper into the ravaged soul of America than any other chronicler of our times.
THE LIFE AND TIMES OF JESUS OF NAZARETH Scapegoats How Islamophobia Helps Our Enemies and Threatens Our Freedoms Arsalan Iftikhar Foreword by Reza Aslan $21.99] Hardcover | ISBN: “Scapegoats is an important book that shows Islamophobia must be addressed urgently.” —President Jimmy Carter When a murderous psychopath goes on a killing spree, law enforcement officials and the media never make his religion the central issue—unless he happens to be a Muslim.
Then it sets off another frenzied wave of commentary about the inherent evils that lurk within the Muslim faith.
From Fox News talking heads, who regularly smear Muslim leaders as secret terrorists, to Bill Maher, who has made Islam a routine target, it has become widely acceptable to libel a religion with a following of more than 1. billion people—nearly one-quarter of the world’s population.
Now popular commentator Arsalan Iftikhar—better known as “The Muslim Guy”—offers a cogent, passionate pushback.
Iftikhar’s spirited defense of his faith is timelier than ever, as politicians, members of the Trump administration, and pundits vie to be the toughest on the block when it comes to escalating the hostilities in the Middle East, often demonizing Islam in the process.
The Hunting Ground, the award-winning documentary by filmmakers Kirby Dick and Amy Ziering, has taken this debate to a new level, becoming a galvanizing catalyst for discussion at the hundreds of campuses where the documentary is being screened each month.
In this companion volume to the film, all those concerned about the “rape culture” on campus can gain an inside perspective on the controversy, as well as reactions to the film from a range of leading writers and guidance on how to learn more and get active.
As in the film, it’s the gripping personal stories told by female students—and the obstinate refusal of college administrators and law enforcement authorities to recognize the severity of the problem—that will rivet readers.
But if you want to know why Snowden did it, the way he did it, you need to know the stories of two other men.
The first is Thomas Drake, who blew the whistle on the very same surveillance ten years before Snowden did and got crushed.
The other is The Third Man, a former senior Pentagon official who comes forward in this book for the first time to describe how his superiors repeatedly broke the law to punish Drake.
When insiders blow the whistle on high-level government or corporate lying, lawbreaking, or other wrongdoing, the public can benefit enormously.
Liberty is defended, deadly products are taken off the market, and wars are ended.
The whistle-blowers themselves, however, generally end up ruined when they refuse to back down in the face of ferocious official retaliation.
This moral stubbornness despite terrible personal cost is the defining DNA of whistle-blowers.
But in many cases, this trust is misplaced, as leading journalists are seduced and manipulated by the agencies they cover—Spooked blows the lid off this unseemly arrangement.
Schou documents how the CIA has embedded itself in “liberal” Hollywood to ensure that its spies get the hero treatment on-screen, delving into its creation of a special public affairs unit to allow celebrities involved in pro-CIA projects—including Harrison Ford and Ben Affleck—unique access inside agency headquarters.
Worse still, Schou relates how the CIA vets articles on controversial topics such as the drone assassination program, granting friendly reporters background briefings on classified material, while simultaneously prosecuting ex-officers who release damaging information.
These and other revelations will help readers see the ways our media has been hijacked by the intelligence community and bring its activities Some necessary scrutiny.
But while the press occasionally exposes the dark side of the war on terror, and congressional investigators sometimes raise alarms about the abuses committed by United States intelligence agencies and armed forces, no high United States official has been prosecuted for these violations—which many legal observers around the world consider war crimes.
The United States helped establish the international principles guiding the prosecution of war crimes—starting with the Nuremberg tribunal following World War II, when Nazi officials were held accountable for their crimes against humanity.
But the American government and legal system have consistently refused to apply these same principles to our own officials.
Now Rebecca Gordon takes on the explosive task of “indicting” the officials who—in a just society—should be put on trial for war crimes.
Some might dismiss this as a symbolic exercise, but what is at stake here is the very soul of the nation.
They are not the victims of ruthless enemy warfare, but of their own military commanders.
These soldiers, afflicted with rare cancers and respiratory diseases, were sickened from the smoke and ash swirling out of the “burn pits” where military contractors incinerated mountains of trash, including old stockpiles of mustard and sarin gas, medical waste, and other toxic material.
Based on thousands of government documents, over five hundred indepth medical case studies, and interviews with more than one thousand veterans and active-duty Gls, The Burn Pits is a shocking read.
The book is more than an explosive work of investigative journalism—it is the deeply moving chronicle of the many young men and women who signed up to serve their country in the wake of 9/11, only to return home permanently damaged, the victims of their own armed forces’ criminal negligence.
