These ﬁndings challenge the veracity of the claim currently widespread among the Western left, and parts of the right as well, that the USA bears primary responsibility for provoking the crisis by pressing too far into Russia’s ‘traditional’ or ‘historic’ sphere of inﬂuence, to which in their view Ukraine belongs.
Such a claim by socialists is questioned on normative as well as analytical grounds.
Ukraine; Crimea; Russia; European Union; USA; Imperialism; War This article explores the origins of the Ukrainian crisis in several historical developments that came together in 2014.
The ﬁrst development, and the condition necessary for activating all the others, is the situation that has unfolded inside Ukraine itself since 1991 with the establishment of a new nation state simultaneously with the return of capitalism.
The ﬁfth development is the overarching confrontation between a declining American power and a reviving Russian power in Europe.
My ﬁndings are at odds with the claim made by academic and political ﬁgures right across the political spectrum in the West that the USA bears primary responsibility for the Ukrainian crisis by having encroached too far into Russia’s traditional sphere of inﬂuence.
The Euro-Atlantic core states had the initiative after the collapse of the Soviet bloc.
They integrated Central European and Baltic littoral states into the EU and NATO on their own terms from the end of the Cold War right up to the international ﬁnancial crisis and the Russo-Georgian war in 2008.
Thereafter, however, the Russian state retook the initiative in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus, the eastward drive of NATO and the EU stalled, and the role of the USA in the region’s affairs became increasingly a reactive one.
This was the broader context of the Ukrainian crisis, which matured and then erupted in the period from 2008 to 2014.
The Fragility of the Ukrainian State The Maidan arose in 2013, as it did in 2004, because the new Ukrainian ruling class failed to share state power democratically or to invest in the development of its own society.
This social class then turned the state to enabling new rounds of wealth accumulation from the living labour deployed in the growing private sector.
On the contrary, the Ukrainian people are as poor today as they were in the last year of the USSR, and they are riven by far more inequalities than they were then.
Their inﬂuence over public policy and public institutions remains weak, even if they have managed repeatedly to recover their basic rights to free expression, assembly and self-organisation.
Thus the present crisis is in the ﬁrst instance attributable to the failure of a newly independent state to meet the mass expectations on which it was founded in 1991.
The Maidan in the winter of 2013–2014 was the latest revolt against this manifest failure, a mass movement that brieﬂy undermined the new ruling class, drove its most powerful faction out of the country, but ultimately failed to dislodge it from the political and economic institutions.
However, the Maidan was sufﬁciently threatening to compel the Russian state—gendarme of the transnational ruling class in its region—to intervene and seize Crimea, to arm a revanchist insurgency in the Donbas, and so to prevent the revolutionary process from spreading into the east and south.
The International Isolation of the Ukrainian State The second historical development that contributed to the outbreak of the current crisis was the failure of the Ukrainian state—for reasons not entirely of its own making—to integrate successfully into either the Euro-Atlantic alliance or the Russia-led alliance.
After succeeding Leonid Kravchuk as president in 1994, Leonid Kuchma pursued a strategy to build a national ruling class that could hold its own place in the international political economy.
His strategy required keeping Western and Russian capital out of the ﬁrst big privatisations of nationalised property, accumulating wealth at home and upgrading technologically so as to prepare the country for membership in the EU and its single market.
Kuchma’s strategy failed because the state leadership could not compel its own capitalists to keep their wealth in the country to upgrade and diversify the domestic economy.
The mounting social inequalities in the midst of a rapid rate of economic recovery on the back of an export boom and an increasingly repressive regime were the triggers for the 2004 Orange Revolution.
From Kuchma’s second term in ofﬁce and Putin’s ﬁrst in Russia, Russian capitalists succeeded in placing substantial investments in the Ukrainian economy.
Rather, each side was trying to incorporate Ukraine’s natural resources, cheap labour and markets onto a low technological echelon of its own regional chains of production and consumption.
Yet the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis prevented either side from making a bid for a dominant position.
So Ukraine ended up in the grey zone between US-led Europe and Russia, and the likely recipient of friction between them that grew as Russia revived and United States inﬂuence in Europe waned.
The Revival of Russian Imperialism The third historical development contributing to the current crisis has been the revival of Russian imperialist ambitions.
From around 2000 Putin began to restore Russia’s position as a power in Eurasia.
He focussed ﬁrst on rebuilding Russia’s economic ties in the ex-Soviet space by reclaiming state control over Russian energy and mineral resources and promoting several national corporate champions in these sectors.
Later, the restored economic links with Russia’s near abroad would lay a path to securing transnational competitive status for Russia’s biggest energy and mineral producers.
It is different from the USA experience insofar as Russian expansion has relied on its competitive advantages in global markets of fuel, energy and mineral resources whereas American capitalism expanded globally with a far more diversiﬁed production base and with already saturated domestic demand.
It is not diversiﬁed nor is its bourgeoisie willing to invest signiﬁcantly in its diversiﬁcation.
Property ownership in Russia is too insecure, access to domestic resources and markets is in the gift of state authorities, and better security and investment opportunities exist for Russian capital investment abroad.
Therefore, while the Russian national economy is not diversiﬁed, Russian capitalism has become diversiﬁed both sectorally and geographically along transnational chains of production, trade and investment.
A Deutsche Bank report in 2008 concluded that Russia had become by 2006 the largest outward investor of its capital of all the BRIC countries.
Russian overseas direct investment was double that of its nearest rivals India and China at $160 billion, up from $20 billion in 2000.
Russia was already the second largest source of ODI in emerging markets after Hong Kong.
Russian private capital was invested ﬁrst in the near abroad and then expanded outwards, seeking new markets, ﬁnancing and new technologies principally in the ﬁelds of fuel, energy and metals.
A survey of 25 top Russian ﬁrms shows they sent 52 per cent of the ODI into Western Europe, followed by 22 per cent to the near-abroad countries and 11 per cent to Eastern Europe.
Evraz in Canada, the USA and Ukraine, Severstal in the USA, Lukoil in Italy and Gazprom in Belarus.
The biggest transnational corporations of Russian origin at the time also included Sistema, Sovkomﬂot, Norilsk Nickel and Basic Element.
By 2010 ODI by Russian ﬁrms exceeded $200 billion, and was going mainly to the CIS and EU countries.
For the past 15 years Russia has targeted Ukraine for reabsorption into its traditional sphere of inﬂuence.
There was an ongoing desire to preserve joint production in engineering, defence, aerospace and other high-technology sectors that survived the Soviet break-up.
It holds the downstream transit facilities and processing industries that Russian energy, minerals and chemical producers need.
Russian producers made their ﬁrst such cross-border acquisitions in 2000.
However, the gas and oil transit pipelines through Ukraine that link Russian suppliers to European consumers, the most valuable transit facility of them all, have remained steadfastly in state hands.
The Yanukovych Presidency The period of Viktor Yanukovych’s presidency saw further popular alienation from the political order, the economy falter under the blows of the 2008 ﬁnancial crisis, and the state face a zero-sum choice of accepting either Russia’s or the West’s terms of integration into their respective regional integration projects.
The mixture of these three factors ﬁnally exploded in Kyiv in the winter of 2013–2014.
Yanukovych narrowly defeated Yuliya Tymoshenko for the presidency in 2009 on a platform of political stability and the restoration of economic ties with Russia.
Ukraine–Russia relations were dominated by disputes about the cost of Russian gas and its transit to Europe.
That inﬂux ended spectacularly with the ﬁnancial meltdown in 2008 that battered people’s livelihoods and convinced enough voters, even in the nationalist west of the country, to give Yanukovych a chance to turn things around.
The arrival of Armani-dressed oligarchs in limos with tinted windows and bodyguards inside to Yanukovych’s inauguration in Kyiv in January 2010 gave everyone a taste of things to come.
Yanukovych perfected the scheme of taking bribes from all of the businesses his ministries permitted to trade.
Yanukovych created his inner circle, called ‘the Family’, from the seven most powerful capitalists.
He restored Dmytro Firtash, the gas trader, to ﬁnancial health by giving him 12 billion cubic metres of Russian gas in settlement of a dispute that Firtash’s ﬁrm Rosukrenergo had had with Naftogaz Ukrainy during Yushchenko and Tymoshenko’s terms, when they tried to close him down.
Gazprom opened an $11 billion credit line for Firtash, which he used to build a monopoly stake in fertiliser processing in Ukraine, a port facility, a bank and the national television channel Inter.
Rinat Akhmetov, the country’s richest man, was also blessed when Yanukovych granted his ﬁrm DTEK a monopoly on electricity exports.
He also ordered the state energy regulator to increase the tariffs local and regional authorities paid for DTEK’s electricity from coal-burning stations, to levels comparable to those paid to state-operated nuclear power stations.
Both Akhmetov and Firtash won tenders to privatise regional electricity distributors.
Both placed their representatives into the state energy regulating commission to ensure that they continued to get high returns for their gas and electricity.
In November 2012 President Yanukovych signed a Double Tax Treaty with the government of Cyprus to replace the Soviet-era treaty.
Thus he preserved the channel used by the biggest corporations to expatriate their proﬁts, either permanently or to recycle them back to Ukraine as foreign investments and loans that were subject to much lower levels of capital gains tax.
Flight of capital to tax havens was taking place through various other channels used by Ukrainian and foreign ﬁrms alike.
They consistently deprived the state budget of between $10 billion and $20 billion every year.
As soon as he took ofﬁce Yanukovych moved to strengthen presidential authority over the legislature, judiciary, public procuracy and the Kyiv city government.
He appointed his own Cabinet of Ministers under Mykola Azarov, denying the legislature its constitutional prerogative.
The October 2012 elections to Verkhovna Rada were the dirtiest in the history of independent Ukraine.
In addition to settling scores with potent rivals, the imprisonment of Yulia Tymoshenko and Yuriy Lutsenko and their barring from public ofﬁce for 7 years served to intimidate the entire parliamentary and extra-parliamentary opposition.
A determined attempt was made—in the end unsuccessful—to muzzle the media by making slander of public ofﬁcials a criminal offence.
This broader offensive had the hallmarks of the drive to ‘sovereign democracy’ made by Putin years before in neighbouring Russia.
When their hugely inﬂated prices ﬁnally collapsed in 2008, GDP dropped more than 15 per cent in the following year, the second deepest fall in Eastern Europe after Latvia.
The private sector was left holding debts equivalent in value to a year’s GDP.12 Commodity prices recovered at the end of 2009, but in the longer term international demand did not.
Ukraine’s recorded annual GDP grew again, in 2011 by just over 5 per cent, but then fell back and registered no growth at all in 2012 and 2013.
In 2014 it began to contract as a result of the Russian seizure of Crimea and the war in the east of the country.
Ukraine covered its trade deﬁcits with Russia and the EU by generating surpluses from trade with the East Asian, Middle Eastern and African countries.
Thereafter, the trade deﬁcit grew year on year, reaching $15 billion in 2012.13 In 2013 Russia began a trade war with Ukraine in response to the ﬁrst easing of trade barriers between the EU and Ukraine ahead of the anticipated free trade area agreement between them.
It banned imports of Ukrainian dairy products, fruit, vegetables, meat, sunﬂower oil and alcohol.
Investment Annual foreign direct investment leapt forward after the Orange revolution from $1.7 billion in 2004 to a peak of $9. billion in 2007.
Ukraine was second only to China in these years in terms of per capita investment ﬂowing into the country.
For the ﬁrst time much of this inﬂow came through the banking system, with many foreign banks setting up Ukrainian subsidiaries to provide both corporate lending and retail services.
Most foreign direct investment went into export credits for agricultural and mining concerns, consumer lending, real estate and the domestic trade in imported luxury goods.
The proportion of foreign capital held in Ukraine’s banks grew from 13 per cent to over 50 per cent between 2004 and 2008.
Between them the banks of six EU member states held 30 per cent of the banking capital.
The European share was held overwhelmingly by large commercial banks, headed up by Raiffeisen of Austria, Unicredit and Intesa San Paolo of Italy, and BNP Paribas of France.
The Russian share was distinguished by the predominance of state banks among their holders—VTB, Vneshekonombank, Sberbank, BM Bank and Prominvestbank, and by four other banks tied to the Kremlin.
The international ﬁnancial crisis in 2008 forced the rival centres of foreign capital to alter their positions in the Ukrainian market.
Facing serious problems at home, the banks that had bought up the domestic networks of several Ukrainian banks were forced to sell.
Ukrainian oligarchs, who had sold their banks at lucrative multiples of their book value, now bought them back at a good discount.
Russian banks, on the other hand, were better protected from the ﬁnancial crisis by ample credit from their own government’s sovereign funds, so they strengthened their position in the Ukrainian banking system.
On balance, however, the biggest initial winners were the Ukrainian private banks, which increased their share of assets in the banking system from 40 to 51 per cent between 2008 and 2012.
The share of Russian capital rose to 12 per cent, making it the largest bloc from any one country and double that of its closest rival, Cyprus, at 6 per cent.
Not to be overlooked is the fact that a considerable share of Cyprus-exported capital came originally from Russia.
It also had developed strong positions in mass media, telecommunications, insurance, business information and information technology.
The country’s gross external debt, which included that of the private sector, was double that amount at $142. billion, equivalent to 78. per cent of GDP in 2013.18 Tymoshenko’s government had taken $3. billion in IMF Special Drawing Rights in August 2008 to bail out the country’s banks and repay sovereign debt for Russian gas imports.
The Ukrainian government was additionally in arrears to Gazprom for several billions dollars’ worth of gas.
Debt repayment became an increasingly heavy burden on the state budget, at the end of 2014 accounting for 40 per cent of total expenditures.
For both the West and Russia Ukraine’s indebtedness provided a handy lever to inﬂuence its government.
The IMF was the arbiter of its creditworthiness and gatekeeper to international capital markets.
It tried to impose its conditions on the government to decrease state 17 Kuznetsov, ‘Industrial and geographical diversiﬁcation’, op. cit.
The Russian government used Ukraine’s indebtedness and its dependence on Russian export markets to leverage the Kharkiv Accords in April 2010.
In June of that year the Verkhovna Rada excluded the goal of NATO membership from the country’s national security strategy, thus restoring its non-aligned status.
Labour Migration The movement of labour also reveals the pattern of Ukraine’s incorporation into the international political economy.
They number in the millions, and their outmigration has had a profound, if contradictory impact on the Ukrainian economy.
It has lost skilled and well-educated people to countries where they are now employed as cheap, illegal or legally precarious labour.
Communities depopulated by the outmigration have seen their social and family structures severely degraded.
Migrant workers have been sending remittances from their earnings home that are estimated to exceed the combined foreign direct investment coming into Ukraine.
The Zero-sum Choice Labour migration, trade, the repatriation of proﬁts from foreign direct investment, debt repayments and capital ﬂight are all tributaries for the extraction of wealth from the Ukrainian economy.
The fact that its economy was closely tied to both the Russian and EU markets, asymmetrically but nevertheless in equally strong measure—through debt to the West, energy supplies from the East, and trade with both—was simply ignored by Russian and EU leaders.
They had been negotiating since 2007 an Association Agreement and a common ‘deep’ free-trade area based on the laws, state competition policy and production standards that are already enforced within the EU single market.
These requirements, which the Verkhovna Rada was urgently adopting throughout 2013, would add considerable costs to the state and private sector in order to make Ukrainian goods acceptable in the EU market.
Except for a transition period when EU food products and Ukrainian automobiles were protected from competition, the abolition of almost all tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade would in the long run expose several Ukrainian industries to sustained and ruinous competition from the EU side.
The Customs Union and its successor Eurasian Economic Union offered Ukraine something different.
This integration project was far less developed than the European Union’s.
Russia accounted for 90 per cent of the combined GDP of the Customs Union’s members, which meant that Russia would dominate the Union whatever its formal governing structure.
The Russian establishment saw in this project one of the important means to reclaim great power status.
Putin called it ‘a powerful supranational association capable of becoming one of the poles in the modern world and serving as an efﬁcient bridge between Europe and the dynamic Asia-Paciﬁc region’.23 Yet such a bridge was hardly possible to build without Ukraine.
Russian diplomacy focussed on this challenge, trying to coax it into the Union by promising generous energy subsidies if it joined and trade sanctions if it did not.
Yet even under Yanukovych and in the worsened economic situation, the government continued to resist.
There was a fundamental lack of trust between Kyiv and Moscow, at the heart of which was the refusal of the Russian state to acknowledge Ukraine’s independence.
This refusal is rooted in a long history of Russian imperial domination of Ukraine.
After gaining independence in 1991 Ukrainian leaders regularly faced jibes from their Russian counterparts about when they would ﬁnally come to their senses and stop playing their game of nation building.
Putin expressed perfectly the paradox that Ukrainian statehood poses to Russia’s leaders when he told George W Bush in April 2008 at the NATO summit in Bucharest that Ukraine really was not a state, but if it tried to join NATO it would cease to exist as a state.
Despite the Kharkiv Accords lowering the price for Russian gas by $100 per thousand cubic metres, Ukraine continued to pay more than Germany and Italy, which are considerably further from Russian gas ﬁelds than Ukraine.
Neighbouring Belarus enjoyed a lower price, but only after its president Alexander Lukashenko sold the country’s gas transit pipelines to Gazprom.
The Ukrainians were not ready to do that; instead, they began to diversify their sources of supply, reducing imports from Russia from 57 million cubic metres in 2007 to 33mcm in 2012 and 26mcm in 2013.25 The Ukrainian government’s inability to service its foreign debt brought matters to a head at the beginning of winter in 2013.
I have been alone for three and a half years in very unequal conditions with Russia’.26 He proposed as a way out of the situation that Moscow be involved in three-way negotiations with the EU and Ukraine.
The Maidan By the time Yanukovych uttered these words, the protesters on Kyiv’s Maidan had grown to several thousand.
No-one was paying attention to the very real shortcomings of the Agreements, or that the EU was not prepared to offer more than 10 million euros to help the government service a debt in the billions.
Their treatment caused outrage in the capital and the numbers on the Maidan the following day swelled to tens of thousands.
On that occasion the two sides agreed a loan of $15 billion to Ukraine, a lower price for natural gas and easing of some restrictions on cross-border trade in 2013–14.
No agreement was reached concerning Ukraine’s participation in the Customs Union.
Putin insisted that it was not even an item of discussion at the talks.
If that was meant to placate the protesters then Putin and Yanukovych were poorly advised.
That evening the crowds on the Maidan were bigger than ever, covering the entire square and spilling over into neighbouring streets.
Their demands grew in response to the government’s ham-ﬁsted brutality against them.
Initially they were limited to demanding that Yanukovych sign the association agreement and hold a public inquiry into the beating and imprisonment of the students.
The protesters put up barricades on Hrushevsky Street—which leads from the Maidan to the parliament—on 19 January.
They now began to demand the release of all detained demonstrators, Yanukovych’s resignation and immediate presidential elections.
So began a month of violent confrontations between the riot police and the demonstrators.
As the confrontation in Kyiv grew to the brink of a shooting war, government buildings across the country came under siege.
By the end of January protesters had seized Oblast State Administration builings in ten regional capitals in western and central Ukraine.
In six other regional capitals they were surrounded by mass demonstrations, defended by Interior Ministry troops and gangs of titushky.
These mobilisations spread to other cities in eastern and southern Ukraine where army barracks, ofﬁces of the Public Prosecutor and the State Security Service came under siege.
From the beginning of February the government made preparations to introduce martial law in Kyiv.
However, on 18 February the State Security Service announced a more targeted ‘anti-terrorist operation’ to dismantle the barricades, reclaim the occupied buildings and disperse the Maidan.
Seventy-seven people were shot dead, by far the single largest number of fatalities in a day.
A ceaseﬁre ensued overnight and on 20 February President Yanukovych entered into negotiations with leaders of the three opposition parties mediated by the foreign ministers of Germany, Poland and France.
Russia’s ambassador to Ukraine and later Putin’s special envoy were present at the negotiations.
Agreement was reached on the same day, signed by all present except Russia’s representatives.
It was put to the Council of the Maidan, who accepted it by 34 votes to 2.
All this took place in the presence of embalmed bodies of demonstrators laid out on the stage before the assembly.
During the day practically all Interior Ministry troops and Security Service left the government quarter in convoys that were escorted out of the city for their own safety by parliamentary deputies.
Some were reported leaving with their families for their home towns or out of the country altogether.
That evening President Yanukovych left the capital for his mansion compound at Mezhyhiria.
At the compound his aides destroyed thousands of ﬁles, throwing some into the artiﬁcial lake from which they were later retrieved.
The documents included detailed records of bribetaking over several years.
They loaded all the valuables that two helicopters could carry and ﬂew Yanukovych to Donetsk airport.
The parliament convened on 22 February and restored the parliamentary republic under the 2004 constitution.
Electing Oleksandr Turchynov as interim president, the parliament called new presidential elections for 25 May.
Yanukovych responded to these developments, still from inside Ukraine, claiming he was the victim of a coup d’etat, and that he would refuse to leave Ukraine or the presidency.
However, on 22 February he tried to ﬂy out of Donetsk airport for Russia, but his helicopter was denied clearance by air trafﬁc controllers.
Days later he appeared in Crimea and from there he left by sea for Russia.
The meeting accused the parliament in Kyiv of dishonouring the 21 February accords, and declared its decisions illegitimate in view of what it described as a climate of terror in the capital.
It was launching the separatist movement across the eastern and southern oblasts.
On the same day Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov told United States Secretary of State John Kerry that the Ukrainian opposition parties had broken the 21 February accords.
While Russia demanded they return to the accords, it began preparing immediately to occupy and annex Crimea, and promote the separatist movement in the eastern oblasts.
He had signed an accord that stripped him of executive powers and denied him the right to form the government.
He would be investigated by a commission looking into the fatalities, disappearances and tortures.
His continuation in ofﬁce was rejected by the assembled thousands on the Maidan, and he ﬂed Kyiv along with the Berkut, Alfa and Omega squads—special forces which had protected him—as they, too, headed for Crimea and the Donbas.
All three opposition parties stood by the accords and earnestly recommended them to the Maidan, as did the foreign ministers who mediated the talks.
Yet after the troops and special forces left the government quarter and the now armed Maidan refused to move until Yanukovych stepped down, his position was indeed bleak, if not impossible.
No doubt, members of his party and their Communist allies were also intimidated and in some cases terrorised by the angry mob and armed vigilantes.
However, to their credit, the Maidan’s stewards and members of the other opposition parties gave them protection as they continued to sit in parliament and vote in the new government.
Except, of course, those deputies like Oleksandr Tsariov and Vadym Kolisnychenko who quit Kyiv immediately for Crimea, Kharkiv, Donetsk and Luhansk to organise the separatist movement.
These acts hardly amount to a case that the USA inspired a coup to overthrow Yanukovych.
Russian state actors had considerably more inﬂuence than their American counterparts over the unfolding events through their agents in the SBU, diplomatic corps, armed forces general staff, interior ministry and the President’s administration.
We were working in a state where the SBU and all the power ministries had been crammed full over two years with FSB agents (Russia’s Federal Security Bureau) … The power ministries in Crimea went over fully onto the side of the occupier … A lot of weapons were removed.
That is to say, formally we had our own power structures, but in reality they were working for our opponent.
Another claim made soon after these events by Russia’s leaders and repeated ever since by their Western supporters was that Kyiv after Yanukovych came to be ruled by a fascist junta.
Made up of 21 ministers, the new government was elected by an elected parliament.
These ministers were put before an assembly of the Maidan for approval, which it gave with some reservations.
The UDAR party of Vitali Klychko declined to take any portfolios, so the government was dominated by the Bat’kivshchyna party.
Oleh Makhnitsky as Prosecutor General, Oleksandr Sych, deputy PM, Andriy Mokryk, environment minister and Ihor Shvayka, agriculture minister.
Dmytro Yarosh, leader of Right Sector, which played a big part in the Maidan’s self-defence was offered the post of deputy to Parubiy, which he declined.
There was justiﬁable concern that the far-right and fascist paramilitaries who had stood on the Maidan would either pose a threat to public order if they were not disbanded, or might merge with state structures.
Members of these groups turned quickly towards the eastern oblasts after Yanukovych fell and the separatist movement emerged.
For its part the government actively drew these militias into the eastern oblasts once the Anti-Terrorist Operation began.
In May, the Maidan’s self-defence forces were ofﬁcially disbanded, but various groups continued to function either on their own or as recognised units of the army or interior ministry.
After Russia intervened in the south and east, the far right lost its claim to the nationalist mantle as a sense of nationalist resistance spread across practically the entire Ukrainian political arena.
In the May 2014 presidential elections won by Petro Poroshenko, the Svoboda candidate Oleh Tiahnybok took 1. per cent and Right Sector’s Dmytro Yarosh 0. per cent of the votes.
The September elections to the Verkhovna Rada saw Svoboda’s share of the vote fall by more than half compared with the 2012 elections.
They failed to clear the 5 per cent hurdle needed to take any seats by proportional representation.
The Ukrainian Crisis Internationalised Russia turned the struggle for power inside Ukraine into an international crisis.
Immediately after Yanukovych ﬂed Kyiv, Russian forces began taking control of the Crimean government, the peninsula’s communications and the urban centres, laying siege to Ukrainian military bases there.
By seizing Crimea Russia violated the Budapest Declaration, which it signed along with the USA and the UK in 1994.
In exchange for Ukraine giving up its nuclear weapons—which were sent to Russia, no less—the signatories had promised to respect Ukraine’s territorial integrity and national sovereignty.
It violated the UN Charter by changing international borders by force, offering as its only defence the fact that the Western powers had done the same by upholding the separation of the Kosovan statelet from Serbia.
Putin acknowledged much later that he ordered the occupation and annexation of Crimea.
In addition, the Russian FSB agent Igor Girkin-Strelkov, who served in Crimea at the time before being dispatched to the Donbas, described on the NeuroMir TV channel how Russian armed forces, and not the local authorities, organised the so-called referendum.
If successful, this would have given Russia a land bridge from its western border through to Crimea and across to Transnistria, thereby cutting Ukraine off completely from the Black Sea.
Although initially constituting about 4 per cent of the territory of Ukraine in 2014, and 5 per cent after the separatist offensive in January 2015, they accounted for a quarter of its GDP and around 30 per cent of export earnings.
Rinat Akhmetov, a prime beneﬁciary of Yanukovych’s patronage whose businesses are concentrated in the Donbas, provided the initial ﬁnance for its armed detachments.
The separatists’ declared aim was to protect the region’s Russian speakers from Ukrainian ‘fascists and banderites’ allegedly coming from Kyiv to ethnically cleanse them.
However, their real aim was to prevent the spread of the Maidan into the east where the oligarchs’ industrial assets and power were concentrated.
The separatists were reinforced by Russian nationalists, fascists, mercenaries and soldiers ‘on leave’ from across the Russian border.
Russian nationals took over the leadership of the Donetsk People’s Republic and its Slovyansk military headquarters , sidelining the original Ukrainian leader (Pavel Gubarev, member of the neo-Nazi Russian National Unity).44 As the Kyiv government stepped up its military campaign against these militias and their declared republics, Russia increased both the calibre and supply of personnel and weaponry to them.
The so-called Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics did establish a certain social base and a professional cadre drawn from the region itself, but their military, diplomatic and ﬁnancial capacities were almost entirely dependent on the Kremlin.
Russia’s principal motive in seizing Crimea and backing the separatist movement in the east was not to gain territory, but above all to suppress the Maidan and to restore Russia’s inﬂuence over the government in Kyiv that Yanukovych had previously guaranteed.
Russia was weaker militarily than the USA, but only in an abstract comparative sense.
In the real disposition of their forces Russia was stronger than NATO in its own near abroad.
Its immediate neighbours were militarily weak and NATO was unable to project and sustain its power in the region.
It could not fulﬁl its commitments to mutual defence of members in Eastern Europe for strictly logistical reasons—it had no forward bases there of any signiﬁcance and could not establish them quickly.
As the Estonian defence minister Sven Mikser put it on 24 June 2015, ‘Putin believes that he enjoys regional superiority’.45 Most important to Putin’s calculations were the political divisions between the USA and its European allies over relations with Russia.
According to a survey conducted by the Pew Research Center, the leaders of Germany, France and Italy were not prepared to come to the defence of East European member states like Latvia, Lithuania or Estonia if they were attacked by Russia.
And there was a growing resistance among the American public to more military campaigns abroad that placed real restraints on the American administration.
All of these factors emboldened Russia to intervene in Ukraine at the moment of opportunity, for which it had been preparing.
Russia was rebuilding its military capabilities and placing them forward across its own borders.
After the Soviet Union’s collapse, the Russian Federation held onto military bases in Belarus, Transdnistria in Moldova, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Kazakhstan.
After Putin became president, they were augmented with new bases and additional forces at existing ones in Belarus, Armenia, Georgia and Ukraine.
In 2014, after annexing Crimea, Moscow annulled its previous agreements with Ukraine on its bases at Sevastopol, Kerch and other Crimean locations.
In January 2015 the Russian defence ministry issued a new military doctrine and announced plans to spend 20 trillion roubles by 2020 to upgrade its military capabilities in Crimea, Kaliningrad and the Arctic.
Into the Arms of the Western Powers If Putin’s aim was to dissuade the Ukrainian state from seeking closer ties with NATO then his actions had the opposite effect.
As a percentage of GDP, Russian defence spending grew from 3. per cent in 2010 to 4. per cent in 2013.
Over the same period the USA’s defence spending fell from 4. to 3. per cent.
The government sought lethal military equipment from NATO, which was refused.
The attitude of the population towards NATO membership also made a historic shift from a majority consistently opposed since 1991 to a majority in favour.
Throughout this period the ofﬁcial position of NATO states, including the USA, was no more than stating that Ukraine had a right to seek NATO membership and to actively discourage any such application.
This was their response in a period when Russia stepped up deliveries of heavy weapons to the separatists (including the BUK missiles that shot down Malaysian passenger airliner MH17) and sent in its own trainers and political advisors, helping them to halt the Ukrainian offensive in the summer of 2014, return to the offensive themselves and take more territory and population.
Poroshenko walked away from the NATO summit in Wales in August 2014 without the weapons he had asked for.
Then he was obliged by his Western allies to send ex-President Kuchma to negotiate the Minsk Accords in September with the leaders of the separatist republics, by which they were recognised as parties to an interstate agreement.
Putin had planned a rapid advance deep into the country, seeking to envelop eight eastern and southern oblasts (Kharkiv, Kherson, Mykolayiv, Odesa, Zaporizhzhia, Dnipropetrovsk, as well as Donetsk and Luhansk) and thereby acquire an unassailable position from which to dictate his terms to the Kyiv government.
He failed to achieve that position and the pro-Russia separatist forces were contained in the eastern reaches of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
The Russians’ advantages in speed and geographic proximity diminished as the conﬂict dragged on, leaving them with superiority only in ﬁrepower.
The war of movement became a war of position, and the longer it dragged on the more it encouraged NATO member states in the region to seek reinforcements of their own borders with Russia from their Western allies.
The Balance of Power Framing the Ukrainian crisis is the changing balance of power between Russia, the USA and Germany as the leading EU state.
It has the biggest investment in Russia of any country in the world, and Germany has admitted signiﬁcant Russian inward investment in return.
The imposition of Western sanctions against Russia has created huge uncertainty as to its future.
This axis passes through a speciﬁc faction of the ruling class in Ukraine grouped around the tycoon and key Russian point of contact Dmytro Firtash, his ally Serhiy Lyovochkin, former head of Yanukovych’s presidential administration, and the Opposition Bloc in the Ukrainian parliament.
This group is trying to build an EU–Kyiv– Moscow axis to compete with the existing Washington–Kyiv–Moscow axis.
Their international platform to build this axis is the Agency for Modernisation of Ukraine, created in Vienna in March 2015.
Its two main pillars of support in Ukraine are the Employers Federation, headed by Firtash himself, whose members’ businesses accounted for 70 per cent of the country’s GDP in 2014, and the leadership of the Federation of Trade Unions.
This faction has been trying hard to discipline the biggest oligarchs Rinat Akhmetov, Ihor Kolomoisky and Dmytro Firtash to its pro-Western course.
The war between Russia and Ukraine has become the issue through which Washington tries to contain German ambitions and marshals all of its European allies to oppose Russia, rather than allowing them to work out deals with Russia behind the USA’s back.
Conclusions I have not ventured into the period since the start of the war in the east.
It has been marked by many thousands dead and injured in the ﬁghting, more civilians than soldiers, a humanitarian crisis in the occupied territories, an exodus of a million now internally and externally displaced people, a deepening economic and social crisis throughout the country, the imposition of Western sanctions against Russia, rising nationalisms in Russia and Ukraine, military exercises and mobilisations by Russia and NATO across Eastern Europe.
This is the ﬁrst and necessary condition for the activation of all the other roots.
It will have to confront the failure of the contemporary ruling class to fulﬁl the popular expectations arising from the attainment of independence in 1991 for prosperity, social justice, democracy and national self-determination.While the ﬁrst three of these expectations were denied by the Ukrainian ruling class, the present war with Russia shows that this same class is also incapable of defending its country’s national independence.
The current situation powerfully echoes the two previous attempts in history—in 1648 and 1917—when a new social class tried and failed to build an independent state centred on Kyiv and the Dnipro River basin.
The social forces mobilised by the Maidan in 2013–2014 also failed, in their case to offer up an alternative, revolutionary leadership and a way out of the crisis.
This particular failure belongs to the Ukrainian and the international left as much as it does to anyone else.
Until the left gets involved with these social forces on the ground the nationalist right will continue to dominate the political terrain on which the Ukrainian question is contested.
I can understand why John Mearsheimer does not even want to know about the internal situation.
This is not simply a failure of analysis, but a failure to uphold these people’s democratic right to national self-determination.
That leaves them, and many avowedly left-wing organisations and individuals standing in the camp of Russian imperialism.
My ﬁndings draw attention to the revival of Russian imperialism since 2000, the divisions in the Western alliance over policy towards Russia, and the diminished capacity of the USA to project its own power into the region.
It provoked the Western powers to respond with economic sanctions and strengthening the capacity of NATO member states bordering Russia and Ukraine.
The harder it is pressed, the less room exists for its manoeuvre between them.
One or another faction of the Ukrainian ruling class may submit to such a claim, or even to a joint Russian–Western tutelage over the country.
Sooner or later their common class interests will lead them to it, but it will not be accepted by the Ukrainian people, nor should it be by those who want to support them.
