Eight departments, associated research institutions and the Norwegian College of Veterinary Medicine in Oslo.
Established in 1986, Noragric’s contribution to international development lies in the interface between research, education and assignments.
The findings in this thesis do not necessarily reflect the views of Noragric.
Extracts from this publication may only be reproduced after prior consultation with the author and on condition that the source is indicated.
Sources of information other than my own have been acknowledged and a reference list has been appended.
This work has not been previously submitted to any other university for award of any type of academic degree.
I thank my husband Fredrik Larsen for supporting me during the research and writing of this paper.
Geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West over Ukraine 13 2.
Diverse memories and beliefs of Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine 29 2.5.
References 42 5 Abstract The Crimean annexation by Russia happened in 2014.
It violated the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of Ukraine as well as established international order between the states.
The main causes of the annexation that provoked it on the domestic level were diversity of regions, ethnic diversity, diversity of memories, beliefs and views between ethnic Ukrainians and Russians, manipulations around the status of the Russian language, dual-state-building of Ukraine with a special status given to the Crimean Autonomic Republic, and the presence of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol City.
The main external causes were geopolitical controversy between the West and Russia, and applying diverse security concepts in a common dialogue between them.
The annexation of Crimea is a dispute over geopolitics, not of international law.
The thesis also explores how the state can react against the international system in the name of its national interest.
The Crimean annexation, Russia, the Black Sea Fleet, NATO and the European Union expansion, Ukraine, the Ukrainian revolution, geopolitical controversy, security, diversity of regions, ethnic diversity of Ukraine.
It is an area with both diverse population and religion, but also with an important geopolitical location with its access to the Black Sea.
Several state transformations of Crimea made civilians of Crimea confused.
The misunderstanding of what was legal and what was not explains the huge wish of Crimean civilians to participate in the referendum of March 16th, 2014, which was organized by the Crimean Government with Russian military presence on the peninsula.
The annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014 happened because of both domestic and external causes.
The external causes of the Crimean annexation were geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West, and applying diverse security concepts in a common dialogue between them.
The domestic causes which also provoked the Crimean annexation were the diversity of regions, the ethnic diversity of Ukraine, diverse views, memories and beliefs of Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine, and manipulations around the status of the Russian language in Ukraine on the eve of the annexation.
Crimea is currently a key issue in the increasing tension between Russia and the West , as well as an issue of political disagreement between these actors.
Ukraine, together with the West, claim that the Russian military invasion of Crimea was an act of aggression against Ukrainian sovereignty, territorial integrity and international order.
On the other side, according to the Russian official statement, Crimea became a part of Russia according to national laws of both Crimea 7 and Russia.
The Russian Federation and Crimea signed an agreement about the Crimean accession to Russia , which made Crimea a federal subject of Russia in accordance to its national law.
To conclude, studying all causes can help to build a complete overview of the Crimean Annexation.
The thesis paper includes Abstract, Introduction, Methodology/Background, Main Discussion presented by ‘Causes of the Crimean Annexation by Russia in 2014’, Conclusion and References.
The purpose of the work is to study the causes of the CA in order to get a complete view of the CA and to discover and analyze different views on why it happened.
Without threats such as the expansion of NATO and the EU near the state’s border with the Russian Federation, the Ukrainian revolution, and the newly established pro-Western government in Ukraine, Russia would not have responded by the annexing Crimea.
For Russia it was important to keep its position in Crimea as well as over the Black Sea.
Furthermore, without these domestic causes Crimea would not have supported illegal actions by the Russian Federation on the Peninsula.
Ultimately, these factors are interconnected, and without both of them the CA would not have happened in 2014.
This paper shows how the highlighting of all causes helps to understand why Crimea became de-facto Russian.
It also presents ideas for potential further research about how to predict such events in the international arena, and how to solve them peacefully if such events have already happened.
In the end, the case of the CA is a good illustration of when a state can break international norms in the name of national core goals and interests.
For Russia, it was strategically important to keep its influence and position in Crimea when Ukraine took a proWestern side.
Thus, this paper also illustrates how a state can act against the international system of rules, when it contradicts its national goals and core interests.
There is a close correlation between the external and domestic causes that provoked the Crimean annexation, which made the Crimean annexation a complex issue that requires a complex approach to studying it.
Since Crimea stays de-jure a part of Ukraine, the causes presented as domestic and external are relative to Ukraine, not Russia.
Also analysed were the biggest TV channels and mass media editions of Russia and Ukraine, and academic articles and books which explore the causes of the Crimean annexation.
Studying the causes of the Crimean annexation will help to understand Russia’s motives and what provoked Russia to carry out the annexation, as well as to understand the motives of Crimeans who supported the illegal actions of Russia on the Peninsula during the annexation.
A complex study of the causes of the CA will also help to predict similar events on the international arena.
Background The Crimean region was transformed from the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic to the Ukrainian Soviet Republic in 1954.
This was mostly explained by the territorial link of Crimea to Ukraine.
The transition was held without providing a referendum, which would have determined the people’s wishes regarding this transition.
The Crimean annexation preceded such events as NATO and the European Union expansion on the East, potential membership of Ukraine in those alliances, and the Ukrainian Revolution.
Crimea has close historical and cultural ties to Russia, and mostly ethnic Russians live on the Crimean Peninsula.
The close ties of Russia and Crimea are exemplified by common 9 language, values, history, traditions and views.
According to Bebler , historically and psychologically Crimea is much closer to Russia then to other Soviet Republic states.
On the eve of the Crimean Annexation it is also relevant to highlight the ‘triple transition’ of Crimea.
The fact that Crimea floated between Russia and Ukraine made Russia have some claims about Crimea possibly belonging to it.
Transitions made ordinary people lack understanding around the difference between what was legal and illegal in the overtaking of power in Crimea.
International financial services such as VISA and MasterCard do not work there, nor are there international organizations on the Peninsula.
Economic sanctions against both Crimea and the Russian Federation are still in force, which provoked a financial crisis and the decline of the ruble.
Additionally, the Russian Federation was suspended from the Group of Eight after the annexation of Crimea.
In conclusion, today relations are the ‘coldest’ they have been since the Cold War between Russia and the West.
External causes of the Crimean annexation by Russia in 2014 Ukraine, including Crimea, occupies a strategically important space between EU/NATO member states and the Russian Federation with its access to the Black Sea.
Suspension of signing the Agreement of Political and Economic Cooperation between Ukraine and the EU by the current Ukrainian government in 2013 provoked mass demonstrations in Kiev and the subsequent overtaking of power by pro-Western political forces in Ukraine.
Such a power shift from pro-Russian to pro-Western was not welcomed by Russia, and was declared violent and illegal.
Since Tsarist Russia until today, Crimea has been an important strategic territory due to geopolitics and its position in providing security for Russia.
Even after the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia kept the Russian Black Sea Fleet on the Crimean Peninsula for security and geopolitical purposes.
Russia taking control over Crimea can be explained by external causes such as diverse security perceptions of Russia and the West due to the Ukrainian Crisis , as well as the geopolitical controversy between the West and the Russian Federation.
Diverse security perceptions of Russia and the West The first external cause of the Crimean annexation by Russia in 2014 was the diverse security perceptions of Russia and the West.
By applying only their own perception to an explanation of the UC and the CA, both parties made the dialogue between them not only difficult, but almost impossible.
According to Sakwa , there are also diverse perceptions and visions of what ‘Europe’ is.
Thus, diverse ideas of what ‘Europe’ should be created diverse 11 perceptions of how to provide security for each nation’s regions.
Following the concept of a security community, the West saw providing security through the integration process “as a form of international cooperation” (Rieker & Gjerde, 2015,6), and the potential integration of Ukraine into the EU/NATO was also seen as a step forward for providing security in Europe.
For Russia, the expansion of the EU/NATO was seen as a threat to Russia’s security according to the Russian Security Concept, 2009.
Even Yelsin, the first President of the Russian Federation, had spoken about the potential tension between Russia and NATO/EU states after their expansion on the East.
Dealing with post-Soviet states, especially with Ukraine, was always one of the most important issues in the Russian security strategy.
The overtaking of power in Kiev during the Ukrainian Revolution and the shift from pro-Russian to pro-Western seemed to pose direct danger to the Russian Federation’s security due to the loss of influence and control over their neighbour’s country.
Furthermore, Russia argues that the EU and NATO are in very close cooperation and “EU’s foreign policy is linked to NATO” , and interprets Western foreign policy 12 towards Ukraine as a threat to Russian security.
In conclusion, providing security is one of the most important issues for the Russian government.
Geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West over Ukraine Diverse perceptions of how to provide security are closely linked to the geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West over Ukraine.
A geopolitical controversy between states or a group of states is a clash of opposing geopolitical interests of those states.
The West and the Russian Federation were involved in a geopolitical controversy , which ultimately provoked the annexation of Crimea by Russia.
There were, on the other hand, some attempts to build relations between Russia and the West on equal terms.
Russia’s Ukraine Policy . 2004 – the Orange Revolution with the West support and defeat of pro-Russian candidate Yanukovich at the president elections of Ukraine; 2004–2010.
In recent years political power in Ukraine has changed from the pro15 Western to the pro-Russian several times, as well as the direction of Ukraine’s state course towards Russia or the West.
The geopolitical controversy which provoked the annexation of Crimea started with the Orange Revolution in Ukraine in 2004 and finished with the overthrow of the pro-Russian government on February 22nd, 2014 during the Euromaidan.
Tsygankov starts his study of Russia’s Ukraine policy and what provoked Russia to annex Crimea in 2014 with the Orange Revolution in Ukraine in 2004.
Indeed, the geopolitical controversy between the West and Russia began in 2004, with the controversy of pro-Russian and pro-Western candidates during the presidential vote.
When it came to the new presidential elections in Ukraine in 2010, the pro-Russian government took control over the state this time.
Thus, the Russian government has tried several times to keep Ukraine under its sphere of influence and control.
Membership of Ukraine in the Eurasian Custom Union was supposed to provide a common custom territory and closer economic, as well as political, ties between Russia and Ukraine.
A last attempt to get Ukraine on Russia’s side was made in October 2013 with an offer of $15 billion in aid from Russia to Ukraine.
In the end, Yanukovych’s government was overthrown on February 22nd during the Euromaidan, and Russia ‘lost’ Ukraine to the proWestern opposition and the West.
Therefore, claims about a clear annexation of the neighbour territory become irrelevant.
Thus, the annexation of Crimea happened when the dialogue between Ukraine, the West and Russia became impossible.
The Ukrainian crisis had a close correlation with the geopolitical controversy between the West and the Russian Federation ; Ukrainian crisis was a cause of the above-mentioned controversy.
The power shift on February 22nd, 2013 played a vital role in the Russian government’s decision to take control over Crimea.
As long as Ukraine stayed ‘close’ to Russia with a proRussian president and gas interdependence, Russia was sure of its geopolitical position.
Russia’s decision to take control of Crimea seemed like a last attempt to keep its influence over part of the post-Soviet space.
According to the President of the Russian Federation’s claim in 2001, “Russia do not consider NATO an enemy organization or view its existence as a tragedy, although we see no need for it.
It was born as the antipode to the Warsaw Pact, as the antipode to the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe.
We do have to follow the reality, and the reality is that NATO is expanding.
NATO promised that they will not expand to the East after the fall of the Berlin Wall…Otherwise, they started to expand by taking control over our allies of the Warsaw Agreement and then over the post-Soviet Balkan states.
In this case, it is more than enough to make a deal about help for guaranteeing the security of these states.
The answer was that it is not our case, and that people and countries have the right to choose how to handle their security.
But it is also true, that they get closer and closer to our border and we get more questions.
The first and the most important, of course, was to support Crimeans, but also the idea that Ukraine one day will become one day a member of NATO is not acceptable for us… And one day NATO military ships will base on the Russian city of military glory, Sevastopol.
If NATO could come to Crimea, they could 18 create military installations against us.
Thus, Putin confirmed the geopolitical meaning of the annexation of Crimea.
The Russian government had seen the annexation of Crimea as a response to the new pro-Western government in Ukraine and their idea to continue negotiations about partnership with the EU/NATO during the geopolitical controversy between the West and Russia.
In the end, there is no data to show supportive evidence about NATO’s promise to not expand on the East.
The annexation of the Crimean Peninsula during the geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West is a good illustration of an instance where a state involved international norms in the name of protecting its own core national interests.
When it came to protecting the interests of Russia, which were linked to Ukraine, Russia did not respond to aggression against Ukraine, but became an aggressor itself.
Such geopolitical ambitions to keep control over the Crimean Peninsula come from the common past of Russia with the Soviet Union.
By signing several agreements with Ukraine about the presence of the Russian Black Sea Fleet on Ukrainian territory, Russia showed interest in keeping military bases on this peninsula and meant to have control over it.
Put simply, giving up its military position on the Crimean Peninsula for the sake of NATO was unacceptable to the Russian government.
If Ukraine were to one day become a member of NATO, it would be hard to imagine there being two opposing military forces in one territory.
As previously noted, having control over the Black Sea always held a lot of meaning for Russia, and especially during the controversy over Ukraine.
As long as NATO and the EU 20 also had access to the Black Sea, it was important for Russia to keep its position in Crimea in order to keep the balance on the Black Sea that had been maintained between the two forces before.
The desire to keep free access to the Black Sea via Crimea during the geopolitical controversy, as well as to keep a military base in Sevastopol City, provoked the annexation of this territory.
Mearsheimer argues that it is wrong to blame only Russia for the military capture of the Peninsula.
The CA can be also explained as an offensive reaction in the geopolitical controversy against losing influence on the post-Soviet area of Crimea, which has important meaning for the Russian Federation.
According to NATO’s Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg, “Crimea has been annexed—borders have been changed by use of force—for the first time since the Second World War.
NATO made no excuses for Russia intervening in a neighbour’s state and annexing part of its territory.
According to Cross , before the annexation of Crimea NATO saw Russia as a partner in keeping security for both of them.
After the CA, NATO and the EU member-states instated sanctions against Russia and Crimea, and the relationship between both parties was suspended.
While discussing the geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West, it is also important to look at the role of Ukraine in this dispute.
Russia’s actions in Ukraine appeared as only an act of aggression against Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, without any reference to the geopolitical controversy between the two nations.
The idea of defending their security interest by destroying it was not welcomed.
Unfortunately, Ukraine has played the role of the victim in this geopolitical controversy.
The controversy did not cover the interests of Ukraine as a sovereign and independent state; Ukraine would only get the advantages of being in a buffer zone position between the West and Russia as long it was a strategically very important state in Europe for both sides.
Maybe it would have been better to stay neutral and have contacts with both parties in order to prevent the geopolitical controversy over Ukraine.
However, Ukraine was not ready to do so for many reasons, one of them being Russian control over many areas in Ukraine.
Regardless, Ukraine showed which side it preferred and which way Ukraine would develop by signing the Ukraine–European Union Association Agreement on March 21st and June 27th, 2014.
The Association Agreement is still under the EU-states ratification process.
This Agreement also outlines the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area between the members.
As noted, after several attempts to keep Ukraine under its influence, the annexation of Crimea was the last thing Russia could do to avoid being ‘defeated’ by the West in Ukraine.
On their side, the West could also predict that signing the agreement about the association with Ukraine might provoke controversy between them and Russia, but it could have been possible to agree about Ukraine.
As long as “Russia and Ukraine share a long geographic border and Slavic culture, as well as having closely interdependent economies” , it was wrong to start negotiations about their partnership with Ukraine without keeping in mind Russia’s interests in Ukraine.
According to the Kiev Center of Political and Conflict Studies , Ukraine was supposed to do major research to find out what kind of consequences Ukraine might suffer before signing the above-mentioned agreement.
According to them, suspending signing of the agreement in 2013 was the right choice, because of Ukraine’s need to adapt its economy—which had been in close connection with Russia for such a long time—for this agreement.
After the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014, the West provided sanctions for both Crimea and Russia and suspended EU/NATO–Russia relations.
The division of Russia’s policy in Ukraine regarding the geopolitical controversy into four stages showed how the relationships between the parties were compounded step by step, not suddenly.
The geopolitical controversy over Ukraine, which then provoked the annexation of Crimea, put other countries that were not involved in the controversy in an awkward situation.
The majority of the United Nations’ members recognized the annexation of Crimea, as well as the illegal referendum in Crimea on March 16th, 2014.
As highlighted before, there were two levels of causes, named as external and domestic, and both of them provoked the CA in the year 2014.
Domestic causes are indirect and because of them, Crimeans supported Russia during her military invasion and the annexation of the Peninsula.
This meant that the Crimean annexation was not a clear grab of a neighbour’s territory, but an event where civilians supported the illigal actions of the other state.
Domestic causes of the CA on the interstate level were linked to each other as well.
The Russian Federation would not had support from Crimeans during the annexation without these domestic causes and the ethnic conflict in the state.
A legal dispute between Ukraine and Russia over Crimea, as well as gaps around the status of Crimea and the unclear right of Crimean self-determination, are also domestic causes of the annexation.
The unclear procedure of the self-determination made people to think that there was not an annexation, but that it was the Crimean’s people own decision about the Crimean future.
Diversity of regions in Ukraine presents the first domestic case of the Crimean annexation in 2014.
For example, diverse regions of Ukraine such as Zakarpatia, Crimea and Donbass have different historical and traditional approaches, as well as different views for their future because of a long history of difference between each other.
However, the diversity of the region was not so obvious until the Euromaidan in 2013-2014.
During the Euromaidan Ukraine was split on several points as Crimea, Eastern and Western Ukraine showed diverse points of view about to the potential state development.
So, Ukraine was not a presenter of one united territory, and such diversity of regions was a direct route to conflict.
It was only a question of time, when the different nationalities would stand for their interests and beliefs.
Of course, this struggle combined with the Russian military invasion of Crimea.
There were several attempts to keep this region under control and keep it united with the rest of Ukraine on a different level of selfdetermination than other oblast1 in Ukraine.
Ethnic diversity of Ukraine According to the Waltz’s ‘First Image’ , the primary cause of the conflict is a human behaviour.
In this case, the behaviour of ethnic Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine, and the diversity between them, were causes of the Crimean annexation.
There were many other causes of the CA on the domestic level, but the main cause was the ethnic diversity behaviour of Russians and Ukrainians during the conflict.
A report from Pew Research Center proves that ethnic diversity between Ukrainians and Russians has place to be in Ukraine.
Sasse’s ‘State of Regions’ presents the idea that the Crimean annexation could have been provoked because of diverse ethnicity, which is closely connected to diverse views and interests.
Ethnic diversity built the ‘wall’ between Russians and Ukrainians before the military invasion by Russia into the Crimean Peninsula in February 2014.
Crimea has a long cultural and historical connection to the Russian Federation.
After several attempts of the Ukrainization of Crimea, Saluschev claims it was not a surprise that ethnic Russians supported Russian actions on the peninsula in 2014.
Thus, in the name of keeping Russian traditions, language and history, Russian actions in Crimea in 2014 received active support from the Russian population of Crimea.
The biggest national group of Crimea is Russian, while the biggest national group of Ukraine is Ukrainian.
It did, however, happen during the critical period of Ukrainian history named the Euromaidan.
The ethnic conflict between Russians and Ukrainians had a latent character before the Ukrainian Revolution in 2014.
Ethnic diversity had become a “binary opposition between Russians and Ukrainians” and tensions between them were blurred until the Euromaidan.
Identity, Transition, and Conﬂict’, Sasse examined how and why such ethnic diversity could provoke a conflict between these nations in the future.
Diverse views of Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine The ‘hot spot’ of the confrontation between Ukrainians and Crimean Russians occurred during the Euromaidan due to diverse views.
Both groups had diverse views about the potential cooperation of Ukraine, which included Crimea at that time.
Furthermore, the new ‘pro-Western’ government of Ukraine (after overtaking power in Kiev on February 22nd, 2014) continued dialogue with the EU and NATO about Ukraine’s potential cooperation.
So, diverse views provoked Crimea to act in own interests, but also with support from the Russian Federation.
During this period, the Crimean and Ukrainian governments did not come to any agreement about common development of Ukraine and Crimea as one state.
There is a correlation between the two diverse nationalities and two diverse views of Crimean Russians and Ukrainians.
To sum up, these diverse views of different regions in Ukraine played a significant role during the Euromaidan and then during the annexation of Crimea in 2014.
Yanukovych’s presidency in Ukraine was a guarantor of a close relationship with Russia.
After the fall of his regime in the February 2014, Crimea refused to be controlled by Kiev with its illegal government by public and government opinion of Crimea.
Previous votes in Ukraine showed how strong the Crimean pro-Russian position was.
Signing an agreement with the EU meant that Ukraine would go out from under Russian influence, which Crimeans did not want.
By all means, Ukraine should follow the interests of its state, but it is also important to follow the interests of all its regions, but not just a part of them.
And when it came to such strategic decisions as cooperation with the EU and NATO or with the Eurasian Custom Union , Ukraine was split in two again.
Such previous experience could have helped the nation to 28 find a common view that would follow the interests both of Ukrainians and Russians in Ukraine , but it did not happen.
To conclude, western and central parts of Ukraine broke all ties to Russia by identifying themselves as a pro-Western region.
Diverse memories and beliefs of Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine There are different memories and beliefs of the ordinary population in Ukraine and Crimea.
These memories are diverse because of previous state affiliations of Crimea and then Ukraine.
Diverse memories and beliefs split Ukraine in two, and also provoked the CA on the domestic level.
While “symbols combine suggestive, emotional and political power” (Sasse, 2007, p.), Crimea is a strong pro-Russian region due to common memories and symbols, especially from the World War II times.
The role and victory of Soviets in WWII are some of the most significant memories for Russians in Crimea.
On the other side, it is important for Ukraine to revive its own history without the Russian influence.
Diverse memories made people diverse in their understanding of who is a hero and who is an enemy.
For Crimea, which was a part of the Russian Soviet Republic during WWII, Stepan Bandera will always be an enemy.
Therefore, proclaiming him as a national hero was unacceptable for Crimea.
To sum up, diverse histories, memories and symbols made people perceive their nation differently, which provoked the CA in 2014.
Manipulations around the status of Russian language in Ukraine Before the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014 there were manipulations around the regional status of Russian language in several regions of Ukraine including Crimea.
Such action by the Ukrainian government made it possible for the Russian government to start its company around defence of the status of Russian language in Crimea and ethnic Russians as minority in Ukraine.
Whether or not to recognize equal positions for Russian and Ukrainian languages has been an open question in Ukraine for a long time.
For Crimeans it was important to keep at least regional status of the Russian language 30 on the peninsula and to continue to speak in their native language; therefore, Russian action in Crimea was supported by ethnic Russians in Crimea.
To add, in opinion of Russians in Crimea the Ukrainian Government started to reform country from a wrong question.
Ethnic Russians as a minority in Ukraine were afraid for their rights in Ukraine in the future with such active pro-western position of the Ukrainian Goverment.
The internal structure of Ukraine In accordance with Waltz’s the Second Image ‘International Conflict and the Internal Structure of States’ , there is a close correlation between the conflict over Crimea in 2014 and the internal structure of Ukraine.
An inter-state system can prevent or provoke conflicts, such as what happened over the Crimean Peninsula.
In this case, a weak state-building process of Ukraine as a unitary state provoked the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation.
Furthermore, Waltz stays that human behaviour is a main cause of conflict, which here refers to the ethnic diversity of nations in Ukraine and their diverse views.
As noted, there are several domestic causes in Ukraine which together provoked the CA, and dispute around the formation of the Ukrainian government is also one of them.
In this case, a federation would give more self-determination to the different regions of Ukraine, and it means that even with previous questions about the status of the Russian language, its cancellation and manipulation could never come true.
While on the other side, “Crimea is a clear exception” with its status of autonomy, own government, and constitution.
Federation as a form of territorial formation could help Ukraine to take into account the opinion of every region.
For Ukraine, it is difficult to operate as a unified state by following only one view without acknowledging the others.
Thus, viewing the central and western parts of Ukraine as in potential cooperation with the EU and NATO made Crimea de-facto Russian 31 as well.
A geographical and political centralization of power in Ukraine with the exception of the Crimean Autonomic Republic was already a mistake of the Ukrainian government in the state-building process.
Thus, “the inherent tension between centralization and decentralization was inscribed in the constitution” and the territorial composition of Ukraine with the Autonomic Republic made Ukraine de-facto a decentralized state.
In conclusion, the choice of Ukraine to be a unified, centralized state in 1991 also provoke the annexation of Crimea in 2014 by the Russian Federation because of the diversity of the Crimean region compared to other regions of Ukraine.
The status of the Crimean Autonomous Republic The status of Crimea as an Autonomous Republic with a special status for Sevastopol City also provoked the annexation of Crimea on the domestic level.
As highlighted before, the institutional arrangement of giving Crimea autonomous status and the possibility to have their own constitution was made to prevent a potential conflict over the Crimean Peninsula (Sasse, 2002), but at the same time such separateness from other regions of Ukraine provoked the annexation of the Peninsula.
In addition, the CA happened because of the unclear legal designation of the autonomous rights of Crimea and Sevastopol.
The Crimean Republic had a president and a Constitutional Court until 1996.
The Sevastopol City with the Russian Black Sea Fleet presence Along with the special status of Sevastopol, the presence of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Crimea at the moment of the CA also provoked the easy over-taking of power by the Russian 32 Federation in 2014.
So, according to the agreements between both parties, Russia did not break the rules de-jure, but Russia did use its already present military staff for taking full control over the Peninsula.
So, the ethnic composition of Sevastopol also drove this region to support Russia during the time of the annexation.
Otherwise, it will look like their own opinion have only people, who are in Kiev currently.
The Government has to not allow the anti constitutional way of revenge of bankrupt political forces professing an extreme nationalism in Ukraine.
There is no doubt that this referendum was illegal according to Ukrainian and international norms , but it also provided the Russian military with support on the Peninsula.
This referendum must be examined, because the results have shown the will of the majority of Crimeans.
Because most Crimeans wished to become a part of the Russian Federation, the annexation of Crimea was held peacefully, without civil war or civil demonstrations against Russian control of the Peninsula.
Certainly, the Crimean annexation happened with the support of the Crimean people.
Such dual-morality explains the killing of policemen on the Euromaidan during fights, the result of orders sent by the Ukrainian Government from Crimea to protect the civil order in Ukraine and the current government , while those who participated in demonstrations and were also killed got honorary titles as Heavenly Hundred Heroes of Ukraine afterwards.
Additionally, when pro-Russian demonstrations in Odessa on May 2nd, 2014 resulted in 46 people being burned alive , Crimeans became even more sure of their choice to support Russia.
Fear played a vital role during the Crimean annexation and while the referendum was held.
Civilians were under fear “for their memories, culture, language and views because of new pro-Western government” , and for what happened in Kiev at the same time.
Such claims from both the Crimean and the Russian governments made civil people confused, while in Kiev a violent over-taking of power had happened.
In the opinion of several respondents in the Russian documentary movie Crimea.
Operating with the results of the Crimean referendum in 1991, the Crimean government said that its people’s wishes would be heard this time.
The collapse of the Soviet Union came almost a year later in December 1991, while the referendum was held in January 1991.
It was clear that the annexation had been hidden under the people’s will and referendum.
Otherwise, according to the results, the Supreme Council of Crimea and the Sevastopol City Council promoted the Crimean Autonomous Republic Declaration of Independence.
In conclusion, one the eve of the Crimean annexation and the Crimean referendum, the Ukrainian government did not give enough attention to the worries of the Russian minority in Ukraine, who were mainly based in Crimea.
There were no attempts to explain to Russians in Crimea that they were part of Ukraine.
There were no open appeals to stay away from the Russian influence nor explanations of what was really going on in Kiev, nor any reassurance that Ukraine would always respect the rights of ethnic Russians in Ukraine due to the Peninsula’s close historical ties with Russia.
Sanctions against Crimea and Russia provoked the financial crisis and the collapse of ruble in Russia.
As a consequence of the annexation, NATO–Russia Council relations are temporary frozen as well as EU–Russia relations.
Thus, the CA involved Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity; this paper claims that it happened because of Russia’s protection of its national interest in the geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West.
The loss of control over Crimea could be a geopolitical defeat for Russia.
The external causes provoked Russia to take control over Crimea, while domestic causes provided the support of Crimeans during the Russian annexation of the Peninsula.
In summary, the annexation of Crimea is a complex issue, the studying of which has to account for both domestic and external causes.
Since Tsarist Russia, Crimea has been an important strategic territory due to geopolitics, providing security for Russia.
Diverse security perceptions of Russia and the West made for diverse understandings of the annexation of Crimea by both parties.
As long as Russia’s and the West’s interpretations of ‘Europe’ are different, there will also be diverse understandings of how to provide security in their regions.
The potential integration of Ukraine into the EU/NATO was also seen as a step forward for providing security in Europe, while for Russia the expansion of the EU/NATO was seen as a threat for Russia’s security according to the Russian Security Concept of 2009.
Another external cause of the CA by Russia in 2014 was the geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West over Ukraine.
As long as Ukraine was “a state on the border between Russia and the West” , it would always have special meaning for Russia due to geopolitics and its position providing security near Russia’s border.
This paper looked the development of the controversy between Russia and the West through Russian Foreign policy towards Ukraine.
By identifying four stages in the relations between Russia and the Ukraine regarding the presence of the West in Ukraine, this paper covered the main events from the Orange Revolution to the overthrow of the pro-Russian government on February 22nd, 2014, which in the end provoked Russia to annex Crimea in order to protect its position during the controversy with the West.
Additionally, this paper has examined the controversy by looking at Russian politics in Ukraine as divided into four stages, and showed how relationships between the parties were compounded step by step, not suddenly; this approach helps to understand why the CA did not happen prior to 2014.
The annexation of the Crimean Peninsula during the geopolitical controversy between Russia and the West was a good illustration of a state invoking international norms in the name of protecting its own core national interests.
Russia’s geopolitical ambitions to keep control over the Crimean Peninsula come from a common past with the Soviet Union.
The second part of the thesis covered causes of the CA from a domestic perspective.
Domestic causes of the CA on the interstate level were linked to each other.
The CA would not have happened without the ethnic conflict 38 between Russians and Ukrainians, which arose out of their diverse views of the future of Ukraine on the eve of the annexation.
The first domestic cause examined in this paper was the diversity of regions.
Following Sasse’s definition of Ukraine as “a state of regions” , these diverse regions provoked a division of the country into several parts—Crimea and Eastern and Western Ukraine—with diverse points of view about potential state development.
The ethnic diversity of Ukraine, as the second domestic cause, has a close correlation with the diverse views, memories and beliefs of Russians and Ukrainians in Ukraine.
Such diversity provoked the CA, with Crimeans taking a pro-Russian stance about political and economic cooperation with Russia, as well as sharing common beliefs and memories with Russia and then with the new Ukraine.
Such diversity provoked active support of Russian actions on the Peninsula by the ethnic Russians in Crimea.
Crimea and Ukraine had diverse views about the political and economic development of Ukraine including Crimea at the time of the annexation.
Thus, when Kiev actively supported the idea of continuing dialogue about potential cooperation with the EU and NATO, Crimea still claimed to stay close with Russia and started to negotiate membership in the Eurasian Custom Union.
In addition, manipulations around the status of the Russian language in Ukraine made Crimeans confused on the eve of the annexation.
Claims that the status of Russian as the regional language would be abolished by the new pro-Western government simply made people scared.
Additionally, the presence of the Russian Black Sea Fleet provoked easy over-taking of power by the Russian Federation in 2014.
While previous domestic causes provoked the CA, the Crimean status referendum has shown that most Crimeans wished to separate from Ukraine and become part of Russia.
The results of the referendum showed the readiness of civilians to support the illegal actions of Russia for the sake of protecting their own interests.
Ukraine’s cooperation with Russia to include Crimea simply was seen by Crimeans as simply a guarantee of keeping close cultural and historical ties with Russia.
In summary, ethnicity is one of the most powerful instruments for achieving state objectives.
Under the calls about protection of common values and interests 39 of civil society, the state can manage its own interest on the specified territory.
Ethnic Russians in Crimea truly believed in a fair reunion with Russia, while Russia just wanted to protect its state interests against the policy of the EU and NATO in Ukraine near the Russian border during the geopolitical controversy.
During the research process attempts were made to sample data about diverse explanations of the CA from both Russian and Western sides, as well as attempts to find an answer for the second potential RQ (What are the different views on the Crimean annexation by Russia in 2014?), but this became irrelevant.
Russia’s official view de-facto agreed with the annexing of Crimea as defence of Russian national interests in the geopolitical controversy with the West.
Unclear attempts at explaining why the annexation was legal, as well as comparing the CA with the Kosovo precedent, only confirmed that the Russian Federation did break international rules in the name of their national interest.
In accordance with Russia’s state opinion, international society just has to approach it as another precedent on the international arena, with the reference to the close historical and cultural ties of Crimea with Russia.
Furthermore, this thesis did not address the domestic causes of the CA in the Russian Federation.
Sure, there were some causes in Russia which played a part in provoking it to annex Crimea.
Both the domestic causes in Russia which provoked it to annex Crimea, and the involvement of the Crimean Tatars in the conflict, are good topics for future research which could approach the CA from perspectives different than those presented in this paper.
Analysis of the domestic and the external causes of the CA can be a relevant basis for developing policy recommendations, because it shows the annexation as a complex issue, not just a clear grab of a neighbour’s territory.
The CA happened because of domestic and external causes, which explains why Russia reacted illegally in the name of protecting its national interest, and why civilians in Crimea supported these actions on the Peninsula.
This basis could provide insight into how to deal with such situations on the international arena, as well as how to predict them.
One approach would be to admit that there was a clear violation of Ukraine’s territory and sovereignty, and to isolate Russia from international society.
Another would be to admit that 40 NATO and the EU made a strategic mistake by involving Ukraine in the integration process.
Third, a new referendum could be provided to Crimea under international supervision.
The Constitutional Process in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in the Context of Interethnic Relations and Conflict Settlement.
The EU–Russia competition in the shared neighbourhood and the Ukraine crisis.
Customs Union between the Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan and the Russian Federation within the framework of the Eurasian Economic Community.
Ethnic Russians of Crimea as an instrument of the Crimean annexation in 2014.
Despite Concerns about Governance, Ukrainians Want to Remain One Country Many Leery of Russian Influence, as Putin Gets Boost at Home.
Russian and EU perceptions of European security and potential implications for Europe and Norway.
Doorstep statement by NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg at the CSU conference in Wildbad Kreuth, Germany.
Association Agreement between the European Union and its Member States, of the one part, and Ukraine, of the other part.
