Triangle Revisited Ukraine has long been considered as a bone of contention between the EU and Russia which could eventually lead to a split of the country along political, cultural or religious lines.
This interpretation, however, fails to explain the dynamics of the Ukrainian revolution and the Russian-Ukrainian war.
PLEASE DON’T CIRCULATE Keywords: geopolitics, democratisation, Ukraine, Russia, European Union Introduction Ukraine has been repeatedly described as an apple of discord, bone of contention, root of disagreement between Russia on the one hand, and the EU on the other.
To some extent this interpretation of EU-Ukraine-Russia triangle resonates with general studies which construe EU-Russia interaction as reflecting a clash of various irreconcilable dichotomies (e.g. a vegetarian elephant vs. a bear , post-modern EU vs. modern, or, even premodern Russia , EU integrationist vision vs.
In analyses of this kind Ukraine is reduced to a mere object of Russia-EU competition.
If Russia and the EU had engaged in some sort of fundamental conflict over Ukraine, the latter would have become a battleground for fierce competition and would have been torn asunder by the two actors and split into a pro-European Ukrainian part and a pro-Moscow Russian-speaking part.
Some might argue that Russia’s annexation of Crimea and unrest in the East of Ukraine are manifestations of the conflict between pro-European Ukrainians and pro-Moscow Russophones.
However, such an interpretation cannot explain the fact that the Maidan activists in November 2013 included both an Ukrainian ultranationalist groups and a predominantly Russian-speaking population of the Ukrainian capital Kyiv and other regions.
It also fails to explain why the significant part of the the Russophone population in the South and some Eastern regions of Ukraine strongly supports the European trajectory of Ukraine and opposes the separatist movement.
The problématique above suggests that Russia-EU interaction in their shared neighbourhood is informed by a dynamic which is more complex than mere ideological or geopolitical competition.
Attributing the same – “integrationist” and “sovereign” features to Russia and the EU, Prozorov explains boththe cases of collaboration and conflict in Russia-EU interaction.
This trend has recently been applied in the research of the Black Sea region.
Others acknowledge that it was the EU that was inconsistent in its policies in the region , and reluctant to engage Russia in EU policies for the region.
They also point to the need for the EU to engage Russia in joint actions.
Drawing on the above critique this paper suggests that the regional projects of Russia and the EU in their shared neighbourhood produce a more complex effect on the region.
Therefore, Ukraine’s predicament concerning its geopolitical choice should be studied at the sub-unit level of analysis.
Applying Langenhove’s conceptualisation, it holds that there are three significant social actors – government, society and business elites.
Since the three actors often have divergent interests and/or motives for action, it is suggested that a state should not be construed as a rational system and the state’s regional orientations should be treated as outcomes of balance of preferences and practices between the three actors rather than a rational choice.
Within the same logic the paper argues that the interests of these actors may differ in the various dimensions – the social, the political and the economic, which means that the balance of preferences will differ in various dimensions.
In addition, it is necessary to analyze the dimension of international security politics which is an important indicator of regional alignments of Ukraine.
The paper will analyse each dimension and will identify in which of them preferences of main actors generate zero-sum logic.
For the present purpose, the phrasings “zero-sum dynamics” implies that he EU and Russia each pursue their own objectives, which to a great extent are mutually exclusive or even antagonistic.
Slicing the EU-Ukraine-Russia triangle Until recently relations in the triangle EU-Ukraine-Russia were depicted as a more or less homogenous complex of zero-sum dynamics.
Thus, the EU seeks to encourage Ukraine to pursue transparent democratic procedures and respect human rights, whereas Russia tries to implement its own sovereign democracy model.
These models were considered antagonistic and generated zero-sum dynamics for Ukraine’s choice.
EU and Russia seek to involve Ukraine in their security projects the EU is seeking Ukraine's alignment with CFSP decisions and its participation in various CSDP missions, with some EU Member State advocating Ukraine accession to NATO, whereas Russia is seeking to involve Ukraine both in closer security partnership, bilateral or multilateral Tashkent pact, or, at least, to secure its neutrality.
Given Russia’s sensitivity about Ukraine’s accession to NATO, the dilemma was also framed in zero-sum terms.
Russia's ideology has been developed in recent times through the appreciation of its unique national character and extreme experiences, which are regarded as justifying Russia's right to seek its own unique way to become 'a normal' European country.
Thus, Russia offers Ukraine an ideology based on glorification of their shared Soviet and pre-Soviet past, common culture and language.
The EU, in turn, offers Ukraine its own post-modern understanding of Europe based on human rights, freedoms and liberties, which make the EU a sort of teleological point of the development of any human society.
At the same time, Ukraine’s rejection of its Soviet past and history and focus on its own trauma and promotion of its own language, seem to be important element of Ukraine’s modern nation-building programme and return to Europe.
It was suggested that the two programmes were antagonistic and defined Ukraine’s choice in zero-sum terms.
The paper will analyze each of the above dimensions and identify the preferences of the three main societal actors in Ukraine – the government, business elites and population.
The analysis of the balance of preferences of the three actors will help account for the dynamics in the triangle.
In addition to a more refined analysis, this approach allows for attributing a certain degree of agency to Ukrainian actors.
This agency is clearly exercised when the interests and motivations of two of the three major societal actors coincide and lead to shaping a certain policy choice.
Quite often such a choice is neither explicitly pro-European nor pro-Western, which demonstrates Ukraine’s ability to diminish the zero-sum dynamics in the triangle.
The paper also analyses changes in the interests of the EU and Russia across different dimensions.
The balance of preferences will demonstrate where zero-sum dynamics prevails, i.e. where the interests of EU and Russia are likely to remain irreconcilable, and where different dynamics can be identified.
Overall, the paper will also look at how changes in the dynamics within one dimension affect its interface with other dimensions.
Euromaidan or Revolution of Dignity 3 The dominant narrative of the last year’s events in Ukraine contends that the pro-European, democratically-minded Ukrainian public rallied against authoritarian President Viktor Yanukovich after he refused to sign the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement in November 2013.
The Ukrainian revolution, often branded as Euromaidan, is described as a civilizational choice of the Ukrainian people for democratic European values and against authoritarian Russia.
Indeed, Ukrainian elites constructed a strong link between the nation’s renaissance and historical return to Europe on the one hand, and the country association with the EU on the other.
Drawing on this link, the EU could build up strong moral authority in Ukrainian politics.
Twenty-seven visits by Cox-Kwasniewski mission to Ukraine, regular presence of EU diplomats in the court sessions against the opposition leaders and frequent reminders from top level Brussels officials that the EU-Ukraine association agreement will be signed only if the problem of selective justice will be resolved created the link between political and economic dimension.
In addition, the strong response of the EU to politically motivated criminal processes against the leaders of the opposition resonated with the demand of the society and added additional significance to the political debate in 2011-2013.
As a result, this internal debate was gradually reframed from a purely government-opposition conflict into a broader discourse about Ukraine’s return to Europe.
All this made the soft power of the EU stronger and provided it with some leverage in Ukrainian politics.
However, the link between the economic and political dimension should not be taken for granted.
However these large rallies did not lead to mass mobilisation and radicalisation of the protests.
The mass mobilisation and violent protests that eventually led to overthrowing President V Yanukovich took place after the night of 31 November, when the riot police brutally dispersed a small number of students and some journalists, who decided to spend the night in Independence Square.
The acts of unmotivated violence by the Ukrainian riot policy were broadcast widely and triggered mass mobilisation of Kyiv residents and inflow of protestors from other cities.
The protests, which were rebranded from the ‘Euromaidan’ to the Revolution of “Dignity”, brought together the broadest spectrum of social and political forces ranging from extreme Ukrainian nationalists with their anti-EU slogans to some religious communities and Russian-speaking retired army officers.
Nevertheless, replication of the Russian model of governance in Ukraine did not produce analogous societal and political outcomes in Ukraine.
In fact, a 4 combination of a number of internal and external structural factors produced the opposite effect.
Even well before the Vilnius Summit, President V Yanukovich faced serious popular resentment and tension in his elite base.
The next section pinpoints some crucial factors which play an important role in the launch of “authoritarian projects” and will assess and compare parallels between Russian authoritarianism and its Ukrainian replica.
Economic Basis, Government and Population In 2001-2002, Vladimir Putin launched the implementation of an authoritarian regime combined with progressive economic reforms and deregulation of small and medium business.
These measures in combination with a growing inflow of petrodollars helped the Russian President buy the loyalty of the population.
The war against Chechen rebels and general disappointment with the West were also a plausible excuse for gradually limiting the public sphere.
Yanukovich took over the office in the conditions of a global economic crisis, with Ukrainian industries being negatively affected by the drop in the demand on the Ukrainian metals and chemical products on the world markets.
This external condition drove the Ukrainian government to introduce serious austerity measures and reforms aimed at optimizing budgetary spending and facilitating economic growth.
The problem was that these reforms went against populist electoral promises by Yanukovich.
Instead of reducing tax, the new taxation code increased the tax-burden and posed arbitrary economic pressure on small and medium enterprises.
With all this taking place in the context of several scandals involving the embezzlement of public funds in energy/infrastructure projects and exuberant expenses for to the president’s residences, a geographic reconciliation gradually took place in Ukraine.
It is indicative that the movement of Afghan War Veterans has its social base in Eastern Ukraine, including Yanukovich’s stronghold, the Donetsk region.
It can thus be concluded that the implementation of a Russian authoritarian model in Ukraine lacked the necessary economic base and, consequently, produced the opposite effect, namely mobilization of the population and broader societal demand for redistributive justice.
However materialistic their motives, Afghan veterans demanded to keep their high pension rates and traders rallied for maintaining their tax exemptions – these movements have a broad social basis, nation-wide membership and self-sufficiency.
Relations between Government and Elites Another factor that affected the Russian authoritarian model in Ukraine was the character of relations between the government on the one hand, and the parliamentary institutions and business elites on the other.
After the Duma election in 1999, V Putin could rely on a significant pro-presidential majority in the Russian parliament.
Apart from the dogmatic Communist party and small centrist and centre-right factions, there was almost no noticeable meaningful liberal parliamentary opposition.
Therefore, the implementation of administrative centralisation in Russia took place in more favourable conditions.
In the case of Ukraine, President V Yanukovich started political centralisation when the Ukrainian parliament had significant opposition factions.
Although compromised by the postOrange period, the Parliament remained an important national site for political debate, particularly in the face of the controversial policies put forward by the new government.
According to sociologists, Klychko owed his popularity to the fact that he has never been a professional politician; whereas the success of radicals from Svoboda demonstrates voters’ preferences to consistent and value-based parties.
All the opposition parties seem to have realised the great potential of non-partisan civil society and have started working closely with its most active representatives to forge alliances.
Finally, unlike Russia, the smaller size of the Ukrainian economy and fewer lucrative business assets, did not allow the Ukrainian president to secure an advantageous role in interaction with business elites similar to that of V Putin’s in Russia.
In addition, the strong business interests of the President’s family raised concerns among major businesses about their future.
Some experts believe that no oligarch, including those who keep a low profile, could feel safe after the Tymoshenko case.
Some of them moved their assets to Europe from where they continued to support some opposition movements.
As a result of the growing tension between Yanukovich and big business, several oligarchs, including his close associate S Lyovochkin, withdrew their support from President V Yanukovich at the peak of the protests.
They also helped to secure a peaceful transition of power after V Yanukovich fled the country on 21 February 2014.
Russia, EU and the Ukrainian democracy The argument about Russia’s resentment about the coloured revolutions suggests that Moscow a) treated the coloured revolutions in the post-Soviet states as Western geopolitical plots, and b) aimed to export authoritarian models to these countries.
The deterioration of relations between Russia and the coloured democracies in Ukraine, Georgia and Kyrgyzstan in 2003-2008 seems confirm this interpretation.
At the same time, the claim that Russia seeks to build a special relationship with post-Soviet countries on the basis of ideological affinity and promote authoritarianism is not entirely valid for several reasons.
In Georgia, in 2003, Russia even played a positive role in the Georgian Revolution of Roses.
It facilitated the removal of the incumbent President Shevarnadze and consolidation of the new government headed by Mikheil Saakashvili.
Therefore, the major factor that affects Russia’s attitude to democratic revolutions is not the revolution per se, but the perceived ideology behind this revolution and the pro-Western geopolitical orientation that it can bring.
Moreover, its own authoritarianism notwithstanding, Moscow can more effectively project its influence and expand its economic presence in democratic societies rather than in autocratic systems.
Ukrainian nationalist Prime-Minister Y Tymoshenko signed a highly profitable gas contract for Gazprom in 2009.
She was then convicted for this under “pro-Russian” President Yanukovich who tried to re-negotiate the contract.
When Moscow refused to re-consider the conditions of the gas deal, V Yanukovich exercised pressure on several Russian energy companies , which demonstrated that Ukraine can also manipulate RussianUkrainian energy interdependence.
Similarly, in Belarus and Central Asia, pro-Russian authoritarian leaders became even less comfortable interlocutors for Moscow than the proWestern nationalist leaders in Ukraine.
So ideology apart, democratic systems seem to be the framework in which Russia is able to play a greater role in the political debate in Ukraine, to exercise its soft and economic power, to articulate its narrative in international affairs and defend its interests.
One can conclude that Russia’s uneasy feeling about democratic revolutions is a function of how Moscow perceives the outcomes of these revolutions.
As long as Russia can maintain its strategic influence over the territory, it has no prejudice as to the form of government in place.
Noticeably, after Russia’s annexation of Crimea and creation of pro-Russian enclaves in the East of Ukraine, Moscow effectively recognized the newly elected centrist President Poroshenko.
The state-controlled Russian media started to wrap-up the militant rhetoric against “Ukrainian Kiev junta” and stopped broad-casting press-conferences with former President Yanukovich.
Therefore, the internal political system has currently ceased to 7 generate zero-sum political logic.
This interest will not push Russia to pursue active policies of democracy promotion.
However, it will prevent Moscow from pursuing counter-democratic restorations.
It is in this democratic landscape that Russia can promote its economic interests in Ukraine as will now be discussed 2.
Russia has attached great importance to the Customs Union and Ukraine's accession to the block.
To make the prospect even more attractive, the Russian President went so far as to promise that Ukraine would be entitled to collect the export tax on all the volumes of gas and oil pumped by Russia and Kazakhstan through its territory.
The EU has also contributed to generating zero-sum dynamics in the economic dimension.
Secondly, EU officials made it clear that while free trade area with Russia is fully compatible with the DFCTA, the accession of Ukraine to the Customs Union would make DFCTA with the EU impossible.
On the eve of the EU Big Enlargement in 2004, Moscow and Brussels engaged in numerous negotiations and addressed most of Russia’s concerns ranging from trade agreements with Poland and Bulgaria to a transit regime between Russia and the Moscow enclave of Kaliningrad.
No similar meaningful trilateral discussion to address Russia’s concerns took place in the case of Ukraine, which escalated the zero-sum logic in the economic dimension.
At the same time, most Ukrainian government and business sector have for the most parttried to escape this binary vision.
Their key concern was that the Customs Union would pave the way for the creation of supranational regulatory bodies which were to decide on the common tariff policy and on disputes and procedures.
Despite the formal principle of consensual decision-making in the Board of the Eurasian Economic Commission, it was clear that the weight of Putin’s close associate and Russian representative V Khristenko, in this decision-making body was more than significant.
In the existing political architecture in Kremlin, Russian companies would have much stronger lobbying capacities, which would inevitably place Ukrainian businesses in an underprivileged position and eventually lead these businesses to be taken over by their stronger and more aggressive Russian counterparts.
Another reason for scepticism was a great disappointment about the deals reached between Kiev and Moscow on gas discounts and basing rights for the Russian fleet in Crimea.
In this context, Moscow’s offer to collect export tax on all gas pumped through Ukraine seemed too good to be true.
The disappointment resulted in a number of practical measures that the Yanukovich government adopted in order to reduce Ukraine’s gas dependence on Russia.
Despite lack of transparency in the energy and electricity projects in 2010-2013, Ukraine switched many of its electricitygenerating capacities from natural gas to coal.
Finally, although the risks of living and making business in developing markets offers high profits, Yanukovich and his business and political elite sought safe havens in the European Union.
Pro-Russian as they were, President V Yanukovich and his family developed business activities in the European markets.
The appointment of the highly respected centrist businessman and politician Petro Poroshenko to the position of the Minister of Economic Development and his skilful mitigation of the 'cheese war' between Russia and Ukraine in March 2012 was another indication that Yanukovich has prepared to 9 depoliticize the economic dimension and confine these relations to the technical domain.
The alternative formula ‘3+1’, essentially Free Trade Area with the countries of the Customs Union was the highest degree of integration to which Ukrainian elite would be ready to accept.
Despite all Kiev efforts, Russia still viewed the EU-Ukraine trade deal as a threat to the Customs Union.
President Putin repeatedly stated that after the EU-Ukraine deal Russia would face a huge inflow of cheap European consumption goods.
At the same time, the Russian leader never specified what those cheap and high-quality European consumption goods were.
More importantly, Putin repeatedly stressed that the EU-Ukraine deal was negotiated without taking note of Russia’s concerns.
The economic dimension might look like the most conflict-prone one because of these clashing preferences.
However, it should be noted, that the first wave of protests in Kiev and other major centres of Ukraine directly affected by the EU-Ukraine trade deal did not provoke any significant civil conflict or geographical clash.
It was mostly peaceful and involved art-related activities, which generated no violence or any politically-geared agenda.
Protestors refused to give the floor to the opposition leaders, so neither the government nor pro-Russian oligarchs saw it as a threat.
By 30 November 2013, most of the protests phased out and most likely would have ended up with nothing.
As mentioned above, it was the excessive violence by the riot police which triggered mass mobilisation and radicalisation of the protests.
Even though it might be argued that Ukrainians were fighting for European values of freedom of assembly and speech, this fight was only marginally related to the EUUkraine DCFTA agreement.
To attribute to the economic dimension a causal power for the future events would be a post-hoc fallacy.
Zero-sum logic in the economic dimension was not powerful enough to produce a conflict within Ukraine, but it was one of the factors that provoked the Russian invasion.
It was not, however, some specific economic interests that drove Russia to invade Crimea.
It was rather the rejection of Russia’s desire to 10 negotiate the EU-Ukraine relations in a trilateral format that had a strong symbolic effect.
The right to negotiate with the EU over various arrangements in Europe has been an important element of Russia’s great power identity.
The rejection of Russia’s claim to take part in negotiations about various, even minor, deals between Europe and the Eastern Neighbourhood challenged Russia’s great power status.
Firstly, when newly elected Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko signed the EU-Ukraine DCFTA in July 2014, Russia’s response was merely rhetorical and not even aggressive.
This indifference demonstrates that DCFTA per se does not pose any threat to the economic interests of Russia and Eurasian Customs Union.
Secondly, when Ukraine failed to quickly put down the rebellion in the South-East of Ukraine, Kiev suggested organizing a trilateral meeting in the format Ukraine Eurasian Customs Union – European Union.
All the above suggests that Russia’s harsh response to the EU-Ukraine DCFTA arose mostly from the fact that Moscow was not consulted before the negotiations.
Although Russia imposed bans on some Ukrainian products, this does not amount to the fully-fledged trade war which Russia waged against Ukraine in July-August 2013.
Therefore, despite initial claims about the zero-sum logic, Ukraine appears to be more inclined to accede to DFCTA with the EU without committing itself to deeper and formal integration with Russia.
The main obstacle to this process is that a mere trade agreement has acquired a strong symbolic meaning and is linked to great power politics and the dimension foreign policy orientation.
The comparison of the two triangles 11 demonstrates that the Ukrainian elite and society at large are trying to find a compromise on the international security.
Indeed, PoR played an important role in blocking Ukraine’s application to NATO Membership Action Plan.
The main reason for not joining NATO was because Ukrainian society was reluctant to make hasty decisions on such sensitive issues as membership in multilateral defence alliances, whether Russia-led or promoted by the West.
This is especially the case when an issue such as this is associated with notions of clandestine diplomacy or corruption.
The incident with the secret letter of January 2008, which was signed by President V Yushchenko, Prime Minister Y Tymoshenko and Parliamentary speaker A Yatsenyuk calling on NATO to grant Ukraine the Membership Action Plan at the Bucharest summit, made it clear that Ukrainian society was not happy about a hasty accession to the alliance.
Thus, even the most committed Euro-Atlanticist Defence Minister Anatoliy Grytsenko has had to accept that Ukrainian society is not ready to make a decision on membership in NATO and he publicly requested the President of Ukraine to withdraw the membership application.
Consequently, the Ukrainian elite had to face the fact that Ukrainian society did not want NATO membership.
Even Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the Russian-Ukrainian war in the South-East of Ukraine in 2014 did not reverse this trend.
Many opposition parties, such as those led by Y Tymoshenko and A Grytsenko, re-introduced the issue of NATO membership to the public debate.
However, despite the return of the Euro-Atlanticist idea, the presidential elections have shown that the major centrist trend prevailed in Ukrainian politics.
Petr Poroshenko ran for president with explicit pro-European rather than Euro-Atlanticist slogans.
Even when a significant parliament majority renounced the neutral status of Ukraine, President Poroshenko stated that political speculations about speedy accession to NATO creates new hurdles for Ukraine’s Euro2 About 12 million USD allocated to several NATO awareness campaigns and embezzled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs further undermined the idea of Euro-Atlantic integration 12 Atlantic trajectory.
Speaking about Europe and the European Union one can notice that the link between the European Union and Ukrainian security has been eroded.
Certainly, the idea of Europe and European norms and standards remains synonymous with the idea of normal prosperous development.
But what is important is that in Ukraine's perception, the European Union in the security domain has been losing its appeal.
One of the reasons for the Ukraine’s disillusionment in the CFSP, namely is the EU’s past failures to stick to its CFSP commitments.
For example, in 2004 German diplomats exerted pressure on Ukraine to impose an effective ban on the exports of unregistered Transnistrian enterprises through Ukrainian territory.
When Russia exerted pressure on Ukraine to lift the ban, Brussels failed to stand by Moldova and Ukraine.
Germany itself did not curtail its extensive collaboration with Transnistrian metallurgy plans.
Neither did EU always enforce travel bans on the Transnistrian leadership.
But Germany is supposed to display a certain solidarity and appreciation of our effort.
Now, it plays s with Russia because Russia sticks to its values and defends them.
Maybe we should also get arrogant for the EU to start taking us seriously' With Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the war in the Eastern Ukraine this disillusionment touched even the most convinced Europeanists.
Brussels’ refusal to provide Ukraine with military support, the piece-meal adoption of economic sanctions against Russia and the deployment of the EU Assistance Mission with a limited budget and a very weak mandate, have convinced Kyiv to reconsider its security approach.
Within the logic of centrist consensus the Ukrainian president followed the Finnish model.
This is not to say that Ukraine has renounced its strategic goal to join European security system.
It rather means that Kyiv has chosen more self-centred tactics,e. it will refrain from strong symbolic steps which could trigger escalation of Russian-Ukrainian war.
Within this logic, Ukraine will continue its cooperation with the EU in those fields where it does not inhibit Ukrainian interests,g.
Ukraine’s participation in the EU operations in the Balkans, in the EU naval operation Atalanta, visa liberalisation, justice, security, border control, fight against organised crime, and drug trafficking.
At the same time, it acknowledges the limitations of the EU’s external action.
In weighing the EU CFSP against its own national interests, Ukraine will abstain from some strong CFSP resolutions.
For example, Kyiv will not exert any pressure against Belarus and will seek temporary alliances with the countries of broader Eurasia.
In the long term, Kyiv will pursue a strategy of increasing its low-profile military defence through practical cooperation with individual players of the Euro-Atlantic Community (e.g.
This tactic will allow Ukraine to 13 increase its defence capability without creating a risk of large-scale war with Russia.
That has been achieved by the pro-Russian political elite by glorifying the Soviet past, vilifying Ukrainian nationalists and narrowing the space for the Ukrainian language.
At first sight the reports of the ultranationalist party “Svoboda” and a new radical group “Right Sector”,that were leading the violent protests at Maidan, seem to confirm this kind of interpretation.
This section will deal with the fusion of these three concepts – national identity, interpretations of history and the language issue and explores their link to the dimension.
Looking at the Ukrainian revolution and its consequences one can conclude that both above interpretations are reductionist for several reasons.
First, active participation of the above ultranationalist parties in the violent protests in February 2014 has not resulted in their growing popularity among the broader society.
After the transition of power in FebruaryMarch 2014, these parties effectively lost their dominant position in the opposition movement.
In the October 2014 parliamentary elections the extreme nationalists failed to pass even the minimum threshold.
For example, several new political forces, such as the pro-President block “Solidarity-Poroshenko”, “Democratic Alliance”, “Civil Position” and “Self-Help”, feature in their electoral party lists Russian-speakers from Donbas and Ukrainian-speakers activists from Western Ukraine.
They also share more or less similar concerns about good governance, corruption and the economy.
Most of these parties seek to conduct reforms of government institutions, the army, police and other institutions , in order to reinstall due political process and legitimacy of the state.
A number of top figures in the current Ukrainian government are native Russian-speakers and represent the South and East of the country.
Avakov, who started his political career in the East of Ukraine in Kharkov; the speaker of the Parliament O Turchinov, who comes from the Eastern Ukrainian regional centre Dniepropetrovsk.
The similarly multi-ethnic composition of the legislature, judiciary and bureaucracy indicates that the ruling political class is committed to a civic nationalist paradigm.
The war in Donbas provides significant evidence which undermines any potential link between language and alleged pro-Russian, non-democratic preferences.
Despite the fact that the part this region has been arena of an intense military conflict, the numbers show that the major proportion of the Russian-speaking community of the region remains loyal to the Ukrainian state project.
Although some polls have shown that about 30-percent of the local population support the independence of Donbas, the number of those who would be ready to take arms and fight for an independent Donbas was tiny.
The first Defence Minister of the socalled “Donetsk People’s Republic”, the charismatic Russian officer Igor Girkin-Strelkov, had to admit that the whole Donbas region with a population of 10 million people produced less than a thousand volunteers ready to fight against the “fascist Kyiv junta” for the independence of the Donetsk People’s Republic.
Geographical evidence also shows no clash between Russian-speaking and Ukrainian speaking territories.
Despite strong Russian support, the secessionist forces were able to expand their control on just half of the Donetsk oblast and one third of the Luhansk oblast, which is less than 10% of the territory of the Russian-speaking South-Eastern Ukraine.
While the government and broader public support the civil nationalism paradigm, the big business sectors seem to be divided.
It is, however, difficult for this group of businessmen to mobilize significant popular support.
First, they have been heavily compromised both in Kyiv and Russianspeaking regions because of their close links with the Yanukovich government.
Secondly, they have repeatedly manipulated the “centre-periphery” discourse in order to mobilize electoral support, but have never managed to deliver on their promises.
Eventually, this discourse was hijacked by more radical groups, both local and Russian proxies.
As a result, the major businesses lost effective control over the rebels in the region.
Kolomoiskiy and S Taruta, who suffered under Yanukovich and have all the reasons to support the current democratic regime.
Fourthly, some of the formerly pro-Yanukovich and neutral oligarchs, such as D Firtash, a famous intermediary in numerous semi-transparent gas deals decided to support Ukraine’s territorial integrity and peace negotiations under the pressure of Western sanctions.
Therefore, although divided the business elite of Ukraine appears to o be show a growing sympathy towards a civic national identity.
The pro-Ukrainian narrative victimises Ukrainians and vilifies the Soviet past.
The pro-Soviet narrative criminalises Ukrainian nationalism and glorifies the Soviet past.
One of the reasons why the society managed to escape from the conflicting discourse is that both narratives were heavily compromised.
Yushchenko and Y Tymoshenko failed the Orange revolution by implementing ineffective policies and getting involved in corruption and personal quarrels.
Several examples of such reconciliation between the two parts of Ukrainian society are some highly popular TV-shows, during which high school and university students from the West and the East of the country discussed controversial issues surrounding WWII and the role of Ukrainian nationalism.
This reconciliatory meta-narrative, which emerged in the broader society, had a knock-on effect on the political elites.
This change took place not because of the altruism of the Ukrainian political class.
The policy of historical reconciliation has most likely gained ground among various political forces in Ukraine, because it has become clear that any party trying to play one part of the country against the other is unlikely to win significant electoral support.
Elections are won by those parties which can attract a critical mass of voters in one of ideologically extreme regions, either the nationalist West or pro-Russian South-East, AND gain some votes in the politically moderate, less ideological Central Ukraine.
Therefore, any political forces which try to stir nationalist fanaticism either in Western or Eastern Ukraine are doomed to fail.
This Ukrainian political class refused to make a choice between a proSoviet Russian narrative and pro-Ukrainian narrative and, effectively chose a post-modern European metanarrative.
A vivid example of how Ukrainian society departed from the exclusivist conflictual paradigm of the Soviet vs. nationalist interpretations in favour of a reconciliatory approach is the debate which evolved around the celebration of the Soviet Victory Day during 2011-2013.
On 9 May 2011 Ukraine witnessed scenes of clashes which took place in the Western part of the country between those who came to commemorate the Victory Day and the local Ukrainian nationalists.
Noticeably, even supporters of Ukrainian nationalism expressed their indignation with the violence rather than with the commemoration of the Soviet Victory Day.
A year later, the same date was marked more by symbolic and rhetorical stand-offs as all parties were trying to stress the non-violent character of their actions.
This change demonstrates that Ukraine is gradually making a more European choice in the domain of ideology.
The trend prevailed during the presidential and parliamentary elections on 2014.
Like the government and the broader society, Ukrainian business elites have demonstrated that they have chosen a “reconciliatory” paradigm.
Leading industrialists prefer not to take sides with one or another narrative.
One could predict that most likely Ukraine will not “criminalize” its Soviet past, like happened in Poland and Baltic states.
The fact that the Ukrainian government, elites and society opted for tolerance and reconciliation of the two histories – the Soviet and nationalist – does not make Ukraine an accomplished nation if judged against the standards of Central European nations.
This does not mean, however, that the country will remain in Russia’s embrace.
This trend for tolerance and reconciliation, however, demonstrates that Ukraine has stepped out from the “conflict-generating” trajectory and that Ukrainians are similar to Spaniards, who have reconciled around the heritage of Franco, and Italians who can have their own disagreements about Mussolini, but do not let them to turn into violence.
A similar dynamic can be observed in the discussion about the problem of the Russian language and its status.
This issue seems to have lost its social significance because it has been discussed too often and has become overly politicized.
In mid March 2012, President Yanukovych stated that he would upgrade the status of the Russian language to the status of the second state language.
This pronouncement , which would had stirred a storm a few years ago, hardly produced any effect.
Centrists put forward a reasonable argument that proper implementation of all provisions of the law would result in every village and community proclaiming its own regional language, not only Russian, but also Romanian, Hungarian, Bulgarian, etc.
That, as centrists argued, would undermine the state institutions and even basic communication between the central and local authorities.
As a result of this law, a considerable part of moderate Ukrainian speaking voters, who could potentially vote for PoR, moved to the right, to the Ukrainian nationalists.
Some of the most active proponents of official reinstating of Russian language were jailed by President Yanukovich repressive machine in 2013-2014.
Further developments with the controversial law about the status of minority languages demonstrate the prevalence of the centrist paradigm.
When after the collapse of the Yanukovich regime, the new government and the nationalist forces mobilized support to abolish the controversial law and revoke a special status for the Russian language, acting President O Turchinov did not hesitate to veto this move.
He gave part of his inaugural speech in Russian and even launched Russian-language news programmes on the national TV channels.
Overall, the leading political forces seem to agree not to politicize the question of the Russian language.
Obviously, the removal of the language issue from the political agenda does not imply it has been explicitly resolved and will never reappear in the future.
But what is important is that despite their ethnic differences and language preferences, both the Russophones and the Ukrainians seem to seek reconciliatory solutions and mostly reject the idea of violence in bi-communal relations, which is effectively a European paradigm.
CONCLUSIONS Placed in the overlapping gravitational field of Russia and the EU, the Ukrainian government, society and business elites are looking for ways to find a balance between their own interests, sometimes even their very survival and Europe’s power of attraction and Russia's influence.
As the above analysis has shown, the trajectory of Ukraine in each dimension is shaped by the balance of preferences among the main societal actors.
As a result, in those dimensions where at least two out of three of these components s find the attractive power of the EU stronger than that of Russia, Ukraine opts for European choice.
This paper looked at the Ukraine-Russia-EU triangle from the perspectives of societal practices rather than from the point of view of formal institutions.
Drawing on this approach, it can be concluded that Ukraine is gradually moving to the European path of development.
Broader Ukrainain society is raising the issues of social equality and fair play and elites are trying to establish a predictable and safe environment.
Lame authoritarianism, rigged parliamentary elections in October 2012 combined with ill-implemented neo-liberal reforms, corruption and inefficient governance, stirred public resentment against the Russian version of Ukrainian authoritarianism and led to the democratic revolution in Ukraine in 2014.
The paper has also demonstrated that Russia’s uneasy feeling about the democratic revolutions is a function of how Moscow perceives the outcomes of these revolutions.
In 2013-2014 Moscow decided to change the balance of preferences and exerted strong pressure on Ukrainian government and businesses.
As a result, the Yanukovich government, backed by the Ukrainian industries, decided to start bargaining and to postpone the signing.
This paper has shown that although these developments in the economic dimension (postponement of the signing, rallies in support of the EU-Ukraine DCFTA) were not linked to the dimension of political practices , Moscow construed these two events as part of a single plot aimed at squeezing Russia out of its traditional sphere of influence and depriving it of the status of great power.
By annexing Crimea and stirring up conflict in Donbas, Russia effectively undermined its objective economic interests and its authority among the partners in the Eurasian Economic Community and in the international arena.
This behaviour reveals a strong link between the economic dimension and the dimension of international security.
This suggests that quite often the subjective self-perception of a country may prevail over its costbenefit considerations.
Although Moscow has tied the economic and political dimensions together and decided to act in the military security dimension to prevent Ukraine’s further integration with the West, Kyiv keeps trying to decouple the two above dimensions from the military political one.
Kyiv seeks to avoid a zero-sum game in the dimension of international security.
Its major entrepreneurs refrain from expressing strong Euro-Atlanticist views.
Although there is a growing popularity for NATO among the broader Ukrainian public, it is still a relative minority.
The majority of Ukrainians and President P Poroshenko himself continue to stick to a centrist paradigm and refrain from strong symbolic actions, which could provoke further Russia’s response.
At the same time, the country is eliciting close de facto cooperation with the most active NATO members and is developing low profile defence capabilities.
In the dimension of ideology, Ukrainians seem to be moving away from the conflictual paradigm and an inclusive civic national identity is being developed.
Having lived with strong polarisations around ideological issues, Ukrainians appear to be developing immunity against political and ideological extremes.
The decline of far right political parties (both pro-Ukrainian and proRussian) indicates the emerging centrist consensus.
Even if a national consensus about the interpretations of history is unlikely to be achieved in the midterm, the Ukrainian ruling elite and wider society seem to be learning from their own mistakes and want to avoid societal violent stand-offs around history.
Despite a measure of support in Donetsk and Crimea to secession from Ukraine, the Russian-speaking community has largely ignored the calls of Russian leaders to join the fight for independence of the self-proclaimed republics of Donetsk and Luhansk.
Thus, one can conclude that Ukraine is moving on to European path of development by a) reaching broader consensus on less controversial issues; b) by relativizing some of the more controversial issues, and c) by refraining from certain actions that could generate zero-sum logic in the EU-Russia context.
This paper has shown that a multidimensional analysis can provide deeper insight into complex dynamics and controversial phenomena of the Ukrainian crisis.
Slicing the EU19 Ukraine-Russia triangle allows to identify and deconstruct links between various dimensions and create areas for meaningful peace dialogue.
Opozytsiynyi shtab natsionalnogo sprotyvu ogoloshue zagalnonatsionalny straik.
Khvatit rassuzhdati o sferakh vliania, Kommersant, 18 Feb.14 AZAROV, M 2012.
Ukraina gotova doluchytsia do budivnytstvo Transanatoloiyskogo gazoporovodu.
Department of Information and Communication of the Secretariat of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine.
Geopolitics, Institutionalisation and the Reconfiguration of European Security.
Anatoliy Grytsenko upevneniy shcho do momentu uhvalenniya rishenniya pro pryiom Ukrainy v NATO ukrains'ke suspilstvo bude gotovo pidtrymaty.
Lessons from the Moldova-Transdniestria Conflict, Washington, Wilson Centre.
The EU Common Strategy on Russia; Learning Grammar of the CFSP, Helsinki/Berlin, The Finnish Institute of International Affairs.
Bolshynstvo Lvovian schiatyut shto v sobytiah 9 Maia vinovny pro-rossiyskie sily.
The Regionalization of the World Order, interaction in conflict resolution Ashgate.
Azarov podpisal vygodniy dlia Rossii dogovor o ZST v SNG bez soglasiya Yanukovicha.
Vystuplenie na Rasshyrennom Zasedanii Kollegii Federalnoi Sluzhby Bezopasnosti.
Ukraina s assotsiatsiei s ES navsegda zakryvaet dveri v Tamozhenyi Soyuz.
Zolotaryov ‘Sprava Tymoshenko pogany znak dlia Pinchuka ta Komois’kogo.
