The media learned the date of the next meeting of Surkov and Volker in the Donbas.
NYT has learned about the fears of Trump lawyers over questioning Russia's interference in elections.
Anti-corruption court should become operational before presidential election, EU Ambassador Mingarelli.
Saakashvili almost does not deny the fact of conversation with Kurchenko.
Ukraine Court Rejects Saakashvili's Plea For Protection From Extradition.
The council made amendments to the law on the reintegration of the Donbas.
Russia backed Luhansk ‘republic’ bans Jehovah’s Witnesses and other ‘non-traditional’ faiths.
The richest Russians lost 2. billion dollars due to the collapse of the United States stock market, which occurred on February 5.
Russians in this list are currently 27 people, in 25 of them the strength was reduced and only in two increased.
The owner of the mining and metals group Evraz and the Norilsk Nickel minority Roman Abramovich became richer in the day by 68. million dollars.
And the co-owner of LetterOne and Alfa Bank Peter Aven received another $ 29. million.
Their wealth amounted to 13. billion and 5. billion dollars respectively.
The owner of ""Severstal"" Alexei Mordashov suffered most in one day he lost 203. million dollars.
After that, the indices of major European stock exchanges are losing at the opening of auctions of 3-3.5% after United States stock indices dropped by 3.8-4.6% on Monday, pulling down Asian stock indices.
Special Representative of United States State Department for Ukraine Kurt Volker may hold a regular meeting with the assistant to the President of the Russian Federation Vladislav Surkov in a month.
It is reported by ""Interfax-Ukraine"" with reference to a source familiar with the preparation of the meeting.
Another time K Volker and V Surkov can meet in March,"" said the source.
According to him, the concrete date of the meeting and the place of its holding are not defined at the moment.
Attorneys of the United States president Donald Trump advise him not to testify in the investigation of Russia's interference in the 2016 United States election, which is being held by a special prosecutor Robert Muller.
The reason for this was the whole list of statements by Trump, which later turned out to be false, so lawyers are afraid that the United States president may lie oath.
However, Trump himself says he wants to talk to Mueller about the possible connection of his people and the interference of russia in the election.
It is expected that the United States president will announce his decision to give testimony in the next few weeks.
Donald Trump's lawyers and advisers strongly oppose the United States president giving evidence of Russia's interference with the elections, believing that Robert Muller will not officially call Trump for interrogation, since, in their opinion, he does not have sufficient legal rights to do so. the grounds.
As reported by the ""Apostrophe"", recently Trump was indignant at the fact that nobody draws attention to economic indicators during his presidency, but only talk about Russia's interference in the American elections.
Head of the EU Delegation to Ukraine Hugues Mingarelli told Ukrainian lawmakers that it is critical for Ukraine to create an anti-corruption court before the presidential election.
He said at a meeting with members of Eurooptimists Interfactional Union, an association of members of the Ukrainian parliament, Censor.NET reports citing LIGA.net.
Mingarelli noted that Ukraine, unlike Armenia, Azerbaijan and other countries, has undergone significant changes over the past few years.
A great price was paid for the changes while they take place not so smoothly, the diplomat said.
According to him, Ukraine must determine the red line in the fight against corruption.
Mingarelli noted that corruption exists in many countries but all of them have certain red line.
Therefore, the anti-corruption court needs to be operational before the election as well privatization and other reforms should start being implemented.
Ukraine’s Western backers have long called for the authorities to establish an independent court to handle corruption cases.
Mikheil Saakashvili, leader of the Movement of New Forces, does not deny the fact that he talks with oligarch Sergei Kurchenko, who is hiding in Russia.
Therefore, taking into account the resonance in society, it was decided not to continue at this stage a precautionary measure"", said Deputy Prosecutor General.
He stressed that the decision to extend the preventive measure is the prerogative of the investigator and the procedural chief.
The prosecution party has filed a petition for the decision to elect Saakashvili as a preventive measure round-the-clock house arrest.
The Pechersk District Court did not satisfy the prosecutor's request to elect a preventive measure in Saakashvili in the form of a round-the-clock house arrest at the time of the investigation.
It should be noted that during a search in Saakashvili's apartment, he rose to the roof of the house where he was detained by law enforcement officers.
Later, it became known that the activists took Saakashvili out of the car of the law-enforcers.
In the evening, December 8, law enforcement officers arrested Mikheil Saakashvili in Solomyansky district of Kyiv.
The Administrative Court of Appeals said on February 5 that a January 3 decision by another court, which in turn had upheld a previous ruling, remained unchanged.
Saakashvili, who walked out of the court after several of his motions were rejected, contended that the ruling was politically motivated and dictated by President Petro Poroshenko -a former friend who is now a bitter foe.
This is yet another decision by Poroshenko, not by the court,"" he wrote on Facebook.
Saakashvili, who was president of Georgia from 2004-2013, is wanted there on charges including abuse of office, which he says are fabricated.
Saakashvili lost his Georgian citizenship in 2015, when he accepted Ukrainian citizenship and Poroshenko's offer of a job as governor of the Odesa region.
But he resigned from the post in November 2016, accusing the government of undermining his efforts to fight corruption and carry out reforms.
Saakashvili has become an outspoken opponent of Poroshenko, who came to power after Moscow-friendly President Viktor Yanukovych fled amid massive protests known the Euromaidan in 2014.
After making amendments to the law, the Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada Andriy Parubiy stated that he intends to sign it publicly at today's parliamentary sitting if he has time to prepare it.
According to the document, Russia is recognized as an aggressor state, which is responsible for the occupation of Ukrainian territories.
At the same time, during the occupation, she used her regular connections and units of the armed forces.
The Russian Foreign Ministry stated that the adoption by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine of the law on the reintegration of the Donbas could be called preparation for a new war.
The authors of the bill are People's Deputies from the Opposition Bloc Yuriy Boyko, Alexander Vilkul and Mykhailo Papiyev.
Thus, the head of the Verkhovna Rada Andriy Parubiy could not sign the said law until the people's deputies would consider this decree.
The move comes just days after the Kremlin-backed ‘LPR parliament’ passed several ‘laws’, including one aimed at hunting down and prohibiting so-called extremism in religious or political organizations, as well as in the media.
Although he suggests that the Jehovah’s Witnesses had been removed earlier, Monday’s announcement is the first formal confirmation of an actual ban on the organization, not its literature.
It was claimed that the material aroused enmity on religious grounds and propagandized the superiority of the Jehovah’s Witnesses over other faiths.
Leaflets from the SBU and the Azov Civic Corps, it was claimed, had previously been pasted around Alchevsk.
The suggestion that Jehovah’s Witnesses, who avoid any involvement in politics and have faced persecution rather than take up arms, should have “assisted radical, neo-Nazi groups and other military formations” was overtly absurd, and unbacked by any evidence.
According to the same ‘law’, all religious organizations and associations in ‘LPR’ will need to undergo compulsory registration, otherwise their activities will be regarded as illegal.
It is unclear what is required for such compulsory ‘registration’, but the imposition of Russian requirements in occupied Crimea was used to put pressure on and / or drive out a number of religious organizations.
In both Crimea and the militant-controlled areas of Donbas all faiths and denominations except the Orthodox Church under the Moscow Patriarchate have come under major pressure.
While that was in ‘DPR’, there is nothing to suggest that the Luhansk militants would follow different policy.
Whatever ‘extremism’ may be, the bill now establishes “a system of state bodies” aimed at countering it.
Should these ‘state bodies’ consider that political, religious or other organizations are carrying out harmful extremist activities, their activities can be suspended before a court bans them, with the same ‘preventive measures’ allowed with respect to the mass media.
Dissolution is envisaged, by court order, of legal entities considered to be providing an ‘extremist organization’ with financial support, venues, printing or educational facilities and technical back-up.
Some of the measures are directly lifted from the Russian measures seen applied in Crimea since Russia’s invasion.
In Russia, two such ‘warnings’ can be sufficient to seek an organization’s or media publication’s closure.
All of this coincides with a change to the ‘LPR constitution’ allowing for individuals to be detained for up to 30 days without a court order.
At one level, it is difficult to see how the measures introduced differ from what has long been the case.
Most of the people seized and held hostage in the self-proclaimed ‘Luhansk and Donetsk people’s republic’, simply disappeared, with few, if any, normal procedural requirements observed.
The head of the Polish state noted that changes to the law on INP have recently led to a broad debate not only in the Polish public and political space, but also in the international arena.
Duda drew attention to the fact that this topic can be heard in the relations between Poland and Israel, Poles and Jews, as well as in the space of Polish-American relations.
Duda said that the Israeli reservation was about possible restrictions on scientific and artistic activities.
The President of Poland noted that these special provisions in the updated law were introduced.
Recall that on January 26, the Polish Sejm supported an amendment to the law on the Institute of National Remembrance.
The punishment provides for a fine or imprisonment for a term up to three years.
Against him were the prime minister, the president, ministers and deputies of the knesset from the coalition and the opposition.
The President of Poland Andrzej Duda has promised to thoroughly analyze this law.
The number of objects on our side has been formed, we are in the negotiation process with the Chinese side, ""the minister said.
He also said that in the summer of this year his visit to China will take place, where he plans to discuss this project in more detail with Chinese partners.
Recall that Ukraine, together with the Italian company Italferr, will develop technical and economic documentation of the Euro zone, connecting Odessa-Kiev-Lviv.
In Russia, during the time of the presidency of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, the prestige of the FSB rose sharply.
Russia has deployed its nuclear-capable Iskander missile system permanently in its exclave of Kaliningrad, according to claims by Lithuania’s president and defence minister, potentially bringing much of the EU and Nato within range.
On the day Lithuania celebrated the first anniversary of the arrival of a Nato battle group on its soil, the Baltic country’s president said the missiles — which have a range of about 400km — were being stationed in the exclave, between Poland and Lithuania.
There is unease in the Baltics as to Russia’s intentions following the annexation of Crimea from Ukraine in 2014, and a series of military drills last summer that some believe rehearsed an attack on Nato.
