President Petro Poroshenko may be the most Moscow-hated Ukrainian politician today.
The Russian state-run propaganda machine has been lambasting Poroshenko for months ahead of the March 31 presidential election, and top officials publicly joined in.
According to the secretary of Russia’s Security Council, Nikolai Patrushev, Ukraine is ruled by Americans from Washington who support Poroshenko because he is their pawn.
Ukraine is seen in Moscow and in the Kremlin as a critical battleground in the global standoff between Russia and the United States.
It all began in 2004 with the so-called “Orange Revolution,” when massive protests in Kyiv against alleged systemic vote rigging prevented the election of Moscow-friendly president Viktor Yanukovych.
After the Orange Revolution, President Vladimir Putin and the ruling Russian elite dramatically changed Moscow’s strategic direction from cooperation and partnership with the West to rivalry and confrontation, combined with a massive military/nuclear buildup.
The ouster of Yanukovych in 2014 was followed by the occupation and speedy annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea and the military conflict in eastern Donbas.
Poroshenko was elected in May 2014 with over 50 percent of the popular vote.
But by 2018, he lost most of his support, which is typical for Ukraine.
Still, by election day on March 31, 2019, Poroshenko, who ran a well-organized campaign, managed to make it into the runoff election, scheduled for April 21, by obtaining almost 16 percent of the vote.
He came in second place to political satirist/comedian Volodymyr Zelensky , who was born to a Jewish family in the predominantly Russian-speaking industrial city of Kryvyi Rih, in central Ukraine.
Since October 2015, Zelensky has played the role of high school professor Vasyl Holoborodko, who, by chance, is elected Ukrainian president as an anti-corruption candidate in the popular television show Servant of the People, which runs on the Ukrainian channel 1+1 and is distributed internationally by Netflix.
The 1+1 channel belongs to Ihor Kolomoyskyi, a powerful Jewish-Ukrainian oligarch, who was initially an ally of Poroshenko, but bitterly broke with him in 2015 and is now in self-imposed exile in Switzerland.
In June 2018, Kolomoyskyi told journalists Zelensky could run and win the presidency despite lacking previous political/administrative experience.
But on March 31, Zelensky won over 30 percent of the popular vote—twice as much as Poroshenko—and currently looks unstoppable, which is seen in Moscow as a positive development.
The next Rada elections are scheduled for fall 2019, and Zelensky, widely considered the favorite to win the presidency, has formed a “Servant of the People” party, apparently hoping to win enough votes to form a stable ruling coalition.
Russian experts interpret Zelensky’s election success as a protest vote, similar to Donald Trump’s victory in 2016 or the electoral successes of Eurosceptics in Italy and other EU countries in recent years.
In their mutual desire to oust Poroshenko, Kolomoyskyi, Zelensky and Putin have become circumstantial allies for the time being, even though, in 2014–2015, Kolomoyskyi and Putin were bitter personal enemies.
The Kremlin could eventually decide to declare the Ukrainian elections fraudulent and illegitimate, if it does not like their end result.
Russian experts believe Poroshenko, together with his purported United States masters and their North Atlantic Alliance minions, might provoke a military confrontation with Russia similar to the one from November 25, 2018, when a convoy of three Ukrainian naval ships attempted to cross from the Black Sea through the Kerch Strait into the Sea of Azov.
Tension is building up in and around Ukraine, with election day less than three weeks away.
