In putting an end to “the Russian spring” in 2014, Putin made a geopolitical mistake.
Putin took a set of absolutely correct and fatal steps in foreign policy, returned almost completely lost sovereignty to Russia, and nobody belittles his enormous merits.
If we consider his actions a ""cunning plan"" or we extol Putin`s mistake as ""strategic wisdom"", we are not showing our fidelity, but actually endangering his real authority.
If we praise the governor equally for his achievements and his mistakes, it means simply we scoff at him, exposing him as vainglorious idiot.
The curtailing of the Russian Spring and refusal to protect the “Russian world” during the long and senseless process of the Minsk talks gave the Kiev junta the chance to rearrange and to restart the escalation in Eastern Ukraine with new force.
Having abandoned a huge part of the Russian world to Kiev, Moscow predetermined future conflicts.
Since that time, Kiev was able to begin escalation or war as they pleased.
Kiev made the first attempt to change of the status quo in Debaltsevo, but direct pressure proved ineffective.
This does not mean that Junta abandoned their efforts, they simply began to search for other methods.
The following step was the recognition of the territory of Ukraine as a territory of the Constantinople patriarchate that led to a split between the Russian Orthodox Church and Constantinople.
This gave to Poroshenko another lever of influence on Moscow.Now, the Russian Orthodox Churches, and Moscow is forced to answer Poroshenko’s provocations.
In the provocation in the Sea of Azov, Poroshenko consciously directed the ships understand what the reaction would be from the Russian side,leading to a firefight and arrest of the Ukrainian sailors.
Strictly speaking, Poroshenko considers Crimea a territory of Ukraine , and, therefor, he didn't have to warn anybody.
He well perfectly understood what he was doing, and what will be consequences would be, and then he declared martial law.
Moscow, besides having restored unity with Crimea and not having completely thrown the Donbass aside, took a passive position in every other regard.
Poroshenko prepared a response, and the timing depended on his initiative.
That is, Poroshenko will rattle his saber, postpone the elections, present himself as the ""savior of the fatherland"" and will again be elected as the president, and everything will remain as it was.
If we count on this happening, Russia doesn’t have to do anything in response.
So far, it seems possible to continue to scoff at Poroshenko who simply got into a mess again.
This is the official perspective of Moscow and the main thesis of the Russian propaganda machine.
It is, nonetheless, impossible to exclude that this might actually be the case.
Let's say however, that everything will not go according to plan, and instead, Poroshenko begins a war with Russia in earnest.
Many lazy analysts answer that it couldn’t, the gun hung up on a wall of the stage will never shoot.
For this purpose, America’s current president is likely not Ukraine’s strongest ally.
There is also the American Deep State, neocons , strategic planning by the Pentagon, and critical problems in the European Union.
War with Russia – not nuclear, but local, made at others expense is an exit.
To the West, it is unimportant if Ukraine is dismembered again, each shot from Russia will be a blessing for the globalists.
The Kremlin perfectly understands all of this, and therefore they will try to evade it as much as possible.
Having begun a conflict which Russia will evade, it is possible to achieve something without real consequence.
If Russia evades a little too intensely, it will also be a kind of ""victory"" for Poroshenko.
Poroshenko has almost nothing to lose in a political sense, he is extremely unpopular in Ukraine , and the risk seems justified.
At the same time, if it is possible to involve NATO in the conflict even symbolically, it will be enough , ""to tame the Russians"" and to earn, if not geopolitical, then moral and electoral dividends.
The transforming of the current conflict into a full scale war is possible, or, at least, cannot be excluded.
Poroshenko has likely made a calculated risk, having held consultations with influential forces of the West , and most likely got serious support for his actions.
It is clear that Putin will evade and hold out to the last before allowing war to break out, but the West is certainly taking steps to limit Moscow’s options.
If Kiev and the West consider that now is the time the Russian-Ukrainian war, they have all levers in place to put this plan in action.
Now, the time of war is upon us, and we cannot choose its starting conditions.
It is impossible to be sure that it will begin now, but it is very precipitate to consider that nothing happensand nothing at all ever will happen – and especially that nothing will happen right now.
