In contrast to Russia’s seizure of Crimea, the uprising in Eastern Ukraine was marked by disorganization and chaos.
Using proxy and surrogate actors, along with military exercises and the injection of Russian troops, Russia sought to institutionalize a political entity inside Ukraine to inﬂuence its domestic politics.
In this article, I analyze the mechanisms by which Russia attempted to implement, and later salvage, its strategy.
The article contributes to clearer theoretical and practical understanding of limited force in coercive diplomacy, signaling, and a more rigorous treatment of the role and uses of proxy actors.
KEYWORDS Ukraine; Russia; coercive diplomacy; limited war; non-state actors Introduction Russian involvement in the internal politics of Ukraine has been a constant since the fall of the Soviet Union.
Viewed as a critical component of its strategic security, it is unsurprising that the Kremlin has taken a keen interest in the fate of Ukraine.
A potentiality magniﬁed by Russia’s preferred viceroy – Viktor Yanukovych – chased out of the country.
However, the well-planned, executed, and rapid seizure of the Crimean Peninsula surprised most observers – along with the new regime in Kiev.
Presented as a fait CONTACT Andrew S Bowen andrewscottbowen@gmail.com 1 There is a large and wide-ranging debate over the sources of Russian conduct in Ukraine.
While the Crimea operation was conducted by the best of a reequipped Russian military, an incipient insurgency soon emerged in eastern Ukraine with Russian support.
In contrast to the coordinated, clear, and concise Crimean operation, the subsequent instability in the Donbas was an amalgamation of contradiction and confusion, led by local power brokers, criminals, and ‘volunteers’ from across the postSoviet space.
Instead of seeking to acquire further Ukrainian territory, Russia sought to create mechanisms that would allow it to negate any further Ukrainian drift toward the West and ensure that it retained veto power over any future negotiations.
These mechanisms, in the form of autonomous regions inside Ukraine, could be manipulated by Russia to inﬂuence Ukrainian domestic politics, and avoid using more overt, external forms of pressure.
Buoyed by the weakened political situation and nonexistent resistance encountered during its seizure of the Crimean Peninsula, the Kremlin entertained a level of hubris and viewed Ukraine’s eastern regions as an opportunity ripe to allow Russia to institutionalize its inﬂuence permanently.
I have avoided such loaded concepts – which can also include grey zone conﬂicts – in order to focus on Russia’s decisions and choices in the conﬂict.
BOWEN independence movement that – while reliant upon Russian support – remained inside Ukraine to prevent further rapprochement with the West.
However, these demands were opaque and confusing in the initial stages, only becoming clearer as the conﬂict progressed.
The limited use of force was a key component of Russia’s coercive diplomacy strategy.
It is also clear that this strategy evolved over time and was subject to adjustment and revision as the conﬂict progressed.
Large-scale military exercises near Ukraine’s border to increase concern of a Russian military invasion.
The use of non-state actors , including organized crime ﬁgures, supported and directed by Moscow to give the appearance of a local rebellion.
This included mercenaries and ideologically motivated volunteers – fostered by a nationalistic Slavic narrative propagated by Russia.
Limited direct injections of Russian units and troops in the form of Battalion Tactical Groups (BTG’s, batalonnye takticheskiye gruppy), separate from the intelligence and Spetsnaz advisors training and advising local political and military leaders, to stop Ukrainian military advances.
In particular, the reliance on illicit NSA’s was crucial to Russian strategy.
Illicit NSAs were turned into insta-patriots, allowing Russia to argue for the insurgency as a domestic rebellion, along with providing a rapid and deployable force already on the ground while minimizing ‘Russian’ casualties.
However, the low cost and deniability of illicit NSAs came with drawbacks including decreased control and eﬀectiveness.
This article seeks to analyze and understand Russia’s coercive diplomacy and its deployment of limited military force in Eastern Ukraine.
It ﬁnds that much Russia’s actions were ad hoc and improvised, driven as much by success in Crimea and developments on the ground as by strategic plans.
Ultimately, Russia’s signaling eﬀorts were confused, muddled, and misinterpreted, only becoming clear as it injected its own troops to forcefully pushback Ukrainian advances.
It also seeks to map out the use of illicit NSAs as a tool of coercive diplomacy and the drawbacks of their use.
This is crucial to advance the understanding and relationship of limited uses of force and coercive diplomacy as measures short of war.
First, I examine the literature on coercive diplomacy and the limited use of force.
Second, I construct an analytical framework to analyze and understand Russia’s use of illicit NSAs in support of coercive diplomacy.
The conclusion summarizes the ﬁndings and draws out implications on signaling, coercive diplomacy, and the use of illicit NSAs by states.
Coercive diplomacy and limited use of military force Coercive diplomacy seeks to prevent or alter an actor’s course of action without resorting to full-scale use of force.
As a strategy, it signals that the proposed beneﬁts of an action, or continuing action, are outweighed by the costs.
The tools to convey this signal include limited uses of force, including nonmilitary measures of coercion such as economic sanctions.
However, the line dividing the limited use of force and full-scale war remains underspeciﬁed.
This line becomes even more complicated with issues of attribution, where actors retain a veil of deniability, even if only formally.
Inadequate operationalization and deﬁnition of many terms have further complicated scholars’ ability to understand these issues.
Open-Qualitative judgments have reduced its deﬁnition to an ‘I-Know-It-When-ISee-It’ status.
Key in the use of limited force is the risk of escalation to greater war.
Thus, the sender seeks to force its opponent to reassess its plans in light of a credible signal of further conﬂict.
Alexander George later diﬀerentiated compellence from coercive diplomacy to emphasize the role of positive inducements in achieving compliance.
However, the ‘oﬀensive/defensive’ debate obscures the variation in actor perception of status quo vs.
Theory and Practice in History,’ in Alexander George and William E Simons , The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy , 29.
Deﬁnition and Characteristics' in Alexander George and William E Simons , The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy , 8.
From the Russian viewpoint, Ukrainian successes during late summer of 2014 was viewed as an attempt to alter the status quo, whereas in the West, Russia’s actions – from Crimea to the Donbas – were revisionist attempts to alter the security system in Europe.
As a result, deﬁning ‘defensive’ from ‘oﬀensive’ can quickly become bogged down in a semantic haze.
Others such as Robert Art and Patrick Cronin identify a more expansive understanding to include both its exemplary and limited use.
To clarify these debates, and to distinguish between coercive and full-scale use of force, attention should be on evaluating whether force is being used in order to signal or bring about a decisive conclusion.
Whether force is being used to signal nevertheless remains contingent upon the clarity of the signal that the coercer seeks to convey.
As Schelling argued, there is a range of possible outcomes, but there needs to be an obvious place to stop.
However, when using covert or secretive methods the place to stop becomes much less obvious.
Despite the focus on costly and public signals,27 the ability of states to communicate in secret and the beneﬁts of doing so are the focus of a small but growing literature.
States can signal through the ‘backstage,’ allowing actors with the capability to access the backstage to receive signals.
However, interpreting signals through the backstage runs into the same conceptual issues as signaling publicly, with the assumption that viewing a signal results in the correct interpretation.
In order to be taken seriously, signals have to be credible, but there is no guarantee that the receiver agrees with the sender of what qualiﬁes as credible.
Additionally, the ‘noise’ of a conﬂict presents inordinate information processing requirements on states and policymakers, making it diﬃcult to ﬁlter out intentional signals from other unintentional information.
The diﬃculty of which is increased with the introduction of proxy and covert actors, since the receiver is unsure the extent of control by the sender over the proxy actors, making it even more diﬃcult to understand the intention of a signal.
State subcontractors The use of proxies is as old as conﬂict itself, with states coopting and manipulating actors for their own beneﬁt.
Almost all civil wars have a transnational component of some sort, including state support for belligerent groups.
BOWEN Some, such as Byman and Waxman and Navin Bapat, have noted the utility of using proxy forces and NSAs as a form of coercion.
This is a crucial oversight as the divide between the politically and materially motivated is malleable and easily traversed.
The organized crime boss of today is the insta-patriot and freedom ﬁghter of tomorrow.
Since war is a costly endeavor, the use of proxies can be an attractive alternative.
By subcontracting out coercion, a state can reduce its potential costs, both materially and politically.
Additionally, by using an NSA – or as became common in Ukraine, ‘volunteers’ – the coercer can gain a veneer of legitimacy by presenting the group as a ‘domestic’ actor.
Since the extent and level of support and control is most likely unclear, the coercing state can circumvent a level of blame and criticism.
Proxies also provide local knowledge that otherwise may be lost on a foreign force.
Local actors can exploit their preexisting knowledge of local political and patronage relations along with their connections to the local community.
An additional beneﬁt is the speed with which these groups or actors can be activated.
Not only low cost, many illicit actors can be quickly transformed into an armed force.
The Russian seizure of Crimea was in large part assisted and enabled by local organized crime ﬁgures.
The most prominent example being the current prime minister of the Crimean Republic, Sergei Aksyonov (AKA the 37 Byman and Waxman, Dynamics of Coercion, 117.
With the decrease in cost and increase in deniability comes a loss of control and precision.
This is in part because the actor itself has an individual set of preferences that at some point will pull or contrast with that of its employer.
In terms of signaling, it can lead to confusion over the sincerity of signals and questions over what is attributable to the sponsor vs. the exuberance of the local actor.
The control, or leverage, over the proxy actor is a determining factor in the ability of the sponsor to calibrate and direct the activities of its proxy.
Because of shirking, or incompetence, the agent can engage in activities that undermine or distract from the ultimate goal of the sponsor.
Being reliant on the sponsor for supplies, funding, and safe haven all increase the control of the sponsor over the proxy.
Additionally, by creating, rather than coopting a proxy, the sponsor can ensure greater alignment of interests by placing preferred personnel in key positions, not to mention structuring the group’s rationale and purpose to match its own.
However, this also increases the risks of clear and obvious connections to the sponsor, diminishing deniability.
As a result, there is a fundamental tension between control and deniability.
In order to achieve increased control, the principal has to exert more eﬀort and resources, resulting in higher visibility.
Along with the concerns over deniability and control, another less emphasized concern is over the actual capability to achieve objectives.
Proxy groups are usually – at least initially – disadvantaged in relation to government forces.
While able to degrade and harass, a proxy group’s ability to decisively engage and defeat conventional security forces is less than certain.
This is not only due to resources, but also command, control, and the professionalism of the ﬁghters.
However, this is not a great concern when facing fractious and underfunded security forces.
Applying Principal-Agent Analysis to StateSponsored Terrorism’, International Studies Perspectives 11/1 , 1–18.
Serbian Paramilitaries in the Bosnian War’, in Bruce B Campbell and Arthur D Brenner , Death Squads in Global Perspective: Murder With Deniability , 292.
In order to face oﬀ against conventional security forces, the proxy’s capabilities have to be increased.
This increased capability comes at raising the visibility of the sponsor’s role in upgrading the proxy.
Thus, with increased deniability comes decreased outcome dominance and vice versa.
As a primary strategy for obtaining conventional goals, proxy actors are often indecisive if not utilized in conjunction with – or in support of – other coercive strategies.
Russia and coercive diplomacy To understand Russia’s use of coercive diplomacy in Eastern Ukraine, this article uses process tracing to evaluate Russia’s words and deeds.
In particular, I seek to gain a better understanding of why particular tools and strategies were chosen at particular points in the conﬂict and what caused an adjustment and re-evaluation of their use.
After the seizure of Crimea, Russia saw an opportunity to take advantage of the confusion and weakness of the new Ukrainian regime and its decrepit military.
Concerned by the expansion of NATO and the EU, and previous experiences in Ukraine during the 2004 Orange Revolution that incentivized a more permanent solution, the Kremlin sought to leverage this instability and create a situation in which the pro-Russian regions had an institutionalized ability to inﬂuence Kiev.
However, what was initially envisioned as an attainable next step, quickly escalated as Kiev was gradually able to consolidate a level of political and military capacity.
What began as a strategy to force Ukraine to recognize a new political status for the East, eventually devolved into ﬁghting to prevent a decisive Ukrainian victory over the separatist regions.
Military exercises and snap inspections Days after the Maidan protests forced former Pro-Russia President Viktor Yanukovych to ﬂee from power, Putin ordered large-scale military exercises on the border with Ukraine.
They involved some 150,000 troops from the 48 Alexander George and Andrew Bennett.
Case Studies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences ; Slater, Dan and Daniel Ziblatt.
However, the threat of invasion and actual insurgency presented the most immediate dangers.
While there was a base level of discontent, domestic arguments are insuﬃcient to explain the extent and continued nature of the insurgency.
These snap exercises served as a distraction to provide cover for the insertion of military forces into Crimea.
These exercises served as a credible signal to Kiev that any forceful response to the Crimean operation could lead to further escalation and outright invasion in the East.
As Russia gradually consolidated its hold over the peninsula, the snap exercises transitioned from providing cover for the large movement of troops, to giving Kiev pause from fully committing all its forces to quelling the incipient ‘grassroots’ rebellion in the East.
Adding to the threat of Russian invasion, on March 1 the Russian Federation Council gave Putin the authority to use troops in Ukraine.
Russia faced almost nonexistent resistance during its Crimea operation, with acting Ukraine Defence Minister Ihor Tenyukh explaining to the Ukrainian Rada (legislature) that only 6,000 men were available out of a ground force of 41,000.56 Contributing to the dire security situation for Ukraine, its force structure remained largely unchanged from the Soviet military, with a 51 Lukas I Alpert and Jay Solomon.
BOWEN majority of its forces situated in the West for an eventual confrontation with NATO.57 In reality, Russia did not maintain the necessary forces to sustain and occupy large portions of the country.
With its primary concern shoring up its hold on Crimea, along with utilizing its best troops, Russia’s force of capable and deployable soldiers had been largely exhausted.
However, instability among the new regime, along with the even worse condition of the Ukrainian military, provided an opportunity for the Kremlin to capitalize on feelings of disenfranchisement, especially among the primarily Russian speaking regions.
Yet, despite the buildup, Russia continued to deny any designs on invasion.
During a call with Secretary of Defense Hagel, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu stated Russia did not intend to cross the border.
Indeed, already at this early point Russia was attempting to signal that the eastern regions had to have a say in the Ukraine referendums and presidential elections set for the end of May.
Ukraine announced a ceaseﬁre on the 19th to allow OSCE observers into the region.
However, tensions escalated with Vice President Biden visiting Kiev and announcing a support package for Ukraine.
Shortly after on the 22nd, Interim Ukrainian President Turchynov called for a resumption of the Anti-Terrorist Operation (ATO, as the campaign was called) after a local politician was killed by a pro-Russian mob.
With Washington and EU support increasing to Kiev, the Kremlin believed that Ukraine would not cease the ATO and come to an agreement that satisﬁed Russia’s interests.
In addition, the small but growing insurgency was still not cohesive or equipped enough to withstand a full-scale Ukrainian oﬀensive.
On 7 May, Putin announced a dramatic turnaround, opening the door for negotiations by announcing that he had ordered a pullback of troops, requested that the separatists delay a referendum set for 11 May, and that Russia was willing to work with whoever won the 25 May elections so long as autonomy was respected for the eastern republics.
These statements were followed up with a formal order from Putin to Shoigu to end the military exercises, eﬀectively ending the potential of an immediate largescale invasion of Russian forces.
Moscow realized in the run up to the Presidential elections of 25 May that its threat of military invasion was ineﬀective.
In part, this was due to the unstable and fragmented political situation in Kiev, heavily inﬂuenced by nationalist and right leaning forces that had protested and fought to remove Yanukovych from power.
It also became clear that Russia was either unwilling or unable to commit to a large-scale invasion of the East – in part due to little desire to annex the economically depressed region.
There also became a point of diminishing capability, as Russian units near the border had to be rotated out to reﬁt, resupply, and re-staﬀ conscripts as other conscript terms expired.
Fighting capacity begins to diminish the moment a unit leaves its barracks, and by May, most of the units had been in the ﬁeld for 4 months.
Including positions of deputy National Security Chair and Svoboda co-founder Andriy Parubiy as secretary of the Security and National Defense Committee.
Svoboda members also gained positions as vice minister and heads agriculture and environment, and for a brief time the Minister of Defense.
BOWEN Russia also had diﬃculty ﬁnding enough deployable units to sustain a presence on the border.
Its modernization eﬀorts since 2008 had reorganized and increased the capabilities of select units (especially the more elite branches such as VDV, Naval Infantry, and Spetsnaz), along with reorganizing the military along a more mobile brigade structure.
A focus of the modernization campaign was increasing the level of contract soldiers and creating permanent readiness brigades.
However, the eﬀorts had achieved limited success by the time of the Ukraine crisis, as contract recruitment was below target levels , and eﬀorts to increase readiness had resulted in only one battalion in each brigade being designated permanent readiness.
As a result, BTGs had to be pulled from various units across all Military Districts, including the Far East MD, and combined into ad hoc formations.
The rebels began to lose ground as the Ukrainian military command regained control and competence.
In a sign of potential rapprochement, Poroshenko announced a ceaseﬁre taking eﬀect on 20 June, with Putin speaking with President Obama and publicly supporting the ceaseﬁre on the 22nd.
Indeed, the Kremlin continued to signal its intent to negotiate a solution with Putin asking the Federation Council to rescind its 1 March authorization to use Russian troops in Ukraine.
However, in the days following, rebel resistance to a ceaseﬁre, Ukraine signing the Association Agreement with the EU, and Poroshenko ending the ceaseﬁre on 1 July meant that there was little hope for a negotiated settlement in the immediate future.
The beginning of July saw increasing rebel losses, both in terms of personnel and territory, with Russia seemingly unwilling to take further steps to stem losses.
However, on the 12th Russia accused Ukraine of shelling its territory along with attacking a border guard unit.
By 3rd August Ukrainian forces had reached the outskirts of Donetsk and Luhansk, pushing the rebel back into increasingly smaller pockets.
At the 69 Author interview with Ruslan Pukhov of CAST, Moscow summer 2014.
Shortly after, Russian troops were injected to stabilize the frontlines.
As the frontline gradually ossiﬁed and Ukrainian forces were blunted, Putin ordered the pullback of troops from the border again, just as he was to meet with Poroshenko in Milan on the sidelines of the Asia-Europe meeting on 12 October.
The mobilization of Russian troops and snap exercises were clearly viewed by Ukraine and caused signiﬁcant concern.
However, as the conﬂict progressed it was insuﬃciently credible that the Russians would overtly invade and occupy the Eastern regions, leading to an increase in Ukrainian conﬁdence.
It was clear what Russia wanted, but unclear the lengths they were willing to go to ensure their preferred outcome.
Illicit actors On 1 March, a crowd of several thousand Marched in Donetsk in Eastern Ukraine carrying the ﬂag of the previously unknown ‘Donetsk Republic’ and demonstrating against the new regime in Kiev.
Gradually protests began to spread throughout the Eastern Regions of Ukraine, seizing police and government buildings.
Worried about their status and the new regime, support for the protestors reﬂected a deep-seated fear that was easily capitalized on by external forces.
This fear was compounded by the weakness of the local security and police forces.
Most were lackluster in opposing the protests and many, such as Aleksander Khodakovsky, former head of the Donetsk SBU unit of Alpha, eventually sided with the local separatists.
It soon became clear that many of these protestors were associated with various fringe movements and local organized crime ﬁgures.
While representing a real, local sense of concern, Russia’s supporting hand was evident from the beginning.
The objective was to force Kiev to negotiate with the separatists and agree to a settlement that gave the East greater advantage in its relations with Kiev.
Why Russia is Not the Real Problem’, 14 April 2014; Yuri Zhulov, ‘Trading Hard Hats for Combat Helmets: The Economics of Rebellion in Eastern Ukraine’, Journal of Comparative Economics 44/1 , 1–15.
Evidence includes purported hacked emails from Surkov’s account, ‘Surkov leaks’, Also, see International Crisis Group.
The lack of control and coherence was an acceptable risk, especially as they faced almost nonexistent resistance.
Additionally, the prohibitive costs of an overt invasion meant that illicit actors presented an attractive policy tool.
Throughout the rest of March and increasing into April, ‘anti-Maidan’ protests and demonstrations spread from Donetsk and Luhansk through the Russian speaking regions of Dnipropetrovsk, Zaporizhzhya, Kherson, Mykolayiv, Kharkiv, Odessa, Donetsk and Luhansk.
The crisis escalated with protestors seizing various government in Donetsk, Luhansk and Kharkiv on 6–7 April.
The protestors, seemingly with no leadership or ﬁgurehead, announced the creation of the Donetsk People’s Republic on 7 April, appealed for Russia to send peacekeepers, and set 11 May for a referendum on the question of sovereignty.
However, the Kremlin and its local surrogates overestimated their ability to turn local resentment toward Kiev into support for Russia and its project.
Out of the eight Oblasts of Ukraine with large populations of ethnic Russians, separatists were only able to gain appreciable traction in Donetsk and Luhansk.
Initially, relatively unknown locals such as Pavel Gubarev in Donetsk, and Aleksandr Kharitonov became self-described governors, but both were soon arrested by the SBU in mid-march.
The leadership question was very unclear during this period, as various ‘people’s’ mayors, governors or the like popped up wherever the separatists gained ground, but had seemingly little hierarchy or coordination.
The few ﬁgureheads, like Denis Pushilin, seemed to speak for, than lead the incipient movement.
It was also clear that most of the armed separatists were an amalgamation of former Berkut and police oﬃcers, or local organized crime ﬁgures.
They both provided a ready and easy deployable force of shooters, not to mention possessing an intimate knowledge of the local power relationships and landscape.
However it soon became clear that external forces were at the very least supporting the uprising, as Igor Girkin , a former Russian intelligence oﬃcer, led the capture of Slovyansk on 12 April.
Examining Support for Separatist Geopolitcal Imaginary in Southeast Ukraine’, Post-Soviet Aﬀairs.
In addition, the siren song of Slavic nationalism attracted ﬁghters from across the post-Soviet world.
Many were directed to Ukraine by opaque organizations or ﬁxers, supported by a trenchant stream of Kremlin directed propaganda.
Especially during the beginning of May, the separatists started gaining in capability, which stymied Ukrainian progress.
Using the momentum gained, the Luhansk People’s Republic was established on 27 April.
Nevertheless, Kiev began to stabilize itself, sending reinforcements along with creating local volunteer forces to supplement the overstretched Ukrainian army.
Statements from the Kremlin and the FM continued to call for a Ukrainian withdrawal and to restore a political dialogue.
For Russia, the foremost goal was to emphasize that it was, at most, an arbiter in an internal Ukrainian conﬂict.
By forcing Kiev to negotiate directly with the separatists, they would legitimize them and Russia’s role as arbiter.
Moscow hoped that by presenting an image of lack of control over the separatists, it would increase the pressure on Kiev to come to a quick agreement.
Volunteer Battalions in Post-Maidan Ukraine’, Instituto Aﬀari Internazioinali.
The most public display of a ‘rift’ was the deﬁance of the separatists to delay their referendum despite Putin’s pleas.
Shortly thereafter in a propaganda move to increase nationalist support, the two republics signed an agreement establishing Novorossiya, referring to the old Czarist administrative region covering most of East and Southern Ukraine.
In the wake of the referendum vote, Moscow realized it needed to organize some hierarchical control.
The DNR began to formulate its leadership, with Moscow transplant Alexander Borodai being ‘elected’ PM, Igor Strelkov its Defense Minister, and Denis Pushilin the speaker of parliament.
However, the most pressing problem was corralling the various warlords and armed groups that had been created.
At the end of May, a coordinated rebel attack temporarily dislodged Ukrainian forces from Donetsk International Airport, but was repulsed with heavy losses.
It publicly re-emerged May 29th when it stormed the headquarters of the Donetsk Separatists and took control.
While the core of the unit initially appeared to be veterans of the old unit, it quickly transitioned into an amalgamation of nationalities, led by Aleksander Khodakovsky.
It appears that Moscow realized that the anarchy it had fostered was beginning to turn into a liability.
Warlords, gangs, and various paramilitary units had begun inﬁghting and operating with little oversight or much regard for the political goals of the rebellion.
In response, an instrument was needed that was deniable but cohesive enough to give Moscow greater control over the separatists.
However, it was clear that this increase in control came with a loss of deniability, as Vostok’s origins, composition, and support could lead to little conclusion other than Russian patronage.
Initially Borodai agreed to Poroshenko’s oﬀer of a 4-day ceaseﬁre, but the fractious nature of the various militia groups meant that it was soon violated.
This not only endangered the cease-ﬁre but Moscow’s negotiating positions as well.
The fragmented nature of political and military structures in the East contrasted with an increasingly cohesive Ukrainian government eﬀort.
With Poroshenko elected, Ukraine gradually consolidated its forces and pushed into separatist territory.
By 5 July, Strelkov was forced to abandon Slavyansk, and rebel leaders made increasingly public, and embarrassing, pleas for intervention from Russia.
Moscow realized that it needed to make further changes to restore order the insurgency.
In response, Borodai announced that Vladimir Antyufeyev, who was responsible for setting up the breakaway republic of Transnistria security services , as the ‘DPR deputy prime minister’ and replace local Alexander Khodakovsky as head of the republic’s security services.
The three most visible leaders of the separatist movement were now Russian citizens, all with varying degrees of connection to the intelligence services of Russia.
Despite the negative optics of now being a Russian led rebellion, Moscow understood that the most important goal was to solidify and stabilize the leadership and regain control of the rebellion.
The situation became dire when Malaysian Air ﬂight MH17 was shot down by an SA-11 Buk Missile on 17 July, almost certainly ﬁred from the separatists.
Immediately following the downing, Russia launched a largescale propaganda smoke screen that ranged from denial to providing poorly doctored photos of a Ukrainian jet shooting down the airliner.
The most pointed example of separatist guilt was provided by Alexander Khodakovsky, which in unguarded statements not only admitted to the SA-11 being under rebel control in that area, but that it was sent back to Russia immediately afterward to hide its presence.
The downing of MH17, combined with increasing successes of the Ukrainian ATO meant that Russia was quickly losing maneuver room.
Kiev boasted that separatist’s territory was 2. times smaller than four weeks previously, with more than 65 towns and villages liberated.
BOWEN clearer by the day that despite the proliﬁc amounts of weapons and facilitation of ‘volunteer’ ﬁghters, the separatists were unable to stem Ukrainian advances.
Barring action by Russia, it was becoming clear that the ‘Novorossiya’ rebellion would end in defeat.
Moscow’s two goals for the separatists, to force Kiev to negotiate directly with the separatists and to build up the separatist’s capability, by early August had seemed to fail.
The allRussian leadership of the republics made it impossible for Ukraine to negotiate with the separatists.
The still fragile domestic political situation, along with the heavy reliance on nationalist ideology for political and military support, precluded any negotiated settlement with separatists.
As a result, the Kremlin realized that for any long-term settlement to be reached, the leadership had to regain a Ukrainian image.
Both Strelkov and Borodai resigned from their posts in August, replaced by long time DPR military commander Aleksander Zakharchenko in Donetsk, and Valery Bolotov being replaced by Igor Plotnitsky.
The separatists held elections in early November, shortly after the Ukraine parliamentary elections, which sought to legitimize the leadership of the republics and increase their bargaining position.
This was part of the Russian eﬀort to turn the disparate separatist’s movement and republics into functioning bureaucratic entities.
Another key objective was to reorganize and coordinate the disparate forces of the republics, along with reigning in the more independent minded commanders.
Especially the Cossack commanders in Luhansk, were either brought into the fold or eliminated.
Many challenged the Russian decreed leadership, either because of their own hubris or over lucrative illicit rackets.
Units were gradually consolidated under organized command structures (into motor riﬂe 95 Ministry of Foreign Aﬀairs, Russia.
Russian troops From the ﬁrst days of the rebellion, Russian troops, intelligence oﬃcers, and political advisors were alleged to be either supporting or directly controlling the separatists.
Despite the support, Ukrainian forces built on their momentum and launched eﬀorts to surround Donetsk and cut oﬀ the border with Russia.
However, by the middle of July it was becoming increasingly clear to the Kremlin that the separatists and military exercises were insuﬃcient.
On 27 July, Ukrainian forces took Debaltseve, a strategically important rail hub dramatically disrupting connections between Donetsk and Luhansk, and were making advances toward Shaktyorsk, another highway route from Luhansk to Donetsk.
In response, Russia built up large amounts of troops and equipment on the border.
These troops were admitted by the Russian MoD to be active members of the 98th Airborne Division, but that they had become ‘lost’ patrolling the Russian side of the border.
As more and more Russian troops became involved in direct action, the narrative shifted from denying their presence to cultivating a proper frame in which to argue for their presence.
This narrative was also required due to the increasing domestic visibility of Russian troops being killed under mysterious circumstances, often after serving in units that were deployed close to the Ukrainian border.
The story quickly became that while there were active duty Russian troops in Ukraine, they were there of their accord and on vacation from their units.0 Despite the support, it became clear that to blunt Ukrainian progress and reverse the trajectory of the conﬂict, Russian forces were required.
Since the middle of August, the intensity of combat picked up, and by the end of the month, Ukrainian forces began to be pushed back across the region.
In Luhansk, Ukraine alleged a tank battalion of Russian troops had forced it to retreat from an airport outside the city.
In addition, Russia opened up a new front in the South, 98 Novorossiya News Agency.
Statement by the Delegation of Ukraine at the 795th FSC Plenary Meeting , 9 Sept.15.
The new front diverted precious resources and personnel, allowing separatist lines to harden.
Ukrainian forces were pushed back, including from Ilovaisk where they attempted to break out of the encirclement, known as the kotel and were ambushed, suﬀering heavy losses.
The threat of Russian invading and occupying larger swath of the country was never higher than at this point.
On 3 September, during a call between Putin and Poroshenko, Putin laid out a seven-point ceaseﬁre plan, along with the separatists agreeing to a potential ceaseﬁre.
In the wake of the ceaseﬁre, the conﬂict maintained a relative calm, punctuated by occasional outbursts of ﬁghting and artillery exchanges.
There was even a recognition that all sides had removed some equipment and forces from the frontlines.
With ﬁghting muted, each side probed and jockeyed for political position in negotiations.
In Ukraine, the Association Agreement with the EU was signed, a new parliament was elected at the end of October, and Poroshenko made a visit to the United States Congress to plead for lethal weapon aid.
Despite progress on energy and political negotiations, Poroshenko and the administration made stringent statements of being prepared for ‘total war,’ along with continuing to reject Russia’s calls to negotiate directly with the separatists so as not to appear weak.2 However, unlike previous frozen conﬂicts, Russia did not overtly intervene and send in ‘peacekeeping’ forces to demarcate permanently new territorial boundaries.
Succinctly laying out Russia’s strategic and underlying concern, in November, Dmitry Peskov, stated that Russia wanted a ‘hundred percent guarantee’ that NATO would not oﬀer Ukraine membership.
Moreover, the Obama administration’s stance, if anything, seemed to harden with the unanimous passing of the Ukraine Support Act of on 19 December 2014.104 By the end of December, all sides realized the need for a negotiated, if temporary, settlement.
The credibility of Russian signals became clear with the injection of Russian forces.
The jockeying continued throughout January and the beginning of February, as it seemed that Russia was intent on probing Western support.
However, the United States agreeing to a $2 billion loan to Ukraine and the EU extending sanctions, along with cancelling a round of talks in Minsk on 30 January signaled that there was a suﬃcient level of support to counter further Russian inroads.
Despite the peace overtures, without capturing Donetsk Airport, and the rail hub at Debaltseve, it would be far too costly for Russia to resupply and support the republics, not to mention their symbolism.
Finally, on 21 January, the Airport was seized by the separatists with support from Russian forces.
After the seizure, jockeying continued between both sides, with Ukraine coming under ﬁre from Russian artillery in Luhansk and a separatist oﬀensive near Mariupol.
In reality, Russian attention was focused on Debaltseve, a key connection between Donetsk and Luhansk, with a dramatic increase in the number of troops, artillery, tanks, and sophisticated jamming equipment engaging Ukrainian forces.
Gradually Russian forces closed in around the city, threatening another kotel.6 In the run up to and during the Minsk II negotiations, it was clear that a last push was underway for Debaltseve before the agreement was signed.
Stiﬀ resistance prevented Russia and the separatists from seizing it in time, and as the guns went quiet along the frontlines, they remained active in Debaltseve.
During the negotiations, Putin tried to delay the implementation of the ceaseﬁre for 10 days in order to allow for the capture of the rail hub.
So crucial was the hub to Russian plans that the Kremlin was willing to risk the entire agreement.
In Hungary Putin stated that the conﬂict over the town was understandable but that, ‘to lose is always painful but life is life.
BOWEN Conclusion This manuscript presents both an empirical study of Russia’s strategy in the Donbas, along with investigating the role of force in coercive diplomacy, proxy actors, and signaling.
The Russian use of coercive diplomacy in Eastern Ukraine was primarily driven by a perceived opportunity to capitalize on the weakened political and military situation in Ukraine.
The failure of Ukraine to present any semblance of coherent resistance to the Russian takeover of Crimea incentivized the Kremlin to press for continued gains.
To do so, Russia sought a long-term mechanism of inﬂuence in a strategically crucial buﬀer zone between itself and an encroaching NATO.109 However, Russia overestimated resentment in the region, and underestimated the resolve of the fractious Ukrainian government.
At the tactical level, Russia’s strategy for coercive diplomacy was subject to revision, adjustment, and compromise as methods were either rebuﬀed or insuﬃcient to coerce Ukraine.
Rather than seeking to create another ‘frozen conﬂict’ through the injection of Russian ‘peacekeepers’ and defeating an adversary to prevent negotiated settlements, Russia sought negotiations – albeit on Russia’s terms – to convince Ukraine to accept a new political arrangement that allowed it to retain the regions, albeit with less control.
Indeed the multiple overtures, combined with the limited and bounded injection of Russian troops, support the argument that Russia intended to negotiate an end to the conﬂict.
A frozen conﬂict would be detrimental to Russian objectives by saddling it with an economically depressed region – on top of Crimea – along with failing to achieve its original goal of institutionalizing a mechanism of inﬂuence inside Ukraine.
During the initial phases of the conﬂict, the combination of NSAs and snap exercises created a signiﬁcant amount of pressure on Kiev, but were unsuccessful in achieving Russia’s goals.
Ultimately, it took the direct injection of Russian troops to demonstrate the clarity and credibility of Russian intentions.
However, Russia’s use of force was demonstrative, and not intended to achieve a decisive outcome.
As a result, instead of focusing on the level or intensity of the use of force, greater attention should be paid to its intention and goal.
The End of the Cold War and the United States Oﬀer to Limit NATO Expansion’, International Security 40/4 , 7–44.
It is clear that in Ukraine, force was used as a signaling mechanism by Russia.
Yet, with its proxies and indirect methods of coercion, Russian signaling was subject to confusion and limited the ability of both sides to come to a negotiated settlement.
Russian signals, despite being visible to audiences with access to the ‘backstage,’ were unclear at many stages of the conﬂict.
Russia’s use of proxy actors complicated the ability of target audiences to discern clearly Russian intentions and level of commitment in the crisis.
While Russian signals became clearer as resources and involvement were increased beyond previous thresholds, it remained unclear whether greater Russian involvement and risk tolerance was directed toward tactical developments on the ground or to demonstrate larger strategic goals and intentions.
Thus, this study demonstrates that covert signaling remains a complicated and confusing endeavor, especially when using proxy actors and questions remain concerning control and involvement, despite being visible to particular audiences.
In addition, the disparate and fractious nature of the separatists themselves ultimately proved to be as much of a hindrance to Russia as Ukraine.
By using state subcontractors, Russia was able to retain a level, no matter how tenuous, of deniability and present a narrative of the conﬂict as an internal conﬂict.
However, it also resulted in a lack of control and eﬀectiveness, as the agency loss and ineﬃciency gradually created a liability rather than asset.
Russia’s experience demonstrates that managing the level of control relative to deniability is a fundamental attribute of using proxies.
Ultimately, while attractive due to their low cost and deniability, proxy forces are often unable to achieve decisive outcomes against a more conventional, coherent force when not employed in conjunction with other coercive strategies.
Additionally, further research should increasingly incorporate the varying motivations of proxies to include materially motivated actors such as organized criminals.
To proxies, political allegiance is often a fungible asset, motivated by immediate opportunity and gain as much as righteous political fervor.
By the end of the conﬂict, Russia’s various ad hoc and improvised adjustments had failed to achieve the initial Russian objectives.
Russia was faced with either intervening to stave oﬀ a complete rebel defeat, or to accept failure.
Ultimately, Russia chose a third option of limited intervention to prevent a separatist defeat.
As a result, the best the Kremlin could hope for was a recognized stalemate.
Angstrom, Oscar Jonsson, and Ruslan Pukhov along with the participants at the 2017 NEPSA and 2017 ISSS-ISAC conferences for their advice and contributions to the research of this paper.
Additionally, the author thanks the Editors of the Journal of Strategic Studies and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful advice.
How and Why Russia Broke the Rules’, International Aﬀairs 90/6 , 1255–97. doi:10.1111/1468-2346.12170 Alpert, Lukas I and Jay Solomon.
Freedman, Lawrence., ‘Ukraine and the Art of Limited War’, Survival 56/ 6 , 7–38.
Gayday, Alexei., ‘Reform of the Russian Army’, in Mikhail Barabanov , Russia’s New Army , 9–32.
Deﬁnition and Characteristics’, in Alexander George and William E Simons , The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy (Boulder CO: Westview Press 1994), 7–11.
Gleditsch, K S., I Salehyan, K Schultz, Idean Salehyan and Kenneth Schultz.
Oﬀer to Limit NATO Expansion’, International Security 40/4 , 7–44. doi:10.1162/ISEC_a_00236 Shiyaev, Valery.
Slater, Dan and Daniel Ziblatt, ‘The Enduring Indispensability of the Controlled Comparison’, Comparative Political Studies 46/10 , 1301–27. doi:10.1177/ 0010414012472469 Solopov, Maxim.
