Calhoun DUDLEY KNOX LIBRARY htt p://w ww. n ps. e du/l ib ra ry Caflwuo is the Naval Postgraduate School's public access digital repository for research mate rials and institutiional publicatkins created by the NPS community.
Calhoun is named for Professor of Mathematics Guy K Caftiouo, NPS's first appointed — and published — schofaily author.
PEREORMING ORGANIZATION NAME AND ADDRESS Naval Postgraduate School Monterey, CA 93943-5000 9.
DISTRIBUTION CODE The color revolutions, the popular democratic protests that occurred in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan from 2003-2005 and overturned the pro-Russian regimes in those nations, played a significant role in the development of Russia’s relationship with the West.
They created a narrative of a continuous wave of pro-democracy, pro-reform movements sweeping through the former Soviet Union that had the potential to spread across the FSU, including to Russia itself This thesis examines Russia’s reaction to the color revolutions as they fit within this narrative of anti-Westemism.
Russian officials saw the West as the cause of the color revolutions and claimed that Western-funded NGOs were deliberately working to undermine the regimes of the color revolution countries, by aiding the activists and youth movements that propelled the demonstrations to victory.
The color revolutions added to the feeling of Western encroachment on Russia’s sphere of influence and contributed to Western involvement in the post-Communist domain, along with NATO and EU expansions in post-Soviet nations and United States’ deals for basing rights in post-Soviet Central Asia.
Because Russia feared the results of Western democracy-promotion and election-monitoring, officials attempted to thwart both activities and developed the narrative of sovereign democracy as a means of justifying their actions.
NUMBER OE Russia, color revolutions, Ukraine, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, Rose Revolution, Orange Revolution, PAGES Tulip Revolution, sovereign democracy _95_ 16.
SECURITY CLASSIEICATION OE REPORT Unclassified NSN 7540-01-280-5500 18.
Mikhail Tsypkin Thesis Advisor Carolyn Halladay Seeond Reader Mohammed Hafez Chair, Department of National Seeurity Affairs THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEET BLANK IV ABSTRACT The color revolutions, the popular democratic protests that occurred in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan from 2003-2005 and overturned the pro-Russian regimes in those nations, played a significant role in the development of Russia’s relationship with the West.
They created a narrative of a continuous wave of pro-democracy, pro-reform movements sweeping through the former Soviet Union that had the potential to spread across the FSU, including to Russia itself This thesis examines Russia’s reaction to the color revolutions as they fit within this narrative of anti-Westernism.
The color revolutions, the popular democratic protests that occurred in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan from 2003-2005 and overturned the pro-Russian regimes in those nations, played a significant role in the development of Russia’s relationship with the West.
They created a narrative of a continuous wave of pro-democracy, pro-reform movements sweeping through states of the former Soviet Union that had the potential to spread to their neighboring countries, including Russia itself These movements were a signal, to both Russia and the West, that corrupt, proRussian regimes would not be tolerated.
Though many of the gains of the color revolutions were later reversed, the narrative they created had a significant impact on Russia.
The fears engendered in Russia by the color revolutions, and Russia’s subsequent decision to blame the color revolutions on Western instigation, contributed to the development of the anti-Western foreign policy that drove Russian interventions.
This thesis examines the ways in which Russia’s political institutions and its historical narrative of anti-Western paranoia has driven its response to the color revolutions.
This thesis also examines the ways in which Russia has shaped its foreign policies to counter the Western countries that Russia perceives as being the instigators of the color revolutions.
It concludes with an evaluation of the effect of Russia’s strategies to counter the color revolutions and their potential for future use.
SIGNIFICANCE In the past decade, Russia has reentered the international stage with an aggressive foreign policy of considerable concern to the United States.
In 2008, Russia intervened in I Georgia to support separatists in the regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
In 2014, Russia annexed the Crimean region of Ukraine and provided support to separatists in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
Because of Russia’s international aggression, the 2015 United States National Security Strategy named Russia as a major threat to international security, which the United States is seeking to counter through diplomacy and military presence. i Russian foreign policy has become important to the security interests of the United States.
Thus, an examination of the contributing factors that have influenced Russian policy may help to guide the United States’ response to Russia’s increased international aggression.
In examining the ways that the color revolutions have affected Russia’s relationship with the United States, EU, and NATO, this thesis sheds some light on one of the possible underlying causes of Russia’s resurgent foreign policy decisions.
Understanding Russia’s views of the color revolutions, and the actions that followed from them, will also be a factor to consider as the United States and other Western partners continue their tradition of promoting democracy and encouraging non-governmental organization participation in countries of the former Soviet Union and elsewhere in the world.
Furthermore, the examination will focus on expanding an area of where there has been limited research.
While much has been written about Russia’s shift to a more aggressive foreign policy, there has been less mention of the effect of the color revolutions on the shaping of that policy.
This thesis works to bridge the gap between events of the color revolutions, and Russian foreign policy that has emerged in their aftermath.
In examining specifically the ways in which the color revolutions have influenced Russia’s anti-Western narrative, this thesis can contribute to the larger body of work that has examined both the color revolutions and the Russian foreign policy of the last decade.
LITERATURE REVIEW The color revolutions in the former Soviet republics of Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan, all happening within a brief, two-year period, sent shock waves throughout the world.
The Russian government, in particular, saw the color revolutions as a threat to its influence on the countries where the color revolutions took place, to their own regime, which could also be a target for a color revolution, and to its relationship with the West.
Thus, Russia needed to take action in order to counteract the effect of the color revolutions.
This literature review will begin with the revolutions themselves, followed by a look at how Russia has altered policies in the wake of the color revolution period of 2003-2005.
It will examine the trajectory of Russia’s policies in aftermath of the color revolutions, including Russia’s policies toward the countries in which the color revolutions occurred.
It also will examine how Russia has altered its domestic policies in response to the threat of internal revolution.
The Color Revolutions In 2003, Georgia’s Rose Revolution toppled the government of Edouard Shevardnadze, a corrupt regime that had created massive economic problems within the country, despite a surplus of natural resources.
The elections in 2003 had serious irregularities, suspicious of a rigged election.
The major opposition party declared victory, and was joined in protest by the other opposition groups.
Shevardnadze was replaced by Mikheil Saakashvili, whose government was much more opposed to Russian influence.
According to Tristan Landry, the Georgians involved in the revolution did not act alone.
Georgia’s attempts to Westernize have not had much success, and Georgia’s new government continues to persecute its opposition.
A new election, held after the demonstrations, saw the election of Victor Yushchenko, a major supporter of the Orange Revolution.
Per Mark Kramer, Yanukovych had been strongly supported by the Russian government, and so the Orange Revolution was a bitter disappointment to Russia and to the eastern areas of Ukraine with large populations of ethnic Russians and Russophone Ukrainians, who had supported Yanukovych.
Weaknesses in Ukraine’s political culture and institutions prevented true reform from taking hold, and Ukraine’s democratic movement was eventually reversed.
However, in the Euromaidan of 2013, Ukrainians again took to the streets in even larger numbers, and with better preparation than in 2004, to protest against Yanukovych and his deals with Russia, and again he was removed from power.
Protesters in Kyrgyzstan ousted corrupt leader Askar Akayev and replaced him with Kurmanbek Bakiyev, who promised a democratic, anti-corruption regime.
Unfortunately, Alexander Cooley argues that Bakiyev failed to live up to his promises; instead he actually increased the level of governmental corruption, along with repressive measures to eliminate his opposition.
Policies toward the Nations of the Color Revolutions Russia’s close ties with Georgia and Ukraine continued after the color revolutions.
These ties, economic, social, and physical, could be used by Russia to put pressure on the governments of Georgia and Ukraine.
When soft power failed to achieve Russia’s goals toward those countries, Russia then had to resort to military intervention, which it did in Georgia in 2008 and in Ukraine in 2014.
In Kyrgyzstan, per Yasar Sari, while the Tulip Revolution contributed to the perception of a “wave” of color revolutions sweeping across the states of the former Soviet Union, the Tulip Revolution did not lead to a pro-Western regime.
Thus, Russia was able to resume its relationship with Kyrgyzstan without any need to attempt to redirect the course of the country.
Therefore, this section of the literature review will focus on Ukraine and Georgia.
Russia’s economic linkages with Ukraine and Georgia mean that it can use economic leverage to pressure the countries, and to punish them when they deviate from Russia’s wishes.
While Ukraine and Georgia trade with both Russia and the EU nations in similar amounts, they are highly dependent on Russia for energy supplies, which gives Russia a strategic advantage.
The construction of the Nord Stream gas pipeline, which delivers gas from Russia to Europe via the Baltic Sea, greatly reduced Ukraine’s access to the lucrative pipeline, which had formerly transited directly across it.i3 Eurthermore, Ukraine and Georgia both send migrant workers to Russia.
While these remittances are not a large part of the overall economy of Ukraine and Georgia, they create ties to Russia through physical and social links between the countries that are not present with the European Union.
Russia has also contributed foreign direct investment to both countries.
This not only gives Russia a stake in Georgian and Ukrainian businesses, but also imports Russian business culture and values as “spill-over” effects so that Russia can utilize EDI for political purposes.i^ Both Georgia and Ukraine have minority populations that can be used by Russia for strategic gain.
In Georgia, the Abkhazians and the South Ossetians attempted to secede in the early 1990s and have remained unhappily a part of Georgia until 2008.1^ In 2008, Russia supported those secessionist groups and occupied their territory.
Putin used the minority status of the Ossetians and the Abkhazians to justify intervening in Georgia for their protection, i^ In Ukraine, Russia also supported the secessionist regions of Donetsk and Euhansk, along with the seizure of Crimea, i^ Russia can also take advantage of the shared language left over from the Soviet Union.
Ukrainian media relies heavily on Russian media sources, which gives Russia major influence over Ukrainian journalism.
Georgia relies on Russian media as well, though to a lesser extent.^o As mentioned earlier, in 2008 Russia moved beyond soft power and intervened in Georgia, using the pretext of an attack by Georgian forces on Russian peacekeepers.
Eater, charges of Georgian human rights violations were also added to justify assisting 14 Jonavicus, “Window of Opportunity,” 27.
Despite the electoral victory of Yushchenko in the aftermath of the Orange Revolution, a significant portion of Ukraine’s population, who voted for Yanukovych, disapproved of the revolution.
These voters were primarily located in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine.
For them, the Orange revolution was a stolen victory, leaving behind a voting bloc that could see Yanukovych return to power.
When Yanukovych did return to power in 2010, he shifted foreign policy aims more toward Russia, making deals to ensure stable gas prices in return for extending the lease for the naval base in Sevastopol, and generally working to reduce the pressure on Ukraine from Moscow, and Russia was able to increase its soft power presence in the region.
Ukraine under Yanukovych became less democratic, “backsliding” into authoritarianism by methods similar to those seen in Russia.
The Soviet legacy bureaucracy, a split society and national identity, patrimonial politics, and rampant corruption all contribute to Ukraine’s failure to reform.
While Russia was unable to prevent the color revolutions of 2003-2005, future democratic revolutions in former-Soviet countries may still be avoided.
In Belarus, Putin and Belarussian leader Alyaksandr Lukashenka have cooperated in ways that protect Belarus from the onrush of democratic ideals.
Russia and Belarus maintained close ties after the collapse of the Soviet Union, those ties have enabled Belarus to avoid closer integration with the European community, as other Eastern European countries have done.i Belarus instead still ties its identity to a Slavic ethnicity and the Orthodox religion, as does Russia.
The United States, the EU, and other European organizations have attempted to encourage a democratic transition in Belarus through the use of diplomatic, political, and economic incentives and punishments.
However, because Russia is available to provide support to Belarus, the Western efforts have been stymied and democratization has not taken root.
Domestic Policies In light of the spread of color revolutions in a brief span of time, Putin’s regime had to be concerned that Russia, too, might experience a color revolution of its own.
Thus, the Russian government took steps to eliminate the danger of a domestic uprising.
Finkel and Brudny argue that the Putin regime successfully prevented a Russian color revolution by coopting the democracy-promotion strategies and turning them to the benefit of the govemment.
The policies that Russia used to counteract the threat of a color revolution include isolationist policies and anti-Western propaganda, alterations to the electoral process, increased media censorship, restrictions on NGOs, and the development of a pro-regime youth movement.
In preventing a color revolution in Russia, Putin’s regime first had to develop ideological strategies of anti-Westernism and state sovereignty to counter the prodemocratic movements.
Gleb Pavlovsky, a Kremlin consultant used print media and Internet to spread the message against the color revolutions.
Regime change through protest was condemned as a Western plot to build anti-Russian states that would threaten Russian sovereignty and destroy the region’s culture.
Putin and his allies in the Russian government claimed that a color revolution in Russia would be a return to Yeltsin’s era of a weak state and economy.
Other officials claimed the color revolutions violated principles of national sovereignty and advocated a concept of sovereign democracy, which would better fit Russia that the Western conception of liberal democracy.
Despite joining the WTO in 2012, the Russian government has commenced a program to undermine foreign trade and investment.
Starting as early as 2006, with a takeover of foreign investment in Gazprom, Russia has prevented foreign investment in major sectors of the economy.
By 2012, Russia’s economy slowed as oil prices and productivity flattened out.
Instead of conducting reforms needed to energize the economy (which would endanger the elites’ control of profits), Russia has increased its economic isolation by continuing to reduce foreign investment and imports.
Opposition media, small in number, are unable to compete with state-controlled media for viewers and readers.
The less trade and investment there is, and the less contact with the West, the easier it is to convince the public that the West is to blame for Russia’s hardships.
Isolation also protects the Russian government from the Western efforts to monitor and ensure free and fair elections.
After the color revolutions, Russia enacted electoral reform in order to prevent genuine opposition parties to take part in elections that might trigger demonstrations.
Legislation enacted in 2005-2006 raised the electoral threshold from 5 percent to 7 percent.
It also got rid of the electoral alliances and the single-member district system, and it restricted party registration, party membership, and regional representation of opposition parties .48 These changes reduced the representation of opposition parties in the legislature down to only one, and created great advantages for Putin’s United Russia party.
The government has also worked to eliminate domestic and international electoral monitoring.
Russia has reduced its domestic election monitoring to a single NGO, which has little power and operates in less than half the electoral districts.On the international front, the OSCE declined to send election monitoring teams to Russia, citing government restrictions that would make it impossible to verily the election.^i The 2007 parliamentary elections in Russia illustrate the increasing backsliding away from democracy of Russian politics that has been exacerbated by the color revolutions.
DeBardeleben writes, “The underlying argument is that the ‘colour revolutions’ that took place in other postcommunist countries since November 2003...offered a powerful impetus for Russian elites to ‘manage’ the 2007 Russian 46 Guriev, “Deglobalizing Russia,” 5.
Shortly after the Orange Revolution, the Russian Duma created a draft of a law designed to significantly restrict the independence of the NGOs operating in Russia.
While the law was eventually softened, it still placed substantial restrictions on the ability of NGOs.
Membership to the Civic Chamber, however, was designed in such a way as to ensure that only authority-approved organizations were granted seats.
Thus, the Chamber would not challenge the government authority in NGO-related matters.
Youth movements were shown to play significant roles in the color revolutions.
Kmara in Georgia and Pora in Ukraine underlined the importance of civil society activism in the promotion of the color revolutions.
Within the Nashi Youth, members created a Voluntary Youth Militia, which was to assist police with patrols and guard the Nashi Youth’s public events.
These militia members were aecused of several instances of physieal violence against members of the opposition parties.
THESIS OVERVIEW This thesis assesses the ways in whieh Russian foreign policy toward the West ehanged in the aftermath of the color revolutions.
It first examines the eolor revolutions themselves, looking at the eauses of the demonstrations and the patterns that emerge from the ways in whieh the revolutions were condueted.
The thesis then examines the reaetions of the Russian government to the color revolutions themselves, and how those reactions led to policy changes.
The main thrust of this researeh is to examine the ties between the color revolutions and the Russian foreign policy that was created shortly thereafter in order to examine the trajeetory of anti-Westernism that arose in the aftermath of the color revolutions.
Finally, the thesis draws a eonclusion about the effect of the color revolutions on the Russian government’s attitudes toward the West and the implications for Russia’s future, and how that future may affect the United States.
Chapter II examines how Russia apportioned blame to the West for the color revolutions, through Western involvement in NGOs, youth activism, and the color revolution demonstrations themselves.
Chapter III examines Russia’s historical narrative of the West’s broken promises regarding the perceived expansions of NATO and the EU eastward toward Russia.
Chapter IV examines Russia’s increasing calls for national sovereignty in the aftermath of the color revolutions, including advocacy by Russian officials for the concept of sovereign democracy to counter Western democracy promotion and electoral monitoring.
The thesis concludes with discussion of the findings of the previous chapters, implications for future relationships with Russia, and highlight areas for further research.
BLAMING THE WEST EOR THE COLOR REVOLUTIONS Kimberly Marten argues that leaders in patrimonial regimes are required to signal strength to their rivals in order to maintain their power.
Specifically, Russia blames the color revolutions on Western funding and Western support for the activist groups that led the revolutions.
Describing this Russian attitude toward the color revolutions, Yulia Nikitina writes, “The West’s way of acting is through the financing of radical, nationalist, neofascist and fundamentalist forces, at least that is how it happens in the post-Soviet region, in the opinion of Vladimir Putin.
Elections that take place after a coup are merely a cover for those who financed the overthrow.
Russian government has used the idea that the West caused the color revolutions as a pretext to justify its own interventions into countries that have had a “Western-sponsored” regime change.
Russian leaders, in blaming Western influence on the color revolutions, focused their blame on the NGOs and the youth movements that were involved in the color revolutions.
Russia claimed that NGOs and youth movements were tools the West used to incite the demonstrations that lead to the color revolutions.
This chapter examines the role of NGOs and youth movements in the color revolutions, and the extent of their ties to the United States and the West in general.
It also explores the actions Russia has taken to counter the influence of NGOs and youth movements at home and abroad.
Explaining Russian Foreign Poliey and Intervention in Ukraine,” The Washington Quarterly 38, no. : 194.
ROLE OF NCOS AND YOUTH MOVEMENTS IN THE COLOR REVOLUTIONS Western demoeracy-promoting NGOs first gained aecess to the eountries of the former Soviet Union following its collapse in 1991 and were mostly allowed freedom to operate as they wished within these countries during the following decade.Prodemocracy youth movements were also enabled by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the subsequent opening of political participation in former-Soviet nations, which influenced the rising generation in favor of democratic values and economic liberalization.
Furthermore, increased university enrollment through the 1990s concentrated youth activists where they could be mobilized for pro-democratic protest.
NGO Activity During the Color Revolutions Western NGOs have played key roles in the color revolutions.
Per Mohammad Soltanifar, Russia and some others argue that the presence of the NGOs undercuts the idea of the revolutions as popularly run.
United States NGO activity during the Rose Revolution was largely focused on election monitoring and reporting as the main form of support to the demonstrators.
This evidence of electoral fraud played a major role in the lead-up to the mass demonstrations that ended up overturning the election results in Georgia.
USAID also increased its funding for election monitoring activities during the elections that preceded the Rose Revolution.
The National Democratic Institute, also contributed to the election monitoring process.
In Ukraine, many of the same NGOs—Freedom House, USAID, and NDI—also served to monitor for free and fair elections.
The election monitoring and exit polling conducted by these and other independent Western-backed NGOs also showed the disparity between the official vote count and the exit polls.Exit polling can be a critical tool in the hands of activists, who can use them as propaganda against the official vote count of the regime.Furthermore, exit polling will appear first, prior to the official Soltanifar, “US—Russian Rivalry,” 11.
NGO Activity After the Color Revolutions After the eolor revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine, NGO participation in those countries did not end.
In both eountries, election-monitoring NGOs continued to function impartially and draw attention to inconsistencies in later elections.
Instead of providing the same assistance to all the parties, the United States assistance favored Shevardnadze’s ruling party.
United National Movement, giving it exclusive access to significant NGO aid.
As the new leader of Kyrgyzstan, Bakiyev showed little interest in reaching out to the West.
Educated and trained in the Soviet Union, he looked to Russia and China to consolidate his power.
Shortly after coming to power, he made a visit to Russia to confer with Putin and reaffirm their relationship and the primacy *‘^ Zielys, “ United States Security Interests,” 186.
Russia and China, being such close neighbors geographically, could perhaps be more relied on to aid Bakiyev if he ran into trouble maintaining domestic power.
Meanwhile, the United States was signaling that it might not be a reliable ally to the Central Asian regimes.
By supporting the Tulip Revolution and in criticizing the Andijan crisis that occurred in Uzbekistan shortly afterward, the United States signaled to the Central Asian countries that democracy promotion would take precedence over maintaining relationships with the regimes in power.
The United States approval of the Tulip Revolution soured relations with other Central Asian countries, especially Uzbekistan, that feared for the stability of their own regimes.
Clearly, the United States was prepared to sacrifice stability for the sake of democracy, a trade-off that was unpalatable to Central Asian leaders.The price of democracy promotion left Washington more reliant on Kyrgyzstan to achieve its mission in Central Asia—logistical support for Operation Enduring Ereedom.
In May 2005, Uzbek troops in Andijan fired on peaceful civilians protesting the trial of local businessmen who had been charged with Islamic extremism.
The United States government criticized Uzbekistan’s excessive use of force, which caused the deaths of hundreds of unarmed civilians.
Youth Movements in the Color Revolutions The color revolutions were each aided by youth movements within their respective countries, which played a major role in driving enthusiasm for democracy and free elections.
These movements were dominated by university students, whose populations had been rising significantly in the past decade, providing a high concentration of students to create networks of protestors.In Georgia, there was the Kmaral movement, formed in February 2003.
Get Out the Vote concerts, publications, and protests against the government and the police, who cracked down on the protests.
Reports from Georgian media indicated that George Soros’s foundations had given $5 million in funding to the Kmaral movement.
In Ukraine, the youth movement was known as Pora, emerging less than a year before the Orange Revolution.
Along with demands for free elections, freedom of the press, the accurate reporting of the elections was also a main concern for Pora.
The Ukrainian youth movement was distinct in that it relied heavily on local businesses for funding for printing, communication, and transportation, capitalizing on the frustrations of business owners, who disliked the excessive regulatory bureaucracy of the current government.
Members of Kelkel acknowledged that their organization was modeled after the youth movements of the previous color revolutions and was poised to use the highly effective means of social mobilization used by its predecessors.
Kelkel in Kyrgyzstan is also claimed to have received money from the Soros Foundation.
Another youth group, called Birge, was also active during the Tulip Revolution, though to a lesser extent.
Other informal youth movements in Kyrgyzstan played significant parts in the Tulip Revolution, especially in the restive southern regions of the country.
In southern Kyrgyzstan, it is relatively common to see informal youth groups develop that serve as self-help associations between peers.
These groups, called jo’ralar, were able to be coopted by influential supporters of the Tulip Revolution and used to assist with the revolutionary demonstrations taking place outside the capital.These youth groups, usually working with a politician or businessman representing the opposition to the current government as their support, participated in a variety of demonstrations in the regions near Osh, Jalalabad, Naryn, and Talas, covering most of the southern areas of the country.
These protests were not coordinated, but together, they were effective.
Between State and Opposition,” SAIS Review of International Ajfairs 26, no. : 86-8.
RUSSIAN REACTION TO THE TOOLS OF THE COLOR REVOLUTIONS According to Karrie Koesel and Valerie Bunce, a key aspect of Russia’s reaction to the color revolutions is the worry over diffusion—that the ideas that have infected Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan will somehow spread into Russia itself, where protests could damage or destroy the Putin regime.
Therefore, the Russian response to the color revolutions was to demobilize the same domestic groups that have the potential to create a color revolution in Russia.
Within Russia, NGOs, and youth movements, along with other political and domestic groups, have been either repressed or coopted.
Both government offieials and aeademies have been quiek to paint foreign NGOs as regime-ehange agents of Western demoeraeies.^i^ While Russia has very limited ability to influence the NGOs operating in the other eountries, Putin has introdueed laws in Russia that prevent the formation and funding of foreign NGOs.
In 2004, Putin elaimed that NGOs were prioritizing aequiring funding from wealthy foreign donors over their primary missions.
This effort began to be realized with the 2005 ereation of an official state institution eall the Civie Chamber {Obshchestvennaya Palata), which had the ostensible mission to serve as a mediator between NGOs, citizens of Russia, and state authorities.However, the eleetions for members of the Civic Chamber were eondueted in sueh a way as to ensure that membership eonsisted of only authority-approved people, who would not challenge the government.
Russia is also eountering Western NGOs through the ereation of its own international organizations to challenge Western demoeraey-promotion efforts.
Additionally, Russia established the Russian World Foundation, which funds Russian international NGOs and finances organizations that work with Russian communities abroad.
Russia’s Reaction to Youth Movements Russia perceives the risk of the youth movements in their capacity for diffusion from one country to another.
The youth movements that Russia claims have been influenced by the West can continue to spread their ideas to other nations of the former Soviet Union, including Russia.
He argues that the youth movements of the color revolutions have not arisen completely independently, but have grown and spread their messaging from each other.
He claims that the Kmaral movement in Georgia was trained in part by a previous youth movement, Otpor, from Serbia, which was in turn trained and assisted by Western-associated NGOs.
The diffusion of the youth movements then allows for their promotion of democratic reform, and the training that they received from the NGOs, to be exported to foment uprising against other undemocratic regimes in the region.
Nashi was organized to fight the enemies of Russia, which consisted of, in their minds, a combination of liberals, fascists.
Western sympathizers, international NGOs, and international terrorist groups, ah united by their hatred of Putin and his leadership in Russia.
Officially, NashVs goals were to fight these enemies and preserve Russian sovereignty.
Despite the cooption of youth by the government, a pro-democracy youth movement did briefly appear in Russia, called Oborona , but it failed to gain traction in the political realm.
While previous demonstrations in Russia were small and posed little threat to the Putin regime and the United Russia party, the police presence and the arrests of prominent figures during the demonstrations were effeetive in diseouraging broader participation by the Russian publie should they attempt eolor revolution style protests in the wake of a perceived fraudulent election.
DeBardeleben writes, “The Russian leadership undermined this potential by making elear that politieal protests would be punished, simultaneously raising the cost to those participating in demonstrations and impressing on the publie that opposition parties were unlikely to prevail.Even immediately after the eolor revolutions, however, a popular revolution in Russia that suecessfully manages to topple the Russian government seemed unlikely.
Suecessful revolutions require well-eoordinated action, and the Russian government had worked to disarm and co-opt youth movements and public demonstrations.
RUSSIA’S NEGATIVE FRAMING OF THE COLOR REVOLUTIONS While the tension of East versus West is a prominent theme of the eolor revolutions as seen from Russia, it is not the only issue.
Also at stake is a struggle within Russia over the constitution of Russian values and identity, and the coneeption of Russia as both a strong state actor and as a democracy.
Since Russia emerged from the Soviet Union in 1991, demoeracy has been a major aspeet of its identity, differentiating the new state from what eame before.
Thus, Russian national identity was tied to both the idea of Russia as a Great Power and Russia as a demoeracy. i^m The color revolutions ehallenged the idea of Russian democracy.
Ortmann writes, “However, the dominant narrative put forward by Kremlin insiders was that the Orange Revolutions was part of an American plan, implemented with the help of covert operations by foreign NGOs, the financing of opposition movements and logistical support for youth groups—and that the United States would attempt to export this revolutionary model even further.”i42 The color revolutions were further portrayed by the Russian government as illegal coups d’etat, that can only occur in “young states” that still have fragile political institutions.
Russian officials accused the United States and its allies of circumventing the normal democratic process in these countries by facilitating revolution instead of working within the existing government.
It also served as further “evidenee” that the United States was involved in conducting regime changes in order to facilitate its goals of spreading democracy and United States influence.
Russia has succeeded in convincing its public that the color revolutions were unsuccessful.
A mere 3 percent of Russians believe that life improved in Georgia and Kyrgyzstan following their revolutions, and only 6 percent believe the same about the Ukrainian revolution. xhis campaign has been most successful with Russian youth, 72 percent of whom are opposed to any version of the democratic movements of the color revolutions taking place in Russia.
In order to show strength in the wake of the color revolutions, Russia needed to take steps to prevent the further spread of the color revolutions.
Koesel and Bunce argue that both Russia and China used negative framing of the color revolutions to distance their own regimes from the events of the color revolutions.
They also argue that the negative framing helped the regimes in Moscow and Beijing to provide further legitimacy by showcasing their ability to protect their own countries from destabilizing Western interference and to promote stability.
CONCLUSION Sharon Wolchik argues that Russia errs in blaming the United States for the color revolutions.
She writes, “It is clear that the successful removal of semi-authoritarian 1411 Ortmann, “Diffusion as Discourse of Danger,” 369.
It was they who did the tedious, difficult, and at times dangerous work of implementing this model.”i5i That said, it is also clear that the domestic actors did not work alone.
They did receive funding and training from NGOs, and were able to capitalize on the experience granted by previous successful demonstrations.
Domestic activists were taught Western techniques for their campaigns against the regimes.
Western election monitors were brought in to monitor the disputed elections.
In Georgia and Ukraine, domestic activists could advance the possibility of achieving membership in NATO or the EU as a way to encourage support for democratic electoral reform.^2 xhe external support received during the color revolutions did make a large impact on both the successes of the demonstrations, and on their ability to spread between countries.
Wolchik continues, “In no case did external actors work alone—they always acted as part of transnational coalitions that included domestic oppositionists and civil society organizations as well as veterans of earlier successes.
Russian blame for the color revolutions, however, lies squarely on the West.
Moscow used this blame to frame the color revolutions as illegitimate Western-sponsored coups, ensuring that the majority of the Russian population views the color revolutions negatively.
Furthermore, leaders used the same the tools of the color revolutions to prevent the occurrence of domestic unrest.
Blaming the West for the color revolutions also allows Russian officials to justify any interventions in these and neighboring countries, thus preserving Russia’s sphere of influence in the post-Soviet space, and countering expanding Western democracy promotion.
The wave of “eolored revolutions” that swept Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan; the disorder in Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan; and the eritieism of the post-Soviet regimes for the absenee of demoeraey or for violations of human rights—these are all parts of Washington’s plan to drive Russia out of its sphere of influenee and to establish eontrol over it.
Russia has reacted to this perceived Western encroachment by first attempting to counter Western influence through economic and cultural means, and then ultimately by military intervention in Georgia and Ukraine.
This chapter examines Russia’s reaction to the perceived encroachment of the West into Russia’s sphere of influence.
This chapter then examines the Russian reaction to Western involvement in the specific nations of the color revolutions, culminating in Russian interventions in Belarus, Georgia, and Ukraine.
HISTORICAL CONTEXT OF THE FEAR OF ENCROACHMENT Russian fears of Western encroachment have a long history.
NATO Expansion Toward Ukraine Russia viewed the eastward expansion of NATO as a security threat—and the closer NATO approached to the former constituent republics of the Soviet Union, the more acute the perceived threat.
If Ukraine and Georgia joined NATO, no “buffer zone” would lie between Russia and the Western powers.
From 2002 to 2010, Ukraine’s government had been moving toward the possibility of NATO membership.
Also in 2003, Kuehma sent Ukrainian forees to partieipate in the U.S.-led eoalition in Iraq, despite strong publie opinion against the war in Ukraine.
Although the Yanukovych government in Ukraine engaged in pro-European rhetoric, its foreign policy was moving toward Russia and away from the West.
While states like Georgia and Ukraine might not have a quick path to NATO membership, it seemed likely that NATO would continue to expand toward Russia, which fed into Russian fears of encroachment by the West.i^*’ Kramer, “Ukraine’s Orange Evolution,” 118.
The Kosovo Conflict of 1999 As a result of its non-aligned status during the Cold War, the Yugoslavian region of the Balkans has been of interest to both NATO and Russia.
After the Cold War ended, Russia still felt that the former Soviet Union nations fell under its sphere of influence.
NATO’s interest in the Balkans left Russia feeling vulnerable to NATO encroachment.
In 1998, following outcry over ethnic cleansing in Kosovo, NATO began an intervention against Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic’s regime, despite the lack of official sanction from the UN Security Council.
Russia, while indicating their willingness to veto a UN resolution in support of the NATO campaign, was not willing to openly support the Serbian regime.
The Legaey of Operation Allied Foree in Russia’s Relations with the West,” International Affairs 85, no. : 577.
A Recapitulation,” International Affairs 85, no. : 4512 . 34 and NATO military and peacekeeping intervention into Kosovo After the airstrike campaign, Russia wished to be involved in the resolution of the conflict, and so both NATO and Russian peacekeepers were part of the UN Kosovo Force , and narrowly avoided conflict with each other during the operation, Relations between NATO and Russia over the Kosovo conflict have been fraught.
Competing spheres of influence left over from the Cold War meant that both NATO and Russia claim the Balkans as an area of interest.
NATO’s intervention, without UN sanction, was seen by Russia as an attempt to bring Kosovo under NATO control.
Russia did not want NATO establishing footholds in a formerly neutral region near Russia’s own border.
NATO’s own explanations of Operation Allied Force did not help ease Moscow’s misgivings.
NATO was grappling with two contradictory principles—state sovereignty versus human rights—and had to make the determination when the latter might override the former.
The international law was not clear in this area, and NATO did attempt to resolve the contradiction.
Russia’s reactions to the Kosovo conflict were markedly different from NATO’s.
Russia was concerned with this potential change in international law, which had negative implications for its own national sovereignty.
From NATO’s Operation Allied Freedom, Russia came away with the perception that NATO, in intervening without the sanction of the FTN Security Council, was defying traditional norms of state sovereignty and instead promoting its own interests in Serbia and Kosovo.
NATO justified the intervention in Kosovo as a matter of humanitarian rights, using the Responsibility to Protect Doctrine.
When Russia intervened in South Ossetia and Abkhazia, the Russian government used the same justifications for its violation of a sovereign state.
In Russia’s 2008 invasion of Georgia, Russia appeared more amenable to violating a nation’s sovereignty in the name of human rights when it worked in Russia’s favor.
Terrorist Threats in Chechnya in the Early 2000s The ongoing separatist conflict in the Russian territory of Chechnya, which had begun in the 1990s and experienced a violent resurgence from 1999 to 2006, exacerbated Russia’s territorial insecurity.
The breakup of the Soviet Union had left Russia fearful that further breakup would occur within Russia.
After all, there were still many ethnicities left in the Russian republics—perhaps one of those might start its own liberation force and seek independence from Russia.
Past Imperfect, Future Uncertain, edited by Stephen K Wegren, 6* ed. , 66-7. 36 region in Russia, had declared independence from Russia in the aftermath of the Soviet collapse, and, upon Russia’s sending a military force into the area, had conducted an insurgency campaign against the Russians from 1994-1996 that was surprisingly effective.
Russia’s military, historically trained for conventional war against European adversaries, was ill-suited for countering the Chechnyan insurgency.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Islamic fundamentalist groups had combined with the Chechnyan separatist movement to attempt to break away from Moscow and establish both Chechen independence and spread Islamic fundamentalism in the region.
If the Chechnyan conflict worsened, it could force international involvement in the ongoing crisis, perhaps dictating a settlement that would either give Chechnya autonomous power within the Russian Federation, or even granting Chechnya outright independence.^^2 the intervention in Kosovo, the Putin regime could imagine NATO forces entering Chechnya to counter reported human rights violations, at the expense of Russia’s territorial sovereignty.
Violenee in the North Caueuses also has the potential to link up with the separatist movement taking plaee in the South Caueuses nations of Armenia and Azerbaijan, and eontinue to eause instability in the region.Also, Russia fears that militant Islam eould spread further into Russia itself, espeeially into the heavily Muslim-populated areas of Tatarstan and Bashkortostan, whieh are located in a region through whieh run vital conneetions between Moseow and the Russian Far East.
Terrorist disruptions in Tatarstan or Bas hk ortostan could cause major disruptions to the Russian state.The threat of domestie terrorism is still very present in Russia.
COUNTERING WESTERN INFLUENCE IN UKRAINE AND KYRGYZSTAN Another Russian response to the eolor revolutions was to work to ensure that the eountries involved would stay eoonomieally dependent on Russia, another area in whieh Russia eould exert its influenee over the region.
However, the eeonomie vulnerabilities of these eountries also eontributed to the fragility of their governments in the faee of the eolor revolution uprisings.
Russia has used eeonomie means to inerease its soft power in the region.
Russia has also inereased its soft power in the former Soviet states through its role as the largest migrant-reeeiving eountry in the world, mostly from the other former Soviet states.
This further strengthens ties between nonEU member nations of the former Soviet Elnion and Russia.
Energy Conflict in Ukraine After the Orange Revolution After the Orange Revolution, Russia used economic pressure on Ukraine as a means of influencing Ukrainian policy toward greater cooperation with Russia.
Jonavicus writes, “External trade structure and economic relations in both Ukraine and Georgia are very interrelated with Russia due to common soviet history.
Even though the trade balance is almost equally distributed between Russia and the EU, strategic relationship is clearly more beneficial for Russia.
Ukraine relies on Russia for energy, and also relies on Russia as a key consumer for Ukrainian exports.
Russia, on the other hand, has the ability to sell energy to other states and make up for the loss of Ukrainian trade.
After the Orange Revolution, Russia enacted a major shift in its energy policy toward Ukraine.
Ukraine has an economy that is a major consumer of energy (three times that of Germany’s energy consumption per unit of GDP), and heavily dependent on Russia as the supplier of that energy in natural gas and oil.
After the Orange Revolution, Gazprom and the other Russian energy eompanies threatened to reseind their deals with Ukraine, and eut off Ukraine’s energy supplies if the eountry did not pay the new higher prices.
Pricing disputes went on until 2006, when Gazprom followed through on its threat to cut off energy supplies to Ukraine for several days, convincing Ukraine to resolve the dispute in Russia’s favor.
Not only did the Russian energy companies receive payments on their higher prices, Gazprom also received control over all of Ukraine’s imports of natural gas via a shell company.
Furthermore, Russian energy companies have been using their profits to purchase equity stakes in Ukrainian companies that control large sectors of the country’s economy, and increase their influence in Ukrame.
The Yanukovych government was able to reverse the higher prices in exchange for greater cooperation with Russia.
In 2010, Ukraine and Russia signed a deal in which Russia would reduce the price of gas for Ukraine by one-third, in exchange for a 25-year extension on the lease to the naval base in Sevastopol, despite the fact that hosting foreign troops permanently on Ukrainian soil violates the Ukrainian Constitution.
Russia’s willingness to use energy prices as a bargaining chip for greater influence in Ukraine seemed largely successful even in the wake of the Orange Revolution, and especially under the Yanukovych government.
Economic Influence in Kyrgyzstan After the Tulip Revolution After the Tulip Revolution, Russia used economic means to secure further influence in Kyrgyzstan that the Russia-friendly Bakiyev regime was happy to accept.
Russia has taken advantage of the massive corruption present in Kyrgyzstan’s energy sector.
Bakiyev, perhaps confident of his power consolidation, turned toward the United States after the 2009 elections.
Once Bakiyev changed course and signed a new deal with the United States for the Manas Transit Center, Russia rescinded the emergency relief, but not before the damage to Russia’s regional influence and prestige was noticed.i5 Russia was unhappy with change, and Putin accused Kyrgyzstan leaders of failing to keep their promises to Russia.
This had a severe impact on the country’s economy and political instability.
RIVALRY IN THE FORMER-SOVIET SPACE AFTER THE COLOR REVOLUTIONS The threat of the color revolutions has contributed to the Russian fears of regional instability.
In an article for the Rossiiskaya Gazeta, Putin alluded to the perceived fear of instability caused by the color revolutions and other mass uprisings, writing, “We continue to see new areas of instability and deliberately managed chaos.
Countering Western Influence in Ukraine The events of the Orange Revolution upset Russia’s own intervention in Ukrainian politics.
The Putin regime was involved in the 2004 elections in Ukraine that lead to the Orange Revolution.
In 2007, a majority of Ukrainians held favorable views of the United States, despite a drop in favorability that oecurred in the aftermath of the United States deeision to invade Iraq, and despite a deeline in support for NATO after the Kosovo oonflict.
Also in 2007, Ukrainian perceptions of Russia were even better, with 81 percent of Ukrainians expressing a favorable view of Russia, despite the events of the previous years.
Whether or not the EU would have accepted the membership of Ukraine, Russia viewed the possibility as dangerous enough to provoke a response.
In 2010, however, pro-Russian Vietor Yanukovyeh was elected to the presidency of Ukraine, who was willing to enact closer ties with Russia in exchange for financial incentives from Russia.
This soothed Russian fears that Ukraine would chose to partner with the West instead of with Russia.
The United States increased its influence in Georgia after the Rose Revolution.
The battle for influence in the region is fiercest between Russia and the United States.
Russia is seeking to foster its longtime political, economic and military domination of the Caucasus, while the United States has invested in the Caucasian energy sector and developed military cooperation with a number of Caucasian countries, undoubtedly in the hope of boosting its penetration of the region.
In 2005, the United States policy toward the nations of the Caucasus is to encourage national independence of the former Soviet republics, and to prevent the increase of Russian, Iranian, or Chinese influence over those nations.
They also sought to increase access to energy resources, continue democracy promotion activities, and prevent the spread of radical Islam.i Washington was also encouraging the idea of NATO expansion into the Caucasus region, opening the door to the possibility of NATO membership for Georgia, along with neighboring Armenia and Azerbaijan.
United States democracy promotion in the Georgia also benefits United States national security interests in the region.
With United States backing and funding Russia cannot use economic incentives and punishments as leverage to control these nations.
Russian influence does not have the same strength in Georgia as it does in Ukraine.
Georgia is not as dependent on Russian energy, has a smaller population of ethnic Russians, and is less connected to Russian sources of media.
Jonavicus hypothesizes that the relative lack of Russian influence in Georgia was a contributing factor to Russia’s decision to undertake military intervention in the country in 2008.
Battle for Post-9/11 Basing Rights in Kyrgyzstan After the September 11 attacks, the United States, in need of transport routes into Afghanistan, turned its attention to the nations of Central Asia.
Thus, after 2001 the United States presence in Kyrgyzstan was focused not on democracy promotion, but on the maintenance of the Manas Transit Center, which the United States used to transport troops and material to Afghanistan.
Russia initially approved of United States presence in the region, due to a shared fear of the danger of al-Qaida and the spread of militant Islam.
This initial friendliness would not last after the events of the Tulip Revolution.
Kyrgyzstan’s relations with the United States worsened after the Tulip Revolution, despite the United States support for the Tulip revolution and the desire for democratic reforms that it represented.
Edueated and trained in the Soviet Union, he looked to Russia and China to eonsolidate his power.
Shortly after eoming to power, he made a visit to Russia to eonfer with Putin and reaffirm their relationship and the primacy of their influence in Kyrgyzstan’s foreign policy.
Further complicating matters for the United States, the KarshiKhanabad airbase in Uzbekistan, the only other facility that was available for transport of United States troops and supplies in the region, was closed in 2005.
This occurred after long-deteriorating relations between the United States and Uzbekistan finally collapsed in the wake of the critical United States reaction to Uzbekistan’s handling of the Andijan crisis, where Uzbek troops opened fire on civilian protesters.
The closure of K2 left the Manas Transit Center as the only transport facility for the United States in Central Asia, a vital staging area for United States forces operating in Afghanistan.
The United States needed to remain on good terms with Kyrgyzstan to keep the base open.
After 2005, Russia feared that the United States would use its military presence to establish a permanent presence in Kyrgyzstan, and worked to counter United States influence.
After the United States won the right to use the Manas Transit Center, Russia, too, negotiated for military basing rights in Kyrgyzstan, and were granted use of the Kant air base, a mere 30 kilometers from Manas.
The Kant air base officially falls under the auspices of the CSTO, to provide Russian air support for counterterrorism operations and air control of the Central Asian region.
However, Russia’s emphasis on creating bases in the Central Asian region reflects on their interest in maintaining a political and military presence in the region, and preventing the United States from winning over Central Asia.
Under Bakiyev, the Manas Transit Center was threatened with elosure several times.
In the 2005 SCO summit, shortly after the Tulip revolution, Kyrgyzstan made a deelaration ealling for the closure of the Manas air base to the United States.
Donald Rumsfeld was sent to Kyrgyzstan to negotiate, and the base remained open.
Less than a year later in 2006, the Bakiyev government raised the rent on Manas for the Amerieans, from $2 million to $200 million, and threatened to close the base to the United States if the new rent were not paid.
After further negotiation, Kyrgyzstan’s leaders settled for a $17 million rent instead.
Again in 2009, Bakiyev ealled for the elosure of the Manas Transit Center, shortly after eoneluding a major finaneial deal with the Russian government, and shortly before the presidential eleetion.
After the eleetion, however, negotiations with the United States again allowed for the base to eontinue operation, with another rent inerease.
RUSSIAN INTERVENTIONS IN BELARUS, GEORGIA, AND UKRAINE When Russia was unable to eounter Western influenee through eeonomie and eulturally means, Russian leaders took more direet interventions to prevent the spread of Western influenee.
Russian leaders aeted to prevent a eolor revolution in Belarus using non-military means.
In Georgia and Ukraine, where Russia has previously tried softer methods of influenee, Russia was willing to engage in military intervention in order to reassert their power in the region.
Political Intervention in Belarus After the eolor revolutions of its fellow former Soviet states, Belarus was seen as a prime candidate for a eolor revolution of its own.
There had been many protests against its authoritarian president, Alyaksandr Lukashenka, resulting in severe poliee eraekdown.
While several former-Soviet countries failed to be affected by democracy promotion and color revolutions failed to materialize, Belarus is a notable case wherein Russian influence worked to counter the possibility of a color revolution.
Thomas Ambrosio argues that the close relationship between Russia and Belarus insulated Belarus from Western efforts to promote democracy there and disincentivized democratization for the people of Belarus, by offering an alternative to greater integration with Europe.
Historically, Belarus has been closely tied to Russia, as a part of the historic Russian empire.
Eurthermore, because of the elimination of the Belarusian cultural elite under Stalin, and the subsequent russification of Belarus under Communism, Belarus claims only a weak national identity, and support for integration with Russia is high.
Russia has supported Belarus in a variety of ways in order to achieve its goal of protecting Belarus from the West.
Russian trade policies and subsidies to Belarus have propped up Belarus’s economic system and protected it from Western trade sanctions.
A Russia-Belarus alliance has prevented military isolation and provided the Eukashenka regime an alternative to seeking EU membership, which would require significant democratic reform, and likely lead to the end of the Eukashenka regime.
Russian media had portrayed the Eukashenka government in a positive light and Russian officials had shown their support for his regime.
Russian influenee on Belarus eulminated in the sueeess of the Belarussian eleetions in 2006.
Russia had provided politieal eover for earlier eleetions in 2000/2001 and 2004, whieh eonsolidated Lukashenka’s power and inereased Belarus’s isolation from the West.
Russia’s influence in Belarus’s 2006 eleetions were essential for heading off another eolor revolution.
The eleetion was widely critieized by Western international observers for failing to meet the demoeratie requirements of a free and fair eleetion.
Despite these eriticisms of the eleetion from Western observers, eleetion observers from Russia and other CIS states denied the allegation of irregularities in the eleetions, and deelared the eleetions fair.
Russian media, also carried in Belarus, diseounted the legitimaey of the opposition and the aceusations of eleetoral malfeasance.
The media also earned stories that eharged Ukraine, Georgia, and the West with interfering in the Belarusian eleetion and other internal affairs.
During the eleetion, Pavel Borodin, state seeretary of the union of Russia and Belarus, praised Lukashenka and deelared him a great leader on par with Leonid Kuehma, Askar Akayev, and Eduard Shevardnadze.
Akayev, Shevardnadze, and Kuehma’s sueeessor Yanukovych, are the leaders ousted by the eolor revolutions.
The 2008 Russia-Georgia War Despite Russia’s prior pronouneements of the importanee of state sovereignty, the Russian government supported the separatists from the Georgian territories of Abkhazia and South Ossetia in their fight for independence, leading to the Russian-Georgia conflict of 2008.
South Ossetia, a region of Georgia composed of both ethnic Georgians and ethnic Ossetians, advocated separation from Georgia as early as 1989, and has been a source of conflict ever since, including the presence of a Russian peacekeeping force in the region.
Abkhazia, another multiethnic region in Georgia with nationalist leanings, has experienced conflict and allegations of ethnic cleansing.
In 2008, Russia engaged in conflict with Georgia in alleged support of these two regions.
Russia used language justifying their actions that was similar to NATO’s in Kosovo, highlighting the importance of intervening in a situation involving human rights violations.
They realized that, despite verbal support from the United States, the EU, and NATO, these organizations were not willing to confront Russia over the fate of the nonNATO-member post-Soviet states and risk coming to blows with Russia.
Russia, in turn, demonstrated their commitment to maintaining their influence in these states, and their willingness to use force to do so.
Russia also showed that, for these states, attempting to gain NATO membership was viewed by Russia as a threat, and thus Russia would threaten their sovereignty in order to prevent its loss of influence.
The 2014 Euromaidan and the Annexation of Crimea In 2014, Ukraine again experienced a popular uprising against Russian-aligned Victor Yanukovych, who had defeated the remnants of the Orange Revolution coalition in the 2010 presidential election.
This uprising, referred to as the Euromaidan, resulted in the exile of Yanukovych and a change of government.
Russian officials have referred to the 2014 Euromaidan in Ukraine as a coup d’etat—a revolution, instead of a mere shift in the governing party.
In return, the three nations were given security assurances of political independence and territorial integrity from Russia and the United States.
Purthermore, Russian officials argue that, just as the West recognizes the results of the Euromaidan uprising as a lawful expression of popular self-determination, so should they recognize the Crimean referendum to join Russia, which occurred shortly after Russian intervention in the region, as a similar act of lawful self-determination.
Putin justified the annexation of Crimea as a defense of Russia’s national interests, and deseribed Crimea as a saered plaee for Russians, similar to the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, a plaee of national and religious heritage that must be proteeted.
Ukraine—espeeially Crimea and the southeastern regions of the eountry— played a central role in Russia’s eonception of its own great power identity dating baek to the time of Catherine the Great.
Her expansion of the Russian empire into “Novorossiya” in the late 18**' century marked the true emergenee of Russia as a foree to be reekoned with on the European stage.
Marten argues that it was not politieally possible for Putin to been seen as giving in to Western pressure regarding Ukraine.
Putin’s politieal patron-elient network requires him to signal strength frequently to both the public and his network members.
After reaching out to the West early in his presideney, he came to feel disrespected by Western leaders over the course of his terms in offiee.
His feelings of being disrespeeted by the West over presumed Western interventions into the color revolutions, and in the Russian elections of 2011, left him no longer willing to eompromise with the West on the issue of Ukraine.
Matsaberidze argues that, despite the interventions in Georgia and Ukraine, Russia has no wish to eonquer those nations.
Instead, Russia is fighting a proxy war against the West, using those eountries as leverage.
CONCLUSION Russian leaders fear that the United States is not only guiding the color revolutions in order to encircle Russia, but will also use the color revolutions as a template for the creation of a similar regime-change revolution within Russia itself Russia’s “besieged fortress” mentality sees sinister Western encroachment from all directions.
They blame Russian weakness following the collapse of the Soviet Union, which allowed the United States and other Western powers to assert their authority in the former Soviet sphere in the 1990s and early 2000s.
It has also seen United States intrusion into the Central Asian states of the former Soviet Union.
Russia has used its influence, especially its control of vast energy resources, in attempt to preserve its influence in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan, along with other former-Soviet nations.
However, Russia’s fears of encroachment have shown no signs of abating.
RUSSIA’S IDEOLOGY OF SOVEREIGN DEMOCRACY In a 2005 interview, Vladimir Putin was asked about the consequences of the color revolutions in the former Soviet sphere.
He responded, “My greatest concern is not that dramatic events are taking place there, but that they are going outside the framework of the existing legislation and constitution.
This chapter explores the Russian government’s efforts to develop sovereign democracy in the wake of the color revolutions.
The concept of sovereign democracy emerged from Russia’s emphasis on national sovereignty and its opposition to the democracy promotion and election-monitoring activities of Western NGOs.
Sovereign democracy holds that state sovereignty is the foundation of international law, and that nonintervention in the affairs of sovereign states takes priority over interventions in the name of human rights violations.
It includes the idea that nations whose sovereignty is violated, for any reason, have the authority to defend their sovereignty through military means.
Developed just after the events of the color revolutions, sovereign democracy was deployed in the Russian reaction to the Tulip Revolution, as part of a campaign to discredit the revolution as undemocratic.
Xo counter the what Russia viewed as the creeping Western influence of democracy promotion efforts by Western NGOs, Russia needed an alternate ideology that would stand in opposition to its view of Western-style democracy and that Russia could use to justify its rejection of the practices of democracy promotion that the Western states were advocating.
RUSSIA’S EVOLVING NARRATIVE ON THE MEANING OF DEMOCRACY Sovereign democracy evolved from Russia’s desire to promote national sovereignty.
The development of a Russian ideology of sovereignty and a strong state needed to continue to be seen as democratic, even as it was influenced by authoritarian ideals.
The combination of strong state and respect for sovereignty without completely turning away from democracy, was turned into the concept of sovereign democracy by Russian thinkers and officials.
The concept of sovereign democracy was introduced in 2005, shortly after the last of the color revolutions, the Tulip Revolution.
Sovereign demoeracy emerged as a eounter to the color revolutions, and especially to the notion that the color revolutions were driven by Western sponsorship.
Ortmann argues that sovereign democracy is not in direct competition with Western-style democracy.
Instead, it is an expression of Russian insecurity over the stability of the Russian state, and fear of disorder that might threaten its viability.
Sovereign democracy allowed the Putin regime to create a political and ideological slogan around which it can formulate policy.
The goal of sovereign democracy was to provide ideological legitimacy for the ruling party, and give the party the initiative to control the ideological narrative.
The sovereign democracy ideology explicitly laid out Putin’s goals for Russia and for Russian foreign policy, and gave the Putin regime additional authority in domestic politics.
Russian democracy became tied to its identity as a Great Power, and the independence and sovereignty that Great Power status could bring.
Sovereignty then became associated to democracy, as it was sovereignty that guaranteed freedom and self287 Ortmann, “Diffusion as Discourse of Danger,” 367.
Ortmann writes, “’Sovereign democracy’ was put in the context of a narrative, in which the United States was undermining the sovereign independence of states through the promotion of democracy abroad, ‘regime change’ with the ultimate aim of creating regimes loyal to the United States—^by force, as in Iraq, or through the export of revolutions.”294 in the Russian narrative, this placed the color revolutions and their Western supporters in opposition to sovereign democracy.
Putin claims to be pro-democracy, but his sovereign democracy has cast doubt on democratic movements.
By emphasizing the rights of national sovereignty, he can then conclude that any domestic movement that is associated with foreign actors violates that sovereignty and is therefore illegitimate.
To the West, the color revolutions are legitimate democratic movements.
Russian leaders disagree, and they use the concept of sovereign democracy to illustrate their position on the undemocratic nature of the color revolutions.
Because the color revolutions contained outside influence, sovereignty has been violated and therefore they cannot be democratic.
Instead they portray the color revolutions as leading to a regime dominated by foreign actors.
United Russia, were considered nonideological candidates, adhering not to any specific political agenda other than a generic label of conservativeness.
While Putin was in office in the early 2000s, he maintained the legitimacy of his regime without linking his government to any specific political ideology, instead highlighting the achievements of a growing economy and successful international policies to build political legitimacy.The color revolutions, however, changed the political elite’s taste for non-ideology though certain challenges remained.
Russian leaders were unhappy with the role democracy promotion played in the color revolutions, in the guise of NGOs, youth activism, and election monitoring.
The Putin regime wanted to denounce those activities while still proclaiming support for democracy in general.
Instead, Putin sought to redefine democracy in such a way as to make it compatible with his anti-democratic goals.
A Russian conception of democracy emphasized the importance of a strong state, national sovereignty, and maintaining domestic order.
Other democratic ideals, such as freedom of the press, freedom of association, and minority rights were disregarded and subject to attack by the Putin regime.
Furthermore, Putin had to distinguish his party from both the Communist party and various nationalist movements, which had been advocating for creating authoritarian governments in Russia for the past decade.
Thus, in creating its new ideology, the Putin regime had a fine line to walk.
Putin needed a to redefine democracy in a way that could be seen by the public as distinct from both the West and from authoritarian movements within Russia.
Finkel and Brudny show that Russian leaders used widespread internet and print media stories to spread delegitimizing messages about the color revolutions.
As noted elsewhere in this thesis, Russian officials specifically blamed Western NGOs for financing activists in the color revolution countries and using democracy promotion efforts and election monitoring to encourage the demonstrations.
The first emergence of a new ideology to counter the Western efforts at democracy promotion was an article by Valery Zorkin, the Chief Justice of the Russian Constitutional Court.
His article, “An Apologia of the Westphalian System,” makes the case that the principles of state sovereignty and self-determination, first established during the treaties of the Westphalian peace in 1648, were threatened Western organization insistent on enforcing human rights at the expense of national sovereignty.
First, the principles of state sovereignty and territorial integrity are being placed in opposition to human rights and nations’ right to selfdetermination.
Second, nation states are being blamed for their inability to ensure effective governance under conditions of globalization.
To Zorkin, human rights and self-determination for minority groups are a threat to Russian national security.
He argues that the greatest threat to the Russian Federation is the success of a minority nationalist independence movement, and the disintegration of the state and the loss of sovereignty that would follow.He further argues that the idea of state sovereignty being overridden in favor of human rights and nationalistic selfdetermination caused the collapse of both Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union and thus could be a threat to the stability of Russia, which still contains restive minority ethnic groups in areas like Chechnya.
Thus, nationalistic and human rights movements within a multinational state can pose a threat to the security and the territorial integrity of that state, by facilitating a violent breakup and inviting the intervention of outside nations.
Writing to a domestic audience, Zorkin claims that any attempt to divide the sovereignty of a state will inevitably lead to violence and human rights violations, alluding to the ethnic violence in Bosnia and Kosovo that arose from the breakup of Yugoslavia in the 1990s.
He also claims that, since September 11, 2001, many states have used the threat of terrorism to attack the idea of national sovereignty and even create laws that override human rights.
This claim aims to point out the hypocrisy of the actions of the United States and its coalition partners, which have participated in interventions against nations that violate human rights, as in the Kosovo campaign, and yet violate those rights in Afghanistan and Iraq in the name of their own security.
Zorkin uses this argument to undermine the position of the United States and NATO as advocates of human rights in the international arena.
Then, aeeording to the prineiples that Zorkin lays out in this artiele, these states will disregard Russia’s territorial sovereignty in order to reetify these violations, just as NATO has done in previous eonfliots.
The Russian publie is not averse to the re-defining of demoeraey away from the western ideal.
Surveys of Russian public opinion of various concepts assoeiated with demoeraey emphasize achieving a high standard of living, maintaining order and law, and eitizens’ rights.
Russian public opinion ranks support for free press, pluralism, and minority rights mueh lower.
Data from surveys undertaken by Yurii Levada’s independent survey organization indieates that the Russian publie seems to have some sympathy for the view that western variants of demoeraey may have limited applieability in Russia, and that T 1 7 Russia would develop its own understanding of the eoneept.
Thus, the Russian publie is willing to follow the Putin government as it ereates an ideology distinet from its eonception of the liberal demoeraey of the West.
Arguments Against Western-Style Democracy Russia takes exeeption to what it sees as the West’s fomenting of revolutions and regime changes in order to advanee demoeraey.
Russia argues that the imposition of what it sees as Western-style demoeraey is not eompatible with the eulture and traditions of these post-Soviet nations.
Instead of stable demoeraey, these attempts to impose Western standards lead to ehaos, violenee, an unstable government, and further regime ehanges as the governmental system fails.
Russian offieials have pointed to the struggles of the post-eolor revolution regimes in Ukraine and Kyrgyzstan, where the leaders of those nations were both ousted in 2010 after failing to address the eorruption that drove the original demonstrations, as proof that the eolor revolutions were not ultimately benefieial to those eountries.
Given the Russian theory that the West aetively fomented the eolor revolutions, it seems that Western forees are willing to undertake revolutions even in states where the leadership is attempting to eoneiliate with the opposition or maintain Western relationships, as Shevardnadze was doing prior to the Rose Revolution.
Thus, Russia believes that Western leaders will eonduet regime ehange without regard to loyalty, and that supporting the West will not guarantee proteetion from Western-sponsored regime ehange.
Russia has also been eritieal of what it eonsiders the Western overemphasis on human rights.
In a 2012 artiele, Putin argued that overriding state sovereignty for human rights eoneerns was not always a good thing.
He further aeeuses the United States of using these humanitarian interventions as a way of seeking the seeurity of absolute invulnerability by intervening in any nation that it deems to be a threat. in Putin’s view, the United States and its allies are aeting not out of an ethieal imperative when intervening in human rights violations, but out of their own self-interest.
Putin also eriticizes what he refers to as the privatization of the human rights agenda by Western nations that eontrol the human rights monitoring proeess.
He elaims that Western states use the agenda of human rights as a means to exert pressure on Russia and other states, subjeeting the Putin regime to undeserved eritieism of its governing praetiees in an attempt to influenee Russian domestie polities by turning the Russian eitizens against their government and easting doubt on its legitimacy.
Russia has responded to the perceived Western criticisms by withdrawing from Western democracy promotion efforts, and working to undermine these efforts in its neighboring countries, starting with •59^ Western election monitoring.
Russia’s Opposition to Western Election Monitoring Russian leaders had opposed international election monitoring of Russia’s neighboring states before the color revolutions, but they resisted even more after the Orange Revolution in Ukraine.
Russia and other members of the Commonwealth of Independent States formed their own election monitoring program and adopted the Convention on Election Standards, Electoral Rights and Ereedoms in the Member States of the CIS in 2002, to counter the results of Western election monitoring groups.
The CIS eleetion monitoring was first used during the 2003 Duma eleetions in Russia, whieh they deelared free and open, unlike the observations of the OSCE and the Couneil of Europe, whieh both disagreed.
Russia, along with other members of the CIS, protested the aetions of Western eleetion observers, arguing that they inaeeurately portray the results of eleetions in the CIS region.
In 2004, Russia and eight other CIS members aeeused the OSCE of using its eleetion monitors, and its aeeusations of unfair eleetions, to impinge on the sovereignty of the CIS states.
The CIS doeument aeeused the OSCE of foeusing too mueh on human rights and demoeraey in the CIS eleetions, and not enough foeus on seeurity issues.
As Ukraine’s 2004 eleetions approaehed, Russian offieials aeeused the OSCE’s Offiee for Demoeratie Institutions and Human Rights , whieh eontains the eleetion monitoring program, of interfering with the Ukrainian eleetion.
These eomments were the first signs that the Russian ehallenge to demoeratie norms was gradually beeoming more explieit than it had been before.
The Georgian Rose Revolution in 2003 and the European pereeptions of Russia’s eleetions in Deeember 2003 and Mareh 2004 annoyed Russia, but it was only after the Orange Revolution that Russia took the ehallenge to another.
Eater that year, Russian Eoreign Minister Sergei Eavrov argued that outside eleetion monitoring eould be used as a tool to manipulate eleetions and to inerease destabilization in vulnerable eountries, and implying that this had oeeurred in Ukraine’s eleetions and subsequent Orange Revolution. xhis narrative that Western eleetion-monitors were manipulating eleetion in the former Soviet spaees allowed Russia to oast doubt on the impartiality of the eleetion monitors and their verdiots.
Moscow argues that European elections should be held to a significantly lower standard than they are currently required to achieve free and fair status.
Some newly democratized states, they argue, cannot realistically achieve such high standards, given the limitations of their governmental institutions.
These states should have a lower bar to clear in order for their elections to be deemed free and fair.
Despite Russia’s claim that it was trying to remove politics from the election monitoring process, giving the Permanent Council involvement in election monitoring would have the opposite effect, creating opportunity for vastly increased politicization.
By reducing the numbers of election observers, the proposal would also leave fewer unbiased reporters to witness the actual election processes.
This proposal from Russia and its allies met with little approval from the Western members of the OSCE and ODIHR officials, and was not put into action.
These proposals for changing the process of election monitoring illustrate how Russia would like to see less election monitoring and a relaxation of the standards of free and fair elections.
Russia’s goals with these proposals do not seem designed to convince the West that they have merit.
Saari writes, “This kind of ‘forum-shopping’ is beeoming an established praetiee in the semi-authoritarian states of the former Soviet region.”34i With Russia available to pronounee eleetions as free and fair, these former Soviet states ean then denounee the OSCE’s verdiet of unfair eleetions as biased or politieally motivated.
Russia then went a step further by making eonditions unfavorable enough to prevent the OSCE from even observing Russia’s eleetions.
During the Russian eleetions of 2007 and 2008, Russian offieials delayed the entry of the ODIHR observers, issuing invitations and visas at the last minute, and establishing restrietive eonditions under whieh the ODIHR would be allowed to observe the eleetions.
Ultimately, the ODIHR refused to observe the eleetions, eiting the delays and restrietions as politieal maneuvers to prevent fair monitoring of the eleetions.
Thus, Russia eould eonduet eleetions, and eertify them free and fair, without any dissenting report from outside observers.
Russia’s Role in the International Arena Russia’s reemergenee as a rising power in the 2000s neeessitated a new international role, no longer the Cold War superpower or the failing state of the 1990s, but as a rising power aspiring to regain great power status.
Russian polieymakers have sought to aseend to the ranks of the major international polieymakers, and play key roles in resolving international issues.
One way of balancing the Western international presence is for Russia to put more effort into its own international coalitions.
The CSTO is also concerned with order and sovereignty, providing political support to the regimes of its member nations in order to avoid color revolutions and similar political uprisings.
Russia can use these international organizations to both increase its regional influence and spread Russia’s narrative of sovereignty.
Additionally, Russia sought to balance against the United States and the EU in the international arena through increased military power.
Russia embarked on an expansive program of military modernization beginning in 2008, aimed at modernizing its aging.
USE OF SOVEREIGN DEMOCRACY AFTER THE TULIP REVOLUTION Shortly after the development of sovereign democracy, the ideology was deployed in the aftermath of the Tulip Revolution to portray the revolution in a negative light.
For Kyrgyzstan’s Tulip Revolution, Moscow made an even stronger case about the color revolutions creating disorder instead of democracy.
The Tulip Revolution was followed shortly after by the Andijan massacre in Uzbekistan.
Although there existed little, if any, connection between the two events, they allowed Russia to tie together the fear of disorder from the color revolutions and the threat of Islamic extremism in Central Asia, confirming the need for greater security in the region. xhis narrative of the Tulip Revolution as causing disorder also ties into the narrative that the United States involvement in regime change in that region of the world, as in Afghanistan, brings increased terrorism threats.
Russian officials went so far as to call the Andijan uprising a failed color revolution, and to tie it to United States democracy promotion efforts.
Thus, Moscow attempted to tie together the color revolutions and United States democracy promotion with Islamic fundamentalist terrorism, to portray the color revolutions as chaotic and dangerous.
By the time the Tulip Revolution occurred in Kyrgyzstan, the concepts of sovereign democracy were able to be put into use by Russia to counter the narrative of democratic reform coming out of Bishkek.
Specifically, Russia blame the United States for inciting domestic unrest.
If Western influence instigated the Tulip Revolution, then it lacked the selfdetermination component required for it to be truly democratic.
Instead, Russia framed the Tulip Revolution as creating disorder, not democracy.
Thus, Russia could oppose it while still claiming to be a democratic country and to value democracy elsewhere.
Kremlin PR consultant Gleb Pavlovsky blamed the United States for testing a “technology of a loss of national sovereignty” during the Tulip Revolution, claiming that the perceived actions of the United States in Kyrgyzstan was undermining Kyrgyzstan’s democratic elections.
Russian political commentator Andrannik Migrainian blamed the United States’ involvement in the Tulip Revolution for increasing destabilization in Central Asia.
He argued that the Central Asian leaders no longer view the United States as bringing peace to the region, but instead as causing more problems for the region than they solve.
Russia’s reframing of the Tulip Revolution was also the creation of a narrative for the previous color revolutions as a ‘wave of revolutions’ that were destabilizing instead of democratic.
In the 2005 Astana Deelaration, written just months after the Tulip Revolution, the member states of the SCO requested the United States and its coalition partners set a timeline for removing troops from temporary basing in Central Asia.
They expelled the United States forces from the K2 airbase they had been using to stage troops entering the Afghanistan theater, and entered into new, friendly agreements with Russia and the CSTO in lieu of United States aid.
The Kyrgyz leadership brought into power by the Tulip Revolution also sought closer ties with Russia, and moved away from the democratic ideal espoused by their movement.
Kyrgyzstan’s relations with the United States soured as Kyrgyzstan repeatedly threatened closure of the Manas facility in the years following the Tulip Revolution.
Russia has reengaged with Kyrgyzstan through investments, largely in their energy sector, which has now fallen almost completely under Russian control.
Russia’s success in Central Asia may strengthen its image of itself as a Great Power, one that is able to influence and project power within its sphere of influence.
CONCLUSION Jonavicus, looking at the outcomes of the Rose and Orange Revolutions in 2009 writes, “Euphoria of the coloured revolutions hasn’t been sufficient to build genuine ‘western-style’ democracy.
By the means of non-traditional and informal influence Russia has managed to form new political regimes in Georgia and Ukraine after its own ‘sovereign democracy’ model.The more recent events of the Arab Spring showed Russia that pro-democracy uprising had not come to an end with the color revolutions.
Putin claimed that this soft power was used to provoke both the color revolutions and the Arab Spring, and to manipulate the domestic politics within the affected nations.
He goes on to eritieize “pseudo-NGOs,” who are funded by outside groups and work, not in the interest of the loeal people, but instead try to destabilize governments for the gain of their home nations.
By 2012, with Russia seemingly no longer feeling threatened by color revolutions, sovereign demoeraey had fallen out of favor in Russia, though Russian offieials eontinue to appeal to sovereignty when arguing against Western influenee in more reeent popular uprisings around the world.
Its replaeement appears to be a rising ideology of nationalism and eonservatism, the fate of whieh remains to be seen.
While the color revolutions succeeded in their immediate goals of overturning rigged elections and replacing corrupt regimes, the color revolutions failed to produce lasting democratic reform, especially in Ukraine and Kyrgyzstan, each of which experienced further uprisings in the decade following the revolutions.
While the color revolutions changed the parties in power, they did little to address the underlying institutional and cultural issues that encouraged corrupt practices in the governments.
Shafee writes, “The latest trend shows that post-Soviet countries cannot be reformed quickly, and a change is not simply about the removal of one leader for the sake of another.
Furthermore, Russia encouraged dependence of these nations through trade and energy deals, aid, and shared media and culture.
They claim that Western-funded NGOs, especially those involved in democracy promotion and election monitoring, were working deliberately to undermine the regimes of the color revolution countries, and aiding the activists and youth movements that propelled the demonstrations to victory.
Blaming the West for the color revolutions did not gain much traction in the international arena, but it did provide fodder for the anti-Western domestic narrative in Russia.
This discourse could then be used to foment popular opinion against the West within Russia, advance a repressive domestic agenda, and lay the groundwork for Russian intervention within those very same countries.
The color revolutions added to the feeling of Western encroachment on Russia’s sphere of influence, ongoing since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
They seemed to fit within a pattern of Western involvement in the post-Communist sphere, along with the NATO expansions, the increasing presence of NGOs in post-Soviet nations, and the United States deals for basing rights in post-Soviet Central Asia to aid in the United States and NATO military action in Afghanistan.
Russia was also threatened by the evolution of human rights interventions into sovereign nations, including the NATO interventions in the Balkans, and the invasion of Afghanistan and Iraq to fight terrorism.
These actions caused Russia to fear intervention into its own fight against Chechen separatists, which included both acts of terror and alleged human rights violation by the Russian forces.
Russian fear of encirclement by the West served as a contributing factor to the decision to take more active measures to prevent further spread by intervening politically, economically, militarily in the color revolution countries.
Russia worked with the other states of the CIS to thwart Western election monitoring activities in their region.
Russia also enacted domestic reforms by restricting NGO activity, tightening electoral party qualifications, and coopting a youth movement, in order to prevent the potential spread of the color revolutions into Russia itself Proposing an alternative to Western-style democracy promotion allowed the Russian government to create a narrative that would enable it to inhibit democracy promotion and fair elections while still maintaining the appearance of support for democracy to its domestic audience.
In more recent years, Russia has continued to accuse the West of inciting regime change and color revolutions.
However, recently there has been a shift toward formalizing these concerns in Russian national security documents and military doctrine, along with statements from public officials indicating that Russia may intervene in other nations to help them defend against Western-backed movements.
Furthermore, Russian initiatives to upgrade and modernize the military forces show that Russia is gaining the capability to carry out possible interventions.
As the Russian economy has declined in the face of falling oil revenue, the Russian government has turned to other means to secure its popularity.
Using propaganda and censorship, the Russian government has been working to convince its people that the causes of Russia’s economic woes can be blamed on the West, and that the solution is not to work on reducing Western sanctions, but to establish even further economic isolation.
The annexation of Crimea in 2014 showed the efficacy of hybrid warfare as a means of intervention that did not prompt military retaliation from the West.
More recently, Russia has expanded its military reach beyond the post-Soviet borders with its engagement in Syria on behalf of the Assad regime.
By supporting the regime in Syria, Russia was also able to claim that it was standing up for national sovereignty over the accusations of human rights violations by the Assad regime that lead the United States to provide support for anti-Assad rebels.
Engaging in Syria also gives Russia the appearance of being or remaining a Great Power, a nation that can intervene and direct the affairs of other nations on the world stage.
Russian involvement has required that the United States and other nations recognize Russia as a key player in the Middle East.
Signaling the potential for future engagement in the region, the Russian aircraft carrier Kuznetsov made a stop in Eibya, to welcome aboard a leader of one of the factions opposing the current UN-backed government, which was put in place after the NATO campaign of 2011.380 future, Russia may continue to undertake military intervention abroad in order to increase its role as a major player in the international arena, with aspirations of regaining its role as a great power.
Russia could use public opinion, by blaming Western incitement of the color revolutions, by attempting to show a pattern of Western encroachment into the post-Soviet region, and by advocating for alternative approaches to democracy and national sovereignty.
And when these options fall short, Russia has shown its willingness to intervene in the nations threatened by revolution, through the use of soft power, and escalating through the use of military force.
Nicolas Bouchet writes, “The key issue here is not whether Russia’s leaders believe their rhetoric about color revolutions or whether they would use this as an excuse when they have other motives for intervening abroad.
Global Politics and Strategy 57, no. . doi: 10.1080/00396338.2015.1008293.
