Russian Government News 17 April 2014, 14816 words, English, 2014 AII Data Processing Ltd.
The annual special Direct Line with Vladimir Putin was broadcast live by Channel One, Rossiya-1 and Rossiya-24 TV channels, and Mayak, Vesti FM and Radio Rossii radio stations.
Especially popular in the course of the discussion were questions about Crimea, including the socioeconomic situation in Russia’s new regions – the Crimean Republic and Sevastopol, the development of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet, and the situation regarding the Crimean Tatars.
There were also questions about the situation in Ukraine, and the assessment of the developments in the southeast of the country.
The discussion also touched upon international issues, such as relations with the West and NATO, the deployment of United States anti-missile defence systems in Europe, the situation with Transnistria, and economic issues related to the global oil and gas markets.
Vladimir Putin answered questions not only from citizens of Russia, but of other countries as well, for instance from experts of the Valdai Club from Germany, the United States and Hungary, and a question from Edward Snowden.
Numerous questions dealing with the country’s life were raised, including those related to healthcare, housing and utility services, relief efforts following the largest ever flood in the Far East last year, prospects for the future use of Olympic facilities in Sochi, as well as ways of instilling patriotism, and building relations with the opposition.
In the final part of the Direct Line, the President answered questions of his own choice.
During the live television broadcast that lasted 3 hours 54 minutes, the President responded to a total of 81 questions and appeals.
Good afternoon, You are watching Direct Line with President Vladimir Putin.
Good afternoon, I could say that we are having today yet another conversation with Vladimir Putin, however the situation is different since the country we are talking to now has changed.
After waiting for 23 years, since the breakup of the Soviet Union, Crimea and Sevastopol have joined Russia.
For this reason, every question today will be directly or indirectly related to Crimea.
We will discuss a number of issues today, including healthcare, army, taxes, agriculture and, naturally, Ukraine.
There is no doubt that we’ll discuss developments in Ukraine’s southeast and the genocide that was unleashed in this region.
Our colleagues Olga Ushakova, Valeriya Korableva, Tatyana Stolyarova and Dmitry Shchugorev will assist us during today’s broadcast, while Tatyana Remizova and Anna Pavlova are working in the call and SMS processing centre.
I would like to remind you that you can watch us live on Channel One, as well as on Rossiya-1 and Rossiya-24 TV channels, and on Russia’s Public Television channel, where interpretation into sign language will be available for people with impaired hearing.
Radio listeners can join our conversation on Mayak, Vesti FM and Radio Rossii stations.
Our call centre has been working for a week, and we will continue to take calls during the Direct Line broadcast.
People from other countries can call us at the number you can see on the screen.
I’d like to remind you that this year you can send video questions to the President from your PC or any mobile device.
Events are unfolding there with an incredible and sometimes alarming speed.
Indeed, two months ago, during the Olympic Winter Games on February 17, no one thought that Crimea would reunite with Russia and that people in eastern Ukraine would stop armoured convoys sent from Kiev with their bare hands.
Before I answer your question, I’d like to go back a little to review recent events in Ukraine.
No, he did not refuse to sign it, but said that he could not sign it on the EU conditions, because it would dramatically worsen the socioeconomic situation in Ukraine and affect Ukrainians.
Yanukovych said that he needed more time to analyse the document and to discuss it together with Europeans.
This provoked public unrest that eventually culminated in an unconstitutional coup, an armed seizure of power.
People in eastern and southeastern regions of Ukraine were worried about their future and the future of their children, because they saw a rapid growth of nationalist sentiments, heard threats and saw that wanted to invalidate some of the ethnic minorities’ rights, including the rights of the Russian minority.
On the other hand, this description is relative, because Russians are native persons in Ukraine.
But an attempt was made to invalidate all decisions regarding the use of the native language.
Instead of starting a dialogue with these people, Kiev appointed new governors – oligarchs and billionaires – to these regions.
They believe that they earned their riches by exploiting people and embezzling public property, and these oligarchs have been appointed to head their regions.
Meanwhile, nationalist groups did not surrender their weapons, but threatened to use force in the eastern regions.
Refusing to see that something was badly wrong in the Ukrainian state and to start a dialogue, the government threatened to use military force and even sent tanks and aircraft against civilians.
I hope that they will see that they are moving into a deep hole, and that they are pulling their country along.
In this sense, the talks that will start today in Geneva are very important, because I believe that we should get together to think about ways out of this crisis and to offer people a real, not sham, dialogue.
There’s no need to go to Donbass for this, because they can summon them to Kiev for a meeting.
They should talk with people and with their real representatives, with those whom people trust.
They should release the arrested , help people to express their opinion in an organised manner, suggest new leaders and start a dialogue.
People in the eastern regions are talking about federalisation, and Kiev has at long last started talking about de-centralisation.
To be able to understand what they mean, they should sit down at the negotiating table and search for an acceptable solution.
Order in the country can only be restored through dialogue and democratic procedures, rather than with the use of armed force, tanks and aircraft.
So far the dialogue has started between diplomats: top diplomats from the United States, Russia, the European Union and Ukraine are meeting in Geneva at this very moment.
We feel strongly that this should not be a sham dialogue between representatives of the authorities, but a dialogue with the people to find the compromise I was talking about.
There are no Russian units in eastern Ukraine – no special services, no tactical advisors.
All this is being done by the local residents, and the proof of that is the fact that those people have literally removed their masks.
So I told my Western partners, “They have nowhere to go, and they won’t leave.
I’m sure we’ll get back to the events in the southeast later in the course of this conversation.
You never gave as much as a hint about Crimea over the course of your political career.
You must have thought about it, but you never even mentioned Crimea in private talks.
The most obvious risk was that the Russian speaking population was threatened and that the threats were absolutely specific and tangible.
This is what made Crimean residents, the people who live there, think about their future and ask Russia for help.
I said in my recent speech in the Kremlin that Russia had never intended to annex any territories, or planned any military operations there, never.
Quite to the contrary, we were going to build our relations with Ukraine based on current geopolitical realities.
But we also thought, and have always hoped, that all native Russians, the Russian-speaking people living in Ukraine, would live in a comfortable political environment, that they would not be threatened or oppressed.
But when this situation changed, and Russians in Crimea were facing exactly that, when they began raising the issue of self-determination – that’s when we sat down to decide what to do.
It was at this exact moment that we decided to support Crimeans, and not 5, 10 or 20 years ago.
I discussed this problem with the Security Council members, and no one objected.
And I’m more than happy now that all the steps in the action plan were taken in a very precise manner, quickly, professionally and resolutely.
I would say the way the plan was executed was unique and unparalleled in history.
Mr Putin, we who live in Russia are very well aware of how things are done here.
But indeed, this was done very quickly – a complicated referendum was organised in the shortest time possible, security issues addressed, and Ukrainian units disarmed – that really gave the impression of a long-planned and prepared action.
It was done on the spot, and we had to play it by ear based on the situation and the demands at hand.
But it was all performed promptly and professionally, I have to give you that.
Our task was not to conduct a full-fledged military operation there, but it was to ensure people’s safety and security and a comfortable environment to express their will.
But it would not have been possible without the Crimeans’ own strong resolution.
Also, I must say that I didn’t add the concluding line to my Kremlin speech – about initiating a draft law on the inclusion of Crimea in the Russian Federation – until the very last day, last moment, because I was waiting for the referendum results.
Polls and surveys are one thing, along with certain groups’ sentiments, but a referendum is the expression of the will of all the residents of an area.
So when the voter turnout reached 83 percent and more than 96 percent supported Crimea’s inclusion in the Russian Federation, it became obvious that this decision was made by the majority, if not unanimously.
Let’s invite Sevastopol, a hero city and a city of military glory – to join in our discussion.
There are hundreds of people gathered here, in the heart of the city, on Primorsky Boulevard.
There are people from all walks of life, including navy and civilian personnel.
These are people who voted for the accession of Crimea and Sevastopol to Russia.
There are students and pensioners, veterans, workers, doctors and representatives of self-defence units.
They are the Grafskaya Quay, a memorial to sunken ships, and Admiral Nakhimov Square, named after the navy man who fought and died as an infantry lieutenant.
Sevastopol is a symbol, a fortress, a city full of special meaning for Russia’s destiny.
And the people of Sevastopol have been contesting that meaning for a long 23 years, which concerns the right to speak Russian and the right to Russian values.
The civilian personnel of the military units are very concerned about the fate of the Black Sea Fleet.
For many of us, the fleet provides work and staff and is the only unique artillery repair plant.
You probably know better than anyone else in Russia that we had certain agreements with Ukraine on upgrading the fleet.
Unfortunately, those agreements were not diligently fulfilled, if at all.
I hope there will be no such problems anymore and that the major part of modern vessels and support ships will be transferred from Novorossiysk to Sevastopol.
Therefore, a substantial amount of this work will be carried out in Crimean shipyards.
The Russian Defence Ministry has already placed an order worth 5 billion rubles with one of the shipyards.
We undoubtedly will be increasing this potential of Crimea because currently it is not in high demand, it is idle.
Certainly, Sevastopol is a city of Russian naval glory, which every Russian citizen knows.
Indeed, so many different people live in Sevastopol, people from different walks of life, with different backgrounds and of different ethnicities.
And the tragedy that is now happening in Ukraine has upset too many people.
Ukraine is currently in a situation where there is a divide within families, not just between nations.
Given the current state of affairs in Ukraine, we do not understand each other on many issues and have even become enemies.
Make no mistake, this issue is highly relevant, and all of us are now guided by certain emotions.
However, if we love and respect each other, we should find ways and means to understand each other.
But even if we are talking about relations between countries, I’m confident that we’ll find common ground with Ukraine and we’ll be there for one another.
I hope that people in Ukraine will also understand that Russia could not do otherwise regarding Crimea.
What I wanted to say is that if we respect each other, we should acknowledge that each of us has the right to make our own choices.
People living in Ukraine should respect the choice made by Crimean residents.
Second, Russia has always been close to Ukraine and will always remain closely related to it.
I’m not talking about the assistance that Russia has been providing Ukraine for many long years, and I’m sure that we’ll get back to that issue.
I’m confident that we will understand this despite all the emotional complications we’re seeing today.
It is highly symbolic that people from across Crimea joined us here in Sevastopol.
Many of them view reunification with Russia as the end of the third siege of this Hero City.
Many people regard the last 23 years as the third siege of the city and the whole region.
Now that Crimea’s dream of reunification has been fulfilled, there are naturally a lot of questions regarding the future.
I would like to start by thanking you, Mr President, on behalf of all the people of Crimea, for the resolve you showed in helping us reunite with our motherland.
That said, the self-proclaimed Ukrainian government is doing its outmost to make life intolerable for the people of Crimea.
For example, almost all banks have left Crimea, which means that we now have problems with exchanging hryvnas and people can’t make payments and transfers.
Specifically, pensioners, who have been saving for many years for a rainy day, can’t withdraw their pension savings because Ukrainian banks are ignoring their requests and legitimate interests.
This is currently one of the most urgent issues that has yet to be addressed.
There are other issues as well, as you know, such as power and water supply.
Oschadbank and Privatbank with its owner Mr Kolomoisky and the head of the Crimean branch Mr Finkelstein are not willing to meet us halfway.
Hryvna circulation is limited, so we have no other choice but to accelerate the transition to the ruble.
The solution is to open accounts for individuals and legal entities and establish a new banking network.
I think that it will take us about one month to open the required number of accounts, roll out the network and equip it with modern technology.
As you know, pensioners and public sector employees will have equal incomes with Russian pensioners and public sector employees, and the Russian Government has already adopted a resolution to this effect.
During this period incomes of pensioners and public sector employees will surge.
For pensioners, income will soar 100%, which means that the gap between pensions in Russian and Crimea… In Russia, pensioners receive twice as much as in Crimea.
The average pension in Russia will be 11,600 rubles this year, while in Crimea it is about 5,500 rubles.
The same goes for public sector employees, who earn twice or even two and a half times more in Russia.
Russian military personnel – and it should be mentioned that a lot of local residents will be serving in Crimea – earn four times as much as in Crimea.
All in all, I’m confident, I hope and believe that people in Crimea will feel the economic benefits of joining Russia, not to mention Crimea’s economy, infrastructure development in the tourism and travel industries.
We believe that all benefits and preferences that were available to Crimean residents in Ukraine should remain in place.
If some programmes do not exist or didn’t exist in Russia, we will keep those preferences in place by providing additional subsidies to the regional budget.
Furthermore, residents of Crimea and Sevastopol will be able to benefit from all social norms and allocations that exist in Russia in accordance with applicable laws.
Mr Putin, it is widely believed that Crimea is only good for vacationing and tourism.
You are absolutely right that Crimea is associated with vacationing and tourism.
Crimea has very good industrial and agricultural potential and we’ll develop it.
There are viable businesses that require modernisation and additional investment, and we’ll certainly take care of that.
I’ve mentioned shipbuilding and ship maintenance, but there are also other industrial centres and promising businesses.
The infrastructure has fairly good development potential, including the port; there is an agricultural sector, and so on.
Regrettably, agricultural output declined by 60 percent in 2013 in comparison to 1990.
In 2013, Crimean agricultural enterprises produced only 40% of what had been their output in 1990.
Rice farms, for example, use a lot of water, and water is currently a problem.
Regarding services, we shouldn’t forget that Crimea was always famous not only as a base for the Russian Black Sea Fleet but also as Russia’s and the USSR’s top health resort.
Regrettably, the holiday infrastructure, hotels and resorts have been decaying.
Our specialists have inspected these businesses, recreation facilities, resorts and hotels, and have come to the conclusion that some of these, if not all, can’t be used under Russian sanitary and epidemiological standards.
The free economic zone you mentioned is something that can provide Russian investors with certain privileges in order to encourage them to come to Crimea and Sevastopol and accelerate development.
I talked to Mr Alexei Chaly not too long ago and he suggested that we establish a development agency.
I’m confident we’re on the right track and sure to achieve some positive and visible results.
There are many SMS messages from people who are apprehensive that Crimea might lose its distinctiveness.
They fear the arrival of big money, people who will put up hunting lodges and big castles, palaces and high fences where there used to be recreation areas and nature reserves, while neglecting to build a sewage system, which Crimea lacks to this day.
These palaces with fences mushroomed all over the place against the background of an astounding disregard for average holidaymakers.
I have already spoken about this publicly on several occasions, perhaps not loud enough.
However, in my conversations with my foreign colleagues I did not hide the fact that our goal was to ensure proper conditions for the people of Crimea to be able to freely express their will.
They acted in a civil but a decisive and professional manner, as I’ve already said.
It was impossible to hold an open, honest, and dignified referendum and help people express their opinion in any other way.
Still, bear in mind that there were more than 20,000 well-armed soldiers stationed in Crimea.
In addition, there were 38 S-300 missile launchers, weapons depots and rounds of ammunition.
It was imperative to prevent even the possibility of someone using these weapons against civilians.
After Sevastopol, let's bring in Russian Black Sea Fleet Commander Alexander Vitko.
Comrade Commander-in-Chief, Black Sea Fleet Commander Vice Admiral Alexander Vitko.
Before I ask my question, I’d like to take this opportunity to thank the Russian people and you personally, Comrade Commander-in-Chief, for the support provided to our fleet during that difficult period in Crimea.
There were no major investments in Crimea’s military infrastructure over the past 23 years.
The housing situation is particularly difficult, especially for former servicemen of the Ukrainian Navy who are now enlisted in the Black Sea Fleet.
Comrade Commander-in-Chief, the results of your projects have become the pride of the Russian people.
First, there will be a programme for the development of the Sevastopol Naval Base and the Black Sea Fleet in general.
Of course, all social programmes that are implemented in the Russian Armed Forces, including permanent and service housing, will apply to the City of Sevastopol and the Black Sea Fleet.
Mr Putin, in your previous answer you mentioned Crimea’s self-defence forces.
The officers of the Crimean Berkut and, of course, the Cossacks were the key players.
There were many intense and dramatic moments, such as in Perekop where the Berkut was just a few hours quicker than the extremists who were bussed to Crimea, and this helped avoid a major tragedy.
I would like to ask my colleague Valeriya Korableva to give the floor to commander of Crimea’s Berkut riot police Yury Abisov.
Mr Abisov’s troops, as well as other regional Berktu units, stayed in Kiev during the most difficult time.
Colonel Abisov told me how they had to make decisions on their own, withdrew their soldiers under fire, took the wounded from hospitals and transported them to permanent garrisons – all that while their vehicles were being fired at.
Dozens of fighters were killed, hundreds were wounded, but we had an order not to shed blood.
The burden of responsibility on the shoulders of a head of state, whether large or small, is great.
In critical moments, one relies on his or her own personal experience and moral values.
As for Mr Yanukovych, he fulfilled his duty in the way he considered possible and appropriate.
Certainly, I spoke with him many times during the crisis and after he arrived in the Russian Federation.
There can be different attitudes to this, but the essence of his answer was that he thought of using force many times but he said that he did not have the heart to sign the order to use force against his citizens.
As far as the Berkut is concerned, you and your colleagues undoubtedly fulfilled your duty honestly, professionally and honourably.
After all, what happened to you and the way your colleagues are treated now in Kiev will come back to bite the Ukrainian state.
You can’t humiliate the soldiers who protect the state’s interests, or force them to their knees, or malign them, or deprive them of medical assistance when they are in hospital.
I know that Berkut officers who are in hospital do not receive proper treatment or even food.
Our numerous appeals to the Kiev authorities to allow us to take everyone in have gone unanswered.
If a state treats people who honestly fulfil their duty like this, such a state can hardly count on others to behave similarly in the future.
I think that eventually everyone will realise how professionally and honourably you executed your order, and they will thank you for it.
Many of the callers point to historical allusions in the Ukrainian events.
He had to leave, but he did not flee from Kiev; he was on a regional trip while the presidential administration and government buildings were taken over in Kiev in breach of a signed agreement.
When Yanukovych signed the agreement on February 21, which was guaranteed by three European foreign ministers from Poland, France and Germany, he believed that this agreement would be honoured.
Under it, Yanukovych pledged not to use the army or other armed force against protesters and to pull the Interior Ministry units, including the Berkut, out of Kiev, while the opposition was to withdraw from the occupied administrative buildings, dismantle the barricades and disarm its fighters.
Yanukovych agreed to hold early parliamentary elections, to return to the 2004 constitution and to hold presidential elections in December 2014.
Had they wanted it, he would have agreed to hold presidential elections in a month or a month and a half, because he was ready to agree to anything.
But as soon as he left Kiev and pulled the Interior Ministry units out of the city, the opposition renewed its attacks, seizing the presidential administration building, among other government buildings and accomplishing a coup d’état in the full and classical meaning of the word.
No one can say why they did it, why they acted so unprofessionally and unwisely, and why they pushed the country towards the current situation.
As for me, you know that the decisions we take in a critical situation depend on our experience and values.
You know that I worked for the Soviet Union’s KGB, or, more precisely, foreign intelligence, where we were trained in a specific manner that boils down to absolute loyalty to people and the country.
Clearly, the Ukrainian issue, the unconstitutional seizure of power and Crimea are the number one issues currently discussed.
According to a poll, some 96 percent of Russians think your decision on Crimea was right.
Those who spoke in favour of it are Yury Bashmet, Denis Matsuyev and Karen Shakhnazarov.
Let me remind you about a letter from Russian cultural figures who supported Vladimir Putin and Russia’s stance on Crimea.
So he would not have understood me at all if I had taken any other stance.
In the circumstances when, as I see it, the Ukrainian statehood ceased to exist, there was no reason to deprive the people of Crimea of the right to determine their fate.
Speaking of which, Mr Putin said that the Ukrainian parliament is partially legitimate.
Therefore, the people of Crimea had every right to determine their destiny.
Of course, I understand that it was a difficult decision which has many international and political implications.
In the past 10 years, we have been forging ties with the People’s Republic of China, and I can see that the convergence is mutual.
Speaking of our relations with China, they are progressing very successfully in terms of trust and collaboration, which are unprecedented.
This includes political cooperation and our shared views on international affairs and global security, which is the basis for these inter-governmental relations.
NATO was established as a counterbalance to the Soviet Union and to the Soviet Union’s policy in Eastern Europe.
We are told it is changing and becoming more of a political organisation.
But Article 5 is still in effect, which is an article on mutual military support.
But it is absolutely clear that we will be expanding collaboration with China.
Our trade with the United States is 27. , but trade with China is 87 billion, and it is growing.
And experts will agree that China is gradually becoming the number one economic power.
With China’s population of almost 1. billion and its modernised economy, this is basically an accomplished fact.
We began holding joint drills at sea and on land, in both China and the Russian Federation.
This gives us reason to assume that Russian-Chinese relations will be a significant factor in global policy and will substantially influence modern international relations.
Mr President, let us return to the open letter signed by prominent Russian cultural figures.
Let me repeat how much I appreciate everyone’s support for my policies on Crimea as well as on other issues.
Take, for instance, Mr Shakhnazarov – I have known him for years, but frankly had no idea about his political views.
So it came as a big surprise to me when he spelled out our common stance on some issues so clearly, definitively and eloquently, and much more vividly than I ever do.
About collective letters – well I think they do no harm, but I would rather they not be orchestrated.
I mean these things should speak from the heart and be spontaneous, rather than coolly organised by someone.
Let us return to the on-going public debate on Crimea and Sevastopol’s accession to Russia.
I see here in this studio Andrei Norkin, a well-know journalist and my colleague from 20 years ago.
