The pro-Western leaders who came to power after Yanukovych fled in the face of protests last February have spoken for months of plans to renounce the neutral status, which prevented Ukraine from seeking NATO membership.
Kyiv and NATO accuse Russia of providing direct military support to pro-Russian separatists who have seized parts of two provinces in eastern Ukraine and fought government forces in a conflict that has killed more than 4,700 people since April.
The legislation approved by parliament says Ukraine will tighten cooperation with NATO with the aim of ""achieving the criteria required to attain membership"" in the Western military alliance.
Moscow has frequently warned that it strongly opposes Ukrainian membership in NATO and has called for formal assurances that this will never happen.
President Vladimir Putin has suggested that the main reason Russia annexed Crimea from Ukraine in March was the prospect of NATO forces being deployed on the peninsula.
Russia used troops and a referendum denounced abroad as illegal to annex Crimea after Yanukovych was driven from power by protests over his decision to scrap plans for a landmark treaty with the EU and tighten ties with Moscow.
The vote in Ukraine added to tension ahead of a planned new round of talks -involving representatives of Ukraine, Russia, the rebels, and the OSCE -aimed to end to the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
After a four-way telephone call between Poroshenko, Putin, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and French President Francois Hollande, Poroshenko's office said the negotiations will be held in the Belarusian capital, Minsk, on December 24 and 26.
More than 1,000 people have been killed in eastern Ukraine despite a September 5 deal on a cease-fire and steps toward peace, but fighting has abated this month.
With reporting by Interfax, AP, Reuters, and AFP RFE/RL RFE/RL journalists report the news in 27 languages in 23 countries where a free press is banned by the government or not fully established.
