Ofﬁcial discourse and directives seek to both avoid risks and exploit opportunities in using soft power toward state ends.
This dichotomous approach to the “power of attraction” demonstrates signiﬁcant differences in the perception of soft power by Russian ofﬁcials and their Western counterparts.
By looking at empirical data from six former Soviet republics, the analysis reveals that Russia, by instrumentalizing its soft power resources in the former Soviet republics, has diminished their potential for generating attraction.
The term itself was used for the ﬁrst time in approach to soft power led the Kremlin to look for ways high-level Russian political discourse in February 2012 by both to remove the risk of soft power threats domestically Vladimir Putin.
In the presidential election campaign, thenand to instrumentalize soft power means for achieving its candidate Putin drew attention to the fact that soft power foreign policy goals.
One attraction. year later, the term was introduced for the ﬁrst time in a Even if the Kremlin has only recently acknowledged Russian ofﬁcial document—The Concept of the Foreign ofﬁcially its interest in soft power, Moscow’s de facto use Policy of the Russian Federation, approved on February of soft power in the near abroad was signaled by experts 12, 2013.
In an article published in 2006, Andrei soft power can be used in a “destructive and unlawful” Tsygankov asserted that Russian authorities were increasway by putting pressure on sovereign states, interfering in ingly demonstrating their readiness to employ soft power in foreign policy making.
Yet, Russia’s mentalizes them, and try to assess the impact of such an approach toward soft power has been questioned by Korejba approach to Russia’s soft power resources.
Due to space , while Rostoks and Potjomkina argue that restrictions we have focused our empirical analysis on six Moscow’s soft power is manufactured and based on a countries from the European near abroad—Armenia, Russian image that hardly corresponds to reality.
In mentalization of Russia’s soft power resources has been train with these thoughts, Rukavishnikov notes that more noticeable. the former Soviet republics would be truly attracted by Russia only if it were to become friendly, democratic, rich, powerful, and able to protect and help them.
Rutland and Kazantsev argue that Russian leaders RUSSIAN LANGUAGE AND CULTURE IN THE have largely misunderstood the character of soft power.
SERVICE OF MOSCOW’S FOREIGN POLICY Moscow has been determined to master—and counter— the arts of soft power projection.
Yet, even though the The Russian language remains an important tool for mainKremlin has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in taining Russian inﬂuence abroad.
It is the lingua franca of various soft power projects, such as the Russia Today TV the former Soviet Union and constitutes a “uniting factor” for outlet, Russia’s soft power gambit has enjoyed only modest the people in the former Soviet space.
However, the younger Russia’s preference for a state-directed approach to soft generation is losing Russian proﬁciency.
In some countries (e.g., erating structures not only as a threat to the regime but also Georgia), Russian has been replaced as a second language as covert means for Western actors to employ soft power as by English.
The decline in popularity of the Russian language a strategy for inﬁltration and penetration of noncompliant in the near abroad started after the collapse of the Soviet states, such as Russia.
The author also assesses that the Union, but it accelerated after the “color revolutions,” the Russian leadership’s approach toward soft power has many Georgian war, and the annexation of Crimea.
Besides neighboring countries, Moscow has made efforts to reverse entertaining, spreading Russian values, and maintaining a the trend.
The establishment of the Russian World certain level of knowledge of the Russian language, these Foundation and the Rossotrudnichestvo agency are two productions are used to provoke nostalgia for the Soviet past examples in this respect.
One of the main aims of the and stir up patriotic feeling among Russians and Russia-symfoundation is to promote the teaching of Russian within pathizers living in the former Soviet space.
Russia and abroad, while Rossotrudnichestvo develops proBut, again, even if this double usage of popular culture jects for promotion of the Russian language and culture might be seen by Moscow as an effective strategy for promotabroad. ing its interests in the near abroad, it does not make Russian Russian was made the working language of the Russia-led culture and the Russian language any less vulnerable in the organizations in the near abroad, including the Commonwealth former Soviet space.
Even if this decision was motivated by the current status means for consolidating their own national identity and state of Russian language as lingua franca for the near abroad, its security.
After the 2008 war, Georgia made English compulimplications are more profound.
Kazakhstan decided which their country is a member state. to prioritize the teaching of English in schools after Russia Russian high culture and popular culture produce soft annexed Crimea.
Such measures will decrease not only the power and support the spreading of the Russian language as level of Russian proﬁciency but, with it, the attractiveness of well.
It is Russian culture in the near abroad. on par with any other in the world and enjoys great appreciation among the elites in the former Soviet space, even in the Baltic states.
Russian popular THE ROLE OF RUSSIAN AND PRO-RUSSIAN culture (contemporary music and books, ﬁlms and television MEDIA IN THE NEAR ABROAD programs) is also very popular and very accessible.
It represents a valuable instrument for Russian foreign policy, as In the wake of technological advances, the cost of procespop cultural productions can deliver not only entertainment, sing and transmitting information has considerably but political messages as well.
For instance, the patriotic decreased and access to diverse sources of information has Hollywood-style ﬁlms White Tiger, Stalingrad, Road to expanded.
Not in vain did Machin and Van Leeuwen the dangers and the advantages of this reality, Russian argue that today’s most important and inﬂuenpolitical leaders have made it a priority to invest in the tial political discourses are not in newspapers or in parliamedia realm since the late 2000s.
This was motivated by mentary debates and political speeches, but in movies and both domestic and external reasons.
Russian contemporary music is also very have convinced Russian political elites that control over the widely broadcast on local radio and is very popular. information space is one of the smartest strategies to ensure Russian popular culture is ubiquitous in the near abroad. both the domestic stability of the political regime and CDs and DVDs with Russian music and ﬁlms are everywhere.
Available through cable or already in the ﬁrst decade of the 2000s, the Kremlin took satellite companies, Russian television networks are also very control directly or indirectly of the Russian mass media, popular.
Compared to the local fare, Russian TV outlets have which also broadcast more widely in the former Soviet big budgets and can afford costly and glamorous productions, space.
In Ukraine, incidentally, the 2013 Russian Foreign Policy Concept Russian media backing beneﬁted former president Viktor included among the priorities of the country the strengthenYanukovych during the 2004 and 2010 elections. ing of the role of Russian mass media abroad and the However, the most obvious instrumentalization of media necessity of counteracting the information threats to the by the Kremlin occurred during the 2013–2015 Ukrainian country’s sovereignty and security. crisis.
The inﬂuence of Russian media in the near abroad From the beginning of the Euromaidan in Ukraine, and varies.
Due to the widespread use of the Russian lanuntil September 2015 when Russia got militarily involved in guage, Russian news and entertainment programs are Syria, every news bulletin on Channel One had at least one widely followed throughout the CIS . report about Ukraine focusing on the insecurity of civilians, Russian television outlets are one of the most important the atrocities of “pro-fascist forces,” violations of peace sources of information for many former Soviet citizens. agreements , and so forth.
According to the November 2015 Barometer of Public If for some reason the news bulletins had to start with other Opinion, for 63 percent of Moldovans, television is their news than about Ukraine, then Ukraine would certainly be most important source of information, and 53 percent of the subject of the second or third report.
Russian media Moldova’s population trust media from Russia . outlets often disregard professional ethics or the basic Popular Russian newspapers, such as Komsomolskaia rules of journalism, and present openly biased interpretaPravda and Argumenty i Fakty, have special editions in tions of events or even fake news.
In addition, the Russian news agenexamples of fake reports about events in Ukraine, presented cies RIA Novosti, Regnum, and Inosmi are very often the by Russia’s public Channel One, was a story about the main window on global politics for journalists from the alleged cruciﬁxion of a young boy.
The the main news bulletin, the channel broadcast a story told by new state-run Sputnik News agency has also set up a woman who was pretending to have witnessed an unimbranches and launched radio stations in the near abroad. aginable scene in Slovyansk after the city was abandoned by Beyond Russian media, the Kremlin supports a series of the separatist ﬁghters.
According to the woman’s account, local, loyally pro-Russian media outlets.
Ukrainian National Guards had cruciﬁed a six-year-old boy The instrumentalization of media in the near abroad by whose father had enrolled in the separatist militia.
There countries “upset” Russia by disregarding its foreign political were no images shown to support the woman’s story, a basic interests, or during Moscow’s interventions in these states. rule in television, nor were any other witnesses found to The documentary The Godfather, about the Belarusian leaconﬁrm the account, an absolute ethical requirement.
In the der Aliaksandr Lukashenka, is a classic example in this end, it turned out that the heroine of the television news regard.
Broadcast by one of Russia’s major television netreport had never even been in Slovyansk.
After Vladimir works, NTV, before the presidential elections in Belarus in Putin was asked about this fake report during the annual 2010, when Lukashenka was showing an inclination toward Special Direct Line with the nation, Channel One had to rapprochement with the European Union , the ﬁlm make excuses for the story, but it did so in an arrogant addressed the human rights violations committed in manner.
The public television network justiﬁed its broadcast Belarus, depicting its leader as an unscrupulous dictator of the story, even though they had not veriﬁed the informacommitted to staying in power at any cost.
Lukashenka has changed radically since the December The main goals of Russian media related to the Ukrainian 2010 elections , when the Belarusian crisis have been to demoralize the Ukrainian people, to leader turned his back on the EU and shifted the country’s defame the authorities in Kiev, and to confuse public opiforeign policy back toward Moscow. nion abroad about the evolution of events.
The master Russian media involvement in election campaigns has narrative has been that the political factions in Ukraine been also obvious in Moldova and Ukraine.
The Church is engaged in Russian politics debts, and that the Ukrainian crisis has been orchestrated by both domestically and abroad.
This rhetoric allows the Kremlin to mobilize and increasingly integrated into Russia’s ruling elite, while the sensitize the public to the threat from the West, simultacurrent patriarch, Kirill I, is one of the most inﬂuential neously legitimizing its military policy in both domestic and political ﬁgures in Russia (Bogomolov and Lytvynenko foreign arenas . 2012, 12), even having a say in the Kremlin’s foreign With fake stories and biased reports, a news outlet cannot policy.
This appears to work for Russian in the near abroad under the Moscow Patriarchate’s canonimedia, which often present events in a totally different light cal jurisdiction. than media in the rest of the world.
It was used for the ﬁrst time ofﬁcially by had not yet been concluded and preliminary information Vladimir Putin in his 2001 speech before the ﬁrst Congress of was pointing to Russia’s involvement.
The programs and have been used by the Kremlin as strategic Russian World is deﬁned as encompassing “not only our instruments in the Ukrainian crisis, some countries in the compatriots in the near and far abroad; also foreign near abroad have taken tough measures against them.
After citizens who speak Russian, learn or teach it, all those who Kiev blocked 14 Russian television channels from its cable are sincerely interested in Russia, who care about its future” networks, Moldova in May 2015 suspended the broadcast.
This deﬁnition offered by the ing of Rossiia 24 on its territory, and also banned from the Russian World Foundation is quite vague and broad, comcountry for ﬁve years two Russian journalists, Dmitry prising people united not by an ethnic commonality but by Kiselyov and Andrei Kondrashov, who were traveling to the Soviet legacy, by a common language, and by an interest Moldova to present the documentary Crimea, the Road in Russia.
These reactions in former Soviet republics indicate narrower and more clearly deﬁned.
Although it stretches that Moscow’s practice of instrumentalization of media in beyond the boundaries of the Russian ethnos to include the near abroad is in fact counterproductive, weakening one Moldova, for example, it is bound by Russian spiritual and of the most important sources of its soft power.
Orthodox Church was the only institution that mainFor the Russian Patriarchate, maintaining inﬂuence in the tained its jurisdiction over the entire post-Soviet territory, near abroad has more than spiritual motivations.
The authority of the ROC is recognized by Moldova, and especially Ukraine, it remains the largest most Orthodox believers in Belarus and the Republic of Orthodox Church in the world.
Therefore, Patriarch Kirill Moldova and by a great number of Ukrainians.
In other is thoughtful when it comes to sensitive issues of the former Soviet republics as well, Russian minorities’ Kremlin’s policy in the former Soviet space.
To prevent such an outrecognized the canonical jurisdiction of Georgian Church come, even “unChristian” actions have been considered.
In over the two separatist regions; the head of the ROC was an attempt to discredit the leader of the Kiev Patriarchate, in not present in St.
In fact, the report misUkraine, and when he decided to back the separatists he did presented the patriarch’s message with reference to the war so in muted tones . in eastern Ukraine, which was that, to defend the country Among the core of the Russian World, the biggest stake from an aggressor would in general not be a violation of the for the Moscow Patriarchate is by far the ﬂock in Ukraine, commandment “Thou shall not kill” (vesti.ru 2015; cerkva. where 70 percent of about 45 million inhabitants consider info 2015). themselves Orthodox.
Here, however, the ROC has the bigMoldova also faces a split of the Orthodox Church.
The Moscow Patriarchate is detera very important role for the Moscow Patriarchate.
Moldova mined to strengthen its status in Ukraine by diminishing the is the only major non-Slavic ﬂock under the canonical autonomy of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church subordinate to jurisdiction of the ROC, which contributes to the reinforcing the ROC, and by attracting the independent Ukrainian of the Moscow Patriarchate’s supranational character Orthodox Church to its jurisdiction.
Between 2010 and . 2013, the Moscow Patriarchate tried to mobilize the support Patriarch Kirill I visited Moldova in 2011 and 2013, and of the Ukrainian government in order to pressure priests and he did not refrain from sending political messages on either bishops of the independent Ukrainian Orthodox Church to occasion.
In 2011, two years after Moldova had removed “return” from Kiev’s to Moscow’s jurisdiction.
A key instrufrom power a pro-Russian Communist government, Kirill I ment for these endeavors was the registration of parishes.
He also made a two-day visit to secessionist they were willing and ready to “soon merge into the Local Transnistria, where he was greeted with great pomp.
This will visit of Patriarch Kirill came only days after Russian Deputy contribute to the further weakening of the Moscow-subordiPrime Minister Dmitry Rogozin warned Moldova that if it nated Orthodox Church, which had already registered a signed an Association Agreement with the EU, this would decrease in ﬂock from 28 percent of Ukrainian Orthodox complicate the efforts to resolve the conﬂict with believers in 2013 to 24 percent in 2014 (Razumkov Center Transnistria.
For Patriarch Kirill the loss of Ukraine would be a The instrumentalization of the Church ﬁts Moscow’s disaster.
Of the 30,000 total parishes in the ROC, 12,000 are strategy of maintaining or increasing its inﬂuence in the in the Ukrainian Orthodox Church under the canonical near abroad.
Without the Ukrainian Church, the resources, it turns out that such an approach has led to the ROC would lose its status as the largest Orthodox Church— ROC’s loss of attractiveness among Orthodox believers in and Patriarch Kirill, his ambitions to reign as leader of the the former Soviet republics.
In to apply for Russian citizenship with only a temporary or December 2014 the Orthodox Church of Belarus announced permanent residence permit.
This initiative came Crimea), President Putin signed into force simpler and faster within the context of Russia’s covert involvement in the rules for granting citizenship to people who speak Russian war in eastern Ukraine. and have at least one ancestor who was a permanent resident of the Soviet Union or the Russian Empire or who lived on the territory of the current Russian Federation.
This deﬁnition is quite vague and Ossetians have Russian passports . broad.
Many (for example the separatists of Transnistria or the insurgents Abkhazians and Transnistrians have Russian passports. from Donetsk and Luhansk), then to an even larger group of According to Russian sources, 200,000 out of 500,000 all former Soviet peoples and people who were part of the Transnistrian inhabitants have Russian citizenship.
In June Tsarist Empire (thus, even Poles and Finns could be compa2015, the Russian Federation opened two registration centriots!) , and ﬁnally, the last circle is the ters for receiving Russian citizenship in the Transnistrian broadest one and includes people who speak Russian and capital Tiraspol, facilitating even more the access of locals who feel an afﬁnity for Russian culture and spirituality. to Russian passports.
Of course, this situation serves to Russian authorities have manifested a growing preoccuremind Chisinau authorities that, prior to the Georgian war pation with compatriots, especially since the August 2008 in 2008, Moscow had suddenly begun actively handing out Georgian war.
In September 2008 President Dmitry Russian citizenship to South Ossetians and Abkhazians Medvedev reformed the federal agency for compatriots . and in May 2011 the Compatriot The passportization policy and the mobilization of compaLegal Support and Protection Fund was created.
The triots in the former Soviet republics contradict the concept of Kremlin aims to increase its inﬂuence in the near abroad soft power.
These actions hamper real partnerships with the by mobilizing loyal constituencies living there.
As few of them agreed, the Kremlin has resorted local language spoken by at least a 10 percent minority to be to informal policies to deliver passports especially to the declared ofﬁcial in that region, a provision in accordance with populations of secessionist regions . universal minority rights, hundreds of Ukrainians mobilized 44 ROTARU in Kiev for street protests against it.
Then, in February do sow confusion about “who is who” in the non-transpar2015, the Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced ent political environments in the post-Soviet space.
This that it would start introducing “sanctions” against holders of puzzlement serves Russia’s political interests in the near dual citizenship, a measure targeting in particular Ukrainian abroad , where the citizens with Russian passports . population’s lack of information works in favor of the Kremlin.
Yet, this instrumentalization of civil society by the Kremlin has motivated the former Soviet republics to RUSSIA’S NGOS IN THE NEAR ABROAD take actions.
In September 2015 Kiev sanctioned 12 Russian associations, Cossack groups, and religious charities, and Russia’s political leadership is aware of the power of civil banned their activity in Ukraine; and Moldova has banned society and its role in producing soft power.
Yet, Moscow entry into the country to leaders of several Russian proxyﬁnds it hard to believe that civil society can be an indepengroups . dent actor and does not accept the idea of relying on autonomous activities of civil society and non-state actors in either in domestic or A COMMON HISTORY—IN SEARCH OF A UNITING foreign politics.
Within this context, Russia seeks to adapt MEMORY this source of soft power to “national conditions” by keeping civil society structures under the watchful supervision of The shared past is not only a source of soft power for the the state with the aim of ensuring that Kremlin but also an essential element for the creation of a they function in the service of the government and not of shared identity in the post-Soviet space.
With only some 25 citizens. years since the fall of the Soviet Union, and with most After the “color revolutions” in Georgia and Ukraine, current political leaders and intellectual elites in the near which Russia perceived as U.S.-orchestrated operations abroad having been educated in the USSR, the memory of under the guise of democratic protests, Moscow sought to the single state in the post-Soviet space remains vivid and prevent future similar risks by instrumentalizing civil society much of the older generation is still nostalgic for the glory organizations in the near abroad.
History, and the memories associated of NGO-like structures ﬁnanced by the Russian government, with recent episodes, play an important part in perception, and started sponsoring the activities of Russia-friendly assoopinion, and relations among the different groups in the near ciations in the former Soviet space.
However, a common history does mimic Western approaches, for example by accusing the not necessarily bring people together.
The study of the governments of the former Soviet republics of serious history of the USSR otherwise than through the prism of human rights violations, especially toward Russian minoriMoscow offers the former Soviet republics numerous reaties; others variously promote the Russian language and sons to see Russia in a much less favorable light, one that defend the Russian interpretation of history, demonize EU would not generate soft power.
The As after the “color revolutions,” and as the reanalysis of -Russian “NGO”s in the near abroad range from assothe history of the USSR became salient in some former ciations representing Russian minorities (Russian Youth Soviet republics,i Moscow sought to ﬁght against the “reinLeague of Moldova), pro-Russian youth movements (the terpretation” of the Soviet past in neighboring countries.
Russia has cinematography has produced a series of big-budget movies some obvious advantages in this area.
Russia’s natural resources, its large market for meant to keep alive the remembrance.
May 9 parades in consumer goods, and its geographical proximity attract Moscow stand out from year to year for more and more businesspeople in the near abroad.
According to ofﬁcial statistics of the Russian Federal Victory Day has been celebrated every year in Russia; Migration Service, in June 2015 there were over 2. million however, its amplitude has grown signiﬁcantly in recent citizens, children and pensioners included, from Ukraine years.
For Moscow, local and Russian business elites that are Beyond projecting power and creating myths of invincibility active in the former Soviet space play an important role in or inevitability that attract others , these manifesthe pursuit of its foreign policy goals.
They not only defend tations are meant to awaken collective memories in the near Russia’s economic position in these countries but also abroad about the common sacriﬁces and common victory durengage directly or indirectly in local politics by lobbying ing World War II, to maintain the nostalgia of the older generaand ﬁnancing political parties to favor Russian foreign poltion for past times.
Therefore, Moscow draws soft power, the promotion of shared history has an instrumental particular attention to the co-optation of business elites role for the Kremlin.
The memory of the Soviet Army’s victory into loyal and cooperative networks.
This is realized mainly in the Great Patriotic War has recently been used by the Kremlin through bribes, ﬁnancial incentives, and the “attraction” of to justify its actions in the near abroad.
In July 2016, the Moldovan government decided to FIGURE 1 Number of citizens from the “near abroad” in Russia as of June 2015.
Day, after having previously rescheduled this celebration to The number of Georgian immigrants does not include those from Abkhazia avoid overlapping with the Soviet holiday. and South Ossetia.
For many local businessmen,Russia is not necessarily a Similar developments can be noted in the case of Russian trustworthy partner; however, they are familiar with Russia’s food market as well.
Therefore, Moscow has used trade is seen as more constrained and sometimes incomprehensible. restrictions and economic embargoes as political instruIn addition, the lack of transparency of business deals, espements for coercing its neighbors’ behavior.
However, even cially with Russian energy companies, brings the local elites if this strategy may bring short-term advantages, it has huge private undeclared ﬁnancial beneﬁts, frequently to the pushed the former Soviet republics into diversifying their disadvantage of their states.
Thus, after September 2013– Russian understanding of lobbying differs fundamentally from September 2014, when Russia banned imports of Western perception.
While for Western lobbyists it is a case of Moldovan wines, fruits, canned vegetables, and meat, in convincing people through the strength of arguments, for 2015, 22.69 percent of Moldova’s exports went to Russian lobbyists the general trend is to see money as the Romania and only 12.23 percent to Russia, compared with core, crucial factor to convince people, presuming that every2013, when the Russian market represented 26.02 percent of one is for sale.
Russia applies huge resources to inﬂuence the Chisinau’s exports and the Romanian market only 16.93 “strategic communities” in the near abroad and therefore often percent . achieves great successes , as in the example of Kyrgyzstan, where it succeeded in convincing the elites of the advantages of joining the Eurasian Economic CONCLUSIONS Union.
Russia’s economic relations with the former Soviet Russia has great potential soft power in the former Soviet republics are not usually guided by the free market mechanspace.
The common history, the Russian language, the isms but rather by political interests.
This, however, creates Russian diaspora, the Orthodox Church, and Russian high instability and uncertainty in business cooperation and leads and popular culture should in theory “produce attractiveness” to a decrease in attractiveness of the economic resources. in the near abroad.
And yet, these resources have often failed to An illustrative example in this regard is Russia’s instrumendo that.
Moscow’s preference for maintaining full control of talization of its energy resources.
Thus, instead of increasing conﬁdence Georgia) and 2009 the former and cooperation between the former Soviet republics and Soviet countries have made great efforts to diversify their Russia, compatriots have been treated with suspicion and energy supplies.
As such, the former Soviet republics have been seekif the interconnector is currently much underutilized due to ing to limit dual citizenship and restrict the use of the Russian Moldova’s infrastructure problems, it decreases Russia’s language in the public space.
Soviet countries to prevent the broadcasting of Russian televiĆwiek-Karpowicz, Jarosław.12.
Thus, as this paper has shown, Russia’s instrumenDarczewska, Jolanta.15.
Accessed January 12, linguistic proximity—Russia, by instrumentalizing the 2016. resources of soft power, is in fact diminishing its attractiveness Gerber, Theodore P., and Jane Zavisca.16.
The Ukrainian parliament approved in 2006 a law that deﬁned the tion-and-compatriot-policies-paved-way-for-crimean-annexation-andfamine of 1932–1933 as genocide against the war-in-donbas.
The Baltic States and Eastern Neighborhood malen’kogo syna i zhenu opolchentsa” (Refugee from Slavyansk between Russia and the EU, eds.
Accessed Kontseptsiia vneshnei politiki Rossiiskoi Federatsii (Concept of the Foreign February 10, 2016.
Inﬂuence of the Russian Orthodox Church in Shaping Russia’s Policies ———. 2015b.
A Contribution to the Discussion on Nationalism and Foreign Bogomolov, Alexander, and Oleksandr Lytvynenko.12.
London, October 24. percent20Trade percent20Measures percent20by percent20Russia_0.pdf.
Army War College Analysis of Russian Strategy in Eastern Europe, an Rufabula.com.15.
V sharshikh klassakh vse predmety Appropriate United States Response, and the Implications for United States Landpower. dolzhny byt’ na angliiskom” (Nazarbayev: In High School, All Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, United States Army War College.
Federatsii v otnoshenii sootechestvennikov za rubezhom” (Federal Law on Rukavishnikov, Vladimir.11.
Palgrave Macmillan. bdomp/ns-dgpch.nsf/1a268548523257ccc325726f00357db3/ Rutland, Peter, and Andrei Kazantsev.16.
Russia’s Inﬂuence 2 9 . h t t p : / / w w n a f t o g a z . c o m / w w w / 3 / n a k w e b . n s f / 0 / Abroad.
Holiness Patriarch Kirill at the Opening of the Third Assembly of the Vesti.ru.15.
