From the moment you step on board, our cabin attendants anticipate your every need.
This dedication to detail stems from the Japanese philosophy of Omotenashi.
It's what inspires the world-class service that makes ANA the best choice for flying to Japan and Asia.
Britain’s strategic ambition has fallen even lower than its defence budget, page 49.
How businesses linked to blacklisted oligarchs avoid Western sanctions, page 59.
Programmes that place the best graduates in poor schools are spreading around the world.
Printed by Quad/Graphics, Hartford, WI. 53027 i_ ; iatene(olelenial-lais helping cure cancer.
Using Microsoft Azure ’ | and HDInsight, scientists and engineers at Virginia Tech harness supercomputing power to analyze vast amounts of DNA sequencing Tahie)aaar-licelam-lare mali eme(-1hV-19 lifesaving treatments.
Fighting in south-eastern Ukraine intensified in the run-up to the meeting, raising doubts about the deal.
Barack Obama, who had earlier warned Mr Putin that Russia’s military intervention would be costly, reserved the right to send arms to Ukraine if diplomacy fails.
Greece’s problems mounted as the parliament voted strongly in favour of ending the country’s current bail-out agreement.
A Eurogroup meeting of finance ministers broke up without even agreeing to disagree.
And the Greek prime minister promised to reverse unpopular reforms and spend more public money.
The United Nations said that hundreds of would-be migrants drowned trying to cross the Mediterranean from north Africa when their dinghies overturned.
In Italy the captain of the Costa Concordia, which capsized off the Italian coast in 2012, killing 32 people, was found guilty of manslaughter and sentenced to 16 years in prison.
A court in Belgium jailed the leader of a group that sent jihadist fighters to Syria to12 years in prison.
It also handed out sentences to 44 other members of the group, which was called Sharia4Belgium.
An insecure democracy Nigeria’s electoral commission, an independent body, postponed for six weeks presidential elections that were due to take place on February 14th, throwing the country intoa period of uncertainty.
The commission delayed the vote after the police and army said they could not secure polling stations in the north of Nigeria while also battling Boko Haram, a jihadist group that has overrun large parts of three states there.
The war with Boko Haram has meanwhile widened to involve more neighbouring countries.
Niger declared a state of emergency after several attacks on Diffa, a border region abutting Nigeria.
An attack by the militants in Cameroon led to the kidnapping of as many as 30 people.
The United Nations backed out of supporting a planned offensive in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo against the FDLR, a rebel militia, because two generals assigned to lead the government’s forces are accused of human-rights abuses.
Fuel-price protesters Protests erupted in Haiti against the cost of fuel.
Although prices have been reduced lately, the protesters want more cuts in line with the plunge in oil prices.
The trouble followed demonstrations earlier this year to demand that national and local elections, which are long overdue, be held.
The president, Michel Martelly, has ruled by decree since January, when parliament was dissolved.
At least three people were killed and ten wounded ina gas explosion on a drilling rig operated by Petrobras, Brazil’s state-controlled oil giant.
It recently lost its chief executive, amid a rumbling multi-billion-dollar bribery scandal.
Venezuela’s government took over a private supermarket chain and arrested its boss.
The president, Nicolas Maduro, claimed that the retailer was “waging war against the population” by hoarding food.
Shortages of basic consumer goods have created long queues across Venezuela for months, which economists blame on price controls anda lack of foreign exchange to pay for imports.
Barack Obama formally asked Congress to authorise American military action against Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.
The president’s decision last summer to launch air strikes against Is without congressional approval was controversial, though the administration says it was legal.
Mr Obama wants Congress to approve combat against Is for up to three years.
Hawks fret that putting an expiry date on military action will encourage Is to wait for America to grow weary.
Meanwhile it was confirmed that Kayla Mueller, an American aid worker held by ts, had been killed.
The circumstances of her death were unclear, but the jihadists claim she died when Jordanian jets attacked one of its bases.
A federal judge had struck down the state’s ban on same-sex nuptials, but Alabama’s chief justice ordered officials to defy the ruling.
Some towns went ahead and issued marriage The Economist February 14th 2015 licences; others refused.
The us Supreme Courtis expected to issue a definitive ruling on gay marriage in June.
The new Republican governor of Illinois, Bruce Rauner, started to curb the power of public-sector unions.
He ordered the state to stop automatically collecting union dues from public employees who do not want to join ’ unions.
The unions say they are entitled to this cash because non-members benefit from their collective-bargaining efforts.
Mr Abbott’s approval rating has slumped to 24% amid a series of gaffes, including giving a knighthood to Prince Philip.
The president of Timor-Leste accepted the resignation of Xanana Gusmao as prime minister.
The former “poetwarrior” led the struggle against Indonesian rule and has been either president or prime minister since independence in 2002.
The allegations, published by several media companies in a manner similar to the WikiLeaks revelations, also suggest HSBC Suisse marketed tax-avoidance strategies to its customers.
Funny that The number of people revoking their American citizenship or residency rose to anew record high of 3,415 last year, according to a list published by the Treasury.
No reason was given explaining why they have renounced their citizenship, but the number has leapt since 2010, when Congress passed the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act.
Sweden’s central bank surprised markets by cutting its main interest rate to -0.1%, joining just a handful of countries with negative rates.
Inflation has been below the Riksbank’s target rate of 2% for three years.
However, Sweden’s economy is growing faster than that of the euro zone, which is also battling deflation.
General Motors said that Harry Wilson, a former member of the task-force that restructured the carmaker as it sought to emerge from bankruptcy protection in 2009, is seeking a seat on its board with the express intent of getting it to buy back $8 billion-worth of shares.
Mr Wilson is backed by four hedge funds, in what is the latest example of activist investors pressing a company for higher returns.
China’s competition regulator fined Qualcomm $975m for abusing its market power when licensing patents for smartphone chips.
It is the biggest antitrust penalty to date levied against a single company in China and comes after a14-month investigation that drew comments from observers on the hurdles faced by Western firms there.
Its troubles may not be over; according to reports it faces an antitrust investigation in South Korea, too.
After a two-year takeover battle, Fosun, the largest privately owned conglomerate in mainland China, won its bid for Club Méditerranée, a holiday-resort firm that was wildly popular in the1970s but has struggled over the past decade.
It is revamping its Club Med villages to appeal to the high end of the holiday market and is expanding in China.
Eighty per cent of its new customers in 2013 were either Chinese or Brazilian.
There was some evidence that OPEC’s decision to maintain production levels in the face of plummeting oil prices in order to retain market share may be working.
The cartel raised the forecast for demand for its oil this year slightly, to 29.2m barrels a day, and lowered its estimate of output from nonOPEC producers, as cheap oil forces American and European oil companies to curtail their capital spending.
Reaching for the sun Apple became the first company to notch up a stockmarket valuation above $700 billion at the close of trading.
It was valued at $710 billion on February 10th, $300 billion more than Exxon Mobil, which has the second-highest market value.
Meanwhile, Apple announced thatitis investing $850m in a solarenergy plant in California that will generate enough power for its new campus-headquarters as well as for local shops and businesses.
Boosted in part by a weaker euro, Germany exported a record €11 trillion in goods last year.
It also imported more stuff, but still posted a trade surplus of €217 billion, the second-highest in the world after China’s.
American employers created 257,000 jobs in January, which was much more than had been expected.
The unemployment rate rose slightly to 5.7%, but this was reckoned to be because more people who have been out of work are choosing to return toa buoyant labour market.
Controversy continued to surround the revision to India’s GDP statistics, as figures showed the economy growing by 7.5% year on year in the last three months of 2014, a slightly faster pace than China had recorded.
Some analysts question the data, pointing out that the evidence from small businesses suggests that the economy is struggling to accelerate.
At one time or another, you may have had an unfortunate ation with a vending yw the slightest imprecision getting what you want. different.
If not matched gy, you'll be left hanging. is, State Street Global over 140* SPDR ETFs.
They cover a broad range of asset classes, so investors have the tools they need to build a precise and diversified portfolio. if you have a craving for precision, then visit 7 us at spdrs.com/highlights.
HOt SO AN Leaders The Economist February 14th 2015 Putin’s war on the West As Ukraine suffers, it is time to recognise the gravity of the Russian threat—and to counter it E IS ridiculed for his mendacity and ostracised by his peers.
He presides over a freefalling currency and a rapidly shrinking economy.
International sanctions stop his kleptocratic friends from holidaying in their ill-gotten Mediterranean villas.
Judged against the objectives Vladimir Putin purported to set on inheriting Russia’s presidency 15 years ago—prosperity, the rule of law, westward integration—regarding him as a success might seem bleakly comical.
For all his enemies’ machinations, he remains the Kremlin’s undisputed master.
He has a throttlehold on Ukraine, a grip this week’s brittle agreement in Minsk has not eased.
Domesticating Ukraine through his routine tactics of threats and bribery was his first preference, but the invasion has had side benefits.
It has demonstrated the costs of insubordination to Russians; and, since he thinks Ukraine’s government is merely a puppet of the West (the supposed will of its people being, to his ultracynical mind, merely a cover for Western intrigues), the conflict has usefully shown who is boss in Russia’s backyard.
His overarching aim is to divide and neuter that alliance, fracture its collective approach to security, and resist and roll back its advances.
From his tantrums over the Middle East to his invasion of Georgia and multiple misadventures in Ukraine, Mr Putin has sometimes seemed to stumble into accidental disputes with the West, driven by a paranoid fear of encirclement.
In hindsight it seems that, given his outlook, confrontation may have been inevitable.
Prevailing will require far more resolve than Western leaders have so far mustered.
What the Kremlin wants Last year Mr Putin lopped off Crimea, redrawing Europe’s map by force.
The war he hallucinated into reality in eastern Ukraine has killed thousands.
Yet these incursions are only his latest bid to bludgeon former Soviet states into submission, whether through energy blackmail, trade embargoes or war.
For Mr Putin the only good neighbour is a weak one; vassals are better than allies.
To him, Western institutions and values are more threatening than armies.
He wants to halt their spread, corrode them from within and, at least on the West’s fragile periphery, supplant them with his own model of governance.
In that model, nationstates trump alliances, states are dominated by elites, and those elites can be bought.
Discredit that—by, for example, staging a pro-Russian uprising in Estonia or Latvia, which other NATO members decline to help quell—and the alliance crumbles.
Mr Putin’s stranglehold on his own country means he has time and freedom for this campaign.
As he has amply demonstrated, he has no qualms about sacrificing Russians’ wellbeing to satisfy his coterie’s greed or to further his geopolitical schemes.
And in the echo chamber his propaganda creates, the nationalism he peddles as a consolation for domestic woes is flourishing.
Barack Obama has blithely regarded Russia as an awkward regional power, prone to post-imperial spasms but essentially declining.
Historians will be amazed that, with Ukraine aflame, the West was still debating whether to eject Russia from the G8.
To paraphrase Trotsky, Western leaders may not have been interested in Mr Putin, but Mr Putin was interested in them.
His Russia has graduated from harassing ambassadors and assassinating critics to invasions.
The current version of this quandary is whether, if the latest ceasefire fails, to arm Ukraine.
Proponents think defensive weapons would inflict a cost on Mr Putin for fighting on.
But anyone who doubts his tolerance of mass casualties should recall his war in Chechnya.
If fresh Russian aggression galvanises the alliance, arming Ukraine will become amore potent threat.
If that seems wishy-washy beside his tanks, remember that the crisis began with Ukrainians’ desire to tilt towards the EU— and Mr Putin’s determination to stop them.
Just as urgently, those former Soviet countries that have joined Western institutions must be buttressed and reassured.
If the case for sending arms to the Donbas is doubtful, that for basing NATO troops in the Baltics is overwhelming, however loudly Mr Putin squeals.
Western leaders must make it clear, to him and their own people, that they will defend their allies, and the alliance—even if the struggle is covert and murky.
So do many Russians, including shameless Putinists who deThe unbalanced global economy American shopper nounce the West’s decadence but exploit its schools and stockmarkets.
It is long past time for every Russian parliamentarian and senior official to join the sanctions list.
At the same time, the West should use every available means to help ordinary Russians, including Russian-sympathisers in the Baltics and Ukraine, learn the bloody, venal truth about Mr Putin.
It should let them know that Russia, a great nation dragged down a terrible path, will be embraced when it has rulers who treat the world, and their own people, with respect not contempt, however long that takes. m The world is once again relying too much on American consumers to power growth GLOBAL economy running on a single engine is better than one that needs jump leads.
The American economy is motoring again, to the relief of exporters from Hamburg to Hangzhou.
Buoyed up by cheap petrol, Americans are spending; in January consumer sentiment jumped to its highest in more than a decade.
The mF reckons that American growth will hit 3.6% in 2015, faster than the world economy as a whole.
But growing dependence on the American economy— and on consumers in particular—has unwelcome echoes.
They filled their ever-larger houses with goods from China; they fuelled gas-guzzling cars with imported oil.
Big exporters recycled their earnings back to America, pushing down interest rates which in turn helped to feed further borrowing.
There, frugal Germans financed debt binges around the euro area’s periphery.
After the financial crisis, the hope was of an end to these imbalances.
Debt-addicted Americans and Spaniards would chip away at their obligations; thrifty German and Chinese consumers would start to enjoy life for once.
America’s trade deficit, which was about 6% of GpP in 2006, had more than halved by 2009.
Hair grows faster than the euro zone, and what growth there is depends heavily on exports.
The countries of the single currency are running a current-account surplus of about 2.6% of Gpp, thanks largely to exports to America.
At 7.4% of GppP, Germany’s trade surplus is as large as it has ever been.
China’s growth, meanwhile, is slowing—and once again relying heavily on spending elsewhere.
China’s exports have actually begun to drop, but imports are down by more.
Consumption’s contribution to growth in the fourth quarter of 2014 was the largest since 2006.
Households and firms in Europe’s periphery are overburdened with debt, workers’ wages squeezed and banks in no mood to lend.
The prospect of quantitative easing by the European Central Bank has sent the euro tumbling against the greenback, further helping European exporters.
The Federal Reserve appears ready to begin raising interest rates this summer.
That is sending yield-hungry capital to America, and the dollar skyward.
The short-term worry is that weak exports, arising dollar and a slowdown in energy investment (because of falling oil prices) will stifle the American expansion.
Rather than pull others along, America will be dragged down by their weakness.
The longer-term fear is that growing imbalances will repeat the financial cycle of the 2000s, in which exporters to America once again finance reckless consumer borrowing.
The ratio of Americans’ debt to income has fallen from a pre-crisis high of more than 120% to around 100%, but consumers still have too much incentive to load up on debt.
Politicians would do well to get rid of subsidies like tax relief on mortgage interest.
Leaders from Brussels to Beijing should not allow falling currencies to become a substitute for structural reform, or for efforts to boost spending at home.
After all, he (like the vast majority of Greeks) wants to stay in the single currency.
But even as he prepared to meet fellow European Union leaders for the first time this week, he was making a Greek exit from the euro ever more likely.
Mr Tsipras has put forward some good arguments against the austerity that has been imposed on Greece as the price of its bail-outs.
He has sound ideas on attacking corruption, fighting tax evasion and shaking up Greece’s cosy business elite.
But his first moves in office included promises to raise the minimum wage to pre-crisis levels, reverse labour-market reforms, restore pension increases, rehire thousands of public servants and scrap privatisation projects.
These would not just breach Greece’s bail-out terms, but also wreck the country’s economic prospects.
To reverse course in this way when Greece’s economy is at last growing and unemployment is falling is perverse.
In its business climate it lags behind neighbouring Bulgaria, the poorest EU country, in areas such as enforcing contracts, registering property and providing credit.
Mr Tsipras foolishly refuses to prolong Greece’s bail-out programme when it expires at the end of the month, talking inTeacher recruitment Those who can How to turn teaching into a job that attracts high-flyers MAGINE a job where excellence does nothing to improve your pay or chances of promotion, and failure carries little risk of being sacked.
Your pay is low for your qualifications—but at , least the holidays are long, and , [mm the pension is gold-plated.
Tene ought to ee a profession for hard-working altruists who wantto improve children’s life prospects.
But all too often school systems seem designed to attract mediocre timeservers.
There is a case for removing the EcB, which is politicised by its involvement in the troika.
But Mr Tsipras cannot expect more loans without conditions, as the bad-tempered break-up of this week’s Eurogroup meeting demonstrated.
The maturity and interest cost of the debt, two-thirds of which is owed to official European creditors, are so generous that Greece pays a smaller share of GpP in debt service than Portugal and Italy.
The government is now required to run a primary budget surplus of 3% of GpP this year, rising to 4.5% from 2016 onwards.
A compromise of around 2.5% would allow him to spend more on social programmes.
Here, then, is a simple message for European leaders to give MrTsipras.
They will help him on debt and the budget, but only if he is prepared to make his economy more competitive.
But, as lazy and incompetent teachers get away with slacking, the committed ones often lose motivation.
Jaded British teachers on online forums remind each other that it is just a few months till the long summer break—and just a few years till retirement.
Yet it is possible to persuade the hardworking and ambi>> > tious to teach.
Finland pays teachers modestly but manages them well; ten graduates apply for each training place.
South Korea recruits teachers from the top 5% of school-leavers and promises them fat pay cheques.
In both countries teachers are revered—and results are among the world’s best.
Even where the profession isin disrepute, high-flyers can be lured into the classroom.
Teach First, Britain’s version, has helped raise standards in London and is one of the country’s most prestigious graduate employers.
Spreading the revolution to the entire profession will mean dumping the perks cherished by slackers and setting terms that appeal to the hardworking.
That may well mean higher pay—but also less generous pensions and holidays.
Stiffer entry requirements would raise the job’s status and attract better applicants.
They know whatit takes to succeed in difficult schools, and what it would take for success to become the norm.
As they become more numerous and influential, they need to argue for a new deal for teachers.
The good ones deserve it—and pupils do, too. m China’s army Lifting the veil XiJinping is bringing a corrupt army to heel.
Now he must make it behave responsibly O SECRETIVE is China’s army that it began admitting foreign journalists to its monthly—and highly uninformative— 4 briefings only last year.
Never before in China’s history have so many high-ranking officers faced such charges at once.
No leader since Deng Xiaoping in the 1980s has held such sway over the armed forces.
His purge of its highest echelons may be partly aimed at crushing potential rivals.
But itis also part of Mr Xi’s campaign against corruption throughout the party and government and it has struck fear into the hearts of politicians and military officers, regardless of their loyalties.
Mr Xishould now use his grip over the PLA to achieve more than just suppress the rampant practice of buying ranks and doing dodgy business deals.
The army remains largely unchanged in two important, and worrying, ways.
First, it is still deeply wary of contacts with its Western counterparts.
During the cold war, America and the Soviet Union worked out codes of conduct to prevent accidents between their warships or fighter planes.
China’s army does not accept the kind of surveillance that the Americans and Russians routinely carried out near each other’s territory during the cold war.
The scarcity of “mil-mil” contacts makes it harder for America and China to communicate in times of crisis.
Secondly, the pLa fosters a paranoid fear within its ranks that America is bent on China’s destruction.
It is only natural for the pLa to be suspicious of the American army and vice versa.
But if the two countries are to cultivate a “new type of great-power relationship”, as Mr Xi often says he wants and the world clearly needs, then their relations have to be built on stronger foundations.
Mr Xi, it was announced this week, will travel to America in September for his first state visit.
It would help if he curbed his army’s tendency to portray America as China’s arch-enemy.
This month the Pentagon said it would not send an aircraft-carrier on a visit to China this year, an idea that both sides had been mulling.
Pentagon officials, it seems, agree with John McCain, a hawkish Republican senator, who said that sending “one of the most sophisticated and lethal military tools in world history” would be a mistake at a time of anxiety in Asia about China’s “aggressive” behaviour in the region.
Such a gesture could help to forge ties with a military establishment that America needs to know better.
Simplicity can be the difference between a mission statement and a mission accomplished.
There are private schools on America’s east coast that cater to the elite, such as Groton, St Paul’s, Andover, Exeter and Hotchkiss, but they leave a pin prick on American life.
American commentators do not see the need to run stories similar to those in the British media about how many businessmen, judges, army officers, lawyers, journalists and actors come from the 7% who are privately educated.
Rich Americans send their children to state schoolsina way rich Britons do not.
Granted, localised funding in America provides wealthy areas with schools that achieve better academically, but these schools are still part of the state system and its culture.
Walk down a street in St Andrews or Durham and you will see what I mean.
SIMON BARROW London You charted the rapidly rising cost of college tuition and fees in America.
However, what really matters is that the burden for paying those costs has shifted greatly from the states to students and their families.
The anti-tax agenda has substantially diminished the ability of states to underwrite the cost of higher education.
One of America’s most important innovations was the creation of great public universities.
What had been an extraordinary public good and aremarkable vehicle for upward social mobility is increasingly a private good, available to students from families who can afford it.
Toa distressing degree America has broken faith with its commitment to public higher education, and with those for whom it represents a way up.
MICHAEL BRACKEN London Trying to prevent suicide Your article on suicide in America (“An awful hole”, January 31st) reminded me of an incident I saw in Japan, of the body of a young woman being removed from under a train.
Jumping in front of a train is one of the most common ways to commit suicide.
Removing that stigma and controlling access to guns would not, as you suggest, lower America’s suicide rate.
Furthermore, cognitive behavioural therapy is better at treating depression and reducing suicidal urges than drugs.
Itis 20 years later and I still remember the thin gold watch on her limp arm.
But for most recipients, the state pension is related to nationalinsurance contributions.
That is why thousands of nonresident British citizens, such as myself, opt to pay voluntary contributions to get a full state pension when they retire.
There is a big distinction between the state pension and the various non-means-tested giveaways that you mentioned.
The state pension is a part-contributory, part-taxfunded system for ensuring a minimum income to the elderly.
Free bus passes, winter heating allowances and the like are indefensible if they are _ paid out regardless of wealth.
But boys and young men should also get the jab as it reduces the likelihood of contracting other types of cancer caused by the human papillomavirus.
Far from remaining “stuck with nearzero growth” those countries of the southern euro zone that have followed Angela Merkel’s prescription of labour-market reform and fiscal repair started to recover nicely some four to six quarters ago.
In the last two quarters for which we have data, annualised growth averaged 2.4% for Spain, 2.2% for Greece and 1.2% for Portugal.
For Spain and Portugal, leading indicators project stronger gains ahead while, sadly, Greek indicators have started to nosedive with the rise of the Syriza threat.
The medicine was bitter, and probably dished out as an overdose in the case of Greece.
Ithas a mild recession precisely because it has not yet swallowed the labour-reform pill.
The Economist February 14th 2015 If Greece now reverses its own labour reforms it will probably sink back into recession.
HOLGER SCHMIEDING Chief economist Berenberg London Greece’s debt looks unpayable only if one looks at the wrong statistics, such as the debt stock as ashare of Gpp, which you regrettably do.
Greece’s debt is at extremely concessional terms, resulting in an effective interest rate on public debt that is lower than Germany’s, anda public debt-service burden that, as a share of Gpp, is about the same as America’s.
HENRY KASPAR Washington, DC Scent by post One of the hyenas depicted on the February 7th cover is cocking a leg while urinating.
Peer review—the process by which academics check the work of their colleagues before it goes to print—is evolving.
Some of their experiments might work The invective that Hungary’s most powerful businessman has unleashed over the past few days towards his country’s prime minister is exceptional.
Beyond the colourful language, the spat is the most serious break yet in Viktor Orban’s governing Fidesz party None of the popular hagiographies of St Valentine give any hint of him liking chocolate.
Standing room C2 | Yet again a story has surfaced of an A-_| airline trying to get approval fora standing section ona plane.
Private lives uta People who work for religious organisations should think about the consequences for their personal lives.
They cannot claim the right to privacy 9) Schumpeter The network effect Materials science Wings of steel 4 Nigeria’s election The least awful 5 Human mating strategies Cads and dads Events ""’A woman's evolutionary reasons to play fast and loose are less obvious, for having many lovers will not bring her more children.
OR CONTACT OUR HIGH TECH HUMAN TOUCH Advisor Competency Based Training and Teaching & Learning Material Pakistan, Islamabad GIZ dedicated to development The context The programme supporting the reform of vocational training in Pakistan aims to improve access to, equal opportunities in, and the relevance of vocational training in the country, Within the scope of the programme, targeted measutes will strengthen the implementation partners capacity to develop competency based training programmes as well as teaching and learning materials.
Your role Develop CBT programmes & TLM for selected trades, organize meetings, workshops and trainings in the context of CBT development and implementation; develop annual plans with budgets regarding CBT programme & TLM development activities; identify relevant experts and organizations to complete CBT & TLM development assignments; define CBT & TLM development processes, templates and guidelines in consultation with stakeholders whenever necessary.
Your Profile You have a Master degree, preferably in vocational training, engineering or business science.
You also have at least 10 years of professional experience with designing, developing, implementing and evaluating of CBT programmes and teaching and learning materials, ideally in an international environment, preferable ~ in Australia or New Zealand, Teaching experience gained at vocational colleges would be a further advantage.
You have experience of cooperating with implementing organisations and working with multinational teams, preferably in countries undergoing conflict and crisis.
InterExec is the global leader in getting top executives to the pinnacle of their careers.
Using our unique international network and in-depth market knowledge, we act discreetly to provide unrivalled access to prime opportunities which are rarely published.
The CEB represents a major instrument of solidarity policy in Europe, helping its 41 Member States to achieve sustainable and equitable growth.
The Economist February 14th 2015 Executive Focus DIRECTOR, TROPICAL FOREST ALLIANCE 2020 The World Economic Forum is the international institution committed to improving the state of the world through public-private cooperation.
We are currently looking for an outstanding person to lead the Tropical Forest Alliance 2020.
You are particularly competent at delivering international forestry or agricultural partnerships, publicWORLD ECONOMIC FORUM ~~ COMMITTED TO IMPROVING THE STATE OF THE WORLD The Tropical Forest Alliance 2020 is a global public-private partnership where partners take voluntary actions, individually and in combination, to reduce the tropical deforestation associated with the sourcing of commodities such as palm oil, soy, beef, and paper & pulp.
Linked to our Global Challenge Initiative on Environment and Natural Resource Security, the World Economic Forum has been invited to host the TFA 2020 secretariat for at least three years from spring 2015 until the end of 2017, supported by international donors including the governments of Norway and the United Kingdom.
As the director of TFA 2020, you will be its recognized leader to all external private engagement, project and team management, public speaking, problem solving and synthesizing. constituents, partners and within the World Economic Forum and our various networks.
Specifically, as guided by the TFA 2020 steering committee, you will lead and manage the TFA 2020 secretariat, ensuring its objectives and expected deliverables are met on time, with the right impact and within budget.
If you have at least 15 years’ relevant experience in the public, private or civil society sectors, with significant experience working across sectors, and either an MD or PhD, please apply.
The European Food Safety Authority is at the heart of the EU’s risk assessment system for food and feed, providing scientific advice which helps to ensure that people across the continent have access to safe, nutritious food.
Provide intellectual, strategic and operational leadership in developing the Department's work program; Lead and manage the REPRO Department ensuring it fulfils its mission; + Develop and deploy a culture of service in interfacing with various stakeholders; Act as a catalyser and generator of innovation and changes; «Contribute to enhance the reputation of the Authority in the provision of excellence in scientific output.
The position is based in Geneva and requires significant travel; salary is in line with official international organizations.
Its purpose is to help prevent long-term changes to the climate system of our home planet.
It channels climate finance flows into renewable energy and climate protection projects in emerging economies.
The Fund is seeking highly qualified individuals who demonstrate talent in multidisciplinary fields.
This is a | unique opportunity to be part of a start-up in international climate finance that offers stimulating challenges.
Apply for GCF staff, consultancy and internship positions at www.gcfund.org/about/opportunities/vacancies.
The intelligence Economist Unit Economist London-based covering Europe As the research and analysis division of the Economist Group, The Economist Intelligence Unit helps leaders prepare for opportunity, empowering them to act with confidence when making strategic decisions.
The EIU is the global standard in providing quality, actionable intelligence to the public and private sector, assessing issues that impact the marketplace for over two hundred countries.
Responsible for production and quality, you will contribute to all areas of the region’s editorial output, undertaking economic and political forecasting and analysis; demonstrating outstanding editorial standards, intellectual leadership and analytical capability; and representing the EIU externally.
This willinvolve focusing on specified countries to produce several reports per month; leading EIU thinking on those countries; preparing daily research notes which interpret politicaland economic events; and commissioning contributors.
To succeed you must have experience of analysing and forecasting political and economic trends; strong writing and editing skills in English; the ability to organise, prioritise and remain calm under pressure; and a collaborative, quality-conscious approach.
We are committed to equal opportunities and creating an inclusive environment for all our employees.
We welcome applicants regardless of ethnic origin, gender, religious beliefs, disability, sexual orientation or age.
This is an opportunity for individuals, companies, think-tanks, academic and research institutions to undertake short-term assignments for the Commonwealth Secretariat on financing for development policy issues.
We are seeking to establish a pool of specialist expertise which we can quickly access.
Consultants will be approached to undertake specific assignments such as research and analysis ; preparing policy papers and briefs; and presenting/facilitating discussions at Commonwealth, International and expert meetings and conferences.
Applicants must have a post-graduate degree in finance and / or economics and substantial postgraduate research / policy development experience in the same field, Your experience of working as a consultant / expert for international and / or regional organisations dealing with financing for development policy issues will be highly regarded, and will equip you with the requisite expert knowledge of recent developments in international economic issues, financing for development and / or the international development system.
Further, you have demonstrable experience in undertaking analytical work on policy formulation and impact assessment; an in-depth understanding of the functioning of the global development and financing architecture; and the outstanding communications skills to present convincingly to policymakers.
To find out more, please go to thecommonwealth.org/jobs The closing date is Thursday 12 March.
Economist £58,578 pa gross + benefits Three-year fixed-term contract London-based with international travel With your 5+ years’ debt management experience or post-doctoral research in sovereign fixed income market; risk management analysis; programming in Matlab tools; or writing analytical reports, you couldjoin us to make a tangible difference to countries’ debt management.
You will be focused on the quantitative analysis and forecasting of macro-economic and financial market variables in client countries; supporting the development of debt management strategies based on a risk management framework; and contributing to the analytical enhancement of debt management solutions.
Following your post-graduate qualification in economics or quantitative finance, your debt management experience must have been gained in government or international organisations and you must be a citizen of a Commonwealth country.
We work with our member governments in areas of economic, social and political development.
Recent refocusing of our priorities has created some outstanding opportunities to help us provide practical technical assistance, offering thought leadership and innovative solutions, and advocacy.
As we improve the wellbeing of 2. billion citizens, 60% of whom are under 30 years of age, so we give you the opportunity to take a significant step in your career and make an important contribution through this role.
To find out more, please go to thecommonwealth.org/jobs The closing date is Monday 23 February.
The Economist February 14th 2015 From cold war to hot war BRUSSELS, LONDON AND MOSCOW Russia’s aggression in Ukraine is part of a broader, and more dangerous, confrontation with the West HE pens were on the table in Minsk, Belarus’s capital, for the leaders of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine to sign a deal to end a year-long war fuelled by Russia and fought by its proxies.
Meanwhile the 1mr has said it will lend Ukraine $17. billion to prop up its economy.
Alexander Prokhanoy, a nationalist writer who backs Russia’s war in Ukraine, compares European civilisation to a magnet attracting Ukraine and Russia.
Russia feels threatened not by any individual European state, but by the European Union and NATO, which it regards as ex20 Briefing What Russia wants > pansionist.
America “wants to freeze the order established after the Soviet collapse and remain an absolute leader, thinking it can do whatever it likes, while others can do only what is in that leader’s interests,” Mr Putin said recently.
The Donbas rebels are fighting not only the Ukrainian army, but against a corrupt Western way of life in order to defend Russia’s distinct world view.
Mistaken hopes Many in the West equate the end of communism with the end of the cold war.
But without the ability to apply hard power, Russia’s version of soft power would achieve little.
Russia “has invested heavily in defence,” says NATO’s new secretarygeneral, a former Norwegian prime minister, Jens Stoltenberg.
According to IHs Jane’s, a defence consultancy, by next year Russia’s defence spending will have tripled in nominal terms since 2007, and it will be halfway through a ten-year, 20 trillion rouble ($300 billion) programme to modernise its weapons.
A revised military doctrine signed by Mr Putin in December identified “reinforcement of NATO’s offensive capacities directly on Russia’s borders, and measures taken to deploy a global anti-missilé defence system” in central Europe as the greatest threats Russia faces.
But Mr Putin is fond of saying that nobody should try to shove Russia around when it has one of the world’s biggest nuclear arsenals.
Ordinary contract soldiers are also still a long way behind special forces such as the Gru Spetsnaz (the “little green men” who went into Crimea without military insignia) and the elite airborne VDV troops, but they are catching up.
Boots on the ground South-east Ukraine shows the new model army at work.
Russia’s European supporters Briefing What Russia wants 21 There have also been at least two nearmisses between Russian military aircraft and Swedish airliners.
Such behaviour is in>> In the Kremlin’s pocket Who backs Putin, and why OPULIST parties of both right and left, many pro-Russian, did well in last May’s European elections, taking between them a quarter of the seats.
This has raised fears of a coherent pro-Russian block forming in Strasbourg.
In Greece, the now-ruling radical-left Syriza party leans towards Russia.
On — February uth Nikos Kotzias, the new foreign minister, went to Moscow-—his first visit to a foreign capital outside the _ European Union.
Anotherleft-wing, broadly pro-Russian upstart is Podemos in Spain, which leads in the polls.
Its. leaderhas accused the Westofdouble _ standardsindealingwithRussia. — France’s National Front, the foremost right-nationalist party, openly admires — Mr Putin.
Itrecently — accepted a €9.4m loan from First Czech Russian Bank, a lender with indirect links to the Kremlin.
Its most controversial figure, Bela Kovacs, a member of the European Parliament, has lobbied on behalf of Russian interests and supported the invasion of Crimea.
But Fidesz, Hungary’s ruling party, once fiercely anti-communist, has also been cultivating closer Russian ties.
In July the prime minister, Viktor Orban, said he was striving to build “an illiberal state” within the Eu.
And uxip’s leader, Nigel Farage, has called Mr Putin ie woud leader he most admires—at least as a political operator.
There is, however, scant evidence that Europe’s populist parties, FN apart, have accepted Russian money-—though it is hard to be sure, given their opaque finances.
Anton Shekhotsov, an expert on fringe parties, thinks that the loan to the _ French party is the exception rather than the rule.
He points out that the Kremlin, in the past at least, preferred to provide “fees” to individual politicians than financial support to their parties.
A motley crew of populists were flown in to give ringing _ endorsements of the Crimea referendum and the election in the Donbas, organised by separatists.
Among them were Mr Kovacs and Aymeric Chauprade, an adviser to Ms Le Pen.
Russian media falsely portrayed these lackeys as 26 ae independent observers.
Since 2013, when Russia restarted largescale snap military exercises, at least eight have been held.
In December the Kremlin ordered one in Kaliningrad, an exclave that borders Lithuania and Poland, both NATO members.
It mobilised 9,000 soldiers, more than 55 navy ships and every type of military aircraft.
Meddling and perverting Destabilisation is also being achieved in less military ways.
Disruptive politics Far-right groups are seduced by the idea of Moscow as a counterweight to the EU, and by its law-and-order policies.
With Republicans resurgent, school vouchers are back O* THE desk of Zeus Rodriguez, the president of St Anthony Schoolin Milwaukee, a mini Republican primary is underway.
A signed photograph of Scott Walker, the governor of Wisconsin, competes for space with snaps of Rand Paul and Jeb Bush—all three of them presidential hopefuls.
St Anthony’s is popular among conservatives because it has more pupils taking advantage of governmentfunded vouchers than any other private schoolin America.
The local neighbourhood was once populated by German and Polish Catholics but is now home to the Hispanic sort.
Yet 95% of the first two classes of high-school students from St Anthony’s have graduated and more than 90% have gone on to college.
All this, for a cost to taxpayers of just $7,500 per pupil; Milwaukee’s public schools, by contrast, spend a whopping $13,000.
After the Republicans’ success in state elections in November, several are pushing to increase the number and scope of school voucher schemes.
In a budget unveiled on February 3rd, Governor Walker called for the expansion of Wisconsin’s three voucher schemes, though he left the details fuzzy.
In each of the 24 states that have vouchers, lawmakers propose to make more children eligible, says Robert Enlow of the Friedman Foundation, which advocates for school choice.
George P Bush (son of Jeb), recently argued for their introduction to Texas, where he is land commissioner.
OECD, Public and Private Schools The Economist February 14th 2015 Also in this section 24 Taxes and cigarette-smuggling 24 At last, a real recovery 26 Tycoons and farm subsidies 28 Barack Obama’s war powers 29 Gay marriage in Alabama 29 Bondage in the Bible belt 30 Lexington: David Axelrod meets reality For daily analysis and debate on America, visit Economist.com/unitedstates Economist.com/blogs/democracyinamerica most of the change is taking place lower down, thanks to vouchers aimed at poor kids in awful public schools.
If these programmes are expanded, America will look a bit more like Japan or the Netherlands, where private schools serve lots of hard-up families and children do better in exams than Americans.
The first came in the late 19th century amid a panic about Catholic Europeans subverting the country’s Protestant identity.
James Blaine, a former Speaker of the House of Representatives, proposed an amendment to the federal constitution banning public funding for religious schools.
The proposal failed, but many states passed their own version of a Blaine amendment and currently three-quarters of states ban directly spending public money on religious institutions.
The ban on publicly-funded Catholic schools spurred the creation of lots of privately-funded ones.
The second wave came after the desegregation of public schools in the South following Brown v Board of Education, when recalcitrant whites set up private schools to keep their children apart from black ones.
The third wave has been underway since 1990, when Milwaukee’s pioneering school-voucher programme began.
Most began life as schemes to help families in predominantly black neighbourhoods with failing schools find something better, and were then extended to children in foster care and those with special needs.
Only now are they being ex>> 24 United States >tended to families wealthy enough that they might have sent their children to lowcost private schools anyway.
Despite providing the inspiration for this movement, Milwaukee’s experience with school vouchers has been mixed.
As well as successes like St Anthony’s there have been some horror stories.
One new private school was run by a convicted rapist; another by a man who used school money to buy himself a pair of MercedesBenzes.
The outright frauds have since been weeded out, but there remain a lot of poorly performing private schools, just as there are many bad public ones.
Wisconsin’s education department has commissioned evaluations over the past 25 years which, controlling for race, income and sex, found that the test scores of children at private schools are no better than those who stayed in the public school system.
This is consistent with the federal government’s evaluation of the voucher scheme for poor parents in bad school districts in Washington, Dc, which found no statistical difference between children who were given vouchers and those who were notin reading and maths.
In both Milwaukee and Washington, voucher schemes get similar results to the public schools but with much less money.
Under the pc scheme, each voucher is worth $8,500 a year, compared with $17,500 to educate a child in the public school system.
In Milwaukee the difference is smaller but still amounts to several thousand dollars.
Another consistent finding from voucher schemes is that parents like being given a choice, which explains why vouchers, once granted, are hard to take away.
Though Milwaukee’s experience overall has been mixed it still has lessons for elsewhere.
If one includes private schools, charter schools and open enrolment at public schools (which means parents may enroll their children in a school that is not in the neighbourhood where they live), around 40% of parents in Milwaukee exercise some kind of choice over their children’s education, an unusually high share.
With so much competition, it is hard for any school to grow complacent.
Some private schools do very well with poor black and Hispanic children, others fail them and yet manage to stay in business, which suggests that even with lots of parents choosing there is a need for an authority than can close the bad schools down.
The good schools, however constituted, have good teachers, inspiring principals and respond to their surroundings.
One such is St Marcus Lutheran, a private school on the other side of town from St Anthony’s.
Some 90% of the pupils at St Marcus are from black, low-income families.
If parents can’t bring their children to school, the staff will go and pick them up.
Some children come from chaotic homes, so the school stays open until 8.30pm and serves dinner.
Ina state that sends a higher proportion of black men to prison than any other, rates of incarceration for St Marcus’s alumni are below the national average for all races.
In their first quartercentury, voucher schemes have faced fierce opposition and coped despite much smaller budgets.
A recent report found that illicit smokes are more than 20% of _ total consumption in 15 states.
There are sound public-health reasons for taxing toba co but as the map shows, the higher the taxes, the bigger the black market. phe The economy At last, a proper recovery WASHINGTON, DC Allsorts of Americans are feeling more prosperous HE American economy has technically been out of recession for six years.
Many who had given up looking for work are trying again— and succeeding.
Lower oil prices also help, since America is still anetimporter of the stuff.
Contraband flows as % of cigarettes smoked, 2013 OUTFLOWS <@ | > INFLOWS iia os.
At 5.7%, America’s is one of the lowest in the OECD, a club of rich countries.
Firms added more than 1m net new jobs in the three months to January, the best showing since 1997.
The Job Openings and Labour Turnover Survey, released on February 10th, showed that by the end of December there were 5m job openings, the highest level since 2001.
Tighter lim_ its on how long people may claim unemployment benefits, which took effect at the beginning of 2014, may have made lowskilled workers more appealing to employers.
By encouraging the jobless to accept lower wages, it may have enticed companies to create more jobs.
Indeed, half the jobs added in January were in low-wage industries like restaurants and shops.
With more work available, in the past year the unemployment rate for Americans without a high-school diploma has fallen by one percentage point.
As the prospects of those at the bottom have brightened, more and more Americans have got up off the sofa and pulled on their work boots.
Source; Bureau of Labour Statistics _ *Because of slack work or business conditions shrank, as disappointed jobseekers gave up hope.
In 2010 1.3m Americans were not looking for work because, they said, there was none available.
No wonder, then, that the labour-force participation rate is finally inching up.
Things are also looking better for those Farm subsidies Milking taxpayers WASHINGTON, DC already in work.
Some 4m Americans who work part-time say they would rather work full-time but can’t get the hours thanks to the lousy economy.
Average weekly earnings in January were 2.8% higher than they were a year earlier, the biggest increase since mid-201u.
That sounds great, but it is probably down to people working longer, rather than better.
In the fourth quarter of 2014 labour productivity fell by 1.8% on an annualised basis.
Americans put in 5% more time at the office—the biggest jump in hours since 1998.
If wages do not take off, Janet Yellen, the chair of the Federal Reserve, will not rush to increase interest rates from their current rock-bottom levels.
Americans would struggle to repay some of their record-beating creditcard debt.
That would lead to big problems in an economy where inflation will remain close to zero in 2015 and Gpp growth is not wild.
Ms Yellen should enjoy the recovery while it lasts. m As crop prices fall, farmers grow subsidies instead HE father of Major Major, a character in Catch 22, a novel by Joseph Heller, makes a good living not growing alfalfa.
To this day, to be treated as a farmer in America doesn’t necessarily require you to grow any crops.
According to the Government Accountability Office, between 2007 and 20 Uncle Sam paid some $3m in subsidies to 2,300 farms where no crop of any sort was grown.
Between 2008 and 2012, $10.6m was paid to farmers who had been dead for over a year.
Such payments explain why Tom Vilsack, the agriculture secretary, is promoting a rule to attempt to crack down on payments to non-farming folk.
But with crop prices now falling, taxpayers are braced to be fleeced again.
American farm subsidies are egregiously expensive, harvesting $20 billion a year from taxpayers’ pockets.
Most of the money goes to big, rich farmers producing staple commodities such as corn and soyabeans in states such as Iowa.
Opposition to spending is muted; few voters realise how much of their money is given to farmers and even fewer would change their vote because of it.
The 2014 bill, which passed with 68 votes in the Senate and comfortably in the House, at least nodded to reform.
Most importantly Congress abolished direct payments based on land ownership.
Instead, farmers now get more subsidised insurance, and new payments which are linked to past crop prices and productivity.
Those not “actively engaged” in farming are in theory banned from collecting subsidies— though Congress delegated the task of defining who is really a farmer to Mr Vilsack’s department.
It could also get America into trouble with the World Trade Organisation if payments exceed certain thresholds.
Ominously, on February 1oth the usDA predicted that net farm income would decline by 32% between 2014 and 2015.
Commodities such as corn (which in America is used to produce everything from biofuel to syrup) and soya have become less valuable of late thanks to soaring supply and weak demand.
But those gains will be wiped out and more by the cost of compensating farmers for their lower incomes.
Any new rules designed to stop nonfarmers from getting payments will be unlikely to work, predicts Mr Smith.
Many landowners have already found their way around similar rules introduced in the farm bill of 2008, nominating young children as farmers, or claiming to be engaged in farming by providing management advice.
He announced his intention to work with Congress on refining and ultimately repealing the hastily drafted Authorisation for Use of Military Force granted in the first days after the 2001 attacks.
Alas for Mr Obama—whose political rise was rocket-powered by his opposition to the 2003 Iraq war—events have intervened.
On February uth the president asked Congress for a fresh AUMF endorsing a limited use of America’s armed forces, including ground troops, against Islamic State and its allies.
Local forces were best placed to defeat the extremist group, he said, adding that the AUMF wording is intended only to give him “flexibility”, for instance to send special forces after targets in locations where local allies could not act.
The request to Congress comes six months after America began air strikes against Is fighters, first in Iraq then in Syria.
Mr Obama already claims legal authority for today’s strikes under a broad reading of the 2001 AUME, which permits attacks on al-Qaeda and “associated” groups, as well as under his presidential powers of national self-defence.
This new authorisation invites the Republican-controlled Congress to give explicit backing for a long-lasting campaign to “degrade and defeat” 1s.
The draft would repeal a 2002 AUMF under which President George W Bush invaded Iraq.
Such Republican hawks as Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina signalled that Senate hearings would become a broader debate about Middle East strategy and whether American firepower also needs to be used against the regime of President Bashar Assad in Syria.
The AUMF risks failing in the Senate if it does not “let us counter Assad’s air power”, Mr Graham told reporters.
Libertarian Republicans are more sceptical that American might can do much good in that region.
Some Democrats, including members of Congress who drew up their own draft AUMES last year, fret that the current lan~ guage could allow Mr Obama or his successor to launch a fresh ground war in the Middle East.
With 60 votes needed to ensure passage in the Senate, a final text will need bipartisan support there.
There are already some 2,630 American troops in Iraq, advising Iraqi and Kurdish forces and protecting American facilities.
A programme to train vetted Syrian opposition fighters in neighbouring countries remains embryonic.
Polls show that Americans consider Is a serious threat, notably after the murder of Americans, most recently Kayla Mueller, a young aid worker.
But most oppose sending ground troops to Iraq if air strikes do not work.
Jack Goldsmith, a former Pentagon lawyer who teaches national-security law at Harvard Law School, says the draft AUMF amounts to a striking expansion of presidential authority.
The 2001 aumF is already being interpreted broadly to allow strikes on Is.
But rather than supersede that old authorisation or place time limits on its validity, this new 2015 AUME “builds on and adds to it”, he says.
For inside this courthouse Alabama’s first same-sex marriages were solemnised on February 9th.
Campaigners for gay rights feel that history is on their side, so they are not shy about invoking it.
Pro-gay demonstrators outside the same courthouse likened their opponents to the white southerners who tried to preserve Jim Crow.
Now, as then, some Alabamians feel it is their Godgiven duty to do exactly that.
Last month Callie Granade, a federal judge appointed by George W Bush, struck down Alabama’s ban on gay marriage as unconstitutional.
On February 8th, shortly before the first gay marriages were due to take place, Roy Moore, the chief justice of the state Supreme Court, ordered probate judges in Alabama notto allow them.
Alabama’s governor, Robert Bentley, a Republican, bravely stayed out of the fray.
According to the Human Rights Campaign, a gay advocacy group, 14 of Alabama’s 67 counties agreed to process the necessary paperwork for same-sex unions.
Perhaps the most cheering thing, at least for fans of marriage equality, was what the events of the past few days hint about the intentions of the United States Supreme Court.
Judge Moore begged it to delay gay weddings in Alabama until it makes its own nationwide ruling on gay marriage.
Cinemas in Little Rock say that almost every ticket for this weekend has already been sold.
In Arkansas as a whole, tickets have sold 2. times as fast as Fandango, an online ticket seller, expected.
Moviegoers in West Virginia, Kentucky and Alabama are also gluttons for punishment.
Sex shops in Arkansas are cashing in with discounts on domination gear and classes on bondage.
Southern sexuality scholars say that watching Miss Steele being tied up and flogged by a handsome billionaire gives repressed women permission to delve into their inner naughtiness.
Many expect gay marriages to be allowed in all 50 states by this summer.
In 2006 about 81% of voters supported an amendment to Alabama’s constitution banning same-sex weddings.
It is difficult to know how many have changed their minds, but the Pew Research Centre, a think-tank, finds that half the people in central Southern states such as Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Tennessee, Texas and Oklahoma now oppose gay marriage and 41% favour it.
However, “they won’t say anything because they in the same situation,” she predicts.
Gay couples in Mobile were not allowed to wed on February 9th, but many gathered to celebrate anyway before one of the city’s Mardi Gras parades.
Cari Searcy, a plaintiff in the case that struck down Alabama’s gay-marriage ban, spoke of her pride in grasping her spouse’s arm in public.
In memoirs published on February1oth Mr Axelrod recalls fretting, soon after the inauguration in 2009, that White House insiders were already talking about breaking Mr Obama’s campaign commitments.
From this and other clues, Mr Axelrod deduced that there was a “tension” between a campaign that had promised to bring hope and change to America and the task of actually governing.
The Chicago-based strategist was already a veteran when he met Mr Obama.
By then he had run enough campaigns to develop his “remedy not replica” theory of politics.
This holds that voters almost always choose change over the status quo, even when a popular incumbent is stepping down, and moreover look for a candidate who seems to correct the perceived weaknesses of a departing leader.
He watched Mr Obama deliver a soaring hymn to a postracial, post-partisan America at the 2004 Democratic National Convention and helped him win election to the Senate in Washington, boosted by opposition to what he called a “dumb” warin Iraq.
Soon, Mr Axelrod concluded that the young lawyer might just be the cure for a country sick of George W Bush.
Mr Axelrod helped his improbable candidate win the 2008 presidential primaries, taking his youth and inexperience and turning them into strengths at a time of deep alienation with politics as usual.
He coined the slogan “Yes We Can”, and helped craft television ads and speeches in which Mr Obama vowed to tame Washington and restore frayed global alliances.
If “Believer” were merely an account of Mr Axelrod’s bruising return to reality, as the 2008 agenda became bogged down by recession, partisanship and gridlock, it would be little more than a historical footnote—even if, as one of the innermost circle, Mr Axelrod has uncommon insights to offer.
Notably, the book adds to the growing body of evidence that Mr Obama is quite an odd man.
Though Mr Axelrod is at pains to relate how his former boss is more human and anguished by tales of woe and suffering than many suppose, he does concede that Mr Obama is astonishingly self-assured, and self-aware.
It turns out that being Barack Obama is a pretty good gig in and of itself,” he is quoted telling Mr Axelrod, shortly before announcing his candidacy.
And though Mr Axelrod blames Republicans for wrecking Mr Obama’s plans to seek bipartisan deals, the strategist does say that the president has aggravated political opponents by lecturing them on why it is in their own political interests to agree with him.
With the most successful Democratic strategist of his generation as the author, “Believer” raises pointed, still-valid questions about Hillary Clinton’s presumed ambition to represent her party in 2016.
As a loyal Democrat, Mr Axelrod has suggested in interviews around the book’s launch that—in the light of Mr Obama’s “great, unfulfilled promise” to change Washington—Mrs Clinton’s years of Washington experience will be much more of an asset in this campaign than in 2008, allowing her to run as a candidate of change.
Yet many of Mr Axelrod’s observations about voter disillusion, and the importance of mobilising great armies of enthusiastic volunteers, will still apply in 2016.
Meet Hillary, the candidate of change Mr Axelrod comes close to conceding that Mrs Clinton was correct in her pessimism about Washington.
In the book he recalls Team Obama’s shock when the president found it was facing “monolithic” Republican opposition to his agenda, rather than the bipartisan support they had “naively” expected as the economy stood on the brink of a depression.
Even ifno candidate can run on “Hope and Change” this time, that does not make “I Told You So” a winning slogan.
At the core of the 2008 Obama insurgency was a belief that being a “very capable” Democrat was not enough to win the presidency.
But many voters had decided that it was not just Republicans, but politics that was broken.
Nor was she willing to break with a system full of lobbyists and deep-pocketed political action committees, he adds.
This time Mrs Clinton faces no serious rivals for the Democratic crown, even before she announces her intentions.
Even if the country ismore resigned to partisanship than in 2008, thatis still true. m ahiteweNnitatecks ty Venezuela The revolution at bay CARACAS Mismanagement, corruption and the oil slump are fraying Hugo Chavez’s regime N A Wednesday evening around 30 pensioners have gathered for a meeting in a long, brightly lit room in a largely abandoned shopping gallery in Santa Teresa, arundown and overcrowded district in the centre of Caracas.
After a video and some announcements, Alexis Rondon, an official of the Ministry of Social Movements and Communes, begins to speak.
Mr Rondon’s rambling remarks over the next 45 minutes belie that claim.
Saying Venezuela is faced with an “economic war”, he calls on his audience to check food queues for outsiders, who might be profiteers or troublemakers, and to draw up acensus of the district to identify opposition activists and government supporters.
Sixteen years after Hugo Chavez took power in Venezuela, and two years after he died, his “Bolivarian Revolution” faces the gravest threats yet to its survival.
The regime is running out of money to import necessities and pay its debts.
There are shortages of basic goods, from milk and flour to shampoo and_ disposable nappies.
Queues, often of several hundred people, form each day outside supermarkets.
Both debt default and the measures that would be required to avoid one pose risks to the regime.
Itis on course to lose a parliamentary election later this year, which might then be followed by a referendum to recall Chavez’s inept and unloved successor, Nicolas Maduro.
That could bring Venezuela’s revolution to a peaceful and democratic end as early as 2016.
Caracas buzzes with speculation that the armed forces will oust the president.
Venezuela is suffering from the combination of years of mismanagement and corruption, and the collapse in the price of oil, which accounts for almost all of its exports.
Chavez, an army officer, was the beneficiary of the greatest oil boom in history.
From 2000 to 2012, Venezuela received around $800 billion in oil revenue, or two-and-a-half times as much in real terms as in the previous 13 years.
Some went on health care and low-cost housing for the poor, who hailed Chavez as a secular saint.
Another chunk was given away in the form of cheap oil to Cuba and to other Caribbean countries, assuring Chavez loyal allies.
Filling a 60-litre tank with petrol costs less than a dollar at the strongest official exchange rate.
Unsurprisingly, petrol worth $2. billion a year, according to an official estimate, is smuggled to Colombia and Brazil, with the complicity of the armed forces.
As well as rewarding supporters with state jobs (the public payroll has more than doubled in 16 years), Chavez expropriated or nationalised 1,200 companies, from steelworks to a maker of cleaning products.
Most now lose money and require government loans just to meet their payroll, according to Victor Alvarez, Chavez’s industry minister in 2005-06.
The state subjugates the still-large private sector through price controls, which discourage investment and production.
The result is that Venezuela imports much of the food and consumer goods it used to produce, though not enough to meet demand.
Blaming retailers for the queues outside their shops, this month the government arrested the bosses of a big pharmacy chain and a supermarket company, both of which it has commandeered.
Until it was modified this month, there were three separate official exchange rates, ranging from 6.30 to the dollar for food and medicines to 50 for many other imports.
Some $20-25 billion was 31 >> > swindled in this way in 2012 alone, according to Jorge Giordani, who as Chavez’s economic guru was the architect of the system.
Even before the oil price collapsed, “2ast-century socialism” had become unaffordable.
Instead of saving windfall oil revenues, as prudence would dictate, the government racked up debt.
Between them, the government and ppvsa, the state oil company, issued more debt than any other emerging economy in 2007-11.
The fiscal deficit is heading for 20% of Gpp this year, according to independent economists.
In 2013 a third of Venezuelans were living in poverty, up from a quarter the previous year, according to the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean.
Now Venezuela faces a brutal squeeze, if the price of its oil (much of which is heavy and sulphurous) stays at this week’s level of around $50 a barrel.
This includes debt payments by the government and ppvsA adding up to $10. billion in 2015.
However the central bank’s international reserves total just $21. billion.
The government has vowed to makea €1 billion debt payment due on March 16th.
Mr Maduro spent most of January travelling abroad seeking emergency loans, without tangible success.
In addition to its official reserves, the government may be able to draw on another $20 billion held in opaque funds.
On February 10th it announced changes to the foreign-exchange regime that would charge some importers closer to the market rate for dollars.
But the change falls short of what is needed to adjust the economy to the scarcity of hard currency.
The government may be able to stumble on until October, when debt payments totalling $5 billion start falling due.
A patrimonial regime Mr Maduro, a former bus driver, lacks Chavez’s political cunning and popular appeal.
He sidelined several powerful ministers and replaced them with military officers.
He has built a loyal political tribe, centred on his own extended family and that of Chavez, according to Margarita Lopez Maya, a sociologist.
The authoritarian state he commands is sliding towards totalitarianism.
On January 27th the defence minister issued an unconstitutional decree allowing the armed forces to use their weapons against protests if these turn violent.
Cuban intelligence agents police the armed forces and the ministries, alert for any sign of dissent.
Chavez seized control of the judiciary and all the other constitutionally independent branches of the state.
Outflows: — Oilrevenue Imports << Services PB Non-oilexports << Debt balance (> Borrowing payments i] Other ; 7, 90... so 30 -2014* Source: Moody's cout -*Estimate tForecast studied more than 45,000 rulings issued in 2004-13 by the constitutional, administrative and electoral chambers of the supreme court and found that in no case did they rule against the government.
Under Mr Maduro, what the government calls its “media hegemony” is now all but complete.
Regime insiders, acting through front men, have bought up opposition media after these were financially weakened by officially promoted advertising boycotts and government refusal to approve the import of newsprint.
According to Miguel Henrique Otero, the proprietor of El Nacional, his newspaper is one of only a handful of independent ones that survive.
Even as repression increases, the regime is being weakened by internal divisions.
Some reform-minded chavistas, like Mr Alvarez, argue that the government should scrap the petrol subsidy, unify the exchange rate and rely on the private sector to reactivate the economy.
Socialist Tide, a university-based group, accuses the government of being corrupt and bureaucratic, and Mr Maduro of betraying Chavez.
Another sign of decay came last month when Leamsy Salazar, a naval captain who for ten years was in charge of Chavez’s personal security, surfaced in the United States.
Arising opposition An hour out of Caracas, in green rolling country knownas Valles del Tuy, Santa Barbara de Dos Lagunasis a rural shantytown, a self-built dormitory settlement of small, roughly finished houses of brick or concrete.
Now Mr Capriles, a lean 42-year-old with lively eyes and dark stubble, gets a warm welcome.
He hands out vouchers for building materials, promises to repair two sports pitches, and listens to complaints about overflowing sewerage and poor housing.
The radicals, led by Leopoldo Lopez, a former mayor of a wealthy Caracas district, want to oust Mr Maduro through street demonstrations.
Mr Lopez has been in jail for a year on trumped-up charges—a political prisoner, he says.
But as Brazilians contemplate the huge corruption scandal now engulfing Petrobras, they might ask themselves just who “ours” refers to.
The pt disliked a successful reform of Petrobras in the1990s, which stripped it of its monopoly of production and distribution while subjecting it to market discipline and arm’s-length corporate governance.
When the company and its new foreign partners made huge deep-sea oil strikes in 2007 Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, Brazil’s president, saw a chance partially to restore Petrobras’s monopoly.
New oil laws drawn up by Dilma Rousseff, his chief of staff and successor, gave the company sole operating rights and a minimum 30% stake in the new fields.
Lula and Ms Rousseff saw oil as the spearhead of an industrial policy that involved fostering favoured sectors and presumed national champions.
Lula ordered Petrobras to build four new refineries, three in the poor north-east.
A new rule required up to 85% of equipment and supplies for the oil industry to be nationally produced.
A dozen new shipyards studded the Brazilian coast, fed on cheap government loans.
They provided 74,000 new jobs, boasted Ms Rousseff during her campaign last year for a second term.
Prosecutors have identified at least 2. billion reais in “suspicious payments” on Petrobras contracts; in a plea bargain, the company’s former purchasing chief has revealed that 3% of the value tution allows in 2016.
Deprived of media exposure Mr Capriles trusts in the retail politics at which he excels.
He says change can only come by winning over many disillusioned chavistas, which he now sees as possible.
The two wings of the opposition are drawing closer, with the help of the Catholic church.
Even at the height of Chavez’s popularity, the opposition had the support of one Venezuelan in three.
Now polls suggest that twice as many identify themselves as opposition supporters than as chavistas.
But many feel alienated from the leaders of all his division’s contracts was diverted to the PT and its allies for personal gain or campaign finance.
The firm’s most recent quarterly results disclose a potential writedown of 88 billion reais in the value of its assets.
This comes on top of the damage to its profits caused by Ms Rousseff’s freeze on _ petrol prices, ina now-abandoned effort to offset her inflationary fiscal policy.
Minority shareholders in Petrobras have seen the value of their investment slashed by 80% since 2008.
Dozens of managers from Brazil’s biggest construction companies, which were Petrobras contractors and the operators of the shipyards, are in jail.
Banks are reluctant to lend to these companies until their future is clearer.
Sete Brasil, a company set up by Petrobras and its bankers to build and lease to it 28 drilling rigs, has run out of cash, according to an industry source.
Petrobras itself has scrapped two of the unbuilt refineries, after spending $1 billion on them; it has abandoned work on doubling output at another and on revamping a petrochemThe Americas 33 on both sides.
The psuv faithful in Santa Teresa repeat the official line that Venezuela is threatened by “the empire” and by Colombian paramilitaries.
Mr L6pez, the propaganda holds, is a fascist who would strip the poor of everything they have gained.
Mr Maduro himself draws a parallel between his government and that of Chile’s Salvador Allende, an elected Marxist toppled by General Pinochet’s CIA-supported coup in 1973.
Allende may have governed badly, but he governed democratically, unlike Chavez or Mr Ma>> ical complex.
The pt’s expansive industrial policy was ruinously expensive for Brazil.
Shielding Petrobras from competition just as the company embarked on the world’s biggest corporate investment programme proved to be an open invitation to steal.
Fixing the level of national content so high was a recipe for delay and extra cost.
Sharing out the work for political reasons deprived the shipyards of economies of scale.
The pt has placed Petrobras in serious jeopardy, at least until the accountants can agree on how to treat the losses caused by corruption.
The deep-sea oil is only viable at today’s price “if we make an effort to reduce costs,” says Eduardo Braga, the new energy minister.
The shipbuilding industry needs “consolidation”; the national-content rule should be “more flexible to guarantee competitiveness for our oil industry,” he says.
What Brazil needs now is a policy that will align Petrobras with the national interest, rather than that of its managers and the ruling party.
This means cutting the company down to size and exposing it to competition.
And it means using oil money to upgrade skills, infrastructure and the research base, so that suppliers are encouraged to set up in the country.
Ordinary Brazilians now know exactly who “our people” are—and it isn’t them.
It is Venezuela’s opposition who are the democrats, unlike some of those who plotted against Allende.
And the United States, apart from a recent congressional initiative to impose sanctions on officials identified as having committed abuses during last year’s protests, has kept well away from Venezuela.
If a coup comes it will be because the army decides that Mr Maduro is no longer capable of defending its interests or because hardship prompts the social explosion that is the regime’s deepest fear.
The real threat to it may come in the parliamentary election, which on present trends it is all but impossible for it to win.
Even a clean election will not settle the question of who will take responsibility for the painful economic adjustment that the regime’s corrupt incompetence has rendered inevitable.
There is talk of a church-brokered government of national unity after the parliamentary vote.
That would at least increase the chances of a peaceful transition from a failed regime.
Under the country’s unique “binominal” system, each parliamentary constituency has two seats; the winning candidate takes one and in most cases the runner-up takes the other.
This has reserved nearly all the seats in parliament for two big coalitions, the centre-left New Majority (to which the president, Michelle Bachelet, belongs) and the centreright Alliance.
It kept small parties out of parliament unless they joined one of the two big coalitions, and ruled out landslide victories by either side.
Moreover, it has tended to over-represent the Alliance at the expense of New Majority.
Rural areas, which had supported Pinochet, were given more weight than their populations warranted.
But the $1. billion a year it earns from sales of cut flowers is not far behind the $1. billion that comes from coffee.
Cloudy skies took some of the bloom off this year’s crop, but growers are feeling festive about the Valentine’s Day season, which accounts for a tenth of their sales.
Growers are expecting bouquets to sell briskly in the United States, which buys three quarters of Colombia’s flowers.
After numerous failed attempts, the ruling New Majority has mustered the votes to scrap the binominal system; the measure passed both houses of parliament in January and should become law soon.
Under a new system the number of lower-house constituencies will be cut from 60 to 28.
Each will return between three and eight candidates, depending on its population, to be chosen by proportional representation.
In some constituencies small parties will be sure of winning a seat with just 13% of the vote.
The new voting system promises to end what Ms Bachelet has called the “permanent draw” between left and right, which has bred complacency among politicians, produced weak majorities for governments and turned off voters.
Less than half of the electorate bothered to vote in the last election.
The new system may cause political fragmentation, which in other countries has made coalition-building and governing difficult.
Its backers reckon that making the legislature more representative is worth the risk.
Ms Bachelet’s foes complain that when the permanent draw is broken the main winner will be her New Majority coalition.
It is also possible that it will break up as smaller groupings seek electoral success on their own.
Cynics say that the candidate quota for women. is unlikely to do much good; they expect parties to dispatch female candidates to their least winnable constituencies.
Many Chileans, disgruntled with the ruling elite, want fewer politicians, not more.
Its authors hope that Chile’s more vibrant politics will prove him wrong.
He had turned an anti-corruption movementinto an electoral machine, winning voters from across religious, caste and class lines.
Storming assembly polls, his AAP took power in Delhi, the national capital which is effectively a state.
Mr Kejriwal (pictured above, on a supporter’s face) blew his opportunity.
As Delhi’s chief, he attacked venal police and bureaucrats, and gave the poor free water and cheap electricity.
Worse, he launched an over-ambitious campaign in last year’s general election.
He apologised, both for quitting in Delhi and for fielding too many candidates nationally.
Assembly polls in Delhi on February 7th gave Mr Kejriwal one of the biggest wins for any party, anywhere in India, since independence.
When Mr Kejriwal becomes chief minister on February 14th he will get a platform for opposing Narendra Modi, the prime minister.
Capable on television and keener than Mr Modi on public debate, he could speak about national issues.
If he is smart, however, he will hunker down and try to run Delhi well, so voters might trust him later nationally.
After results were announced on February 10th he vowed not to be arrogant.
If the election had been held in July, the earliest plausible date, enthusiasm for Mr Modi might have swept in the Byp, which has recently won four other state polls.
Instead, AAP had time to marshal voters, who liked Mr Kejriwal’s humility and promise of honest rule.
Many voters, even some BJP MpPs_ privately, welcomed a check on what is widely seen as his arrogance; he is known as highhanded and aloof in government.
One ByP minister, in Delhi in December, called non-Hindus “bastards” and earned only a light reprimand from Mr Modi.
A fringe around the BJP seeks mass conversions to Hinduism, while stirring fears of “love jihad”, a supposed Muslim campaign to seduce Hindu women.
Mohan Bhagwat of the Hindunationalist Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh , an ally of Mr Modi, repeatedly says that all Indians are Hindus, offending minorities.
As for Congress, the election in Delhi has left it “staring at the abyss of irrelevance”, says Jairam Ramesh, a former cabinet minister, unless it reforms and finds a new leader.
The AAP’s main strategist, Yogendra Yaday, talks of his party filling a vacuum in the national opposition.
A test looms in assembly elections in poor but populous Bihar, where the Byp hopes to expand.
Those anxious for change hope the budget on February 28th will signal his support for radical devolution of power to states, changes in the tax system, a new land law and more.
He may see such reforms as a boost to the economy which would win him more support; or he may back off, fearing the political risks.
But the margin, 61 votes to 39, was hardly a ringing endorsement of Mr Abbott’s leadership, just 17 months after he became prime minister.
Since he led the conservative LiberalNational coalition to power in September 2013, Mr Abbott has spent much of his term fighting to win voters’ confidence.
But a Newspoll survey—published as his Liberal colleagues in Canberra, the capital, cast their votes on his future—showed just how much he has failed.
More than two-thirds of those surveyed were dissatisfied with Mr Abbott’s performance.
Voters backed him at least partly out of despair with the former Labor government and its debilitating leadership wars.
The public mood soured after his government announced its first budget last May.
But it contained cuts in spending on health, education and welfare that Mr Abbott had once promised not to make, and which seemed to fall most heavily on poorer Australians.
Mr Abbott and Joe Hockey, Australia’s treasurer, did a bad job of selling the budget to voters, appearing dismissive of their concerns.
Instead he got into a scrape of his own on January 26th when he awarded a knighthood to Prince Philip, the husband of Australia’s head of state, Queen Elizabeth.
An ardent monarchist, Mr Abbott reintroduced knighthoods and dames to Australia’s honours system last year, 40 years after they were abolished.
The “knightmare” brought ridicule on Mr Abbott, and further stoked concerns that he was out of touch with modern Australia.
Its impact was felt in Queensland, where a government allied to Mr Abbott’s coalition could lose power after a state election on January 31st, the results of which were expected to be declared soon after The Economist went to press.
Grumbling about Mr Abbott’s leadership has recently extended to his own backbench mps.
He angered colleagues by declaring that it was for the public to “hire and fire” leaders.
Some felt Mr Abbott was casting himself in a presidential role, ignoring the conventions of Australia’s Westminster system, in which parties elect their own leaders.
The drama has reflected a growing pattern among Australian politicians from both sides to move against leaders when poor polling seems to threaten electoral oblivion.
Leadership upheavals have only fed the cynicism of many Australians towards their politicians.
They fret about the turbulent political scene’s impact on business confidence and certainty.
Ina country where voting is compulsory, says Mr Marsh, about 40% of people now vote for minor parties and independents, spoil their ballots or do not vote.
Liberal and Labor, which once shared most of the vote between them, now offer outdated ideologies to an increasingly diverse Australia.
The latter may be sorely tested again in May, when Mr Abbott’s government will present its second budget.
Former civil servants, schoolteachers and professors are among those attempting to block trucks bringing supplies for the construction of a vast new facility in and near the camp, to be used by American marines.
Some of those attempting to reach the base by canoe have been stopped by coast-guard vessels and re-launched in rough waters.
That conservatives are standing alongside left-wingers in opposition to the base could spell trouble for the Americans.
Okinawa hosts about half of all 53,000 American troops in Japan; their 32 military sites occupy nearly a fifth of the main island’s tiny area.
The Americans do not want to lose even more public support for their presence, which they and Japan consider vital to regional security.
In 1996 American officials agreed to relocate the most unpopular base, at Futenma.
Ten years later a site at Henoko, adjacent to Camp Schwab , was formally selected.
In December 2013 the Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, broke the impasse by persuading Mr Onaga’s predecessor, Hirokazu Nakaima, to reverse the opposition that had made him popular, and agree to start landfill work.
On February 6th he launched a review of Mr Nakaima’s decision, with a view to overturning it.
One question will be how a study commissioned by Mr Nakaima could have concluded that the planned base would have little effect on the dugong, an endangered sea-cow that grazes off the coast at Henoko.
In January the government cut by 5% Okinawa’s yearly subsidy, the source of nearly half of its budget.
Both American officials and anti-base activists note that Mr Onaga may already be softening his stance.
One member of his review panel worries that the governor may have appointed too many conserva>> > tive lawyers to it who are not especially worried about the Henoko project.
By the time the panel releases its verdict this summer, construction may have proceeded so far that even Mr Onaga would balk at the cost of stopping it and having to compensate the central government for doing so.
No mainland prefecture would willingly accept a new base and its rowdy marines.
One long-mooted possibility has been to fold Futenma into Kadena, a massive American air-force base on Okinawa.
One American officer jokes that the base would be so crowded in the event of conflict that helicopters would have to park on its golf course.
For now, despite the bases, anti-American feeling does not run deep on Okinawa.
But that could change if residents’ wishes are ignored, says Mr Ashitomi, the protest leader.
The demonstrators, he says, could shift to demanding the removal of all American military sites on Okinawa.
That could put the Americans, and Mr Abe, in a bigger quandary. m Vietnam's migrant labourers Going to debt mountain TAN LIEU Working abroad is no bargain ROKERS’ billboards outside Tan Lieu, a poor rural community in northern Vietnam, advertise “Labour Export”—jobs abroad.
Vietnam’s youthful population of 90m adds up to15m each year to the growing work pool.
But economic growth, at 6%, is not fast enough to keep all of them employed.
Dreaming of fortune, young Vietnamese are pouring overseas as maids, builders and factory workers.
Assembling mobile phones on 12and 16-hour graveyard shifts was “easier than farming”, she says.
Yet to finance the trip, her family borrowed close to $5,000 to pay a labour broker.
Today the prime destinations are Taiwan, Japan, Malaysia and South Korea.
Since 2005 the number of Vietnamese working abroad on labour contracts has nearly doubled, to about 500,000.
The $26 billion that migrants send home each year helps a bit to bridge a yawning wealth-gap between rich and poor provinces.
Official migration channels are surely safer than illegal ones that facilitate the movement of sex workers across VietAnimal welfare in Vietnam Pet soup NAM DINH AND HANOI Man’s best friends are under fire P ICTURES of pets adorn the facades and menus of restaurants in Nam Dinh, a city in a part of northern Vietnam where cats and dogs are commonly consumed.
Down the road, terrified puppy-eyes stare out froma metal cage beside a dog restaurant’s kitchen, A victim yelps as a butcher raises his knife.
The proprietor says his staff gets through scores of kilograms of dog meat per day.
Vietnam, a one-party state, already has many critics of its repression of dissent, its corruption and a banking sector plagued by bad debt.
Amid negotiations for free-trade agreements with America and the European Union, the government wants to avoid even more bad publicity that may damage its image; even relating to the treatment of animals.
Tuan Bendixsen of Animals Asia, an NGO in Hong Kong, reckons that dog thieving for this purpose has become even more widespread in Vietnam since 2013.
Neighbouring China cracked down on dogeating in Beijing when it hosted the Olympic games in 2008, but it remains popular in some parts of the country, especially in winter when itis considered to help keep the body warm.
Yet of the many Vietnamese who migrate legally, more than a third of them women, some end up being exploited.
A report on trafficking last year by America’s State Department concluded that Vietnamese have among the highest debts of all Asian expatriate workers.
As a consequence, they are “highly vulnerable” to debt bondage and forced labour.
Poor treatment encourages some workers to break their contracts and look for better work, often illegal.
It became such a problem in South Korea that in 2012 its government cancelled its Employment Permit System for Vietnam.
Permits were later issued again on a trial basis, but Vietnam’s labour ministry said in January that South Korea would close the gates again unless the share of illegal workers among Asia 37 tons of them as they were being smuggled from China to fill soup pots in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital.
Foreign criticism, and the growth ofa pet-owning middle-class at home, is putting pressure on the government.
Along with other South-East Asian countries, Vietnam pledged in 20%, albeit non-bindingly, to stop the dog-meat trade.
A draft of the nation’s first veterinary law is due for debate in May in the National Assembly, Vietnam’s legislature.
With support from international aid donors, they have opened a handful of offices where prospective migrants can learn about their rights.
Vietnam’s press also makes much of police busts of lawbreaking labour recruiters.
Futaba Ishizuka, a researcher at the Institute of Developing Economies in Japan, says the government lacks the political will to regulate the labour agencies, which are often unlicensed affiliates of state-owned enterprises.
For all the tribulations, rural Vietnamese, especially from northern and central provinces, are still eager to go abroad.
In Tan Lieu, 64km from Hanoi, slender concrete homes, financed by remittances, are rising next to the paddies.
Ms Hang says she has already saved the $3,200 needed for the renovation of the family home. m 38 Asia The jailing of Anwar Ibrahim is a setback for the whole country, notjust the opposition FTER taking an inexplicable four months to make up its mind, Malaysia’s highest court on February 10th came up with the verdict its critics said had been scripted for it all along.
It rejected an appeal by Anwar Ibrahim, the opposition leader, against his conviction on a charge of sodomy—of having sex in 2008 with a young man who had worked for him.
Since a prison term also entails a five-year ban after release from running for political office, this would rule Mr Anwar out of the next two general elections.
The three-party coalition he heads, Pakatan Rakyat, poses the most serious threat the United Malays National Organisation, UMNO, has faced in its nearly six decades of continuous rule.
But the opposition depends heavily on Mr Anwar’s leadership, so his sentence sounds like good news for the prime minister, Najib Razak.
Having Mr Anwar out of the way certainly offers political benefits to the government.
In the general election in 20133, when he led the Pakatan campaign, it won more of the popular vote than the UMNO-dominated coalition, Barisan Nasional , though, thanks to gerrymandered constituencies, it won only 40% of parliamentary seats.
One of its members is a conservative Islamist party, appealing to the ethnic-Malay, Muslim majority; another represents mainly the ethnic-Chinese minority; Mr Anwar himself heads a multiracial, secular party.
An important factor in keeping these elements together has been Mr Anwar himself.
A former deputy prime minister, he fell out with his mentor, Mahathir Mohamad, during the Asian financial crisis in1998, and emerged as the leading advocate of reformasi—fundamental reform of an ossified, corrupt political system.
His latest conviction, however, is a mixed blessing for the government.
It insists the judiciary is independent, and points out that, in this case, the charges were brought by the alleged sexual partner.
But conspiracy theorists—a category including virtually every observer of Malaysian politics—will interpret Mr Anwar’s legal travails as politically motivated.
They walked out, but Mr Anwar’s supporters at home will think he did no more than state the obvious.
Even abroad, where Malaysia is often praised as a model of Muslim-majority democratic moderation, many will be suspicious.
Mr Anwar was acquitted of this charge in 2012 because DNA evidence had been mishandled, only for the government’s prosecutor to appeal against the decision.
So, unfairly or not, the case has harmed the image of Malaysia’s judiciary, and, to the extent that he is seen as implicated in its decisions, of Mr Najib himself.
Already his reputation as a liberal and moderate has been dented by his government’s use of another archaic and draconian law, on sedition, to hound its critics.
They include a political cartoonist known as Zunar who was arrested this week, apparently for a tweet critical of the verdict on Mr Anwar.
Having promised to repeal the sedition law, Mr Najib in November said it would actually be strengthened.
They present a far greater immediate threat to Mr Najib than does the opposition, especially since they have the support of Dr Mahathir.
He vacated the prime minister’s office in 2003 and is now 89, but remains a powerful political force.
He has turned against Mr Najib, as he did against his predecessor, Abdullah Badawi—and indeed Mr Anwar before that.
With Mr Anwar behind bars, UMNO hardliners will have less reason to worry about the opposition, and can concentrate their fire on Mr Najib’s leadership.
They have been handed a weapon in the troubles surrounding 1mps, a sovereign-wealth fund, whose board of advisers Mr Najib chairs.
It is behind on debt repayments and accused of a woeful lack of transparency.
This week a group of Malaysian banks was reported to have threatened it with being called into default if payment is not made this month.
Its troubles might even have an impact on Malaysia’s standing as a sovereign borrower.
Chameleon karma Under attack from his own right flank, Mr Najib has little room to make good his promises of political liberalisation.
Even economic reforms—where he has a respectable record of, for example, widening the tax base and cutting fuel subsidies—may stall.
The most difficult ones require the ending of Malaysia’s rules mandating commercial discrimination in favour of the Malay majority, a system to which many in UMNO are wedded.
So the BN, whose ethnic-Chinese and ethnic-Indian components fared disastrously in 2013, risks becoming a mere shell for an UMNO ever more beholden to Malay-nationalist forces, thus further sharpening a dangerous racial polarisation in Malaysian politics.
Mr Anwar, a political chameleon whose real beliefs are sometimes hard to pin down, has many critics, but he could at least credibly lead a coalition that bridges Malaysia’s ethnic divides.
That is why his incarceration is a dark day not just for Malaysia’s opposition, but for Mr Najib and the country itself.
Given General Xu’s recent retirement as the highest ranking uniformed officer in the armed forces, this was astonishing news.
General Xu, the media said, had accepted “extremely large” bribes, for which he now faces trial.
The People’s Liberation Army —as the Chinese army, navy and air force are collectively known—has not fought a war for 35 years.
But the world’s largest fighting force is now engaged in a fierce battle at home against corrosion within its ranks.
Xi Jinping, China’s president (pictured, pointing), has taken his sweeping anti-corruption campaign into the heart of the pLa, seemingly unafraid to show that a hallowed institution is also deeply flawed.
In January the pLa took the unprecedented step of revealing that 15 generals and another senior officer were under investigation or awaiting trial.
It said it would launch a stringent review of recruitment, promotions, procurements and all of its financial dealings in order to root out corruption.
One reason Mr Xiis keen to clean up the army is to ensure that it remains a bulwark of party rule.
The pra is the party’s armed wing-—its soldiers swear allegiance to it rather than the people or the country.
All officers are party members and each company is commanded jointly by an officer in charge of military affairs and another whose job it is to ensure troops toe the party line.
Fighting military graft is intended to enhance both of these qualities.
Mr Xi wants to develop a lean, rapidly deployable fighting force, which is better able to project power abroad and defend the nation’s borders which China regards as encompassing a vast maritime area as well as Taiwan and Japanese-controlled islands in the East China Sea.
Many Western experts believe the PLA is becoming increasingly able to assert China’s territorial claims, despite the corruption.
But warnings such as those by General Luo are taken seriously by Mr Xi.
Military corruption, though seldom spoken of so publicly before, haslong been a problem.
In the1990s the pra, at first with the party’s blessing, dived into commerce.
The army set up 20,000-30,000 business across China, says Mr Cheung; including hotels, financial services and nightclubs.
In 1998 President Jiang Zemin called a The Economist February 14th 2015 Also in this section 40 A film’s unusual talent 40 The economy and the goat-year For daily analysis and debate on China, visit Economist.com/china halt to most PLA commerce, but the armed forces never rid themselves of graft.
But wages are still not high enough to reduce incentives for corruption.
Senior officers receive a pittance compared with the bosses of state-owned enterprises.
Many supposedly affordable homes built for soldiers since 1999 were instead constructed as luxury villas and sold off or enjoyed by military personnel.
Some generals reportedly erected ceilings twice the standard height in order to add a floor later.
The PLa says it will scrutinise appointments more closely and make secret inspections to stamp out the acceptance of bribes by recruitment officers.
To cut costs and break up monopolies, private companies will be allowed to bid for most defence contracts.
Military auditors recently joined a national meeting of their civilian counterparts for the first time—a sign, perhaps, that the PLA is beginning to air its problems more openly.
One of his first jobs after graduating was as a personal sec>> 40 China > retary to the minister of defence.
But even with his enormous authority Mr Xi will find it hard to change such a secretive and hidebound institution.
The fallen generals can expect tough punishment, but the PLA tends to deal with its own wrongdoers with a light touch.
The ill-defined quality of “political reliability” will remain a crucial factor in gaining promotion—one wide open to abuse.
Most troops have no direct combat experience, commanders are ill-trained in the complexities of modern warfare, and training for rank-and-file troops is not realistic enough.
Annual double-digit increases in defence spending— the norm for the last two decades—have helped equip the PLA with some advanced weaponry, but not necessarily the ability to use it effectively.
It is in fact a lunar-solar mix, with an extra lunar month added every so often to stay in line with a wholly solar calendar.
This ancient system, some 2,500 years old, is not just an academic curiosity.
The Chinese New Year holiday, and with it a peak in consumption and prices, scuttles back and forth between January and February (in the Gregorian calendar), complicating the annual comparisons.
Thanks to the insertion of a lunar leap month last year, the Chinese New Year holiday falls espeAnew state-sponsored film is the product of unusual talent N FEBRUARY 19th cinemas in China will begin showing “Wolf Totem”, a film based on a Chinese novel critiquing man’s impuise to tame nature, in whicha young man from Beijing attempts to domesticate a wolf.
The author, Lu Jiamin, was jailed for more than a year for his role in the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989.
Worried his subsequent writings would be banned, he wrote the novel under a pen name, Jiang Rong.
The French director, Jean-Jacques Annaud, had been banned from China for making “Seven Years in Tibet”, a film released in 1997 that depicts the Chinese army invading Tibet and portrays the Dalai Lama sympathetically.
But China Film Group, a state-owned giant, and others made Mr Annaud a rare foreign director of a Chinese feature film, with a budget of more than $40m.
In 2007 an English-language translation won the inaugural Man Asia Literary Prize.
The acclaim was so great, andso swift to spread, that back-footed censors decided to turn a blind eye to the author’s background and refrained from banning the book.
Mr Annaud says he was surprised when, in 2007, representatives of the Beijing Forbidden City Film Corporation visited him in Paris to ask him to make the film.
In late December 2009, however, months after his hiring had been announced, Mr Annaud did apologise.
In an open letter circulated in Chinese online (a liberal but generally fair translation, he says), Mr Annaud declared he had “never supported Tibet’s independence” and had no “personal relationship” with the Dalai Lama.
Mr Annaud’s self-criticism helped protect against that, and the Chinese system in turn protected _ him.
That astronomical quirk should offer a modicum of comfort to those fretting about the latest Chinese economic data, which, at first glance, portend doom.
Consumer prices rose just 0.8% from a year earlier, a sharp decline from preceding months.
Everything from shipping to roadworks is completed in a rush before China shuts down for its New Year.
As a result, January appeared unusually sluggish compared with a year earlier.
Consumer inflation typically sheds about half a percentage point in Januaries when the New Year comes so late.
As for trade, adjusted for the calendar, the declines in exports were still big but not as severe as reported.
An unseasonably warm winter made for lower vegetable and fruit prices, weighing on inflation.
And the collapse in global commodity prices eroded the value of imports.
China’s oil demand, for example, was about the same in volume terms as a year earlier.
Because. of the perennial calendar headache, China’s statisticians wait until March to publish the full range of data for the economy, lumping January and February together to assess the true state of retail sales and industrial output.
These are almost certain to show that the economy is slowing, though not as dramatically as implied by the January numbers.
It has started easing monetary policy, most recently by raising the proportion of deposits that banks are free to lend.
But this is as much a response to capital outflows as itis to the slowdown in growth.
To get a better reading on the latter, the government knows that it will have to wait for one more cycle of the moon.
Just six hours after Al Arab first went on air the Gulf statelet gagged it; on February 9th authorities said it must close for good, claiming it was not properly licensed.
Its real sin, it seems, was to give airtime to Al Wefaq, Bahrain’s main opposition party.
The short life of Al Arab is emblematic of a wider flowering of independent Arab media, and its subsequent withering.
The channel took shape during the heady days of the Arab spring, when autocratic regimes were falling and people yearned for free media.
Appetites had been whetted since the early 1990s, with the advent of the internet and satellite Tv.
Some regard the mother of all independent Arab media to be Al Jazeera, a panArab television station that first broadcast in1996.
Although funded by the ambitious rulers of Qatar, it broke the mould of Arab journalism, which then consisted of little more than reheating official press releases.
The station’s professional journalists, topclass technology and feisty talk shows seta new standard for freedom of expression.
Audience figures rocketed to tens of millions as it won scoops that included airing video and audio tapes of Osama bin Laden, the late head of al-Qaeda.
By 2011 it was playing a role in fomenting the Arab spring by streaming live footage of protesters from Tunis to Tripoli.
Such was its clout that others tried emulating it, not least Al Arabiya, a Saudi-based broadcaster that came on air in 2003.
But al Jazeera’s influence has since waned amid perceptions that its journalism has turned partisan.
World Bank; Arab Social Media Report *Among population aged 13 and up 42 Israel's partisan newspapers 42 Palestine’s culinary delights 43 South African tourism 43 Justice in Chad and Senegal 44 Nigeria’s delayed vote For daily analysis and debate on the Middle East and Africa, visit Economist.com/world/middle-east-africa rain’s mainly Shia uprising.
The most acute criticism surrounds al Jazeera’s kind treatment of Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood, a line that corresponded closely with Qatar’s foreign policy.
And as Al Jazeera once provided a model of free speech, local regimes are now seeing in it a model for propagating their own views across the region.
Iran and Syria backed the launch in 2012 of Al-Mayadeen, a pan-Arab satellite channel based in Beirut.
They hope it will counter the Gulf channels that are inimical to Bashar Assad, Syria’s president.
A journalist at Al Modon, a Qatar-funded news site, says it was launched partly to counter Saudi Arabia’s media influence in Lebanon.
A loss of trust in the impartiality of satellite TV is all the more worrying because it had been seen as an alternative to local media long cowed by authoritarian governments.
When Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, Egypt’s army chief came to power he quickly closed down Islamist television stations.
Three Al Jazeera journalists were imprisoned in Egypt for more than a year on spurious allegations of belonging to a Muslim Brotherhood cell.
In Syria Mazen Darwish, who headed the Centre for Freedom of Expression, is just one of 12 journalists in Mr Assad’s jails; others have their work stymied by rebel militias.
In Saudi Arabia four journalists have been jailed after covering Shia protests in the eastern province.
Little wonder that much news broadcast on local channels is mind-numbingly 41 42 Middle East and Africa > dull.
In Saudi Arabia television stations mainly offer religious fodder and reports of royal beneficence.
Syrian state television once claimed Al Jazeera was building sets of Syrian cities so as to stage fake protests.
Private media is often little better since it is owned by big businessmen whose interests usually lie in buttering up regimes.
He has thatin Israel HaYom (or Israel Today), the country’s best-read paper, which not only glorifies him and his wife but also damns their foes.
Recently, however, its cheerleading seems to be causing Mr Netanyahu as much harm as it does good.
Opponents facing him in an election on March17th accuse Mr Netanyahu of being in hock to its publisher, an octogenarian American casino mogul, Sheldon Adelson.
Smarting from allegations that the paper infringes regulations on campaign funding, Mr Netanyahu has used his Twitter feed to attack its critics.
One ray of hope is that people increasingly seek news online, where resources and wannabe journalists have proliferated since the Arab spring.
Internet access is surging across the region (see chart on previous page) and is used particularly by young people in places like Saudi Arabia to find alternative sources of news.
These inamong them is Noni Moses, the reclusive publisher of Yediot Ahronot, which had previously been Israel’s largest circulating paid newspaper.
Yediot’s attacks on his family, he bridled, were no longer taking place daily in print, but hourly on the internet.
Mr Netanyahu’s defence of the paper on Twitter has only increased suspicions that his precipitous call for early elections 13 months into his term was motivated less by his desire to rid himself of a quarrelsome cabinet than by concern for the survival of Israel HaYom after a bill to stop the free distribution of newspapers passed its first reading.
His foreign minister, Avigdor Lieberman, who grew up in the Soviet Union, called it Pravda.
Many Israelis just call it Bibi-ton, merging Mr Netanyahu’s nickname, Bibi, with iton, the Hebrew for newspaper.
While Mr Moses has broadly supported a two-state settlement with the Palestinians, Mr Adelson ridicules the thought of a negotiated compromise.
For years he and his Israeli wife have brought tens of thousands of Americans, including congressmen, on partisan tours of Israel.
The Republican congressmen he funds are now inviting Mr Netanyahu to talk to Congress shortly before the Israeli elections, to the Democrats’ fury.
His speech will, no doubt, get a favourable write-up in Mr Adelson’s newspaper.
One such is Madr Masr, a newspaper in Egypt that manages to push boundaries, perhaps because it is written in English.
Networks in rebel-held Syria broadcast local news via YouTube channels or Facebook pages; a few including Aleppo Today broadcast on satellite.
But even new media fall into the habits of their older brethren, such as uncritically airing conspiracy theories, however outlandish.
Such silliness may not quite accord with the Jeffersonian ideal of a free press acting as a guardian of liberty.
But better a cacophony of dissenting voices— online or beamed from satelites—than the stifling monotone of state-controlled or cowed media.
These days, says Mr Batteh, the region’s people “are sophisticated consumers” who browse several news sources to distil the truth.
The genie of feisty and critical media may be stuffed back into the lamp, but not the thirst forinformation. m Palestine’s culinary delights The king of cauliflowers AL-RAM A humdrum food in gourmet form I; MAY challenge the spirit to think of cauliflower as anything but an overrated, ungainly plant.
But in the craggy land between Ramallah and Jerusalem, there is one variety of that plain vegetable that invariably attracts a crazed following at this time of year.
Every winter stands manned by farmers pop up along most of the West Bank’s winding roads, with proud growers displaying vivid yellow bouquets wreathed in green roughage.
Forget the white vegetable that, when boiled, resembles a brain and releases a gassy aroma redolent of cheap cafeterias.
This is zahara baladi, an ancient local cultivar that takes a full year to grow and is in season for just a few weeks.
The plant has a nice, mustardy hue; the flavour is well-rounded, sweet and earthy and the texture irresistibly creamy.
All this is enough to entice Palestinian Jerusalemites to leave their homes in blustery weather.
Their craze reflects not just the brief flowering of a delicacy, but also a gastronomic renaissance brought about by successful Ramallah chefs, many of them trained abroad, and a bumper crop of recent books highlighting local cooking.
Cauliflower has been mentioned by Arab botanists for more than a millennium.
It is the crucial ingredient in maqluba, a gem of Palestinian cuisine in which fried florets are cooked with chicken or lamb in a huge pot of spiced rice that is triumphantly turned upside down before serving.
Translated literally, zahara baiadi means wild flower, and it usually makes its appearance some time in February, just as the terraced hills eruptin a riot of colourful blooms.
Commercial vegetable growers sometimes try to engineer their plants so as to produce saleable crops twice a year.
But purists will always insist on the existing variety of zahara baladi.
It is said to cure everything from respiratory ailments to postnatal pain.
In villages, chunks of the stuff are artfully combined with onion and spices and blended into a light dough thatis fried, producing an appetising fritter.
In Jerusalem, families wait eagerly till winter to make mtafayeh—a one-pot wonder consisting of lamb and zahara baladi cooked with goat yogurt, tahini, lemon and fresh minced garlic.
Tambo International dressed for the bush, with cameras slung and wallets bulging, ready to splash out on wine and adventure.
A record 10.3m visitors arrived in 2014; the sector hauled in $10. billion and employed 645,000 people.
Itis a bright spot in an otherwise dismal economy; GbP growth has limped, at about 2% for the past two years and unemployment is at 35% and rising.
All this makes the South African government’s imposition of stringent new immigration laws rather baffling.
Starting in June, just in time for school holidays, children under the age of 18 will have to carry an unabridged birth certificate, with parents’ names listed, when arriving and leaving.
If only one parentis accompanying the child, then sworn affidavits from the other parent are required.
This is supposedly to stop child trafficking, but is far more heavy-handed than measures imposed elsewhere.
Another regulation, also coming into effect on June 1st, will force visitors from places needing advance visas to apply in person at a South African embassy or consulate in their home country; the job can no longer be done by post.
In China and India, which are big, growing markets for South African tourism, this could mean flying to the nearest big city.
The government has shown slight signs of wobbling; it has twice delayed the application of the new rules, and set up a team to discuss the issue.
A leaked report by Grant Thornton, a consultancy, for the Tourism Business Council of South Africa said the policy could cost more than 100,000 jobs.
Diplomats from Asia and the Middle East say the rules will deter investment and tour companies are reporting cancellations.
Even South Africa’s tourism minister has said the sector’s huge benefits could melt away.
While South Africa makes life harder for visitors, nearby countries are doing the very opposite.
For example, Zambia and Zimbabwe are testing a single joint visa, easing travel to Victoria Falls on their shared border.
If the six-month experiment succeeds, other neighbouring countries are set to join.
In contrast, a “uni-visa” system for the 15 countries of the Southern African Development Community, a bloc dominated by South Africa, is nowhere near to being ready, despite having been mooted in 1998.
One big sticking point has been South Africa’s fear of a deluge of illegalimmigrants.
The government’s phobias appear to have cloudedits vision. m Chad and Senegal A pan-African trial, at last A fallen African dictator is likely to face anew kind of African justice NE of Africa’s most bloodstained former leaders, Hissene Habré, is likely to be formally charged in the next few days by a special African court with having committed a string of atrocities when he was president of Chad from 1982-1990.
The judges of the so-called Extraordinary African Chambers, set up in 2012 in Senegal, will decide what charges he must face.
Mr Habré, now aged 72, has been living in Senegal since fleeing from Chad at the end of his reign.
He is alleged to have committed crimes against humanity, war crimes and torture.
Around 40,000 people are reckoned to have been killed and many more tortured during his rule, according to Chad’s truth commission.
They filed a case against him in 2000, whereupon he was indicted by a Senegalese court and arrested.
But in 2012 Belgium, where the victims had sought justice invoking an unusual law that enables it to prosecute anyone for human-rights abuses wherever committed, won a case against Senegal at the International Court of Justice, the UN’s main judicial organ for adjudicating disputes between states.
A new Senegalese president, Macky Sal, gave the case a fresh lease of life, with the eager backing of Aminata Touré, an anticorruption campaigner who served as his prime minister until last summer.
With the endorsement of the African Union , Nigeria they oversaw the innovative creation of the Extraordinary African Chambers.
By contrast, the Au has been increasingly hostile to the International Criminal Court in The Hague, which has sought to bring human-rights abusers to book since its creation in 2002, on the ground that it has unfairly targeted Africans; all its indictees have so far been African.
Mr Habré could not, in any case, be tried before it, since his alleged crimes were committed before the ICC was set up.
Last year the AU said it would promote its own continental human-rights court—but incumbent leaders and their senior officials, it added, must be exempt.
The court in Senegal may well be a one-off, but it sets the right sort of precedent for the continent’s abusive presidents.
Years of inept governance, military rule and corruption have left citizens disillusioned.
Many are unimpressed by their choices in the coming presidential elections.
A darker cloud of uncertainty was cast over Africa’s biggest economy on February 7th when electoral officials said they were delaying the elections scheduled for February 14th by six weeks.
Private polls conducted for both parties suggested that, had the vote gone ahead as planned, President Goodluck Jonathan might well have been clearing his desk.
Electoral delays are not unusual in Nigeria—the 20 presidential poll was postponed too—but this hold-up is particularly controversial because it was forced by the army.
The generals told electoral officials that they would not provide security for a vote in the north-east, where the jihadists of Boko Haram control an area of roughly 30,000 square kilometres.
A postponement would give the army time to secure the region, they said.
Jibrin Ibrahim of the Centre for Democracy and Development a f) Better late than never think-tank in Abuja, went so far as to call the army’s action “direct blackmail” of the electoral commission.
In part thatis a reflection of how deeply suspicion of the army runs in Nigeria, which has suffered repeated coups.
Olusegun Obasanjo, a former president and stalwart of the ruling party, recently sided with the opposition and expressed concern over the delay.
Boko Haram, which wants to establish an Islamic state, has been waging war since 2009, and gaining ground steadily.
It has also struck across borders, most recently with attacks in Niger and Cameroon.
Most Nigerians laugh at the army’s confident assertion that security can be restored in time for a poll in late March.
In January Chad began moving up battle-hardened soldiers, who are now fighting militants within Nigeria.
Its men have reportedly liberated towns including Gamborou, Malam Fatori and Baga.
Separately, Nigeria, Niger, Cameroon, Chad and Benin have agreed to send a multinational force of about 8,000 to battle the insurgents.
Such a multi-pronged assault ought to gain further ground against Boko Haram, which is thought to field no more than 6,000 fighters, but getting it under way may take time.
Nigeria is only accepting foreign help with “lukewarm acquiescence”, one Western diplomat argues.
It is unlikely that it will allow foreign forces beyond its border towns.
In short, the security situation is unlikely to change in six weeks before the vote.
If it goes ahead as planned at the end of March~and a further delay would be unconstitional—voters in large parts of the three north-eastern states most affected by Boko Haram are likely to be disenfranchised, much as they would have been had it taken place in February.
The question many Nigerians are asking, however, is whether the enforced pause will swing the outcome of the vote. m The German economy No new deal BERLIN Germany is investing too little—hurting Europe, the world and itself ROM Washington to Athens, politicians and economists who often have little in common all agree that Germany under Chancellor Angela Merkel is largely wrong about economic policy.
Germany’s apparent economic strengths—the lowest unemployment in two decades; steady, if low, growth; a balanced federal budget—mask weaknesses and policy errors, they say.
Given low interest rates, now would be a golden opportunity to borrow and invest more at home, boosting the economy and providing a Keynesian stimulus to the entire sluggish euro zone.
By definition, this surplus measures the excess of savings over investment.
Public investment in Germany-—shared by the federal, state and local governments—has fallen from 6% of GpP in 1970 to 2% now.
Roads, bridges, broadband internet and much else could do with more money.
The Cologne Institute for Economic Research, another thinktank, reckons that the capital stock of German machines has not risen in real terms since 2008.
Frans Timmermans For daily analysis and debate on Europe, visit Economist.com/europe growth.
But other German economists are sceptical about claims of underinvestment.
Christoph Schmidt, chairman of the German Council of Economic Experts, which advises the government, thinks published ratios ofinvestment as a percentage of GDP can be misleading when compared both across time and between countries.
Reunification in 1990 caused a one-off investment boom in both parts of the country.
Yet the trend of declining public and private investment remains clear.
A recalculation to fit European Union norms lifts Germany’s investment ratio from 17% to 19%, by including companies’ research and development spending.
But German ones have for years preferred to invest abroad, not at home.
The main reason for low domestic investment, says Michael Htither, the Cologne institute’s director, is uncertainty and nervousness over the future.
Continuing anxiety over Greece and the euro has been especially damaging.
More recently worries about Russia, which is more commercially entangled with Germany than with other big Western economies, have unsettled the business climate.
But the biggest problem for many businessmen may be benighted government policies.
These start with Germany’s “energy transition,” a plan to exit simultaneously from fossil fuels and nuclear energy.
The surcharge that many firms have to pay on a unit of energy is larger than the entire cost of electricity paid by firms in America.
Half the firms polled by Mr Hither’s institute claim that this makes any new investment unattractive.
Many also complain, in a country that has an ageing, shrinking population, about a shortage of skilled workers despite Germany’s admired apprenticeship system.
Mrs Merkel’s government, under the influence of her Social Democratic coalition partners, has made things worse by letting some workers retire at 63, rather than at 67, as previously envisaged.
In the housing market, owners are put off investment by a cap on rents in many cities.
A new federal minimum wage is yet another measure that will add costs for business.
The best way to boost investment is to fix these policy errors, argues Mr Schmidt.
On energy, even if the government insists on sticking to its emissions targets, it could leave the choice of technology to the market.
The pension age could be raised again; the minimum wage should be lower.
Yet Germany led resistance to calls for more public money to be put into the European Commission’s planned investment programme.
At home it is constrained by the constitutional “debt brake”, adopted in 2009, which requires state governments to balance their budgets by 2020 and the federal one to do so by 2016.
Wolfgang Schauble, the finance minister, has beaten the timetable, balancing the budget in 2014.
He and Mrs Merkel are proud of the “black zero”, which demonstrates that Germans sticks by the rules, as others should.
The books may balance, but Germany is a long way from rectifying its investment shortfall at home.
Muhammad, their 20-year-old son, died fighting jihadists of Islamic State across the border in the Syrian town of Kobane shortly after Kurdish forces declared victory on January 26th.
Pan-Kurdish sentiments have been sharpened by the battle against Is, in turn stirring the long-standing rebelliousness of Cizre, where a legendary Kurdish emir, Bedr Han, rose up against the Ottomans in the early 19th century.
Scores were killed in Cizre in 1992 when Turkish forces opened fire on civilians who celebrated the Kurdish new year in defiance of orders to stay home.
Muhammad was imprisoned for a year for throwing stones at a police vehicle.
The Justice and Development party has made unprecedented overtures to the Kurds, easing bans on the language and talking to the imprisoned PKK leader, Abdullah Ocalan.
Yet many Kurds believe the state is behind the violence that has recently gripped Cizre.
One 12-year-old was shot, allegedly by security forces, on January 14th.
The unrest began in October when Turkey refused to let Kurdish fighters open a corridor to Kobane.
It escalated into street battles between PKK supporters and Huda-Par, an Islamist Kurdish party, whose precursor, Hizbullah (unrelated to the eponymous Lebanese militia), was used by the Turkish state to fight the PKK in the 1990s.
The PKK insists that Huda-Par has links to 1s and that Turkey backs both.
In Cudi, a gritty part of Cizre, men and women huddle round wood-burning stoves as they keep nightly vigil at “checkpoints” to keep Huda-par and Turkish forces out.
Like thousands of Kurds he ekes out a living harvesting crops in western Turkey.
Unemployment in Cizre runs at 70%, against a national average of 10%, says Leyla Imret, the 27-year-old HDP mayor.
She insists the HDpP will win the minimum 10% of the national vote needed to win parliamentary seats in June’s election.
But this time it plans. to run as a party despite polls suggesting it may not clear the hurdle.
In the regional capital, Diyarbakir, many Kurds don’t want to be part of the Turkish parliament anyway.
If the HDP is not represented in parliament, tensions could spiral out of control,” he warns.
Farther west, in Suruc, which stands opposite Kobane, some 200,000 Syrian Kurds who fled the war prefer to stay in rough camps run by the HDp-run municipality rather than a shiny refugee complex built by the government.
A section for “martyrs of Kobane” has been added to the local cemetery, where this correspondent counted 66 fresh graves.
Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, is at one end, Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, at the other.
It is a fitting image, given that Mr Pu‘in is due in Budapest on February 17th, two weeks after Mrs Merkel.
His visit will mostly be about renewing Hungary’s gas contract which expires this year, says Viktor Orban, the prime minister, who wants what he calls a “flexible” arrangement.
For his part, Mr Putin wants to show the world that he is not as isolated as some claim.
The Ukraine crisis, and Mr Orban’s links with Russia, have put Hungary in the spotlight.
Georgia’s prime minister has just visited; Turkey’s president is expected soon.
He caused considerable alarm around the European Union in July 2014 when he declared that Hungary would remain a democracy but become an “illiberal state”, citing the examples of Russia, Turkey and China.
Mrs Merkel criticised the term on her visit, but was firmly rebuffed by her host.
Russia is Hungary’s biggest trading partner outside the EU, and supplies most of its gas.
Moreover, America’s loss of interest and influence in central Europe points to a greater focus on Germany and Russia, argues Mr Orban.
The cancellation of Russia’s planned South Stream gas pipeline was a blow.
Cheap gas is a fundamental pillar of the government’s populist policies, says Peter Kreko of Political Capital, a Budapest thinktank.
Many in the West think the cosying-up between Mr Orban and Mr Putin has gone too far.
Hungary has taken a €10 billion ($11 billion) loan from Russia to upgrade its ageing nuclear power plant.
Last year Mr Orban also broke ranks over EU sanctions on Russia, claiming that they did more harm to Europe than to Russia.
Hungary has repeatedly called for autonomy for ethnic _ Hungarians in western Ukraine.
At worst, it was seen as a set-up; at best, the result of American puritanical excess.
The spectacle of a handcuffed mF head doing the “perp walk” aroused special outrage.
Those charges were eventually dropped, but France now has its own home-grown version in a courtroom in Lille.
Mr Strauss-Kahn, along with others, is accused of “aggravated pimping”, an offence that carries up to ten years in jail.
The presiding judge in the trial, which opened on February 2nd, made it clear that this was a criminal, not a moral, No longer a world saviour tled government in Kiev, helping Moscow.
He has courted Germany, on whose economy and investment Hungary depends most heavily.
The case against Mr StraussKahn hinges on whether he knew that the women who attended soirées libertines, or group-sex parties, often organised in his honour, were paid.
On February 10th Mr Strauss-Kahn admitted taking partin such parties—but no more than “four times a year”, he said, because he was too busy “saving the world” after the global financial crisis.
Aman many once saw as a Socialist front-runner for president is no longer a public figure.
There has been plenty of news coverage, but no editorial outpouring of moral disapproval.
The day after Mr Strauss-Kahn testified, Le Monde, a left-leaning newspaper, had no story about the trial on its front page.
Yet as the prostitutes testify, this tolerance is being put to the test.
A group of topless feminist protesters tried to disrupt Mr Strauss-Kahn’s arrival in court.
Jean Quatremer, ajournalist who raised questions about Mr StraussKahn’s sexual behaviour in 2007, said it was time for the media to examine their own silence.
Never before has such a once-powerful French figure had his bedroom activities exposed in public, semi-pornographic detail.
Most cases of sexual assault against French politicians are dropped, including one by Tristane Banon, a French writer, against Mr StraussKahn.
But a taboo has been broken, and traditional indifference to sexual excess called, painfully, into question.
Russia’s relations with Hungary are “isolated from the overall situation in the world,” says Vladimir Sergeyev, Russia’s ambassador to Hungary.
Doomsday scenarios include the break-up of the country, which could push waves of refugees across the border.
Some 200,000 ethnic Hungarians live in western Ukraine, and many could seek sanctuary.
Charlemagne | When less is more Frans Timmermans takes on the Brussels blob IRST VICE-PRESIDENT for Better Regulation, Inter-Institutional Relations, the Rule of Law and the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
The bureaucratic ring of Mr Timmermans’ official description belies the formidable challenge of his role, which is to get Europe to do less.
In fact he has been more of a sponge, soaking up difficult issues as they arise, from sustainable development to a controversial article in a transatlantic trade deal.
His trickiest taskis to ensure that Brussels’s legendary appetite for rule-making is kept in check.
In a series of “confessionals” last year, Mr Timmermans asked each of his colleagues to make the case for their legislative priorities.
The resulting “work programme” for 2015 had just 23 items, a fraction of previous years’ lists.
A review of existing EU law is under way, witha view to cutting red tape.
This is an unfamiliar approach in an organisation where “more Europe” often serves as a secular creed.
Mr Timmermans insists his job is about getting Europe to work better, not acting as deregulator-in-chief.
But his approach has riled Eurocrats and members of the European Parliament.
The biggest challenge, says Mr Timmermans, has been tackling the “Brussels logic”, according to which policymakers do not obstruct projects they consider useless for fear of seeing their own ideas squashed.
As an example of the overreach he wants to tackle, Mr Timmermans ridicules a failed attempt by the Eu to regulate the use of olive-oil jugs in restaurants.
His instincts play well in Britain, which is preparing for its own debate on the role of the Eu.
David Cameron, the Tory prime minister, has pledged to renegotiate Britain’s membership should he retain power after an election in May, before holding an in/out referendum.
Some have suggested that Mr Timmermans should take charge of any talks with Britain.
As Dutch foreign minister, he also expressed scepticism about Mr Cameron’s motives in seeking a new deal.
But his presence in the senior ranks of the commission will reassure pro-European Britons that their message will find receptive ears.
The mandarins in Britain’s civil service were delighted by his appointment.
European countries worried about Russian aggression were similarly cheered.
One Brussels-based diplomat credits this intervention with unifying the EU behind a tougher line on Russia.
Yet if the Eu has held together on sanctions, it has floundered on a broader strategy.
In 1991, during a diplomatic stint in Moscow, he holed up in a government building during an attempted coup, talking to local MPs and diligently dispatching reports back to The Hague.
Today, he suggests, if Europe is struggling to work out how best to deal with Vladimir Putin, itis because most countries stopped paying attention after the end of the cold war.
The soothsayer of subsidiarity For years the Eu has been in firefighting mode, battling to hold the euro together or reacting to unrest in its neighbourhood.
These emergencies have consumed energy and resources, but also raised awkward questions about where the limits of European power should be drawn.
Across Europe grumpy voters have been turning to populist parties that assail Brussels for its bureaucratic excesses.
The assignment granted to Mr Timmermans thus repre-sents a double gamble.
And second, that the forces behind greater integration, particularly in the economy, need not spill over into areas best left to national, or even local, governments.
Fluent and more-or-less accentless in six European languages, fiercely ambitious and the proud owner of a formidable intellect, Mr Timmermans is well placed to take on Brussels’s bureaucratic machine.
A recent row with the European Parliament over his decision to withdraw a “circular economy” (ie, recycling) plan may portend more trouble ahead.
If Mr Timmermans has a weakness, say observers, it is a scratchy vanity that can rub colleagues up the wrong way.
He always thinks he knows best, says a former colleague, and, even more troubling, he usually does.
But if his ambition sometimes tips into arrogance, that may not be the gravest sin in a place that too often takes pride in consensus over conflict.
In the original book, Dr No, who had grand plans of his own, saw them thwarted when he was buried alive under a heap of bird guano.
Europe’s bureaucrats and lawmakers may not be too fond of him, but Mr Timmermans should at least escape that fate. m Economist.com/blogs/charlemagne Muscle memory Britain’s strategic ambition has shrivelled even more than its defence budget RITAIN has long prided itself on punching above its weight diplomatically and militarily.
Yet in its response to Russian aggression in Ukraine, Europe’s most serious security crisis for a generation, it has been little more than a backseat driver.
When the fighting flared up, it was Francois Hollande of France and Angela Merkel of Germany who flew to Moscow.
Britain was also notably slow to react when Barack Obama announced he was forming a coalition to defeat Islamic State last September.
In a House of Commons vote held, languidly, a few weeks later, the government only asked for authorisation to strike Is targets in Iraq.
In a report published last week, the Commons defence committee noted that the country had carried outless than one air strike a day.
When the committee visited Iraq, it found a total British military contingent of just three people outside Kurdish areas.
Rhetorically, the government remains committed to the idea that Britain is a great power.
The last Strategic Defence and Security Review, in late 2010, paved the way for a cut of 8% in the defence budget.
Britain has slipped from fourth to sixth in the global defence spending league since 2012, according to siIpRi, a think tank—putting it behind France, Saudi Arabia, Russia, China and America.
But in truth, its relative military decline has been less dramatic than the country’s diminished appetite to be a leading security player on the world stage.
The Milibandwagon For daily analysis and debate on Britain, visit Economist.com/britain wanted their country to aspire to be a great power and not accept decline—the highest level since the first survey in 2010.
To be fair, Britain is quietly pulling its weight as part of NATO’s efforts to reassure members in eastern Europe who feel threatened by Vladimir Putin’s irredentist Russia.
In 2017 it will be the lead nation for the alliance’s new 5,000-strong rapidly deployable spearhead force.
Another good sign is the growing number of joint projects stemming from the Anglo-French defence treaty of 2010, which recognised a shared interest in still wanting to play a global role with reduced means.
Money has been saved on testing nuclear weapons, developing an unmanned combat aircraft and producing a new anti-ship missile.
The Conservative-led coalition can also claim success in dealing with the Ministry of Defence’s overheated equipment budget, closing a £45. billion hole left by the previous, Labour, government.
It committed itself in 2012 to funding a tenyear £159 billion equipment programme that includes two aircraft-carriers, a modernised air-transport fleet, more battlefield helicopters, new attack submarines and destroyers.
If the plan sticks, Britain will have smaller but still highly capable armed forces.
The ministry’s Future Force 2020, of which the equipment programme is part, requires spending increases of 1-2% a year in real terms from 2015.
A new Strategic Defence and Security Review must be completed by the next government later this year— work on it has stopped because of the general election in May.
If Mr Cameron is reelected, defence will probably have to take at least some of the pain coming from the second stage of the government's austerity programme.
That would mean Britain fails to meet its NATO commitment to spend at least 2% of cpp on defence, despite Mr Cameron again pledging to do so at the alliance summit he hosted in Wales only in September.
On a visit to Washington last month, Mr Cameron was leftin no doubt that Britain’s influence would wane significantly if defence spending fell further.
Should Labour win power, defence will rank even further down its list of priorities.
Sir Nick worries that Britain no longer has a clearidea of whatits armed forces are for.
Amid the campaign cacophony of competing retail offerings to voters, that message is unlikely to be heard.
Much of the data, stolen to expose alleged tax evasion, was this week made public in a co-ordinated splash by a group of media outlets, including the Guardian and the BBc.
The haul, dating from 2005 to 2007, includes hundreds of embarrassing documents, from internal e-mails breezily discussing undeclared client funds to details of “bricks” of cash being handed over to account-holders.
The owner of the Ivy restaurant in London withdrew sFr5m in cashina single day; his lawyer has said this involved no impropriety.
The leak dents the image of the London-based bank and may give it a legal headache.
Criminal cases are piling up there—and in Belgium, Spain and Argentina.
France has concluded that more than 99% of its citizens on the list were likely to be evading tax.
A broader Anglo-Swiss agreement on reclaiming tax-evading money has also disappointed by bringing in around £1 billion in two years—about one-third of the amount that had been expected.
This allows formerly tax-shy Britons to pay overdue taxes and penalties anonymously through their offshore banks via a withholding arrangement.
The agency’s defenders say it took a “pragmatic” approach to the HsBc files, concluding that the best way to maximise revenue was to offer tax evaders a brief window during which they could come clean and pay reduced, civil penalties.
Criminal prosecutions are costly and tricky, especially when the data is stolen, and may have netted even less.
But with lurid details appearing daily in newspapers, the taxman seems timorous.
Coming shortly before a general election, the revelations have kicked up a political storm.
Conservative mps have gleefully pointed out that the misdeeds revealed by the leak took place during the previous, Labour, administration.
Labour figures retort that they did not come to light until the coalition was in power, and that David Cameron made Lord Green, HSBC’s boss at the time, a minister some time after it should have been clear that the bank was in HMRC’s sights.
Labour was campaigning against tax evasion and aggressive tax planning by companies even before this debacle.
Ed Miliband, the party’s leader, has taken aim at Britain’s offshore dependencies, such as Jersey and Bermuda, threatening them with blacklisting—even though they are more compliant with global anti-moneylaundering standards than most OECD countries.
Mr Cameron has made a crusade out of stamping out banking and corporate secrecy.
Still, a whistle-blower (who was subsequently sacked) identified poor controls at the private bank as recently as 2013.
HSBC is already under the cosh on both sides of the Atlantic for past sins, including facilitating sanctions evasion and the laundering of drug money.
To settle these, it paid $19 billion to the Americans, who are now reportedly considering revoking the associated deferred-prosecution agreement.
In Belgium, whose diamond dealers were big users of HSBC Geneva, prosecutors talk darkly of issuing international arrest warrants for the current and former heads of the bank if it does not co-operate.
In Britain, too, calls for scalps will grow louder—at least until the election.
Now, in The Art of Storytelling, internationally recognized storyteller Hannah B Harvey teaches you the tried-and-true methods professional storytellers use to capture and hold onto an audience’s attention.
Although you may never set foot on a stage, knowing what storytellers do in the process of crafting and delivering memorable tales can help you enhance the stories you tell everyday—to your children at bedtime, in your conversational anecdotes, and in your presentations at work.
Offer expires 03/02/15 THEGREATCOURSES.COM/3ECON 1-800-832-2412 LECTURE TITLES Telling a Good Story The Storytelling Triangle Connecting with Your Story Connecting with Your Audience _ Telling Family Stories The Powerful Telling of Fairy Tales Myth and the Hero’s Journey Tensive Conflict and Meaning Giving Yourself Permission to Tell 10.
From Parents to Professionals Course no.13 | 24 lectures SAVE UP TO $185 DVD $254-95 CD $179:95 +$10 Shipping, Processing, and Lifetime Satisfaction Guarantee Priority Code: 108280 For 25 years, The Great Courses has brought the world’s foremost educators to millions who want to go deeper into the subjects that matter most.
Download or stream to your laptop or PC, or use our free mobile apps for iPad, iPhone, or Android.
Now it is little more than an awkward memory, a piece of mid-term spin briefly trumpeted by a newbie leader keen to cut his own path—which turns out, on the basis of Labour’s general-election campaign so far, not to be terribly one nation anything.
Labour’s early showing in the campaign has been more divisive than unifying, even as its appeal appears less national, due to the party’s shrinking support in Scotland and tin ear to the more affluent south, by the day.
His objection is to the fact that, instead of trying to fix Labour’s big weaknesses—its weak polling on the economy and on Mr Miliband’s fitness for command-—the Labour leader has mainly been promising to spend oodles on the Nus, while launching blistering attacks on business.
With hardly a pause to acknowledge the jobs and wealth firms helpfully create, he promises to intervene in energy and banking markets; to raise corporate taxes; and to foist more apprentices, higher wages, more paternal leave and other gimmes onto company books.
When the boss of one of Britain’s most trusted firms, Boots, dared squeal, the Labour leader denounced him as a Monaco-based tax avoider.
Mr Miliband wants a more productive private sector, which is good, yet appears to have given little thought to the greater inefficiency of public services, which is not, considering he promises to rescue most of them from Tory ravages.
Compared with the Conservatives, whose Australian campaign chief, Lynton Crosby, rules with an iron bar, Labour’s campaign lacks a clear chain of command.
No one knows whether Douglas Alexander, the campaign manager, Lucy Powell, the deputy campaign chief, or Mr Miliband is in charge.
Many speak of local issues as most important; this is partly true, but partly an acknowledgment of the weakness of the party’s main message—whose architect, Mr Miliband, few are depicting on their leaflets.
There is no such Tory scheme; most of the modest role for private health-care providers in the NHS was created under Labour.
Yet she was following orders, Mr Miliband having instructed his lackeys to “weaponise” the NHS, on the basis that Britons love it, Labour invented it and it is creaking under the pressures of an ageing population.
Asked what message they would like to be able to sell on the doorstep, half a dozen Labour candidates gave your columnist the same reply.
They would like to be able to say more about aspiration, getting on, hope for the future—the things New Labour used to talk about, and on which Mr Miliband is silent.
Electoral history suggests the Tories should be streets ahead; in David Cameron they have a relatively popular leader of a one-term government that has overseen an economic recovery.
Labour has the most disliked opposition leader since records began and dismal ratings on the election’s biggest issue, the economy.
Yet the two parties are level-pegging, on around 32%, which, given the advantage Labour enjoys from outdated constituency boundaries, in effect puts it ahead.
To win a majority, the Tories need about a six-point lead, which is hard to imagine.
In recent months Labour’s vote has been leaking to the protest parties it may end up in government with.
It is also based on a calculation that, because the Tories are at close to their core support, there are few Tory-Labour switchers to be had, so less call for the economic reassurance they traditionally look for.
Yet Bagehot struggles to understand why Mr Miliband cannot do both things at once.
Strip away the attention-grabbing rhetoric, and many of his prescriptions are sensible.
Britain’s economy is growing but its workers are unproductive, which is why the recovery has not been widely felt.
Improving skills through apprenticeships is therefore an excellentidea, which businesses should applaud.
Indeed, had Mr Miliband couched even his more radical ideas in terms of the need to improve markets, not his desire to bash predatory capitalists, he might have won a few of the predators over.
The problem with Mr Miliband is not so much that he is a dangerous extremist; in Germany or Sweden he would be considered solidly centrist.
It is that he appears unable to couch, or even consider, his earnestly held beliefs in such a way as to build a consensus of support for them.
The impression is of a political autistic, with extraordinarily little awareness of how he comes across or willingness to learn from his mistakes.
That is a worrying trait in the man pitching to be Britain’s next leader.
About 70% of the school’s new arrivals last September had reading and mathematical skills below the minimum expected for their grade.
Whatever the label, most countries have schools where most children are from poor families, expectations are low, and teachers are hard to recruit.
And in most, the falling prestige of the teaching profession makes matters worse.
But Ms Sarmiento, who graduated from a four-year biology degree course a year early, had to see off fierce competition to win her teaching spot.
Teach for America , the scheme that placed her, accepts just one in six applicants.
It looks for a stellar academic record and evidence of traits that distinguish the best teachers in tough schools, including leadership, resilience and motivation to help the poor.
Recruits get five weeks’ training and pledge to work for two years in a disadvantaged school.
After two decades of growth, the number of applicants is falling slightly as the graduate jobs market strengthens.
And thanks to its 25-year history and 40,000 alumni, Americans are no longer surprised that bright, ambitious graduates want the most demanding teaching posts.
A quarter of European and Latin American countries, as well as Australia, China and India, have something similar.
Many of the schemes are new, with just two or three cohorts placed in schools.
Ambitious youngsters are attracted by the lack of a requirement for a teaching qualification, the chance to make a difference—and the high-energy approach.
Many applicants have degrees in mathematics and science, subjects where teachers are scarce.
Results seem positive, though so far there have been few rigorous evaluations.
Pupils of TfA recruits do just as well in reading as those of other teachers; in maths, their test scores are better.
Britain’s Teach First has been credited with helping to improve standards in London.
It now provides nearly a quarter of new teachers in the country’s most difficult schools.
Critics, including teachers’ unions, fret that afew weeks of training is too little fora novice teacher, no matter how gung-ho.
Like its counterparts elsewhere, Teach First provides the graduates it places in schools with support.
Experienced colleagues help them with lesson planning and mentors visit their classrooms.
Most enroll in a teacher-certification course (some countries insist on this), meaning that university tutors are on tap, too.
New teachers, whatever their route into the classroom, struggle most in their first two years, even in the easiest schools.
Now 90% return for a second year—a higher share than for all novice teachers, in all types of schools.
Some countries add weekend gatherings and seminars for participants to swap ideas and commiserate.
Recruits may even be “overloaded with support”, says Dzameer Dzulkiflii who runs Malaysia’s scheme—which could be a waste of more than their time, since such support is expensive in the rural areas where many are based.
Indeed, the cost of the Tf model is what may prevent it going mainstream.
But such pilot programmes matter because they can drag standards up across the board.
And most countries’ programmes aim to turn out alumni who will lead more than a single classroom.
Several help participants find private-sector jobs after their two-year stint.
Ideally, leaders in any sector who have seen the battlefield will become powerful allies in the quest to improve the worst schools.
Fifteen of the 15 who have completed Peru’s programme now work in its education ministry.
A team of alumni from Lithuania’s scheme recently helped draft its tenyear education strategy.
A fifth of school principals in Washington, Dc, are Tia alumni, as are its schools chancellor, Kaya Henderson, and several of her senior staff.
Many of those who leave teaching English-language education move to social programmes or start-up ventures.
Chaitra Murlidhar, an engineer and alumna of Teach for India, now works for a non-profit foundation set up by Thermax, a large manufacturer.
A teacher-retraining scheme she designed is being used in Pune, an industrial city in west India.
Alumni in Australia and Spain have created online teaching resources for teachers and pupils, such as digital and video lessons that can be personalised.
Last year Teach First was runner-up in a national poll to find Britain’s most prestigious employer of graduates.
Just as important, says Evgenia Peeva of Teach for Bulgaria, is to demonstrate that poor children from barely literate families can learn—if they have excellent teachers.
It has often been a thankless task; many pupils yawn their way through class.
Comparable global data are scarce, but experts say the situation is similar in much of the non-Anglophone world.
Common problems include bad teachers hired via written tests rather than oral ones, and an outmoded approach that sees English as a foreign language to be taught about, rather than a lingua franca to be taught in.
Teachers’ lack of fluency means too little English conversation in the classroom, says John Knagg of the British Council, so pupils do not get used to using the language.
It is as if they were being taught to swim without ever getting into the water.
China has made English compulsory in school from a young age, but teachers are overstretched and mostly underqualified, says Jing Zhao, a visiting researcher at the Harvard Graduate School of Education.
Just over 1m English-language staff teach over 200m Chinese pupils, a heroic, if mind-boggling, teacher-pupil ratio.
English spoken here Many speak a scripted English in class and prefer to focus on the pen-and-ink grammatical work on which their pupils are examined.
The problem is compounded by education systems that are out of touch with parents’ demands for more English instruction.
In Japan, for instance, the government has said it will bolster the mandatory English requirement for children in primary school—but only from 2020 when the country hosts the Olympic games.
In Latin America “there is a huge gap between what the system provides and what the students actually need,” says Rosangela Bando of the Inter-American Development Bank.
Better-off city-dwelling children are more likely to have private language lessons, internet access or the chance to travel abroad.
But even in state systems where instruction has long been poor, there are signs of change.
Agustin’s colleague, Armando Velazquez, a mid-career English teacher, refuses to speak a word of Spanish in the classroom and makes the whole of his lessons conversational.
At the start of one of his first classes, a pupil mimes vomiting when asked whether he likes English.
By the end, the youngster is merrily using it to describe Lionel Messi, an Argentine footballer, as fast, rich and famous.
A year ago Mr Velazquez benefited from an English-language course that he says changed not only his teaching, but his life.
Such on-thejob training has also produced results in Chile and Malaysia, says Mr Knagg.
It makes up for its dearth of English-speaking teachers by contracting Filipinos who teach via videoconferencing from Manila to pupils’ laptops or tablets in Montevideo.
Interactive technology can help make lessons more lively, as South Korea has discovered.
Ultimately, the goal should be to teach other subjects in English, as Canada is helping China to do, rather than just teaching English.
Even if the most promising innovations are widely copied, fluency will come only gradually; today’s pupils must first learn enough English to become tomorrow’s competent teachers. m It’s a Wanda-ful life BEIJING AND WUHAN eae f te iy Cy é ‘ L} \¢ |* le } China’s biggest property tycoon wants to become an entertainment colossus ANG JIANLIN started life with a red spoon in his mouth.
Thanks to his influence, the youngster was able to join the People’s Liberation Army at 15 and so avoid the worst deprivations of the Cultural Revolution.
After 17 years in the army, he decided that the future belonged not to generals but to businessmen.
So in 1988, after a stint asa bureaucrat, he formed a property company in the north-eastern city of Dalian, using $80,000 of borrowed money.
You do not expect blaring disco music and strobes, leggy beauties and champagne first thing in the morning.
But that is how Mr Wang—who favours private jets and flashy yachts (he owns Sunseeker, the British maker of the sleek craft seen in James Bond films)—celebrated his latest deal on February 1oth.
In the glittering ballroom of the Sofitel Wanda hotel in Beijing, he toasted a $1. billion deal to buy InFront Sports & Media, which holds some of the marketing rights to FIFA’s World Cup.
The previous month he took a 20% stake in Atlético Madrid football club.
Mr Wang is also on track to become the world’s biggest owner of five-star hotels, with billion-dollar investments in Sydney, London, Chicago and Los Angeles.
Hollywood moguls were perplexed when some Asian guy they hadn’t heard of bought Amc, a big but struggling American cinema chain, for $2. billion in 2012.
Some scoffed at his plans to spend $8 billion on the world’s largest studio complex in Qingdao, China.
But they certainly took note when he got Leonardo DiCaprio, John Travolta, Kate Beckinsale and other celebrities to fly there for the project’s launch in 2013.
He is now rumoured to have Lionsgate, the studio behind “The Hunger Games”, in his sights.
Out-Disneying Disney Mr Wang wants to transform Dalian Wanda into a global entertainment colossus capable of beating Disney, which plans to open Shanghai Disneyland next year.
He is dreaming up acquisitions that will increase his group’s annual revenues by 2020 to $100 billion, a fifth to come from outside China.
The influence of his years in the PLA, where he rose from border guard to regimental commander, is evident.
Why authors need to be entrepreneurs For daily coverage of business, visit Economist.com/business-finance erect bearing.
However, his charmed career and his free-spending ways raise several important questions about Dalian Wanda’s future.
Take the threat to his core property business first, where Wanda’s bricks-and-mortar empire faces the twin dangers of a weak property market and rising online competition.
Jones Lang LaSalle, a property-management firm, estimates that the total floorspace at shopping malls in the biggest 20 cities will rise from 62m square metres now to 87m in two years.
On top of the risk of oversupply, the value of the land on which developers’ loans are secured is falling.
Oscar Choi, an analyst at Citigroup, has visited Wanda Plaza malls in cities large and small; he was impressed by how efficiently they were run, and their pulling-power among local consumers.
All this is helping the group with its defences against the spread of e-commerce, which is hitting many Chinese shops hard.
In August it launched a 5 billion yuan venture with Baidu and Tencent, two leading 55 internet firms, to devise “online to offline” | 56 Business > services, in which consumers use their smartphones to choose products but are then led to a physical shop, where they buy them.
As part of this plan, Wanda is now wiring up all of its shopping centres with Wi-Fi and Bluetooth sensors so that shoppers can be monitored intensely.
A new app, to be launched soon, will ping them with promotions and information as they step inside the malls, and will let them do such things as book parking spaces.
Consumers can peruse goods on the shelves but pay on their mobile phones to save queuing, and have their goods delivered straight to their homes.
Citigroup predicts that net profits at the firm’s property division will keep soaring, rising by over half between 2014 and 2016, to 22. billion yuan.
He acknowledges that sales of these sorts of things are suffering at his centres.
Wanda has done more than its rivals to shift its malls’ mix of tenants in this direction.
Now, tenants offering such services occupy about 40% of its floor space, which is to rise to 60% over time.
His diversification into theme parks, film-making and other entertainment services follows a similar logic.
As the country’s investment-driven model of growth gives way to one focused on consumption, the services sector seems certain to rise.
CCTV, the main state television network, has named him its “Economic Person of the Year” not once but twice.
Given his firm’s operational know-how and its sensible diversification strategy, it would be wrong to dismiss him as just another Asian crony capitalist living off his connections.
Ask Mr Wang about whether his PLA links have been useful, and he laughs that all he gets from his old army buddies is requests for money.
Press him on his association with Bo Xilai, a powerful Communist figure and former mayor of Dalian, now jailed on corruption charges, and he insists that they did not get along.
Mr Wang says his firm had already spread beyond Dalian by the time Mr Bo secured power, so he did not need his help to succeed.
Bloomberg, a_ financial-information firm, conducted a lengthy investigation of Mr Wang’s ties to the political elite but in the end did not publish the story.
Dalian Wanda insists that neither it nor Mr Wang have received any sort of undue benefit from their connections to people in power.
Flush with success It is fair to say that Mr Wang’s commercial acumen has played a large part in Dalian Wanda’s success.
Independent accounts describe how he got his first break by doing unpleasant tasks that cosseted, state-run property firms spurned.
For example, when Dalian’s civic leaders wanted to redevelop the city’s slums, he jumped at the chance.
By adding a small toilet to each refurbished flat—a luxury enjoyed only by members of the elite at that time—his firm built its reputation.
Wanda was also ambitious in expanding beyond its home base, something made difficult at the time by a thicket of regulations and local favouritism.
Far from chasing politicians, Mr Wang brags that these days they are chasing him—and that he turns down most of their offers of cheap land.
Despite the country’s reputation for endemic graft, “It is possible to get prime land in China without being corrupt,” insists Yvonne Zhou of the Boston Consulting Group.
Especially in smaller cities, she says, local governments are falling over themselves to modernise their centres by attracting a prestigious Wanda Plaza.
Citigroup Though sceptics may exaggerate Dalian Wanda’s dependence on links to officialdom, the firm’s recent move into cultural industries has clearly been made with government support.
Development projects that have a cultural element enjoy swifter approval.
Asked about his firm’s involvement in this campaign, Mr Wang boasts that AMC’s cinemas showed no Chinese films before his takeover but now show up to tena year.
A 1. square km plot in the old city has been rebuilt with a1,700 metre canal, a Wanda department store, two Wanda hotels and several office buildings.
Mr Wang risks coming across as too much the playboy in an increasingly Cromwellian China.
He deserves credit for building a mighty business empire, and certainly has much to celebrate.
But as his ambition grows, investors may come to see his enviable contacts as a growing vulnerability.
The son of a Communist guerrilla hero should know that from time to time the party suddenly and unexpectedly devours its own.
London, Milan and Paris come next; and in the autumn they repeat the circuit.
Lots of aspiring fashion hubs in emerging markets, from Shanghai to Mumbai, are also staging lavish shows.
With a10to 15-minute catwalk display costing up to a few million dollars, some industry commentators wonder if there are better ways for fashion brands to spend their marketing budgets than parading their wares at more and more shows.
Yet, for now at least, they remain central to the business of flogging posh frocks.
First, because buyers from department stores and other retailers are in the audience, ready to sign contracts if they like what they see.
Second, as a broader brand-building exercise, to convince consumers that a label is still at the cutting edge.
That is largely because luxury brands have been cutting out the middlemen in their distribution chains.
More than 80% of the shoes, bags and other products bearing the Prada label are now sold in its own shops, compared with about 50% a decade ago.
For Burberry, the share has grown from less than 40% to more than 70% over the same period.
So the fashion shows have become less about selling the latest collection to other retailers’ buyers and more about communicating the brand’s image to a wider public.
They launch new ranges more frequently, often staging their own publicity events.
But the main fashion shows are still the image-burnishing flagships of a more diffuse promotional effort.
Franca Sozzani, the editor of Vogue Italia, says little has changed in the staging of the main shows.
But digital technology and social media are making them more accessible to the public.
As with book publishing , this means there are now legions of fashion “influencers”, with big followings on Twitter, Instagram and Pinterest.
A recent survey of the luxury industry by the Boston Consulting Group concluded that word of mouth overtook magazines last year as the biggest influence on consumers’ purchase decisions.
Marc Jacobs, an American designer, has used it to capture e-mail addresses, by getting devotees to register in advance for live-streams in return for a chance to win tickets to shows.
The luxury industry in the 1990s was defined by the rise of global brands.
The 2000s were all about those brands taking control of the retail “experience” offered to customers.
The BCG report posits that in the coming decade, the industry will focus on getting to know individual customers.
For $180 you can buy a Constellation Taurus, a 59metre, 80-tonne freighter that is perfect for anyone looking to break into interstellar trading.
Would-be space truckers who pay up now will have to wait until 2016, when “Star Citizen”, a video game being developed by Cloud Imperium Games , is ready for lift-off.
Crowdfunding—in which artists, authors and designers raise money directly from their fans—has been good to the makers of video games.
So far the game has accumulated $72m; another few million dollars rains down every month.
Its nearest competition is Ethereum, a Bitcoin-inspired publishing platform, which raised $18m.
In return for pledges—ranging from $36 to $18,000— they get virtual spacecraft to use in the game, early access to unfinished versions, T-shirts and so on.
What they do not get is equity in the business or a cut of any profits.
As with other “reward crowdfunding” campaigns, these modern-day patrons of the arts are willing to pay because they like the idea of “Star Citizen” and want to see it produced.
Bigger, more conventionally financed games-makers try to appeal to as broad an audience as possible.
However, there is a chunk of the audience that “doesn’t want those compromises,” says CIG’s owner, Chris Roberts.
Even so, some fans fear Mr Roberts is taking on a bigger, more complex project than he can handle.
In response, he notes that one advantage of games is that they can be released in stages to reassure backers.
CIG has already sent some of them a module that lets them take a tour of their new spacecraft, and another that lets them stage dogfights with other craft.
Mr Roberts, who has also worked in Hollywood, thinks crowdfunding could work for big-budget films and television, two other risky sorts of production that can inspire rabid devotion in fans.
They would have to find ways to involve fans in the production process without giving away the plot.
And the principal economic tools at its disposal are sanctions, which have tightened incrementally since last March.
In several cases, however, companies that would have been subject to sanctions because of their links to “designated” Russian oligarchs have managed to wriggle free of the restrictions with well-timed transactions.
These have had the effect of reducing the stakes held by parties subject to sanctions below thresholds that would trigger penalties against their businesses.
It was compiled for one of the many Western companies that fret about whom they can or cannot do business with under the sanctions regime.
Originally set up by Gazprom, an energy giant, the company provides insurance to Russian firms, including numerous ones on sanctions lists.
Every member of the Sogaz board, including Alexey Miller, the boss of Gazprom, is affiliated with a sanctioned entity.
Until March 51% of Sogaz belonged to Bank Rossiya via a wholly owned subsidiary, called Abros.
Rossiya is Russia’s 17thlargest bank, and its owners have links to Mr Putin.
The remainder of the shares in Sogaz were divided between Gazprom, its subsidiaries and other figures close to the president.
Under the rules, Sogaz should have been too, as an entity that is 50%-or-more-owned by a_ sanctioned party.
Investigators who have seen the paperwork note that the transaction was not filed with the Russian authorities until March 24th, after sanctions took effect.
With Rossiya’s stake below 50%, Sogaz was able to produce comfort letters showing Western counterparties that it was not subject to sanctions.
A note in Sogaz’s 2013 accounts, published in April 2014, mentions Rossiya losing control through a share transaction, but gives no reason for it.
The Office of Foreign Assets Control , the arm of the us Treasury that oversees sanctions, closed the loophole in August.
Now, a firm is blacklisted if the stakes of sanctioned individuals add up to 50% or more.
Under these new rules, Sogaz should have been subject to sanctions because of its links to both Bank Rossiya and Kordeks, a 12.5% shareholder reportedly controlled by Mr Timchenko, whom America had blacklisted several months earlier.
However, in another exquisitely timed transaction, Rossiya cut its stake again—according to the paperwork, two days before the OFAC changes were announced—thus helping Sogaz avoid sanctions once more.
A document published by Sogaz in late August states that Abros, the Rossiya subsidiary, now held only 32.3% of Sogaz.
It said the transaction had taken place on August 6th and had been registered on August uth, just before the sanctions were expanded on August 13th.
This meant that the total shareholdings in Sogaz of sanctioned parties had fallen to 44.8% , again bringing it below the threshold.
You belong to yourself In another curious development, Rossiya later seems to have given away its remaining stake in Sogaz, by transferring ownership of Abros to Abros itself.
Another striking feature is that a tiny sliver of Abros is not management-owned.
According to corporate records, a stake of 0.004% is held by a firm called Bolshoi Dom 9 , whose six shareholders (including its largest investor, Yuri Kovalchuk) all own stakes in Rossiya or are >> wae SoA Soe ISS fie > affiliated with the bank.
This stake is very small but attracted the private investigators’ attention.
Given the shareholders’ links, “the assumption must be that they continue to exert influence over Abros and, therefore, Sogaz,” they conclude.
Neither Rossiya nor Sogaz responded to multiple e-mails seeking comment.
So it is unclear why Rossiya, also under sanctions, would want to distance itself from its former subsidiary.
It could be that Rossiya hoped that if Abros were no longer a majority-owned subsidiary of the bank, it would be taken off the list.
Mr Timchenko is also a founder of Gunvor, a giant oil-trading firm, along with Torbjorn Tornqvist, a Swede.
Until March 2014, 43.6% of Gunvor was owned by Fentex Properties, of which Mr Timchenkbo is the sole beneficial owner.
An identical stake was held by Frefika Foundation, a vehicle owned by Mr Tornqvist.
The remaining 12.8% was owned by a share plan for senior Gunvor employees, with no voting rights.
When Mr Timchenko was put on OFAC’s sanctions list on March 20th 2014, America alleged that Mr Putin had an undisclosed economic interest in Gunvor.
The day before, Fentex Properties sold its stake in Gunvor to Mr Tornqvist, giving him 87.2% of the shares and 100% of the voting power.
Gunvor denies that Mr Putin is a beneficiary of Gunvor orits activities and says Mr Timchenko “has absolutely no ongoing involvement” in the firm.
But it says Messrs Timchenko and Tornqvist “had been in talks about a divestiture for a while prior to the actual sale”, in part because of strategic differences.
It says this process was speeded up after the first round of sanctions on March 6th.
Another business linked to Mr Timchenko is the Hartwall Arena, a venue in Finland that has hosted concerts by the likes of Miley Cyrus and Aerosmith.
Several big concerts were threatened with cancellation because of worries that the arena itself would be blacklisted.
At some point around the time of sanctions—it is unclear when exactly—the shareholding structure changed.
Since the son was not on the sanctions list, total ownership of the venue by sanctioned parties thus fell to 49.5%, meaning it could continue to be used for concerts by Western stars without repercussion.
Roman Rotenberg told a Finnish newspaper that a deal for him to take control had been in the works since 2013, before the Ukraine conflict.
The Economist sought comment from the Rotenbergs through smp, a bank they co-own, but was unable to reach them.
Western lawyers say other Russian companies have concluded similarly welltimed transactions, the effect of which has been that they avoided sanctions.
Two senior sanctions lawyers told us they have seen evidence of such transactions, though neither was willing to provide names.
In several cases, says one, the European subsidiaries of Russian companies thought to be controlled by parties on sanctions lists suddenly appear to be only indirectly owned by them, thanks to the creation of a new corporate layer (ownership of which ject to sanctions OP) After August 2014 is hard or impossible to ascertain) to hold a majority stake in them.
OFAC declined to comment on these specific cases or on whether it might broaden its sanctions so that businesses subject to this sort of share transfer remain blacklisted.
It did say that it encourages Western firms to watch out for purported changes in ownership, in which someone subject to sanctions sells shares in a “sham” transaction—for instance, at below market value or in a temporary arrangement.
Even in scenarios where a bona fide transfer brings sanctioned parties’ combined stakes to below 50%, OFAC says it would continue to urge Western counterparties to exercise caution, as “such entities may be controlled—even if not owned” by blacklisted parties, for instance through nominees.
Feeling the pain Some lawyers think OFAC will not be too concerned about cases like that of Sogaz because it is not those firms but their owners who are the main targets.
Even if some of their businesses dodge sanctions, the oligarchs who have had to loosen their grip on them are still feeling pain.
What matters more to OFAC than the timing of the divestments is that they are genuine transactions, not window-dressing—so that the blacklisted are forced to sell assets they would rather keep.
Moreover, even if a holding manages to avoid blacklisting, it might still suffer if Western firms give it a wide berth, anticipating a further tightening of the sanctions.
Indeed, much as they insist their rules are clear, Western governments design them with a degree of ambiguity, so as to encourage Western firms to play safe and shun any company that might conceivably be connected with targeted people.
But this approach increases uncertainty for Western companies that do business with such firms.
Faced with this, many have felt obliged to hire investigators like those who looked into Sogaz’s affairs.
This is costly, and even seasoned sleuths are often unable to give firm assurances about ownership and control, given Russian business’s widespread use of offshore jurisdictions, points out Judith Lee of Gibson Dunn, another law firm.
The broader worry is that such cases make it look as if sanctions are too easy to dodge, undermining their credibility at a time when the West wants to appear strong.
The book will become a blockbuster without Ms Lee so much as signing a copy.
Standing out as a book writer today requires more than a bright idea and limpid prose.
Authors need to become businesspeople as well, thinking strategically about their brand, and marketing themselves and their products.
There is more competition for readers’ and reviewers’ attention, and fewer bookshops to provide a showcase for new titles.
In 2013 some 1.4m print books were published in America, over five times as many as a decade earlier.
Publishers are increasingly focusing their efforts on a few titles they think will make a splash, neglecting less well-known authors and less popular themes.
Many authors dream of a happy ending in which, having delivered their magnum opus, they sit back and enjoy an endless stream of royalties.
Even the most successful writers need to invest large amounts of time and resources in promoting themselves.
Authors mostly used to rely on public-relations staff provided by the publishing house.
Authors must court an expanding variety of “influencers”— people whose opinions can determine a book’s success.
Once a select group of newspaper reviewers were the principal arbiters of literary taste.
Now, as the amount of newsprint devoted to reviews keeps shrinking, a host of bloggers and social-media pundits fill the gap.
Oprah Winfrey used to help books soar up the charts by discussing them on her television show.
More recently Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook has become an important endorser.
Steven Pinker, a psychologist, enjoyed a “Zuckerberg bump” in sales of his book, “The Better Angels of Our Nature”, after the social network’s boss told his online followers he was reading it.
Pre-orders of books all count toward the first week’s sales figures, so canny authors try to get people to buy copies in advance of publication.
Eric Ries, a lecturer on entrepreneurship and innovation, went on a “pre-book” book tour to drum up interest before his work, “The Lean Startup”, even had a firm name, and started selling it online more than a year in advance of its publication.
The Times compiles its lists by tracking sales at a few thousand shops, wholesalers and online retailers.
It is not hard for writers to find out which outlets feed their numbers into the rankings; indeed, there are firms that provide such information, for a fee.
Wordsmiths can then route their book tours accordingly, and encourage buyers to place orders at those shops.
Another way of working the system is to release a bookin a quiet period—such as this month—when there is less competition for a place on the bestseller lists.
Last year the Times added 12 new bestseller categories, including travel, humour and spirituality.
It has also expanded its main lists, to 20 books, which gives more authors a shot at making the charts.
If they fail to make a Times bestseller list, they can always try for another one, such as Amazon’s.
Their moment of glory may have lasted a mere few seconds, but no one needs to know that.
Chapter and purse The open secret of publishing is that very few authors can live by books alone.
Even some of the most successful ones make most of their money from public speaking, consulting or teaching, and use the publicity gained by their books to justify higher fees.
Take Chris Anderson, an author (and former journalist at The Economist), who is paid tens of thousands of dollars for each lecture; or Alain de Botton, a writer on philosophy, whose profile brings paying customers to his School of Life.
Last month Simon & Schuster, a publisher, announced it would sell online video courses led by some ofits authors.
The trouble with many budding writers is that they are not cut out for this new world.
Readers these days want to get to know the creators of the books they buy.
Diffident authors may feel uncomfortable with getting so close to their fans.
So instead of spending money on expensive branches, we pass the savings to you.
LEXIS TSIPRAS and his radical left Syriza party worked for more than a year while in opposition to prepare their policy platform.
Over 80 committees were charged with producing specific proposals for overhauling different sectors of the Greek economy.
Planning for power is one thing; exercising it quite another, especially when a country is in a hole as deep as Greece’s.
Syriza’s programme, if fully implemented, will result in a sharp fall in revenues and a large increase in social spending.
Yet many Greeks stopped paying taxes before last month’s elections, anticipating cuts and forbearance.
Government revenues fell by more than 20% in January on an annual basis; the 2015 budget is now likely to be derailed by the end of March, says a former finance minister.
None of which plays well with Greece’s creditors, whose €245 billion bail-out envisages austerity and reform, not splurges and backtracking.
As The Economist went to press, Mr Tsipras, now prime minister, was about to meet Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, in what promised to be a fraught exchange.
Unless some sort of agreement is found soon, another Greek default looms when IMF debts mature in March.
Since the financial crisis began, its economy has shrunk by more than any other rich country’s.
Between 2008 and 2014 nominal GDP, a rough proxy for an economy’s capacity to repay debts, fell by 22%, much more than any other European invalid.
The economic collapse is comparable to one on the other side of the Mediterranean, in war-torn Libya.
The trouble with price-match guarantees For daily analysis and debate on economics, visit Economist.com/economics but, despite losses imposed on some private-sector lenders, did little to lower them.
At the end of 2009 Greece owed €301 billion, then around 127% of GpP, mainly to the private sector.
Today it owes around €315 billion 475% of GDP), all but €70 billion of which comes from public lenders.
But the money comes with conditions aimed at stabilising Greece’s finances.
These include cuts to Greece’s minimum wage and pensions, lay-offs of civil servants and the privatisation of various assets, including ports and state-owned buildings.
Creditors like Mr Schauble hope the package will make Greece more competitive and thus spur economic growth, as well as generating a budget surplus to be used to pay down debt.
The crunch has come because Greece wants to keep the low rates but not the conditions.
Nadia Valavani, a deputy finance minister, plans to scrap a hated property tax, enfia,a popular move that will cost the state €2 billion in revenues.
Ms Valavani also says a tax on businesses offering services to tourists will stay at13% and not be hiked to the standard 23% as planned.
The Aegean islands, Greece’s most prosperous region, will continue to enjoy lower rates of value-added tax than the rest of the country.
The threshold at which income tax bites will be restored this year to €12,000, leaving around 3m low-income 63 64 Finance and economics > Greeks paying no tax.
The privatisation programme, due to raise a total of €25 billion, including €3. billion this year, has been halted.
To balance the books Mr Tsipras is pinning his hopes, optimistically, on a tax crackdown.
Smuggling cigarettes and fuel costs the government around €15 billion a year.
Panayotis Nikoloudis, a former anti-money-laundering tsar who heads anew anti-corruption ministry, says there are 3,500 cases of large-scale tax evasion amounting to €7 billion; they Buttonwood | Commercial property has been delivering excellentretu | EP interest rates low for long enough and the property market will eventually boom.
It is even proving true in Europe, despite the continent’s sluggish economy.
According to Real Capital Analytics, an information provider, Europe saw €213 billion of commercial-property transactions last year, up by 13% from 20133 and the highest annual total since 2007.
The number of transactions more than doubled in Spain last year and there were big gains in Switzerland and the Netherlands, too.
Three European markets—Austria, Ireland and Switzerland— surpassed the transaction levels of 2007, the top of the last cycle.
Europe’s rebound outpaced the 9% rise in global property transactions, although not a 15% rise in American deals.
Itis hardly surprising that investors are enthusiastic for bricks and mortar.
In both the cash and government-bond markets, yields are zero or even negative.
By comparison, yields of 5% on American property or even 4% on office blocks in central London look attractive.
Sabina Kalyan of CBRE Global Investors says that prime offices (those in the best locations) in Madrid are now changing hands at 4.5%, compared with around 8% at the bottom of the market.
Prime property yields in all Europe’s capitals are now at or below the level of 2007.
Nonetheless, the long-term returns from property look very respectable.
In the ten years to end-September, American commercial property delivered a total annualised return of 7.9%, according to IPD, a property-information group; returns in both Canada and New Zealand could yield €2. billion in 2015.
But in the unlikely event that all this money were collected, Greece would still be €4 billion short.
Many governments’ plans do not add up, of course, and Mr Tsipras has already signalled a willingness to compromise.
First, Greece would keep “70%” of previously agreed reforms; those ditched would be replaced by ten new measures agreed with the OECD, rather than the despised “troika” of the EcB, the imF and European Commission.
That compares with the 81% annual return achieved by American equities over the same period and with the 6.8% annual return achieved on long-term Treasury bonds.
The equivalent rates for British equities and long-term bonds were 8% and 6.8% respectively.
On the first point, central banks are still cutting rates in much of the world.
There is the possibility of rate rises in America and Britain over the next year, but with inflation very low, central banks are likely to be cautious.
The world economy is not exactly racing, but forecasts predict GpP growth of more than 1% in the euro area and Japan and more than 3% in America.
Finally, the government would spend an extra €19 billion on “humanitarian assistance” for struggling Greeks.
Despite the low interest rates the country is being charged, the loans are profitable, since most European governments can borrow at even lower rates.
Cut>> which investors are most enthusiastic about, managed to weather the 2008-09 recession and so should be resilient to another downturn.
In terms of supply, it is easy to be misled by the view from The Economist’s of-. fices of the flocks of cranes perched over London.
Globally there is yet to be the kind of development spree that usually marks the peak of the property cycle.
So it is possible that commercial property’s streak could last a good deal longer.
Lots of investors need income and the obvious alternative to property—corporate bonds—has had a very good run.
Investors have even been willing to accept a negative yield on bonds issued by Nestlé, . a Swiss foods group, in effect paying for the privilege of lending it money.
Until the 1970s property was the asset of choice for long-term investors such as university endowments and pension funds.
It has been replaced in recent decades by government bonds, which are much more liquid.
If yields on bonds stay at Japan-like levels for a while, however, the allure of property will only increase.
And if inflation returns, property willbe a better hedge than conventional government bonds. ne Eventually, such logic will inflate a bubble, of course.
Residential property in London (fuelled by a combination of low rates and international capital) has already reached that point.
But the surge of interest in second-tier and more speculative commercial-property projects that marks the top of the cycle is only just beginning, at least in Europe.
Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood ‘The Economist February 14th 2015 > ting them to a profit-neutral level and further extending the duration of Greece’s debts could generate savings worth 17% of GppP, according to Mr Darvas.
In the spirit of not profiting from Greece’s depression, euro-zone Officials could also release €1. billion in profits from an earlier EcB bondbuying programme.
But Greece’s government will have to offer much more in return, and Mr Tsipras will have two constituencies in mind if he reverses course.
On privatisation, for example, both the finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, and the development minister, George Stathakis, have voiced support for completing the sale of the state’s 67% stake in Piraeus Port Authority.
China’s Cosco, which already runs a profitable container terminal Private equity and energy Refilling the pipeline at the port, and Denmark’s Maersk were frontrunners among the shortlisted bidders.
But one of the left’s stalwarts, Theodore Dritsas, is shipping minister and has vowed to block the deal.
Panayotis Lafazanis, who heads a new ministry for “productive reconstruction”, environment and energy, has blocked two other deals aimed at bringing Greece fully in line with Eu energy directives.
The other group Mr Tsipras will have to keep happy is an electorate buoyed by the government's feisty dealings with the rest of Europe.
Earlier this month Apollo Global Management announced that profits were down by 79% year on year in the three months to December 31st.
Energy-related assets, whose valuations have fallen with the oil price, are largely to blame.
Spurred on by the shale boom in America, private-equity funds have invested heavily in the energy sector.
More money was raised for energy buy-outs in America in 2014, and more deals were made, than ever before, according to Preqin, a data provider.
Private-equity firms mainly invested in oilfield-services companies, which support the industry but do not own oil themselves.
Because such firms are involvedina variety of activities there is greater scope for the type of restructuring private-equity types specialise in, such as selling off lessprofitable units or firing people.
But the buy-out firms had also begun to invest in Finance and economics 65 oil companies themselves—a more straightforward bet on the oil price.
Carlyle’s earnings were dragged down by its stake in SandRidge Energy, a debtladen oil-and-gas exploration company, which lost 58% of its value over the quarter and has just announced that it is mothballing most of its drilling rigs.
And Samson, an American producer partly owned by xx, has also fallen in value.
Despite such losses, private-equity investors are now more interested in the sector than ever, according to Antoon Schneider from the Boston Consulting Group.
Many see the situation now as akin to the collapse in property prices in 2008, when investors who had borrowed too much (including many private-equity funds) were forced to sell as prices plummeted.
Some _ oilservices firms that cater to ongoing operations—by providing maintenance for offshore rigs, for example—may have been hit unfairly hard and could well bounce back.
Companies that specialise in more expensive ways of getting oil out of the ground, such as makers of offshore drilling rigs and construction vessels, were already suffering from the problem of overcapacity before the price fell and are now in even worse shape.
The volume of high-yield debt in the energy sector is now three times what it was in 2008, according to Credit Suisse.
Cheap oil is imperilling borrowers, such as American shale producers, who need cash to stay afloat until prices (they hope) rebound.
With banks unwilling to lend and many companies desperate not to sell assets, private-equity firms can name their terms when offering financing.
Blackstone alone says it has a war chest of $9 billion available for energy investments, not to mention the energy-related debts it might buy through credit funds.
Warburg Pincus, another private-equity firm, closed a $4 billion energy fund late last year.
All of which holds out a ray of hope for those private-equity funds that are currently sitting on devalued energy investments, provided they can afford to waitit out.
GppP is typically measured by reference to the prices and structure of the economy in a base year.
Over time this snapshot becomes less relevant, and the Gop figures less accurate, so the base year is updated every few years.
Narendra Modi’s victory in national elections last May owed much to general dismay about a floundering economy.
True, a real growth rate of 7.5% looks a little too lively given sluggish car sales, feeble demand for credit, and the soggy revenue growth reported by many big listed firms.
But the recent sharp fall in inflation explains some of the discrepancy.
Firms’ top-line growth has slowed in part because prices are not rising as quickly.
The cso reckons GppP will grow by 7.4% in 2014-15 in real terms, half a percentage point faster than in the previous year.
In other words, falling inflation makes it look like economic activity is growing more slowly than it is.
Prospects for India’s economy are brighter than for other emerging markets.
Lower commodity prices, which have hurt raw-material exporters such as Brazil, Russia and South Africa, are a boon for India, which imports 80% of the oil it consumes and much else.
The prospects for further rate cuts, and for the economy more generally, depend on what emerges when Mr Modi’s finance minister, Arun Jaitley, presents his first full-year budget on February 28th. m Zimbabwe's economy Nothing for money HARARE The introduction of new coins triggers a debate about what currency to use S INFLATION climbed towards 80 billion percent in 2008-09, Zimbabweans abandoned the Zim dollar in favour of the American one.
Since then, shopkeepers, with no access to American coins, have had to hand out pens, sweets and chewing gum instead of change.
Just over a month ago, however, the central bank began issuing “bond coins”, denominated in American cents, to be used only in Zimbabwe.
That has triggered a debate about whether the country needs its own currency again.
Inflation stopped dead, boosting growth and bringing about a general expectation of macroeconomic stability.
Once normal commerce resumed, importers enjoyed reduced transaction costs and foreign investors did notneed to worry about exchangerate volatility.
But now the economy is on the skids again, thanks largely to mismanagement, and this time the lack of a local currency is exacerbating its ailments.
Meltdown is held off by remittances of up to $500m a year from Zimbabwe’s diaspora, along with rising government deficits and foreign aid.
The American government bans all business dealings with certain Zimbabwean officials and companies, but it pays a quarter of the country’s health-care costs.
The government’s indigenisation policy, under which foreign-owned assets are partially expropriated, has scared off investors.
Only sophisticated foreign firms with billions to spend on pits and drills can get at the stuff below.
Meanwhile, Zimbabwe has adopted American monetary policy along with the dollar.
The Federal Reserve’s talk of higher rates is the opposite of what its economy needs.
Zimbabweans have not forgotten the misery of life with the Zim dollar, when shops were empty and petrol was rationed.
They have little reason to believe officials would manage the currency better in future.Without public trust, no government can imbue paper with value.
Stockbroking was seen as a dubious business, devoted less to working with the customer than to working the customer.
After a wobbly start, Morgan Stanley’s expanded stockbroking operation has put paid to such sceptical assumptions.
Almost uniquely among bankers, James Gorman, its chief executive, has emerged from the crisis with an enhanced reputation.
Wealth-management units, as stockbroking arms have been rebranded, are boosting returns at other American banks, too.
Merrill Lynch, which collapsed during the crisis thanks to an ill-timed foray into proprietary trading, is now earning pre-tax margins of 25% as a division of Bank of America.
Industry-wide data collected by Aite Group, a consultancy, indicates that by 2013 big American wealth managers had more than recovered from the pronounced shrinkage of assets during the crisis and have since continued to grow.
Their profitability has also been bolstered by a shift from charging for individual transactions to levying an annual fee of 1-2% on all the assets they manage.
The award is designed to provide work experience for a promising journalist or would-be journalist, who will spend three to six months at The Economist writing about economics and finance.
Applications should be sent to deaneinternny@economist.com by March 6th.
Inequality in Japan Finance and economics The secure v the poor TOKYO The problem is not the super-rich N THOMAS PIKETTY’S bestseller, “Capital in the Twenty-First Century”, Japan appears as another rich country in which wealth is becoming ever more concentrated.
The bursting of Japan’s asset bubble in1991is one reason why the rich have amassed less than in America or many European countries.
The share of wealth held by the richest tenth of Japanese is lower than in famously egalitarian spots such as Norway and Sweden.
In fact, it is the second-lowest of the 46 economies surveyed by Credit Suisse Research Institute, above only Belgium.
The share of income going to the wealthiest has been fairly stable too.
According to an analysis prepared for the Wall Street Journal by Mr Piketty’s collaborators, the share of national income taken by the top 1% in Japan, excluding capital gains, fell from a high of 9.5% in 2008 to 9% in 2012.
The most important is not between the mega-rich and the rest, as “Capital” would have it, but between a privileged cadre of workers on permanent contracts and those with more tors are better off with index funds.
In practice, however, many individuals follow the pack, and so sell when they should buy and buy when they should sell.
Wealth managers, in contrast, draw up an investment plan with clients and then stick to it.
So the benefits may come more from avoiding panicked shifts in strategy than from any special skill.
At any rate, a study on behalf of Merrill by Dalbar, a research firm, concluded that returns to individuals who invest on their own trail those who hire financial advisers by three percentage points a year—a vast sum, if accurate.
That helps explain a dramatic reversal since 1999, when Merrill was stunned to find its market valuation had been surpassed by that of Charles Schwab, a discount broker.
Now Schwab and others like it, including Vanguard and Fidelity, are trying to become more like precarious jobs, who account for a rising share of the workforce.
The average annual salary for permanent employees is around ¥5m , compared with ¥2m for less secure workers.
Many argue that what Japan really needs is alot more inequality, but of a different kind.
If people were paid for what they accomplish, argues Robert Feldman of Morgan Stanley, the economy would grow faster.
And Japan’s chronically low levels of business creation mean that there is worryingly little wealth inequality of the sort created by entrepreneurs — who become billionaires by dreaming up exciting new products and services.
None of that has stopped “Capital” selling over 130,000 copies so far in Japan.
Mr Piketty’s timing is ideal, for he has tapped into growing doubts about Abenomics, the economicrevival plan of Shinzo Abe, the prime minister.
By inflating asset prices, Mr Abe’s schemes could increase the gap between haves and have nots, Mr Piketty warned during his visit.
Ironically, however, Mr Abe’s main economic concern at the momentis bullying big companies into lifting workers’ pay.
Earlier this month, for example, in an effort to broaden its offerings, Fidelity announced the acquisition of eMoney, which provides wealth-planning products to a large number of small advisory firms who use them to bring in and retain clients.
Anyone who has recently visited a British supermarket will be familiar with such seemingly generous deals, typically extended to shoppers after they pay.
The four biggest British supermarket chains all offer some form of price-match guarantee, promising that their customers could not save any money by shopping elsewhere.
But economists have long been suspicious of such promises, which can leave consumers worse off.
The problem is that price-match guarantees can blunt the logic of competition.
Suppose a car dealership worries about a rival undercutting its prices and stealing customers.
Even if the dealership can respond by cutting its prices too, it might lose sales in the interim.
As a result, cutting prices no longer wins the competitor new business; buyers stay loyal and invoke the guarantee instead of switching.
All that price cuts achieve for the competitor is the erosion of profits on existing sales.
It will probably conclude that prices—and margins—are better left high.
Consumers end up suffering due toa guarantee that at first glance seems good for them.
There is no evidence that Britain’s current crop of price-match guarantees has hurt consumers.
Even when one player had much lower costs than the other, prices still rose, albeit by less.
Most relate only to another store’s advertised prices, not to the sum that it would actually charge after applying its own price-matching offers.
Suppose an incumbent supermarket charges £4 for a steak and offers a price-match guarantee.
The savvy entrant could advertise a higher price of £5, while promising not just to match any lower price, but to refund twice the difference.
Yet the advertised price of £5 would not trigger the incumbent’s own price-matching guarantee.
Customers might still be tempted to switch by price cuts structured in this way.
That may be too clever by half, but there are other reasons why guarantees might be harmless, or even welcome.
At British supermarkets, refunds usually come in the form of a discount on the next shop; to take advantage, a customer must return with the voucher.
Remembering to do so takes effort, as anyone with a stack of unused gift vouchers knows.
Although any discounts it offers will be matched by the first supermarket in the form of vouchers, customers may value the straightforward price cut more highly, since taking advantage of it is less of a hassle.
If enough customers think this way, the result would be a genuine price war—although some might find switching stores more of a chore than remembering to bring their vouchers with them.
For instance, if some customers are too busy to shop around, a firm can sell to them ata high price while using a guarantee to attract more price-sensitive, hassle-tolerating customers.
Finally, a price-guarantee may be an attempt to signal genuinely lower prices and thus stand out from the crowd.
This works only if there is a genuine difference in efficiency between rival stores, such that only one can afford to sell on the cheap.
Then, the nimble firm might want a price war in order to speed the lumbering one’s demise.
In such circumstances, any attempt by the lumbering firm to collude tacitly is futile; if it offers a guarantee, its bluff will be called.
So when low-cost firms make such promises, consumers can take them as a sign of a competitive offering.
There, it is the more expensive supermarkets that are promising to match each others’ prices.
Only one has pledged to match the deals on offer at Aldi and Lidl, nimble low-cost rivals that are making inroads into the market.
Those on board expected creatures to be sparse in number and entering hibernation.
His research, and that of his colleagues, showed that planktonic animals such as copepods (pictured above) and krill were abundant, active and grazing on the still smaller algae of the phytoplankton, themselves adapted to manage with the tiniest sliver of winter light.
Larvae were turning into adults and a few species were even reproducing.
This revelation of life in the middle of the polar night is one of many surprises of recent Arctic science.
And that knowledge is changing people’s understanding of the world’s northernmost habitat.
The Arctic, sparsely populated and rarely visited by outsiders, is easily forgotten by those at lower latitudes.
A1°C rise in temperatures at the equator—from, say, 25°C to 26°C—will have effects, but does not change much.
Between 1996 and 2014, the rate rose to148,000km?, even though the past two seasons have seen an increase in summer ice compared with the low point in 2012.
This accelerating rate involves two feedback loops—one well-known, the other less so.
The well-known one is that ice reflects sunlight but water, which is darker, absorbs it.
Some would melt in summer and freeze again in winter, but most would remain throughout the year.
Now, millions of square kilometres melt away in summer and refreeze in winter.
Multiyear ice is eroded by the wind and pounded from below by ocean currents, so its surface is pitted and ridged.
When multi-year ice thaws, the meltwater gathers on its surface, forming ponds between the ridges.
That means a fair amount of ice remains uncovered, and continues to reflect sunlight.
Meltwater from first-year ice, though, spreads right across the smooth surface, reducing reflectivity far more.
Primary production, as carbon compounds produced by this photosynthesis are known, is rising.
According to Mar Fernandez-Méndez of the Alfred Wegener Institute in Bremerhaven, in the summer of 1982 a column of Arctic seawater with a cross-sectional area of a square metre fixed 26 milligrams of carbon a day.
With rising primary production, and thus more food available, you might expect the rest of the ecosystem to be flourishing, too.
There has, for example, been a substantial increase in the number of cod—especially of sexually ac69 > tive cod, more than seven years old.
These fish are also now found much closer to the pole than they used to be, at 79° or 80° north.
Unlike some other seals, harbour seals do not depend on ice to give birth or to moult, so the ice’s retreat is less bothersome to them.
And as a predominantly temperate species, they benefit when waters warm up.
Other species, though, are being squeezed by competition from these newcomers and by changing conditions in general.
In the waters where cod thrive, minke whales and harp seals are struggling, at least to judge by the condition of their blubber.
A study by Bjarte Bogstad of Norway’s Institute of Marine Research found that the blubber of both species had declined from being more than 4omm thick in the early 1990s to less than 35mm now.
The whales may be suffering because the Arctic zooplankton on which they feed are being replaced by more temperate species that are harder to catch or less nuttritious.
Garry Stenson of Fisheries and Oceans Canada, a government agency, reckons that the number of harp-seal miscarriages has risen greatly in response.
Harp seals exemplify the difficulty of adapting to changing conditions.
The obvious response for an ice-dependent animal such as a harp seal would be to follow the retreating ice—in its case, northward from its breeding grounds near Newfoundland.
Dr Stenson says harp seals will swim north, but only if there is no ice in March, as happened in 2010.
In 20 there was a little March ice and they stayed put—only to be almost wiped out when the ice melted later in the summer.
This sort of thing, of course, is all part of the cut and thrust of ecology.
More worrying to those who study the Arctic’s biological awakening is that the rise in primary production which sustains it might suddenly be capped.
After many postpone-__ _ ments its replacement, the Deep Space Climate Observatory, should have gotoffthe — _ launch pad and into orbit on February 11th, as The Economist went to press.
Jon Lawrence of Britain’s National Oceanography Centre has looked at what might happen to nutrient availability and productivity in an ice-free Arctic.
He concluded that, as the ice melted, primary production would rise by only 1%, not 300%, as a linear extrapolation would suggest.
Something similar happens in other oceans, of course, but in the Arctic the lost surface nitrates do not seem to be being replenished—perhaps because of a lack of the upwelling currents found elsewhere.
Mr Lawrence calculates that almost all the extra productivity the Arctic is likely to see will thus take place at least 20 metres below the surface, where it is pretty dark regardless of ice.
Another reason the Arctic’s creatures may not flourish in the extra sunlight is that they have evolved to take advantage of a short summer.
This season is so compressed that the timing of plant growth, animal births and feeding cycles has to be closely synchronised.
And since copepods are food for predators, the ecosystem as a whole will suffer.
To capture the impact of changing environmental conditions on food webs as a whole , two recent studies built computer models to describe them.
These looked at how many species are in a web, how many links there are between these species (ie, who eats whom), where the species live, and whether that is changing.
Both models suggested that the condition of some Arctic food webs is coming under strain.
For example, copepods whose internal clocks better matched changed conditions would spread rapidly.
Because the poles are cold, warm air flows from the equator north and south in order to equalise temperatures.
The Earth’s rotation disturbs these air currents, creating the jet stream, which flows around the planetina >> February 14th 2025 > wavy pattern, bringing up warm air and making north-west Europe hotter than other places at the same latitude.
If the temperature gap between the north pole and the equator narrows (because the Arctic is warming faster), then the poleward flow of air might falter.
One is that it may increase the so-called “Siberian High”, a huge build-up of dry, freezing air that is known to affect much of the northern hemisphere’s weather—for there seems to be a link between the loss of sea ice in parts of the Arctic and lower temperatures in Siberia.
The other is that, as the jet stream weakens, its waves become exaggerated, creating pockets of air connected with extreme weather events, such as the exceptional cold that hit the American Midwest in January 2014.
The links between these weather patterns and the warmer Arctic are unproven.
Variation is so great, they argue, that if there is some sort of signal from the melting Arctic, it is being lost in the noise.
For the same reason, however, it is too early to write off the signal altogether.
Whether the Arctic Ocean’s awakening is for good, or ill, or both, it is unstoppable.
It is cheap, requires no power or skill to use and yields instant results.
And in the rough-and-tumble of the sea rather than on the calm of the laboratory bench, that equipmentneeds to be robust, as well.
Such marine measurements are important, however, in order to track the acidification of the ocean that is being brought Technological evolution Science and technology 71 Making sweet music Artefacts, as well as organisms, can evolve by natural selection ee eval evolution happens by random mutation and selection.
But since technology is the result of conscious design, the mutation part of the process might reasonably be assumed to be deliberate rather than random.
A study just published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society suggests, however, that this is not always the case.
Nicholas Makris and his colleagues at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in collaboration with Roman Barnas, a violin-maker at the North Bennet Street School, in Boston, have been looking at the evolution of that instrument.
One aspect of the process intrigued them in particular—the changing shape, over the years, of the holes in a violin’s body that amplify the emerging sound.
They were called “fitheles”, a word derived from vitula, the Latin for heifer, the source of the gut for the strings.
The instrument arrived at its modern form between the 16th and the 18th centuries, in the workshops of Cremona, a city in northern Italy that produced the Amati, Guarneri and Stradivari dynasties of luthiers.
The answer, arrived at after several pages of advanced mathematics, and confirmed by experiment, is that holes’ sound-amplification properties depend not on their areas but on the lengths of about by rising carbon-dioxide levels in the air.
The xPRIZE foundation, a charity that runs technology competitions, has therefore put up $2m in prize money, to be awarded to those inventors who can come up with devices which will do that tracking best.
And on February 9th, in Seattle Aquarium, the competitors started going mano amano.
At the industrial era’s dawn in the mid-8th century, the ocean’s surface waters had a pH of 8.2.
They showed how the shape of the hole varied over the centuries, and how that affected its power output.
The final Cremonese design had twice the sonic power of the circular holes of the fithele.
Except that Dr Makris doubts “design” is precisely the right word for what happened.
The market, presumably, favoured those journeymen withina | workshop who made more powerful instruments.
When they became masters — in their turn, they then passed their ways of doing things on to their own apprentices.
Only at the very end of the period might a deliberate change have been made, as the holes get suddenly longer.
Intriguingly, intentional attempts in the19th century to fiddle further with the f-holes’ designs actually served to make things worse, and did not endure.
As is also the case with living organisms, mutation and selection seem to have arrived at an optimal result. reckoned to have absorbed abouta third of the carbon dioxide emitted by the burning of fossil fuels.
That has reduced average surface pH to 8.1—a fall that may sound trivial but, because the pH scale is logarithmic, equates to a 25% increase in acidity.
Many sea-creatures, though, make their shells and skeletons out of calcium carbonate or calcium phosphate—materials that dissolve in acids.
Preliminary studies suggest that some >> 72 st >of these animals are already finding it harder to survive than they used to.
If that is true, and the problem of acidification gets worse, everything from tropical coral reefs to temperate-water mussel farms may be affected.
This will in turn have an impact, albeit indirectly, on organisms further up the food chain.
At the moment, the machines used to measure seawater’s pH cost $10,00020,000 each, and cannot be deployed at depth because the pressure there will damage them.
The Wendy Schmidt Ocean Health xpriZE, as this particular contest is called, hopes to correct both flaws.
Half the prize money is for low-cost contenders, aimed at the likes of oyster farmers and cash-strapped government officials who cannot, at the moment, measure seawater’s acidity.
The other half is for highperformance scientific meters able to monitor the deep ocean for months at a time.
Getting pHysical Among the front-runners in the first category is Smartphin.
The brainchild of an engineer called Benjamin Thompson, this is designed to replace the stabilising fin under a surfboard.
Sensors within the fin record the water’s temperature, salinity and acidity, and then broadcast those data, together with the fin’s location (as recorded from global-positioning satellites), to base via the mobile-phone network.
Dr Chen thinks his device might be commercialised for as little as $1,000.
To cut costs as much as possible it employs standard p-cell batteries and cheap memory cards to record the data.
Another entrant is, to all intents and purposes, a 21st-century reboot of the litmus test.
Between now and March 7th these devices, which are among 17 entrants to the contest, will measure the pH of water pumped from Puget Sound, including all the micro-organisms, algae and plants therein that might foul the instruments’ sensors.
Up to five finalists that survive the ordeal, and prove they can measure acidity to within 0.02 pH units, will then be tested on a cruise this summer.
According to Paul Bunje, who runs the competition, only two firms make seawater pH meters at the moment.
Once the prizes have been awarded, they can expect alittle competition themselves.
For many, the very word will conjure an image of Princess Leia from “Star Wars” , or of the holodeck of the starship Enterprise.
Every approach tried so far represents a trade-off between the quality of the image, its size and the cost of the kit that produces it—and making the first two acceptable means the third is exorbitant.
They have made a gizmo which they hope will eventually be able to project screen-sized moving holograms for not much more than the cost of a high-end television set.
Holography works by squashing all of the three-dimensional information in a scene into a structure called an optical grating.
When this grating is illuminated, light bounces off its bumps and troughs in such a way that the reflection reconstructs the original scene.
An unchanging grating yields a static hologram, such as is found on a bank card.
But gadget-makers and military types would dearly like to use similar trickery to create holo-videos, by continuously varying the grating’s geometry.
Dr Smalley’s team, therefore, take a different approach, the latest iteration of which they have just reported in the Review of Scientific Instruments.
Their story began when Dr Smalley was plain Mr Smalley, a student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
In 2013 he published the design of a chip that costs roughly $10 to produce and which is capable of making a small, simple hologram.
The chip is a crystal of lithium niobate that has a light-carrying channel called a waveguide carved into it.
Lithium niobate is piezoelectric-meaning that when a voltage is applied to it, it contracts or expands, becoming more or less dense as it does so.
If the voltage varies, this makes moving patterns of moreand less-dense material.
Changing the frequency with which the voltage varies changes the pattern.
Since light takes different paths in material of different densities, such patterns can form optical gratings that change sufficiently fast to create moving holograms.
As light passes through such a grating it is diffracted into a horizontal fan, forming a holographic line that is equivalent to one line of a television display.
This can then, if desired, be run through a scanner that splits it up into multiple lines, one above another, generating a picture.
Using this method, Dr Smalley was able, by employing red, green and blue light simultaneously, to create a coloured, holographic image.
Unfortunately, this single-waveguide image can be seen only by looking straight along the waveguide’s axis.
The next task, therefore, is to scale the design up by linking many crystals together, to create an image both bigger than a single crystal’s display and capable of being seen from lots af directions.
That means controlling precisely where the optical output of a waveguide goes—which is what Dr Smalley’s latest paperis about.
To align the outputs of many devices, the team needed to know in exquisite detail how the colour and angle of light coming out of each one of them change as the voltage frequency is altered.
That is no mean feat of measurement, but by using a bespoke system of detectors Dr Smalley and his collaborators have discovered the crucial voltage frequencies that diffract different colours independently of one another but at angles which overlap nicely.
This will allow multicoloured images to be created from numerous waveguides in a way that resembles Monet rather than Jackson Pollock.
In principle, such a display should be able to produce room-sized holograms.
Butif the system does scale up in the way Dr Smalley hopes it will, then living-room holography may be yet another hoary prediction of the future that actually does arrive in the present. m Portrait of a country MOSCOW The domestic response to Andrei Zvyagintsev’s award-winning film, “Leviathan”, says alot about today’s Russia, and especially about the church O THOSE in the know, there are two Russian trailers for “Leviathan”, Andrei Zvyagintsev’s new film, which opened in Moscow earlier this month.
The official version nods at the praise that has already been showered on the film at the Cannes film festival and the Golden Globes, as well as its nomination for an Academy Award.
A “film made for the Western elites,” preaches Father Vsevolod Chaplin.
It has been denigrated as heresy and slander by supporters of the state and the church, and praised by liberals who recognise its truths.
The main character, Nikolai, is a soulful car mechanic who lives in a wooden house by the Barents Sea with his frustrated wife and a depressed teenage son from an earlier marriage.
His house and land are being taken from him by the state, represented here by a drunken and corrupt mayor whois closely advised by an Orthodox priest.
Nikolai’s friend, a lawyer, travels from Moscow to help him fight the mayor.
In the end, Nikolai loses his wife, his freedom and his house, which, in a final twist, is bulldozed to make space for anew church that is inaugurated by the mayor and the priest, who preaches about patriotism and love for the Russian state.
One can almost feel the sweaty mayor’s breath, with its reek of vodka and onion.
Boats are shown rusting in the sea; a giant whale’s skeleton rots on the beach.
Eliot 75 Lawrence before Arabia 76 Love songs, a history 76 Racism and the theatre For daily analysis and debate on books, arts and culture, visit Economist.com/culture of Culture and the priest a kGB general.
It would have been an anti-Soviet picture; today, it is an anticlerical one.
The Soviet Union may have gone, but the reverence for the state as an almost sacred force in Russia remains.
The role played by communist ideology has been largely replaced by that of the Orthodox church, which, like the state itself, has turned into something of amonster.
This metamorphosis of religion into ideology is one of the most striking themes both of “Leviathan” and of contemporary Russian life.
The Bolsheviks destroyed churches and shot priests, but they also adopted Orthodox Christianity, borrowing its imagery and language to sanctify their rule.
Josef Stalin, who trained as a cleric, appealed to the nation when the Nazis invaded the Soviet Union using the biblical “brothers and sisters” and enlisted the church as an ally during the war.
Like the ke¢B—the Committee for State Security—the church has adopted the role of guardian of the state.
Just as the communists’ ideology became a form of religion, religion has become an ideology, used by the godless state to justify both its sacred status and its right to break its own laws.
All the mayor needs to do, he says, is to show authority and force, crushing an individual like Nikolai.
A few days before the film was released in Russia, Kirill, the patriarch of the Orthodox church, took to the floor of the Duma.
He praised the Soviet era for breeding “solidarity” in people and lashed out at the depravity of the West.
Neither Western free73 > doms nor laws, he argued, can bring good by themselves without the fundamental values generated by the state—whether the Soviet Union or Russia.
Kirill was one of the first to call for Pussy Riot to be punished three years ago after the punk band staged an anticlerical performance in a Moscow cathedral, which is referred to in the film.
It was rebuilt by the former mayor of Moscow, Yury Luzhkov, who also gave a flat to Kirill in the House on the Embankment, which was originally built for the Bolshevik leaders.
Thomas Hobbes himself could barely imagine what a monster church and state have become.
One Russian liberal essayist wrote that “Leviathan” depicts a people who have fallen from God.
To some on the Republican right in America, this evolution is a rake’s progress, in which QE is a debasement of the currency leading to hyperinflation and economic ruin.
They want a return to the gold standard, whereby the amount of money would be linked to a country’s gold reserves.
But in a new book, “Making Money”, Christine Desan, a Harvard law professor, challenges the view of money’s history as a fall from grace.
She is part of the “cartalist” school which argues that money did not develop spontaneously from below, but was imposed from above by the state or ruler.
A sovereign might offer tokens as payments for goods and services, and agree to accept those tokens back to meet taxes or debts.
In effect a guarantee from the state, this made such tokens useful for private trade.
And governments were able to charge for the service of turning gold and silver bullion into coin.
Despite this incentive for the creation of money, the standard medieval complaint was that there was not enough money to go round.
Modern economists tend to think of money as a real, not a nominal, issue; expanding the money supply may raise prices but not affect the volume of goods and services being traded.
Coin shortages encouraged the use of money from abroad, the author argues.
In addition, the coinage was debased by the medieval practice of “clipping” of coins, or shaving off the edges to save the silver.
All this led to the frequent need to reclassify or redenominate the coinage.
Sometimes it was the monarchs who were pulling off this trick as a way of boosting their own finances.
Nevertheless, every change prompted howls of complaint from the losing parties.
This attitude underwenta reversal after the Glorious Revolution, which brought William III to power in 1689 with the help of Whig financiers who set up the Bank of England.
The king’s creditors naturally had an interest in sound money, and Britain adopted the gold standard, which was to last, in peacetime at least, for much of the next two centuries.
Over the long run, prices were remarkably stable during this period; over the short run, however, the discipline required by this standard required some short, sharp slumps which imposed considerable pain on the working classes.
The advent of universal suffrage after the first world war made it impossible for democratically elected governments to impose such costs on their voters; commodity money disappeared and “fiat” money (ie, money that is what the government declares it to be) becam the norm.
Jonathan Cape; £25 HEN Thomas Stearns Eliot died in 1965 few other poets could claim to match his achievement.
But since Eliot’s death, little has been known of the life that led up to its creation.
His widow , Valerie Eliot, refused to authorise any biographies; the poet’s reputation became tarnished with accusations of anti-Semitism.
Some 50 years on, a new biography sheds light on a tricky, brilliant writer.
In doing so Mr Crawford charts the creation of one of the finest pieces of literature in the 20th century.
Few previous biographies have been able to delve into the early years of Eliot’s life.
Mr Crawford’s book, by contrast, is rich with >) ist February 14th 2015 » detail.
Aged ten, Eliot astounded his family by reading John Milton, a complex 17th-century poet.
During his time at Harvard—where he also spent time writing bawdy ballads with his drinking companions, alcohol masking his shyness—he was introduced to modern French poetry which would profoundly change the way he wrote.
Thanks to all these influences, “The Waste Land” reverberates with the sound of other poems and differing languages.
Butit was Eliot’s unhappy personal life, as much as his literary background, which inspired his great poem.
She flirts with old flames and with Bertrand Russell, the philosopher, with whom she would have an affair.
They move between London, where they live in faintly seedy neighbourhoods, and the countryside, where they rent a cottage with Russell.
Both suffer breakdowns; these nervous attacks and bitter sexual recriminations underpin Eliot’s poem.
The poet and his wife separated in 1933 and Vivien entered an asylum five years later.
Yet she was also instrumental in encouraging Eliot to write poetry; she was an early reader of “The Waste Land”, inserting a line of her own init and scribbling praise in the margins.
John Murray; £25 ROM earliest childhood, Ned Lawrence knew that his family was different, in some unspoken way, from other families, and that he was not at all like his four brothers.
Such tough beginnings can either inhibit a personality or stimulate its growth.
Lawrence”, a quirky but rigorous biographical study by Anthony Sattin, a British travel-writer, the man best known as Lawrence of Arabia fell firmly in the second category.
Other books about Lawrence, and a famous film, present him as a hero of the first world war who rallied the Arabs to rise against the Ottoman empire, guided them to great victories and lobbied for the Arab cause, with disappointing results, in post-war negotiations.
Although every phase of Lawrence’s life has mysteries, the early part is less shrouded by fantasy and legend, and should therefore be slightly more accessible, the author suggests.
He was secretive as well as inquisitive, sceptical of received truths, easily bored but passionate about medieval history, cathedrals and brass rubbings.
During his teenage years, he would hang about building sites in his home city and gather fragments of pots and jugs which he reconstituted and delivered to grateful museum curators.
He knew there was something odd about his parents’ relationship but could not divine what; only later did he learn that, scandalously for those times, they had never married.
His father was an Anglo-Irish baronet who had left his legal wife for Lawrence’s mother, a governess who was herself born out of wedlock.
With her, Ned had an intense but strained relationship; she wanted to know more about him than he would tell.
His letters from teenage cycling trips round France contained lots of information about castles, but only intermittent signs of real feelings.
The same might be said of the letters he wrote, to many recipients, from the Levant.
The pale-skinned lad known ironically as “Dahoum”—dark one—was a local boy who carried water to Lawrence’s excavating team at Carchemish, a site on today’s Turkish-Syrian border.
In 1919, as one of four motives for embracing the Arab cause, Lawrence said he had “liked a particular Arab very much”; he had only just learned of Dahoum’s death from typhus two years earlier.
Mr Sattin avoids adding to the speculation about the exact nature of this friendship, but he is defensive about it.
As the book notes, Lawrence recalled the relationship as one in which there was such mutual understanding that the pair could spend hours togetherin silence.
If Lawrence ever wrote a fuller account of his friendship with Dahoum, it may have been in the memoirs he burned in August 1914.
Like their subject matter, biographers such as Mr Sattin have to be diggers and restorers, sifting a mass of evidence and gluing the bits together.
They have survived repression, expanded human freedom and proved uniquely hospitable to the voices of the marginalised.
He largely proves his thesis, with a capacious definition of love that includes bizarre Sumerian fertility rites (a king arouses a goddess’s votary to such heights of passion that “then and there she composes a song for her vulva”), chivalric troubadour songs and, alas, the dreary, repetitive artlessness of Robert Palmer.
Mr Gioia proves as gifted at noticing cross-cultural similarities as he does at unearthing trivia.
Both Provencal troubadours and contemporary rock and roll owe tremendous debts to African and Middle Eastern influences.
Sentiments of courtly love emerged in songs in Georgia and Provence at roughly the same time, apparently independently.
Songs in late-medieval Europe and regions today known as Bihar and West Bengal struggled with similar questions of how to balance spiritual and carnal love.
To Mr Gioia, such similarities argue for a Darwinian view of love songs—that they are an evolutionary necessity, fulfilling a role similar in nature and intent to bird songs.
The church thundered against “lewd and sensuous songs”, but this objection weakened and eventually faded over time; in 1667 it canonised a pope who had previously written libretti for opera.
To appease Human Resources and dodge “those superficial laws about harassment”, he asks Ileen studiously to document Jaclyn’s missteps.
It’s just that Jaclyn’s prickly demeanour disrupts the “teamwork atmosphere” he wants for his office.
With a proper paper trail of her mistakes, he can send Jaclyn packing without fear of a lawsuit.
Set in a generic doctor’s office with drab linoleum flooring, this play turns latent prejudice into something palpable and uncomfortable.
Jaclyn, performed with stage-dominating charisma by It’s for you-hoo notes, play a prominent though rarely positive role in folk songs around the world.
Allan Bloom, a conservative American philosopher and polemicist, grumbled that “rock has the beat of sexual intercourse”—a charge levelled against the tango in the early 20th century, the waltz in the 19th and the sarabande in the 16th.
Like many critics today, he is gripped by a regrettable need to say Tonya Pinkins, is black.
She is hard-working, but also, indeed, a bit snappish and ~ occasionally rude to patients.
Race, that detail that people like to pretend isn’t important, suddenly becomes inescapably central.
Racism, plainly, is something that white people want to believe is behind them, whereas — black people know it pervades their days.
Events over the past year, which saw two high-profile cases in which white police officerskilledunarmed black men and were not seriously punished, have forced Americans to confronta darkandpernicioustruth about the country’s racial inequities.
The notion that a few decades of civil-rights _ laws and a bit of affirmative action (often doled out grudgingly) haveredressed centuries of slavery and subjugation has ~ been exposed as hubris.
But the idea that “Rasheeda Speaking” is part of a wider conversation that Americans are finally having nowis also a distorted view of things.
There are plenty of opportunities to laugh, thoughsomeof the chuckles rise up from a grim place.
Such a compulsion rarely produces observations of value, and Mr Gioia’s are no exception.
He channels Bloom in worrying that modern love songs feature “sexual elements...so heightened and the romantic trappings so noticeably absent” that they recall Mesopotamian fertility rites.
But, as he notes, the love song has outlasted religious, social and political objections for centuries; it will survive Miley Cyrus and Justin Bieber—and grumpy intellectuals. m Courses The Ultimate Degree for Finance Executives London « Nice « Singapore Since 2008, EDHEC-Risk Institute has been offering a unique PhD in Finance programme to elite practitioners who aspire to higher intellectual levels and aim to redefine the investment banking and asset management industries.
Drawing its faculty from the world's best universities and enjoying the support of a leader in industry-relevant academic research, the EDHEC-Risk Institute PhD in Finance creates an extraordinary platform for professional development and industry innovation.
Following a stimulating scientific curriculum and working individually with leading specialists on research issues of particular relevance to their organisations, practitioners on the programme's executive track learn to leverage their expertise and insights to make original contributions at the frontiers of financial knowledge and practices.
Challenging professionals to step back, reflect, and generate radical innovations, the EDHEC-Risk Institute PhD in Finance is the ultimate degree for finance executives.
Come to Wharton to develop the instincts and mindset you need to broaden your leadership perspective and strengthen your skill set.
So if you’re looking for the executive education program that taps into the minds who taught Silicon Valley’s most successful innovators, do this.
Combining the strengths of three world-class graduate schools and the disciplines of international relations and public policy in modules spanning 14 months.
Avi Turetsky, COO, Riverside Europe Fund The Riverside Company, Brussels, Belgium To jearn more, visit us as weatherhead.case,edu/dm O FACULTY OF LAW, ECONOMICS AND FINANCE S tudy Finance . in Luxembout LUXEMBOURG SCHOOL OF FINANCE Open to the World Luxembourg NYal skolo) Meo} m a lar lalal-) BE PART OF... ... ahighly international school with renowed faculty and small class sizes, situated in the heart of Europe and in a thriving global financial center.
Benefit from a rich and promising setting to prepare your future inFinance. mzsf wwwIsf.lu Learn more on www.learnmore.lu jaya i | UTA UNIVERSITE DU LUXEMBOURG fa IPDET International Program for Development Evaluation Training JUNE 8 — JULY 3, 2015 | Ottawa, Canada “Nearly 90% of IPDET participants would recommend this program to a colleague.” —Annual Evaluation Report, 2014 This program targets individuals who manage, conduct or fund evaluations in a development context.
Applicants should be fluent in English with a sound track record in oil & gas.
OFFICE BURUNDAIS DES RECETTES COMMUNICATION ADVISOR,BURUNDI NUMBER: PRQ20141141 The Office Burundais des Recettes is a semi-autonomous government institution which manages | revenue collections from Customs, Domestic taxes as well as non-fiscal revenues on behalf of Government of Burundi.
OBR with the support of TradeMark East Africa seeks to engage individuals/firms to enhance and develop its communications strategy.
TRADE PR MARE Growing Prosperity Through Trade TMEA cannot answer any query relating to this tender three days or less prior to the submission deadline.
AMRO offers competitive remuneration and expatriate benefit packages pursuant to the internal guidelines.
Background in setting benchmarks on key macroeconomic indicators and guidelines for policy recommendations for multilateral as well as bilateral surveillance is desirable); Deep understanding of the macroeconomic, financial, fiscal policies in the ASEAN+3 members and advanced economies, and market situations and regulatory requirements of regional or global financial markets.
SPECIALIST Specialists will, conduct sectorial based economic surveillance and research on ASEAN+3 members and advanced economies, and work on CMIM related issues.
Main duties include supporting country surveillance and make policy recommendations.
SPECIALIST Specialists will, conduct sectorial based economic surveillance and research on ASEAN+3 members and advanced economies, including works related to providing technical assistance to ASEAN+3 members in the area of macroeconomic and financial statistics, and work on CMIM related issues.
We require candidates to possess excellent oral and written communication skills in English.
This would require devoting about 30 days per year, including time spent in two meetings with other interactions with members of the ISPC Secretariat, and other colleagues in the System, taking place in virtual mode.
All applications will be treated in the strictest confidence. 10th 2015.
A fourth Council Member will be appointed in March 2016 with expertise in plant genetic resources and their management.
The CGIAR is committed to achieving diversity in terms of gender, nationality, culture, and educational background.
We welcome applications from everyone irrespective of gender and nationality but, as women are currently under-represented, we would particularly encourage applications from women, and applicants from Asia and Latin Applications for all four positions will be considered simultaneously.
The IWPs are ately qualified developers. rocess for developers through ‘document.
The crop scientist should possess extensive knowledge of agronomy, and the || physiology of crops and cropping systems relevant to developing countries.
The social scientist will have research experience in policy, institutional, or household analyses, holding, a disciplinary qualification in the noneconomic social sciences and with expertise in relation to the enhancement of gender research and equity.
The water research and management scientist will have research experience | in agricultural projects in developing countries which focus on water use.
The plant genetic resources scientist will have detailed international knowledge of | the conservation, management, and use of plant genetic resources for agriculture.
Experience of strategic planning approaches to agricultural research will be an asset.
RFP bidding documents shall be issued subsequently to the Qualified Bidders, shortlisted through Stage-i bidding process.
Manager , NTPC Limited, 6th Floor, Engineering Office Complex, SA-8A, Sector-24, NOIDA, Distt.
The date & time of receipt of bids (both techno-commercial and price bid) for above mentioned packages is up to 1400 Hrs.
The date and time of opening of Price Bids for the respective Packages shall be intimated separately after opening of Techno-Commercial Bids.
NTPC Bhawan, SCOPE Complex, 7, Institutional Area, Lodhi Road, New Delhi-110003 CIN: L40101DL1975GOI007966.
KLT Il represents one of the few remaining port facilities owned by the NPA which is not under some form of long term PPP management.
Today, activities at KLT II include the handling and storage of fish and shrimp and containers.
The resulting effect has been the poor development of KLT II's facilities, and the related emergence of a sub-optimal operating environment.
The Federal Government is resolved to halt this decay in infrastructure by providing the enabling conditions and environment necessary to spur private sector investment at KLT Il.
In light of the foregoing, the Federal Ministry of Transport has embarked upon the project to concession an area on KLT II for the development of a Container Terminal.
The ICRC Act of 2005, being the principal federal law for concessions and PPPs, would apply to the proposed concessions.
The container terminal will be situated on Phase II of Kirikiri Lighter Terminal.
The KLT II container terminal will be expected to handle both domestic and international cargo.
In order to be pre-qualified, prospective bidders, who must be local/ international terminal operators must be able to demonstrate a track record of successful management, investment and operation of a container terminal.
Evidence of ample financial resources (including letters of support from reputable Nigeria or intemational financial institutions.
Technical and operational capabilities covering: » Type of business engaged in by members of bidding entity » Number of years of container operations » Experience in Nigeria and/or international experience.
Upon receipt of Expressions of Interest, the NPA shall evaluate and pre-qualify applicants.
Haver Analytics. *% change on previous quarter, annual rate. tThe Economist poll or Economist Intelligence Unit estimate/forecast.
Start the day with analysis and reporting from The Economist's correspondents around the world.
Listen in cars, planes and trains with no interruptions using the full offline listening mode. i Global defence spending Global defence spending increased by 1.7% in 2014, following three years of decreases.
Chinese expenditure continued to outflank that of regional rivals, increasing by 9.7% in 2014.
In contrast, spending in North America and Europe declined, despite concerns over Russian ambitions in Europe.
Russia’s own defence spending increased by 8.3% in 2014; it continues to spend moreasa percentage of cpp than America.
While America remains the biggest military spender, its share of the global total has fallen from 47% in 2010 to 38% in 2014.
Other markets % change on Dec 31st 2013 Index one inlocal in$ Feb 11th week currency terms United States 2,068.
Markit; Thomson Reuters, *Total return index. tCredit-default-swap spreads, basis points.
Economist.com/indicators & On air and on point Our radio app, with updates available every weekday morning.
BA OY EcBiline Sih Industrials AU) SD Sena Aaa 132,05 ses ee Ni eax Ese od 143.
Economic and financial indicators R:{} Germany’s liberator Richard von Weizsicker, first president of his reunited country, died on January 31st, aged 94 ORTY years, as the Old Testament shows, marks a psychological threshold.
Richard von Weizsacker observed this on May 8th 1985, as he gave the speech of his presidency and his life.
In 40 years, a people could traverse the desert and reach the promised land; but they could also forget old lessons and stray from the path.
Andso, 40 years after their surrender in the war they had started, the Germans should face their crimes and their own destruction as honestly as they could.
Only then— and this was his shocking twist-would they understand that the day of their defeat was the moment of their liberation.
Helmut Kohl, then chancellor, had muttered something similar a few weeks earlier, but the public had taken little notice.
Now, however, the thought came from the ceremonial head of state, a white-haired and elegant aristocrat, the son of a diplomat, and it was delivered in dialect-free German that resonated with gravitas.
A few months after the speech, Mr von Weizsacker became the first German president to visit Israel.
But members of the ss were still being honoured among war dead, and Germany’s historians were on the verge of a long academic struggle over whether the Holocaust was unique.
Not everybody was ready to take the last step towards freedom through honesty.
But Germans knew that this appeal came from a man as deeply implicated as any of them.
His father, Ernst, had been a senior official in Hitler’s foreign ministry.
His oldest brother, Carl Friedrich, was a physicist who worked on nuclear fission to give Hitler the bomb.
As a gangly, enthusiastic teenager he invaded Poland with the Wehrmacht as part of the 9th Potsdam, an elite Prussian infantry regiment.
On the second day of the war Heinrich, his middle brother, was shot through the throat not far from him.
With his regiment he laid siege to Leningrad and advanced almost to Moscow.
In 2009 journalists confronted him with a newly discovered order from 1941 that told his regiment to take no prisoners.
Many of the men who tried to assassinate Hitler on July 20th1944 came from his regiment.
He was close to them, and remembered, in a billet on the eastern front, shooting holes in a portrait of Hitler.
After the war, when his father was accused of war crimes in the Nuremburg trials, he interrupted his law studies to defend him, arguing that he had tried to prevent even worse crimes.
But Ernst had signed an order to deport 6,000 Jews to Auschwitz, and his son could not save him from prison.
For a while he would not touch politics, going instead into business and becoming president of the lay assembly of the Lutheran church, whose teachings he quietly lived by.
He preached reconciliation among Christians in divided Germany, and was among the first to demand that the westward-shifted border of Poland, which he had once barged through, should be seen as permanent.
Mr Kohl brought him into centre-right politics in 1969, as a member of the Christian Democratic Union, but he was never a party apparatchik.
In the 1970s he naturally supported Ostpolitik, the policy of rapprochement with all the eastern countries; it did not matter that the idea came from Willy Brandt’s rival Social Democrats.
At the Berlin Wall On Kristallnacht in 1938, when Jewish shops were smashed, Mr von Weizsacker had been in Berlin.
In 1981 he became mayor of the city’s western side, now split by a wall as though in punishment.
But he insisted that the German question remained open as long as the Brandenburg Gate remained closed.
Slim, ascetic and patrician, he made a telling contrast with the fat, shabby chancellor.
The cbu boss revelled in political combat; the head of state stood apart, a figure of decency, dig_ nity and goodness.
When Germany was at last reunited, he was the best spokesman the country could have wished for.
Perhaps the sweetest moment occurred just after the Berlin Wall fell in November 1989.
The president rushed to Berlin and approached the wall at Potsdamer Platz, in no-man’s-land.
East German soldiers were breaching the wall to make a border crossing.
You become someone new—someone with » more skills, more confidence, more opportunities.
Start learning a language today and find a new you in a world of possibility.
All rights reserved, Free shipping for products shipped within the contiguous United States only, Offer limited to TOTALe CD-ROM set purchases made directly from Rosetta Stone and cannot be combined with any other offer.
Rosetta Stone TOTALe includes interactive online services that require online access and are offered on a subscription basis for a specified term.
Online services must be begun within 6 months of purchase or are subject to forfeiture.
Oracle and Java are registered trademarks of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
