A Ukrainian pilot detained in Russia since 2014 has made a triumphant return home following a prisoner swap that saw her traded for two Russians.
Savchenko, who was exchanged for two Russian intelligence operatives held by Ukraine, thanked her supporters, and promised to fight for the release of other Ukrainians in Russian jails.
Flanked by her mother and sister and holding a Ukrainian flag, she posed for a photo.
Her return was celebrated in Ukraine, where she is viewed as a national hero and possible future political leader.
It also marks a significant moment of detente between Moscow and Kiev, and a breakthrough in on-off diplomatic negotiations conducted in Minsk.
The prisoner swap comes a few weeks before the European Union decides whether to extend sanctions against Russia, imposed following Vladimir Putin’s annexation of Crimea in 2014 and his covert invasion of eastern Ukraine.
Quoting unnamed sources, Kommersant newspaper reported that the exchange was agreed late on Monday during a telephone conversation between Putin, Poroshenko, Angela Merkel and François Hollande.
Russian media said a special presidential plane sent by Putin took off from Kiev to Moscow with Yevgeny Yerofeyev and Alexander Alexandrov on board.
They both told Reuters in interviews last year they were Russian special forces soldiers who were captured while carrying out a secret operation in the rebel-held Donbas region.
The plane arrived back at Moscow’s Vnukovo airport on Wednesday afternoon, where the two men were reunited with their wives.
Putin “had signed an order to pardon pilot Savchenko”, Russian media reported.
The president said on state TV that he hoped the prisoner exchange would reduce tensions in the Donbas region.
Savchenko, a military pilot, volunteered to fight with a ground unit against pro-Moscow separatists who launched an insurrection in eastern Ukraine against Kiev’s pro-western government.
She was captured and put on trial in southern Russia, charged with complicity in the deaths of Russian journalists who were killed by artillery while covering the conflict.
While in Russian jail, she was elected a member of the Ukrainian parliament and is widely regarded in Ukraine as a symbol of resistance against Russia.
Putin said he had pardoned Savchenko following a request from the journalists’ families.
Her release is a boost for Poroshenko, whom critics accuse of failing to tackle Ukraine’s endemic corruption or to confront entrenched oligarchic interests.
Dmitry Gudkov, the lone liberal opposition deputy in Russia’s parliament, argued that if Russia had exchanged Savchenko earlier, Alexandrov’s Ukrainian defence lawyer, Yury Grabovsky, might not have been murdered near Kiev in March.
There wouldn’t have been another split in society over an artificial propaganda story,” Gudkov wrote on Facebook, referring to the fact that Savchenko was elected to the Ukrainian parliament and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe during her imprisonment.
People shouldn’t be hostages,” the opposition Parnas party member Andrei Pivovarov wrote on Twitter.
Valentina Matviyenko, speaker of the upper house of parliament, insisted that Savchenko not been exchanged but transferred to Ukraine under existing prisoner transfer agreements, RIA Novosti reported.
The MP Alyona Shkrum wrote on Twitter that Savchenko’s mother was complaining that she had not had time to cook a pot of borscht for her daughter’s arrival.
