Akhmetov released a video message in which he fiercely attacked pro-Russian separatists in Ukraine’s southeastern provinces of Donbas.
Yet Akhmetov was far from the first person in the Ukraine crisis to hurl the term at his ideological opponents.
He was unusual only insofar as the word has been much more commonly used by the pro-Russian side in the conflict.
Thomas de Waal De Waal is a senior fellow with Carnegie Europe, specializing in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus region.
On the surface, the use of this term may merely seem to be a symptom of strong emotions in eastern Ukraine.
But in the former Soviet Union, more than in any other part of the world, the word genocide has been used as a weapon of political rhetoric for more than sixty years.
In the current crisis, the use of this language casts the Russian-Ukrainian conflict as a replay of the ideological divide of the Second World War, with Russia and Ukraine branded as “antifascist” and “profascist” respectively.
These labels are weapons in a rhetorical conflict that fuels the fighting on the ground between combatants who otherwise, in background and culture, have much more that brings them together than divides them.
And these terms are the result of a nearly seventy-year process that has turned a legal concept describing a crime against humanity into a politicized accusation with a general application.
Genocide and the Soviet Union The use of the word genocide in the Soviet Union and its successor states has its origins in the beginnings of the Cold War.
In 1946, as the world confronted the repercussions of the Nazis’ mass killing of Europe’s Jews in what came to be known as the Holocaust, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution declaring genocide a crime under international law.
By giving a word to what had been called a “crime without a name,” the accord sought to deter future acts of mass killing of that scale.
The Soviet Union supported the resolution, but problems arose when the UN attempted to craft a legal definition of the term.
Moscow objected to a reference in the declaration that allegedly misidentified the “object of genocide” by including political groups alongside national, ethnic, racial, and religious ones.
Evidently, Stalin feared that the inclusion of this criterion could lay his government open to prosecution for genocide for destroying his own enemies.
Additionally, the tribunal proposed for hearing cases of genocide was formulated as a supranational organ, foreseeing that in the future a citizen of one country might be charged with genocide in another.
The Soviet Union feared that its adversaries could potentially use this as a political weapon.
In 1948, the UN adopted the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, codifying the new crime.
Unfortunately, however, an idea that was initially adopted as a noble cause by the victorious Allies over Nazism was tarnished as those same Allies began to fight the Cold War with one another.
The Soviet delegation succeeded in removing the reference to political groups from the convention, but other ideas it had proposed also failed to make the cut—most significantly, the idea that genocide was inherently connected to fascism and racist theories.
Whatever the legal nuances of the new term, the Soviet Union immediately appropriated it for its own political goals in the Cold War.
Writing in 1956, Traynin accused the United States of carrying out genocide against African Americans with its Jim Crow laws.
Traynin had similar condemnations of apartheid in South Africa, the treatment of Indian highlanders in Bolivia, and other forms of oppression carried out by “imperialist” powers.
Condemning these abhorrent practices, Traynin’s rhetoric went over the top.
To Andryukhin, genocide was not just a crime committed by Western “imperialist” powers, but one backed by conscious ideology and carried out with relish and glee.
As important as Traynin’s and Andryukhin’s examples of genocide are the ones they never, or seldom, cite.
In Traynin’s discussion of the Nazis’ death camps, Jews are mentioned only in passing as one of the main groups killed.
Any mention of the Armenian Genocide is conspicuously absent from both texts.
Raphael Lemkin, the Polish lawyer who coined the word genocide in 1944 after immigrating to the United States, frequently used anticommunism to argue that the United States government should ratify the UN genocide convention.
When official Washington was unreceptive to his ideas, Lemkin fell back on the support of anticommunist Eastern European immigrant communities that were more than eager to use the new term.
According to Lehman, “genocide, developed to a science by Nazi Germany, has been practiced on an even vaster scale by Soviet Russia.
That trend continued in the second half of the twentieth century and became even more marked after the fall of Communism.
Genocide After the Soviet Collapse In post-Soviet political discourse, the word genocide became even further unmoored from its original legal formulation than the already-loose meaning it had acquired during the 1950s and 1960s.
For the first time, post-Soviet peoples began to explicitly label themselves, rather than others, as victims of genocide.
It is in the context of this semantic shift that the term has been employed so broadly in the current Ukraine crisis.
As they constructed fifteen new nation-states out of the wreckage of the Soviet Union in the 1990s, post-Soviet peoples and governments rediscovered and reinvented national histories, cultures, and languages.
In the process, the new nations frequently described their past sufferings as “genocide,” with barely any reference to the international legal understanding of the term.
As the historian Tzvetan Todorov has noted, no one wants to be a victim, but many want to have been victims.
The status conferred by past victimhood gives justification to complaints and demands that might otherwise seem unreasonable.
If a group can prove that it has been the victim of injustice, it “obtains a bottomless line of moral credit.
In the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan over the disputed territory of Nagorny Karabakh, Armenians termed the 1988 pogroms by Azerbaijanis against Armenians in the town of Sumgait genocide.
Azerbaijanis did the same with reference to the killing by Armenians of Azerbaijani civilians outside the town of Khojali in 1992.
Abkhaz and Ossetians have accused the Georgian state of genocide against them, while Georgia has accused the Abkhaz of committing genocide against ethnic Georgians.
Circassians have called on the world to recognize the mass deportation of their ancestors from the Russian Empire in the 1860s as genocide—and won recognition of the term from the Georgian parliament in 2011.
In contemporary Russia, the “G-word” has entered the mainstream vocabulary as a description of many kinds of abuse or victimization.
If continued, Delyagin warned, those policies would lead to “financial repressions” analogous to the most intense period of Stalin’s Great Purge.
More seriously, Sergei Glazyev, an economist, Russia nationalist, and one of the chief ideologists of “Eurasianism,” which is now a dominant ideology in President Vladimir Putin’s Russia, has argued that ethnic Russians are at risk of genocide both from Russia’s neighbors and from foreign powers.
Unlike many around him who have cried genocide, Glazyev does specifically refer to the UN genocide convention.
He emphasizes that the commission of genocide need not require physical violence, merely the creation of conditions that make it impossible for a people to survive.
Yet his version of Russian politics in the 1990s reads like an opposition conspiracy theory, with ordinary Russians perpetually cast in the role of victims.
After the shelling of the Russian parliament in 1993, the “victorious revolutionaries” had total impunity and carried out reforms for the sake of personal enrichment, Glazyev writes.
As an economist and academic, Glazyevbacks up his partisan claims with statistics about the sharp decline in the living standards, health, fertility, and education levels of the Russian population during the 1990s.
His work also touches on moral issues, perhaps foreshadowing his role today as an adviser to the increasingly socially conservative Putin.
Glazyev blames Russia’s falling birthrate not only on the country’s economic collapse but also on “propaganda of debauchery,” the destruction of the family by the media, and “dubious methods of sexual education” developed outside the country and then implanted in Russia.
This “genocide” may be happening in Russia, but it traces its origins back to the West.
He places Russia’s “economic genocide” in the context of several historical genocides, including the Soviet elimination of so-called class enemies.
Genocide and Ukraine In one country in the post-Soviet space—Ukraine—the genocide label has proved especially divisive.
There, the question of genocide has been a serious and polarizing issue for much of the country’s history since independence.
Ukraine’s genocide narrative can be traced back to 1933, when a horrific man-made famine caused by Stalin’s grain requisition policies in the southwestern Soviet Union took more than 2 million lives in Ukraine.
The new debate over one of the grisliest chapters of Ukrainian history raised the question of whether the Holodomor was genocide.
Many Ukrainian nationalists answered “yes,” and this led to more questions.
The suffering became one of the ideas underpinning the presidency of Viktor Yushchenko, who came to power as a result of Ukraine’s Orange Revolution of 2004.
While previous presidents had commemorated the Holodomor and sought to incorporate it into the Ukrainian national identity, Yushchenko actively promoted the idea of the famine as genocide.
The following year, Yushchenko promoted a tougher law that would criminalize Holodomor and Holocaust denial, although the parliament never voted on the bill.
When he succeeded Yushchenko as president in 2010, Yanukovych took a different position on the Holodomor.
Shortly after coming to power, he told the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe that the Holodomor was not genocide.
Political opponents even tried to take Yanukovych to court for denying that the Holodomor was a genocide.
Each November, he gave a formal address commemorating the victims of the famine, referring to it as a “tragedy” or an “Armageddon,” but never a genocide.
In Russia, the description of the Holodomor as a genocide was largely rejected both by politicians and by historians, some of whom accused Ukrainians of anti-Russian bias.
However, Ukrainian cultural scholar Mykola Riabchuk argues that anti-Russian interpretations of the Holodomor were neither the official view nor prevalent in society.
But if you take a look at all the speeches and publications by Yushchenko . . . he was very careful not to blame Russia,” Riabchuk said.
Some Ukrainian scholars partly explain the different identity of the southeastern provinces—notably the two regions of Donetsk and Luhansk—by the fact that their peasant population was wiped out in the 1933 famine and replaced by a more Russified Soviet worker population.
So this is part of the explanation why we have the current troubles, why Donbas is so rebellious, disloyal,” Riabchuk said.
In Russian discourse, the idea of a “genocide” perpetrated by Ukrainians against ethnic Russians proliferated in opposition to the 2004 Orange Revolution.
The bill in question was rejected in the Ukrainian parliament, but the author believed it could still be passed in the future.
If that happened, she predicted, Russian speakers would be excluded from the government, have their media eliminated, be unable to defend themselves in court, and even face assault and murder.
Using terms eerily prescient of Ukraine’s 2014 clashes, the publication accused the “Orange junta” of denying the “native Russian land, heroic Crimea” its language.
It is no surprise, then, that the word is again being invoked in the current conflict in Ukraine.
In eastern Ukraine, pro-Russian separatists know that they are challenging the status quo and the international order, which places them at a disadvantage.
By framing their struggle as one against a regime attempting to commit genocide, they present their actions not as a first choice but as the last resort of a people trying to protect its fundamental human rights.
Meanwhile, in Russia, the most persistent exponent of the idea of a genocide against Russians, Sergei Glazyev, has framed events in eastern Ukraine as part of his broader narrative of widespread persecution of ethnic Russians in other post-Soviet states.
Antifascism has increasingly become a central idea in Putin’s Russia, reinforcing a growing tendency to identify the modern country with the Soviet Union.
The Red Army’s victory over Nazism is increasingly reframed as a victory of the Russian nation rather than of the multiethnic Soviet people.
The enhanced prominence given to Victory Day on May 9 and debates about giving the city of Volgograd its old name of Stalingrad are further reflections of this reimagining of history.
Accusations that the new Ukrainian government is fascist—Glazyev even told a BBC interviewer that Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko is a Nazi—fit into this narrative.
On the Ukrainian side, it is notable that the Holodomor is a less politicized issue now than it was during the Yushchenko presidency.
Even Rinat Akhmetov, who now supports the government in Kiev, is a Russian speaker who emerged from the eastern, Russia-oriented cultural and political narrative and who previously had strong ties to Yanukovych.
Perhaps for some, but for the majority of participants in this ideological battle, the Holodomor remains in the background.
Ukraine already has a national genocide, and making more accusations would only serve to delegitimize the Holodomor.
The current Ukrainian leadership has instead used a different kind of inflammatory language, accusing the rebels of Donetsk and Luhansk of being “terrorists” who undermine Ukraine’s state order.
However, in the wake of the tragic downing on July 17, 2014, of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 in eastern Ukraine, presumably by a separatist-fired surface-to-air missile, the terrorist label has understandably gained greater traction in the international community.
Nonetheless, such rhetoric makes the task of reconciliation much more difficult and reduces the space for a political compromise in eastern Ukraine.
People of different ethnic, religious, and linguistic identities can live and have lived together in Ukraine in peace.
But the invocation of genocide, a word that signifies “ultimate evil,” incites the belief that Russians and Ukrainians are incompatible and closes down opportunities for dialogue and cooperation.
In a crisis where words matter, the implacable rhetorical war in Ukraine helps fuel an increasingly dangerous conflict.
Matthew Kupfer is a junior fellow in the Carnegie Russia and Eurasia Program.
Notes 1 “V svyazi s situatsiyei na Donbasse Rinat Akhmetov sdelal ekstrennoye zayavlenie” , Segodnya.ua, May 19, 2014, www.segodnya.ua/regions/donetsk/v-svyazi-s-situaciey-na-donbasse-rinat-ahmetov-sdelal-ekstrennoe-zayavlenie-521628.html.
