The ongoing military conflict between Russia and Ukraine is a stark reminder that shifts in political tone and military tactics do not necessarily correlate with each other or represent substantive shifts in a state’s foreign policy goals.
A systematic analysis of official Russian statements and military conflict data over the last two years reveals that Moscow has no plans to accept Ukraine’s sovereignty over the Donbas.
The Kremlin’s enduring Ukraine policy is to stall genuine conflict resolution unless the Donbas is provided political autonomy on Moscow’s terms, essentially turning the region into Russia’s client statelet.
The Kremlin’s characterizations of the political situation in Ukraine are only partially suggestive of Russia’s militarized support for its client insurgents in the Donbas.
Back when the conflict started in 2014, there appeared to be a clear relationship between the harshness of Moscow’s political tone and its military actions in Ukraine.
The following month, regular and irregular Russian forces and mercenaries surrounded and massacred hundreds of Ukrainian government troops near Ilovaisk.
However, the softening of the Kremlin’s tone toward Ukraine at the end of 2014—Putin stopped making parallels between Nazis and Ukrainians, for example—did not lead to a reduction in violence.
Russia and its proxies drove Ukrainian government troops out of the Donetsk international airport, annihilated Ukrainian troops near Debaltseve in early 2015, battled down the Azov Sea coastline toward Mariupol, and launched deadly rocket and artillery attacks across the Luhansk region.
Casualty data unequivocally defy the notion that the war between Russia and Ukraine ended in early 2015.
The OSCE reports hundreds of weekly violations of the Minsk ceasefire accords, mostly by Russia-backed separatists.
Since then, the death toll has continued to climb, however, reaching a casualty count of 9,371 by late May 2016.
Most deaths have resulted from offensive operations by Russia-backed separatists.
The death toll of about 4,285 for the period from last February to May is more than four times the annual rate that international relations scholars use to classify armed conflicts as wars.
Since March of this year, there has not been a major spike in violence, but this too does not mean the war is over.
It only means that Kremlin-backed military operations have become more circumspect.
There was some hope when the cumulative death toll from December 2015-February 2016 increased by the lowest margin of any three-month total.
More than that, softer rhetoric and military tactics have not equated to a greater acceptance of Ukraine’s sovereignty and right to choose its own geopolitical orientation—in other words, even less military conflict does not mean an increased prospect of resolution.
That becomes clear if one looks at the Kremlin’s position on three key issues regarding the legitimacy of a) Ukraine’s sovereignty within the borders it inherited from Soviet times; b) its post-Euromaidan government leaders and institutions; and c) the Moscow-backed insurgent governments in the Donbas.
Kommersant, which at that time was relatively independent from the Kremlin, interpreted Putin’s statement as a thinly veiled threat that if NATO granted Ukraine a path to membership, Russia would dismember Ukraine.
In Putin’s most recent public statement on the topic, he tied Ukraine’s sovereignty to its geopolitical orientation.
In a September 2015 interview on the United States news program 60 Minutes, Putin implied that Ukraine has no right to sovereignty if its government decided to leave what he considers to be Russia’s sphere of influence.
The reference was to the February 2014 ouster of the pro-Moscow government of Viktor Yanukovych and the arrival to power of a pro-EU and pro-NATO government.
Critically, its acceptance of a freely and competitively elected Ukrainian president, parliament, and local government structures has been conspicuously guarded or cursory—particularly when compared to the Kremlin’s characterizations of the ousted Yanukovych administration and of other entrenched autocratic governments.
An additional Google News search from January 2015 through May 2016 has yielded no reports suggesting otherwise.
The Kremlin first delayed and then obfuscated congratulations to Petro Poroshenko on his victory in Ukraine’s presidential elections in May 2014.
Three days after the polls closed and the results were evident, the Kremlin claimed that it was waiting for the complete count.
However, though the phone call was confirmed, and there does not appear to be any public documentation of when, where, and how Putin formally congratulated Poroshenko on his election victory.
It also used the same phrase to characterize the unrepresentative and unverifiable results in the insurgent-held territories of the Donbas.
Meanwhile, in two other countries, Putin quickly and unambiguously endorsed the uncompetitive rubber-stamped re-elections of entrenched post-Soviet autocrats Nursultan Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan and Aleksandr Lukashenko in Belarus.
The Kremlin issued no such endorsement for any of the major elections in Ukraine even though, unlike in Belarus and Kazakhstan, Ukraine’s elections were certified as free, competitive, and well-organized by international observers.
Finally, breaking with tradition, the Kremlin did not issue standard protocol congratulations to the Ukrainian government on Ukraine’s Independence Day in 2014 or 2015.
Two months later, the Russian military and its local client forces defeated Ukrainian border guards and occupied several hundred kilometers of Ukraine’s internationally recognized border with Russia.
The Kremlin then dispatched Vladimir Antyufeev to de facto run the separatist entities.
Antyufeev is a seasoned Russian official who spent a quarter-century successfully institutionalizing the Russian client statelets of Transnistria, Abkhazia, and South Ossetia.
Russian military assistance also increased, enabling the DNR and LNR armed forces to launch a counter-offensive and inflict mass casualties on Ukrainian troops attempting to reclaim insurgent-occupied lands.
Moscow legitimated further uncompetitive and unrepresentative elections in the separatist entities.
In November 2015, Putin’s influential advisor, Vladislav Surkov, in his capacity as a representative of the Russian president’s administration, congratulated DNR leader Alexander Zakharchenko on the anniversary of his “election,” a courtesy not extended to Petro Poroshenko.
Moscow’s insistence on the DNR/LNR’s legitimacy has been the cornerstone of its bargaining position in international negotiations on the conflict.
Most notably, it uses the conflict to hold Ukraine’s sovereignty hostage.
Moscow applies pressure on Kyiv to grant the Donbas de facto state sovereignty, something that would legitimate the entities nominally within Ukraine but, for all intents and purposes, keep them under Moscow’s rule.
In a November 2015 press conference, Putin was adamant that the insurgent DNR and LNR governments receive formal legitimacy through certain changes in Ukrainian law that will give them de facto veto power over Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policy.
Until that happens, Russia will not allow Ukraine to control its international border.
United States and European governments need to recognize that as long as the Kremlin does not change its stance on the relative legitimacy of the Ukrainian state, its leadership, and the separatist entities, expectations of diplomacy resolving the Donbas conflict are naïve at best.
Any disagreements about their autonomy enable Moscow to delay a political settlement indefinitely and hold Ukraine’s sovereignty hostage to the Kremlin’s geopolitical ambitions.
Russia’s signing of international agreements on resolving the conflict is not an indication of military restraint or any other change in policy.
First, given the tenacity of the Kremlin’s line, the West’s position on any internationally-negotiated settlement will be significantly strengthened if the United States—the only actor with military capabilities superior to Russia’s—rejoins the process.
Moscow will not change its strategy based on its convictions, but it could do so out of uncertainty about further military costs.
This means graduating away from the Minsk format to a quadrilateral U.S.-EU-Ukraine-Russia format.
Second, Western policymakers should consider revising their bargaining strategy to decouple tradeoffs between political and military issues.
Trading off Ukraine’s restoration of border control for Donbas autonomy is a recipe for impasse and protracted military conflict.
Military withdrawal and cessation of hostilities should come first and be considered separately, with further sanctions on Russia if Ukrainian forces are not allowed to regain control of the entire length of its internationally-recognized eastern border.
Ukraine would be more open to Donbas autonomy if Moscow publicly recognized the legitimacy of Ukraine’s sovereignty and its post-Euromaidan elected leadership.
