Kharkiv and Krivoy rig do not want to pay for repairs to the occuppied territories.
We know the Crimea is signifiant to Russia as a strategic Black Sea naval base.
The lawmaker also accused Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko of not being interested in ending the war in the Donbass and said he was using Russia as an excuse to scapegoat his critics.
Russia says it will never return Crimea to Ukraine, making the idea of leasing it to Moscow improbable even if it could gain support in Ukraine, where many people would oppose voluntarily granting Russia any form of control over the peninsula.
At a security conference in Munich on Friday, Mr Poroshenko warned the West against “appeasement” of Russia, and some American experts say offering Russia any alternative to a two-year-old international agreement on Ukraine would be a mistake.
The Trump administration has sent mixed signals about the conflict in Ukraine.
But given Mr Trump’s praise for Mr Putin, John Herbst, a former American ambassador to Ukraine, said he feared the new president might be too eager to mend relations with Russia at Ukraine’s expense — potentially with a plan like Mr Artemenko’s.
It was late January 2017 when the three men associated with the proposed plan converged on the Loews Regency, a luxury hotel on Park Avenue in Manhattan where business deals are made in a lobby furnished with leather couches, over martinis at the restaurant bar and in private conference rooms on upper floors.
A lawyer who joined the Trump Organization in 2007 as special counsel, he has worked on many deals, including a Trump-branded tower in the republic of Georgia and a short-lived mixed martial arts venture starring a Russian fighter.
He is considered a loyal lieutenant whom Mr Trump trusts to fix difficult problems.
He is married to a Ukrainian woman and once worked with relatives there to establish an ethanol business.
Mr Artemenko, tall and burly, arrived at the Manhattan hotel between visits to Washington.
He had attended the inauguration and visited Congress, posting on Facebook his admiration for Mr Trump and talking up his peace plan in meetings with American lawmakers.
Mr Artemenko said he saw in Mr Trump an opportunity to advocate a plan for peace in Ukraine — and help advance his own political career.
Essentially, his plan would require the withdrawal of all Russian forces from eastern Ukraine.
Andriy Artemenko, a Ukrainian lawmaker whose plan to resolve the three-year-old conflict in Ukraine reportedly wound up on the desk of thenUnited States national security adviser Michael Flynn, has been stripped of his citizenship by presidential decree, the State Migration Service says.
The migration service said in a statement on May 5 that President Petro Poroshenko had terminated Artemenko’s Ukrainian citizenship over the lawmaker’s voluntary acceptance of foreign citizenship.
Artemenko had previously acknowledged that he holds Canadian citizenship.
This entry was posted in Uncategorized and tagged artemenko, cohen, flynn, Poroshenko, russia, ukraine.
