Nigel Walker Russian annexation of Subject specialist: Crimea Ben Smith Contents 1.
Other Parliamentary material 24 5.1 Debates 24 5.2 Statements 25 5.3 Early Day Motions 36 6.
Further reading 37 The House of Commons Library prepares a briefing in hard copy and/or online for most non-legislative debates in the Chamber and Westminster Hall other than half-hour debates.
Debate Packs are produced quickly after the announcement of parliamentary business.
They are intended to provide a summary or overview of the issue being debated and identify relevant briefings and useful documents, including press and parliamentary material.
More detailed briefing can be prepared for Members on request to the Library. www.parliament.uk/commons-library | intranet.parliament.uk/commons-library | papers@parliament.uk | @commonslibrary 2 Number CDP-0093 , 18 April 2019 1.
Background Little green men 18 March 2019 was the fifth anniversary of Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
The process began in February 2014, as soldiers wearing Russian combat fatigues and carrying Russian weapons began seizing important installations in the peninsula.
Russia initially denied they were Russian soldiers but later said they were.
Referendum After Russia had gained full control of Crimea a referendum was held in which voters were not given the chance to choose the status quo, conducted in polling stations under armed guard.
Later a member of the Russian Human Rights Council mistakenly posted the real election results, showing that about 55% had voted to join Russia on a turnout of 40%, according to reports.
On 27 March, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution calling on states not to recognise the annexation.
The 47-member Russian annexation of Crimea 3 council oversees the 1949 European Convention on Human Rights and its associated court and some argue a Russian departure would deprive Russians of one of the last protections against authoritarian government.
Recent developments Stability remains elusive in eastern Ukraine and Russia has moved to shore up its hold on Crimea.
Russia is building a road and rail bridge across the Kerch Strait, connecting Crimea to Russia.
Source Ukrainian official and media sources/BBC On 25 November 2018 Russian border patrol ships attacked and seized three Ukrainian Navy vessels attempting to enter the Sea of Azov from the Black Sea through the Kerch Strait, in a move that looked designed to gain complete control of the Sea of Azov.
In December suspicions that Russia has nuclear arms in Crimea were reported.
These developments suggest that, while the conflict in the eastern mainland regions of Ukraine may be resolved, Russia does not intend to restore Ukrainian sovereignty over Crimea.
Press articles The following is a selection of press and media articles relevant to this debate.
British government Foreign Secretary statement on the fifth anniversary of the illegal annexation of Crimea Foreign and Commonwealth Office 18 March 2019 Five years ago, Russia illegally annexed the peninsula of Crimea in a blatant land grab from Ukraine.
Russia seized key Parliamentary and Police buildings from the Ukrainian authorities and then ran a sham referendum in an attempt to legitimise its actions.
Once President Putin signed an illegal decree to absorb Crimea into Russia, the Russian authorities ran illegitimate ‘elections’ and imposed Russian citizenship, Russian law and military conscription on everyone living in this part of Ukraine.
I condemn the illegal annexation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, five years ago.
The UK will never recognise Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and we call on Russia to end their illegitimate control of the peninsula and their attempts to redraw the boundaries of Europe.
Russia’s pattern of unacceptable behaviour has continued with their supply of weapons and personnel to the conflict it initiated in eastern Ukraine, the illegal construction of a bridge connecting mainland Russia with Crimea, and their relentless attempts to monopolise the Kerch Strait in a campaign intended to undermine Ukraine’s economy and demoralise its citizens.
Russia continues to commit human rights violations beyond its borders by systematically persecuting those who voice their opposition to the illegal annexation of Crimea.
I call for the immediate release of all Ukrainian political prisoners, who are being held in Crimea and Russia without access to international monitoring organisations or essential medical treatment.
Russia must also immediately release the 24 Ukrainian servicemen, who were detained whilst lawfully attempting to sail through the Kerch Strait.
We join NATO and the EU in condemning Russia’s unjustified use of force on Ukrainian vessels in November last year.
The UK, along with our EU and G7 partners, remains unwavering in our support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Mr President, the Russian Ambassador spoke at length and in colourful and imaginative language about many other actors as he introduced this topic but he said nothing about Russia’s role.
The German Ambassador an eyewitness to Minsk -showed us why with his accounts of the events of the time and Russia’s actions.
Mr President, the United Kingdom welcomes this opportunity to discuss the repeated violations of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity at the hands of Russia.
Russia’s aggression towards Ukraine is not limited to the Donbas and Crimea Russia seeks to undermine Ukraine at every opportunity; undermining the ceasefire; supplying the Russianbacked separatists with weapons and calling illegitimate electionsall in breach of the Minsk agreement.
These actions have a tragic impact on the lives of Ukrainian civilians.
Despite the parties recommitment the ceasefire on 29 December, violations are increasing and that continues to be military activity in the disengagement zones.
However, our understanding of the situation within non-government controlled territory is limited because the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission is unable to carry out its mandate.
This threatens the ceasefire and ultimately the security of Ukraine and the wider region.
A raft of incidents that Russia is yet to provide an explanation for, only reinforces this conclusion.
For example, the downing of an SMM long range UAV near the Ukraine-Russia border, outside Ukraine government control last year.
And just last week, SMM twice observed the Russian electronic jamming system ‘ZHITEL’ in the Donbas.
I would ask the Russian Ambassador to ensure his country’s support for the Special Monitoring Mission and to allow them to observe.
Mr President, a further example of Russian attempts to destabilise Ukraine is the illegitimate elections in the non-government controlled territories of the so-called Luhansk People’s Republic and Donetsk People’s Republic in the Donbas last November.
This represents a clear breach of the Minsk agreements and unnecessarily increases tensions.
Russia could use its considerable influence on the Russian backed separatists to encourage them to comply with them its commitments.
Mr President, next month marks the fifth anniversary of the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia.
And it’s worth reminding ourselves of Russian annexation of Crimea 7 the facts.
In response to Russia’s plans for an illegal and illegitimate referendum in Crimea.
The Security Council on the 15th March 2014 voted on a draft resolution that reaffirmed the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine and noted that Ukraine had not authorised the referendum and that it had no validity.
Following the illegal and illegitimate referendum in Crimea on 16th March, on 27th March 2014, the United Nations General Assembly adopted Resolution 68262 supported by one hundred member states which affirmed the General Assembly’s commitment to the territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognised borders and underscored the invalidity of the referendum.
Mr President, we not only object to the illegal annexation of Crimea because it is illegal.
We also object to it due to the Russian government’s appalling treatment of many of those who live there.
Mr President, despite calls in General Assembly resolutions for the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to visit Crimea, Russia continues to refuse.
We, the international community must stand united and call for Russia to release all political prisoners and allow urgent, unrestricted access for human rights monitoring organisations immediately.
Mr President, less than three months ago, Russian authorities admitted to using force in the Black Sea to seize three Ukrainian naval vessels injuring three Ukrainian servicemen.
These actions are not in conformity with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and they are a blatant attempt to destabilise Ukraine by harming economic activities of other ports of the Berdyansk and Mariupol -hampering Ukraine’s ability to manage its economy.
Let me be clear, Mr President, Russia’s actions in Ukraine have no basis in international law.
To protect it, the international community must continue to stand united and remain focused on Russia’s behaviour and its attempts to integrate Crimea into Russia including through the construction of a bridge across the Kerch straits.
I would like to end by reiterating the United Kingdom’s full support for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity including within its internationally recognised borders and territorial waters.
We look forward to discussing the situation in Ukraine further at the forthcoming General Assembly debate on 20th February.
And I take note of the Russian Ambassador’s enthusiasm for Security Council meetings on Ukraine and look forward next time to hearing about what Russia is doing to meet its obligations and bring an end to the suffering of the people of Ukraine.
Foreign and Commonwealth Office 16 November 2016 Statement by Ambassador Martin Shearman, of the UK Mission to the United Nations, on the Third Committee resolutions on Crimea.
The OHCHR has detailed the arrests, ill-treatment, torture and intimidation perpetrated against political opponents and minorities, as well as the denial of basic human rights to those who do not accept the forced imposition of Russian legislation and citizenship on the Peninsula.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned at the persecution of the Crimea Tatar minority, including the banning of the Tatar Mejlis and at the use of anti-extremist legislation to silence dissenting views.
It is deplorable that the de facto authorities continue to deny access to all international monitoring organisations, thereby preventing an independent assessment of the human rights situation in Crimea.
The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Human Rights Monitoring Mission for Ukraine, has been operating in the Ukraine for two years, yet throughout that period it has been systematically refused access to Crimea.
Restoring access to the Crimean peninsula for international human rights monitoring bodies is therefore the primary, and necessary, goal for this draft resolution.
The international community has sent a strong message through the passing of this resolution that Russia cannot simply trample over international law.
President Putin should take notice of this clear and resounding message and work together with all parties to de-escalate the situation.
PM statement on President Putin’s actions on Crimea Prime Minister’s Office, 10 Downing Street 18 March 2014 David Cameron has made a statement about President Putin’s actions to attempt to annex Crimea.
The steps taken by President Putin today to attempt to annex Crimea to Russia are in flagrant breach of international law and send a chilling message across the continent of Europe.
Britain depends on the stability and security of the international order.
That relies on a rules based system where those who ignore it face consequences.
And that’s why the EU and the United States have already imposed sanctions.
It is completely unacceptable for Russia to use force to change borders, on the basis of a sham referendum held at the barrel of a Russian gun.
President Putin should be in no doubt that Russia will face more serious consequences and I will push European leaders to agree further EU measures when we meet on Thursday.
Foreign Secretary condemns Russia’s recognition of Crimea as a 'sovereign state' Foreign and Commonwealth Office 17 March 2014 The Kremlin has this evening announced that President Putin has signed a decree recognising Crimea as a sovereign state.
The United Kingdom, in common with the European Union and the majority of the international community, does not recognise the 16th March Crimea referendum or its outcome as legal or legitimate.
The UK condemns in the strongest terms Russia’s flagrant disregard of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The UK calls again on Russia to enter into dialogue with Ukraine and with the international community to resolve this crisis through diplomacy and in accordance with international law, not to exacerbate it further through unilateral and provocative actions.
Continuing to ignore those calls will bring serious consequences for Russia.
We will urgently consider our response to this latest escalation with our allies and partners, including at the European Council this week.
Five Years at Home Harbour concert held to mark the fifth anniversary of the 2014 Crimean referendum and Crimea’s reunification with Russia.
Friends, I would like to speak to those present here, on this square in Simferopol, as well as to all people of Sevastopol and Crimea who are not here but whose hearts are with us.
I would like to congratulate you on the fifth anniversary of Crimea and Sevastopol’s reunification with Russia.
This event has become part of our lives, our perception and our history as the Crimean Spring.
And this was possible thanks to the referendum that took place five years ago, where all of you took part and voted for this historic decision.
The actions of the people of Crimea and Sevastopol remind me of the actions of Red Army soldiers during the first tragic months after the breakout of the Great Patriotic War, when they tried to battle through to join their comrades and carried their field flags close to their hearts.
You have also kept your love for our Fatherland, Russia, for many years and even decades, although you were not part of Russian statehood.
Friends, Russian annexation of Crimea 11 The events five years ago resulted in an incredible growth of patriotism across Russia and also demonstrated the great power of truth and justice.
This is why Russia opened its heart and soul and embraced you into its huge multi-ethnic family with joy and happiness.
We have done a lot over the last five years, but there is still more to do.
Crimea Is Ukraine US Department of State 27 February 2019 Five years ago, Russia's occupation of Ukraine's Crimean peninsula fueled an escalation of Russian aggression.
Russia attempted to upend the international order, undermined basic human freedoms, and weakened our common security.
The world has not forgotten the cynical lies Russia employed to justify its aggression and mask its attempted annexation of Ukrainian territory.
Russia’s use of force against a peaceful neighbor must not be tolerated by reputable states.
The United States remains gravely concerned by the worsening repression by Russia’s occupation regime in Crimea.
During the past five years, Russian occupation authorities have engaged in an array of abuses in a campaign to eliminate all opposition to its control over Crimea.
As part of this campaign, Russia has arbitrarily detained and wrongfully convicted individuals for peaceful opposition to the occupation, and in some cases has forcibly transferred these individuals from occupied Crimea to Russia.
The United States calls on Russia to release all of the Ukrainians, including members of the Crimean Tatar community, it has imprisoned in retaliation for their peaceful dissent.
This includes Oleh Sentsov, Oleksandr Kolchenko, Volodymyr Balukh, Ruslan Zeytullayev, and approximately 70 others.
We call on Russia to cease all its abuses immediately, to end its occupation of Crimea, and, in the meantime, to comply with its obligations under international law, including the law of occupation.
In the Crimea Declaration of July 25, 2018, the United States reaffirmed its refusal to recognize the Kremlin’s claims of sovereignty over Crimea.
The United States also condemns Russia’s illegal actions in Crimea and its continued aggression against Ukraine.
The United States will maintain respective sanctions against Russia until the Russian government returns control of Crimea to Ukraine and fully implements the Minsk agreements.
The United States reiterates its unbending support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, within its internationally recognized borders, including its territorial waters.
We are approaching the day of reunification with the Ukrainian Crimea Ukraine Government 27 February 2019 Ukraine and the Ukrainian Government are countering Russia’s aggression and occupation of Ukrainian territories and are bringing the day of the reunification of continental Ukraine with the peninsula closer.
United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations, Ambassador Kurt Volker took part in the event.
The Head of Government stressed that the history of occupation of Crimea became a personal history of many families, including the family of the Prime Minister.
Our citizens today are in Russian prisons, because they defend their right to freedom and free views,"" Volodymyr Groysman stressed.
The Prime Minister emphasized that today calls for the liberation of Crimea and the release of Ukrainian political prisoners are questions not only of Ukraine, but of the entire civilized world, because it concerns global security.
Before annexation it was a beautiful Ukrainian resort with a temporary stay of the Russian fleet that had to leave the peninsula and relocate to Russia.
Today it is a military base that poses a threat to the entire democratic world.
The whole democratic world must be united in order to force the aggressor to refuse from his plans and to begin to respect the law and sovereignty of other countries.
We must fight for the release of every political prisoner so that Ukrainians return home,"" the Prime Minister said.
Volodymyr Groysman expressed confidence that aggressor should pay heavy price for his barbaric actions.
We remember, and we think about how to approach the day when we can celebrate the date of the liberation of Crimea from the Russian occupation forces.
The Ukrainian Crimea will be a hospitable resort and a pearl of our state.
International organisations Statement by the North Atlantic Council on Crimea NATO 18 March 2019 1.
Five years ago, Russia used force against Ukraine to illegally and illegitimately annex Crimea.
This violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity is a serious breach of international law and a major challenge to Euro-Atlantic security.
We reiterate our full support for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognised borders and territorial waters.
Allies are deeply concerned by the human rights abuses and violations being carried out by the Russian de-facto authorities in illegally annexed Crimea against Ukrainians, the Crimean Tatars, and members of other local communities.
These violations include extrajudicial killings, abductions, enforced disappearances, violence, arbitrary detentions, arrest, and torture.
Despite the 2017 Order of the International Court of Justice, the Mejlis, the Crimean Tatars' self-governing body, remains under persecution and is banned in its homeland.
NATO calls on Russia to bring an immediate end to all violations and abuses in illegally annexed Crimea, to release Ukrainian political prisoners and hostages, and to grant international monitoring organisations access to Crimea.
Any attempts to legitimise or normalise the illegal and illegitimate annexation of Crimea must end, including the automatic imposition of Russian citizenship, forced population movements, conscription in the armed forces of the Russian Federation, and illegal holding of Russian election campaigns.
We condemn Russia's ongoing and wide-ranging military build-up in Crimea, and are concerned by Russia's efforts and stated plans for further military build-up in the Black Sea region.
We also condemn Russia's construction of the Kerch Strait bridge, which represents another violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity and is imposing additional hardship on Ukraine's economy.
Russia's unjustified use of military force against Ukrainian ships and naval personnel near the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait in November 2018 is part of the larger pattern of Russian aggressive actions in the region.
In line with United Nations General Assembly Resolution 73/194 from 17 December 2018, we call on Russia to unconditionally release the Ukrainian crew members it detained, to return the captured vessels and to comply with its international commitments by ensuring unhindered access to Ukrainian ports in the Sea of Azov and allowing freedom of navigation.
NATO's response to address Russia's illegal actions in Ukraine has been alongside and in support of an overall international effort, which has included sanctions.
There can be no return to ""business as usual"" until there is a clear, constructive change in Russia's actions that demonstrates compliance with international law and its international obligations and responsibilities.
The European Union reiterates that it does not recognise and continues to condemn this violation of international law.
It remains a direct challenge to international security, with grave implications for the international legal order that protects the territorial integrity, unity and sovereignty of all States.
The European Union remains committed to fully implementing its nonrecognition policy, including through restrictive measures.
The European Union calls again on UN Member States to consider similar nonrecognition measures in line with the UN General Assembly Resolution 68/262.
Russia's violations of international law have led to a dangerous increase in tensions at the Kerch Strait and the Sea of Azov.
The unjustified use of force by Russia against Ukraine on 25 November 2018 is a reminder of the negative effects of the illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula on regional stability.
The EU reiterates its call on Russia to release the illegally captured Ukrainian crewmembers, vessels and equipment unconditionally and without further delay.
Pending their release, Russia should respect their rights to legal representation and access by consular authorities, and to provide the injured crewmen with appropriate medical treatment.
The European Union condemns the construction of the Kerch Bridge without Ukraine's consent which constitutes a further violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The EU expects Russia to ensure unhindered and free passage of all ships through the Kerch Strait to and from the Azov Sea, in accordance with international law.
The illegal restrictions to such passage have negative economic consequences for Ukraine's ports in the Azov Sea and the whole region.
The European Union does not and will not recognise the holding of elections by the Russian Federation in the Crimean peninsula.
The increasing militarisation of the peninsula continues to impact negatively the security situation in the Black Sea region.
In violation of international humanitarian law, Russian citizenship and conscription in the armed forces of the Russian Federation have been imposed on Crimean residents.
Since the illegal annexation by the Russian Federation, the human rights situation in the Crimean peninsula has significantly deteriorated.
Residents of the peninsula face systematic restrictions of fundamental freedoms, such as freedom of expression, religion or belief and Russian annexation of Crimea 15 association and the right to peaceful assembly.
In accordance with UN General Assembly resolution 73/263 of 22 December 2018, it is crucial that the regional and international human rights monitoring mechanisms as well as the non-governmental human rights organisations have unimpeded access to Crimea and Sevastopol.
The rights of the Crimean Tatars have been gravely violated through the shutting down of Crimean Tatar media outlets, the banning of the activities of the Mejlis, their self-governing body, and the persecution of its leaders and members of their community.
The EU expects Russia to reverse these decisions and to end the pressure on the Crimean Tatar community.
Crimean Tatars, Ukrainians and all ethnic and religious communities in the peninsula must be ensured the possibility to maintain and develop their culture, cultural heritage traditions, education and identity.
Russia must also take measures to improve the environmental situation, which has considerably worsened since the illegal annexation.
The EU reiterates its call for the immediate release of Oleh Sentsov, Edem Bekirov, Oleksandr Kolchenko, Mykola Semena, Volodymyr Balukh, Emir-Usein Kuku and all those who have been detained in the Crimean peninsula and sentenced in breach of international law.
Journalists, human rights defenders and defence lawyers should be able to work independently and without undue interference and intimidation.
The EU calls for full compliance with international human rights standards in the peninsula.
All pending cases of human rights violations and abuses, such as enforced disappearances, torture and killings, violence, politically motivated prosecutions, discrimination and harassment should be thoroughly investigated.
Full, free and unrestricted access for international human rights actors to the whole territory of Ukraine, including Crimea and Sevastopol, continues to be paramount.
The EU recalls UNGA Resolution 73/263 of 22 December 2018, and calls for its full implementation, including the Russian Federation's obligations under applicable international humanitarian law.
The Candidate Countries North Macedonia*, Montenegro* and Albania* and the EFTA countries Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova align themselves with this declaration.
Tatars 02 Apr 2019 | 238283 Asked by: Paul Farrelly To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, what representations he has made to the Russian Ambassador in London and his Russian counterpart on actions taken against Crimean Tatars in Russian-occupied Crimea.
Sir Alan Duncan | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office We are deeply concerned by ongoing reports of human rights abuses against the Crimean Tatar community.
The Foreign Secretary has not made direct representations to the Russian Ambassador in London but has publicly condemned Russian human rights abuses in Crimea.
Most recently, he co-signed an op-ed with EU partners on 27 February in which he criticised Russia's treatment of the Tatar community, and, in a statement to mark the fifth anniversary of Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea, condemned Russia's continued pattern of human rights violations in the peninsula and called for the release of all Ukrainian political prisoners being held by Russia.
The UK supports the work of the UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, which works to reduce violations by strengthening the field presence of human rights monitors and reporting on the situation.
Lord Ahmad of Wimbledon | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office Sanctions imposed alongside our international partners, including the US, in 2014 have had a coordinated impact on Russia by increasing economic pressure to change its Ukraine policy and sending a clear, united message that Russian aggression in Ukraine will not be tolerated.
This impact has been strengthened by the continuation and maintenance of 2014 sanctions since their implementation.
The current bilateral relationship is not the one the UK wants and we remain open to a different relationship with Russia one where Russia desists from attacks that undermine international security and actions that undermine the territorial integrity of its neighbours.
Theresa May | Department: Prime Minister I am happy to give my right hon.
This was an illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia, and we have been doing everything we can to ensure that the appropriate sanctions are imposed that will have an impact.
We have been one of the voices around the EU Council table that has been advocating the roll-over of sanctions at every stage and ensuring that, as we look at the actions of Russia here and elsewhere, we enhance those sanctions and rightfully put pressure on those who are responsible.
Politics and Government 19 Feb 2019 | 221577 Asked by: Jim Cunningham To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, what recent assessment he has made of the current levels of political stability in Ukraine; and if he will make a statement.
Sir Alan Duncan | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office The UK remains concerned over persistent attempts by Russia to undermine political stability in Ukraine.
Russia's malign intent is evident in their support for separatist forces in eastern Ukraine, the detention and mistreatment of civilians in Crimea, the recent firing on Ukrainian vessels in the Black Sea and their growing economic stranglehold on the Ukrainian ports of Mariupol and Berdyansk.
This is reinforced by Russian disinformation campaigns and cyber-attacks designed to create a false narrative of Ukraine as a failing state.
The reality is that Ukraine has made enormous progress towards realising its potential as a fully democratic, modern and prosperous state.
The UK is providing substantial assistance to strengthen Ukraine's democracy and institutions as part of its reform programme.
This includes specific support to help Ukraine counter potential outside interference in presidential and parliamentary elections in 2019.
The best answer to malign Russian activity remains a well-functioning, democratic and stable Ukraine.
Philip Hollobone The Russian annexation of Crimea has been followed by the construction of the Kerch bridge to the Russian mainland.
To date, no NATO ship has entered under the bridge into the sea of Azov.
Gavin Williamson | Department: Defence We can be very proud that the Royal Navy was the first navy to enter the Black sea and go to Odessa in solidarity with our Ukrainian friends.
Currently we have no plans, but we will continue to keep this situation under review; and we plan to make sure that further Royal Navy vessels visit the Black sea later this year.
Ukraine 19 Dec 2018 | HL12079 Asked by: The Marquess of Lothian To ask Her Majesty's Government what long-term strategy they have formulated to deal with the conflict between Ukraine and Russia.
Lord Ahmad of Wimbledon | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office Russia's pattern of aggression undermines the international rules-based system.
The Prime Minister has been clear that the UK is open to a different relationship, if Russia changes its behaviour.
Russia has illegally annexed the Crimean peninsula, continues a conventional conflict in eastern Ukraine, and, most recently, has fired on Ukrainian ships.
The UK is fully committed to upholding the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally-recognised borders.
The UK is working with international partners to resolve the conflict peacefully and helping Ukraine to strengthen its democracy and institutions.
It is imperative that Russia abides by its commitments under the Minsk Agreements and withdraws its forces from all of Ukraine, including Crimea.
We fully support EU sanctions which will remain in place until there is progress on the Minsk process, and the Crimean peninsula is returned to Ukraine.
To deal with the conflict, Her Majesty's Government provides substantial technical, development and political support to Ukraine in areas which include good governance, anti-corruption and defence reform and capability.
Sovereignty 03 Dec 2018 | 196687 Asked by: Jim Cunningham To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, what steps he is taking to support the independence and sovereignty of Ukraine.
Sir Alan Duncan | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office The UK continues to fully support Ukraine's independence and territorial integrity.
Crimea and the Donbas are part of Ukraine – what Russia has done and continues to do there breaches its obligations under international law.
Together with partners, we continue to call on Russia to abide by its international commitments and withdraw its forces from all of Ukraine, including the Donbas and Crimea.
We strongly condemn recent Russian aggression against Ukrainian vessels near the Kerch Strait.
This is yet further evidence of Russia's continued violation of Ukrainian sovereignty following the illegal annexation of Crimea and construction of the Kerch Bridge.
The Foreign Secretary issued a statement on 26 November, and spoke with the Ukrainian Foreign Minister on 29 November to reiterate that the UK stands with Ukraine against Russian aggression.
The UK is also providing over £35 million to support Ukraine in a range of areas including governance reform, anti-corruption and humanitarian aid to help Ukraine continue its transition to become a stable, transparent and prosperous state.
Sir Alan Duncan | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office Russia’s actions in Ukraine have deliberately violated a number of international agreements and commitments including the 1997 RussiaUkraine Treaty of Friendship.
We continue to work with international partners to support Ukraine as it deals with the ongoing impact of Russia’s aggression against it.
It is Russia which created this conflict, Russia which supplies weaponry and personnel to the separatists, and Russia which refrains from using its considerable influence on the separatists to get them to comply with their Minsk commitments.
It is imperative that Russia abides by its commitments under the Minsk Agreement and withdraws its forces from all of Ukraine, including Crimea.
Military Aid 25 Jul 2018 | 164956 Asked by: Nia Griffith To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, pursuant to the Prime Minister's oral contribution of 16 July 2018, Official Report, column 24, what support the Government is offering to the Government of Ukraine in relation to the situation in the Crimea.
Sir Alan Duncan | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office The UK is absolutely clear in its rejection of Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea.
The British Government regularly highlights, publically and multilaterally, Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea and human rights abuses towards those who oppose the illegal annexation.
In public statements, including the UK statement at the recent UN Human Rights Council, our bilateral contacts with Russia and in multilateral fora we have called on Russia to immediately release Ukrainian prisoners detained for politically motivated reasons.
The EU has taken practical measures to reinforce its policy of non-recognition of the illegal annexation of Crimea, including on 18 June the EU renewed trade sanctions in response to Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol for a further 12 months; and on 5 July economic sanctions were renewed for a further 6 months.
Council of Europe 26 Apr 2018 | 137138 Asked by: Liam Byrne To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, what criteria he plans to use to decide whether to support lifting the suspension of Russian credentials at the council of Europe.
Sir Alan Duncan | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office In accordance with its status as a statutory body of the Council of Europe and independent from the Committee of Ministers, the decision is a matter for the Parliamentary Assembly to decide.
PACE has made clear its own criteria for Russia to return which are laid down in the its own resolution requirements.
PACE has not suspended Russia; the decision was taken by Russia since 2015 not to present credentials for its own Delegation in response to voting restrictions placed upon Russian annexation of Crimea 21 them by PACE following the illegal annexation of Crimea in 2014.
The UK is clear that a Russian return to PACE would be contingent on the withdrawal of all Russian military personnel and support for separatists in Eastern Ukraine, as well as an end to the illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula.
David Lidington | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office Russia’s destabilisation of eastern Ukraine has resulted in a humanitarian crisis, with over 1. million people displaced, over 6000 people killed and tens of thousands wounded.
The situation there will only improve when Russia abides by the commitments it made at Minsk; withdraws its troops, its heavy weaponry and support for the separatists.
Since Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea we have become increasingly concerned by the deteriorating human rights situation there.
We continue to call for free and unconditional access by international humanitarian and human rights organisations to Crimea at all times.
Russia 17 Mar 2015 | 226956 Asked by: Andrew Rosindell To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, what assessment he has made of the implications for his policies of President Putin's statement that the Russian annexation of Crimea was planned before the referendum on self-determination.
David Lidington | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office UK policy, which is fully in line with our international partners including the EU and US, has not changed.
We do not, and will not, recognise the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia.
Russia’s intervention in Ukraine represents a flagrant violation of a number of its international commitments.
That is why Russia has been isolated in the Security Council and in the wider international community.
Until Moscow does so, it can expect the EU’s Crimea sanctions to remain in place.
Russia 21 Jan 2015 | 220986 Asked by: Tim Farron To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, what recent representations he has made to the Russian government about its annexation of Crimea.
David Lidington | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office We have made clear that we will not recognise Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea, which remains a part of the sovereign territory of Ukraine.
This point is raised as a matter of principle in any high-level level UK/Russia bilateral meetings.
I last raised this issue the last time I met the Russian Ambassador in December.
Andrew Rosindell To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, what the Government's policy is on recognition of Crimea as the territory of Ukraine.
David Lidington | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office The UK does not, and will not, recognise the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia.
Russia 22 Jul 2014 | 205915 Asked by: Andrew Rosindell To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, what steps he is taking to ensure that Crimea is still internationally recognised as part of the Ukraine.
David Lidington | Department: Foreign and Commonwealth Office The Government strongly condemns Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea which violates the UN Charter and is illegal under international law.
This result delivered a resounding international condemnation of Russian actions in Crimea and made clear Russia’s isolation in the Security Council and in the international community.
Russian annexation of Crimea 23 G7 leaders issued a statement on 4 June which affirmed G7 countries’ non-recognition of Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and condemned the unacceptable interference in Ukraine’s sovereign affairs by the Russian Federation.
G7 Leaders confirmed the decision by G7 countries to impose sanctions on individuals and entities who had actively supported or implemented the violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and who were threatening the peace, security and stability of Ukraine.
They underlined their implementation of a strict policy of non-recognition with respect to Crimea/Sevastopol, in line with UN General Assembly Resolution 68/262.
The EU has regularly condemned Russian actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine and supported action including the imposition of travel bans and asset freezes on 72 individuals and the sanctioning of two entities; the cancellation of the EU-Russia Summit; agreement not to hold bilateral summits; and a decision to block Russian membership of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and International Energy Agency.
On 16 July, and in line with the EU’s policy of non-recognition of the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol, the Prime Minister and other EU Leaders requested the European Commission and the European External Action Service to present proposals for additional measures on restricting investments in Crimea and Sevastopol.
The European Council also asked the International Financial Institutions to refrain from financing any projects that explicitly or implicitly recognised the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol.
The UK remains firmly committed to Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Sir Gerald Howarth Given that Russia has effectively annexed Crimea, in contravention of the Budapest agreement signed by Britain, the United States and Ukraine in 1994, and that it continues to threaten eastern Ukraine, what consideration has my right hon.
Philip Hammond | Department: Defence We are clear that a graduated response to these unjustified actions by Russia is necessary, but it should be a diplomatic response in terms of economic and trade sanctions.
Meetings are ongoing today across the European Union to try to agree the best way to deliver that response.
My Right Honourable Friend the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs attended the Foreign Affairs Council on 18 February.
It was chaired by the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , Federica Mogherini.
Ukraine The Council had a comprehensive discussion on Ukraine, covering the reform process as well as the security and humanitarian situation, in particular in eastern Ukraine and the Sea of Azov.
The Council reiterated its full support for Ukraine's independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty and continued condemnation of the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol by Russia.
Foreign Ministers acknowledged the important progress Ukraine has accomplished in key areas over the past five years and highlighted the need to maintain reform momentum.
The Council also expressed the importance of ensuring that the elections in Ukraine are well conducted.
They highlighted the importance of ensuring that the OSCE election observation mission can conduct its work and can observe the elections in full accordance with its usual practice.
Ministers exchanged views on how the EU can help, following the developments in the Azov Sea and Kerch strait region, particularly through strengthened support in the affected areas, including in sectors such as railway and road connections, training, and support for SMEs.
They reiterated the EU's call for all detained Ukrainian seamen to be released immediately as well as for the return of the seized vessels and free passage of all ships through the Kerch Straits.
I have today laid before Parliament a Ministry of Defence Departmental Minute concerning a further gifting package which the UK intends to make to the Government of Ukraine.
Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and its destabilising activities in Eastern Ukraine, including direct military support to the separatists, has demonstrated its disregard for international law.
Since fighting began, 26 Number CDP-0093 , 18 April 2019 nearly 8,000 people have been killed and approximately 18,000 injured.
The latest ceasefire agreement, reached on 29 August, has seen a reduction in violence in the conflict zone.
However, until there is a political settlement to the conflict the Ukrainian Armed Forces have to remain deployed forward and continue to suffer fatalities and casualties.
As a result of the prolonged engagement in this conflict, the UAF face a chronic shortage of basic equipment, and have requested help.
This Government is committed to supporting Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
Our proposed gift of non-lethal equipment is designed to prevent further Ukrainian fatalities and casualties and to help improve resilience on the ground.
Subject to completion of the Departmental Minute process, delivery is expected to be undertaken over the coming weeks.
The total cost of this proposed package of equipment is approximately £971,000, including transportation costs and contingency.
I have today laid before Parliament a Ministry of Defence Departmental Minute describing a gifting package which the UK intends to make to the Government of Ukraine.
Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and its destabilising activities in Eastern Ukraine, including direct military support to the separatists, have demonstrated its disregard for international law.
The latest ceasefire agreement, reached in Minsk on 12 February and which came into force on 15 February, has seen a reduction in violence in the conflict zone.
However, fighting has not ceased in some areas and there continue to be fatalities and casualties amongst the Ukrainian armed forces.
As a result of their prolonged engagement in this conflict, the Ukrainians face a serious shortage of basic equipment, and have requested help.
Our proposed gift of non-lethal equipment is designed to prevent further Ukrainian fatalities and casualties and to help improve situational awareness on the ground.
The Departmental Minute, which I have today laid before Parliament, describes a gifting package to the Ukrainian armed forces that will comprise five priority items that are needed which will provide immediate benefits.
These items are Individual first aid kits, Global Positioning Systems units, helmet-mounted monocular night Russian annexation of Crimea 27 vision goggles , ruggedised laptops, and Mk6 helmets.
The total cost of this proposed package of equipment is approximately £850,000, including transportation and contingency costs.
This gifting package is being provided alongside other training activities, which are being delivered by UK military personnel to the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
The past month has seen an escalation of violence in the eastern regions of Ukraine.
Fighting has been intense around the town of Debaltseve, a strategically important rail and road hub between the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk.
The Ukrainians have suffered indiscriminate missile attacks on buses in Donetsk and Volnovakha and on the port city of Mariupol.
What is happening on the ground now resembles, to all intents and purposes, a small-scale conventional war.
Over 5,000 people have been killed since the crisis began last spring, and over 1. million people have been displaced from their homes.
In recent weeks, Russia has aggravated the effects of its initial incursion by stepping up the military support it provides to its proxies.
It has transferred hundreds of heavy weapons, including rocket launchers, heavy artillery, tanks and armoured vehicles; and it maintains hundreds of regular soldiers, including special forces, in Ukraine, as well as command and control elements, air defence systems, unmanned aerial vehicles, and electronic warfare systems.
The recent escalation in fighting would not have been possible without the military support and strategic direction that Russia provides.
In these circumstances, it is vital that all the countries who have a stake in the rules-based international system remain clear and united against Russian aggression.
In Normandy last summer, we agreed with the US and our European partners that the most effective channel of communication with the Kremlin would be through a small group.
This is known as the Normandy Format, comprising Germany, France as the host of the Normandy meeting, Ukraine and Russia.
Chancellor Merkel and President Hollande met President Poroshenko in Kiev last Thursday, and President Putin in the Kremlin on Friday.
On Saturday, in Munich, I held meetings with Secretary of State Kerry and German Foreign Minister Steinmeier to assess the prospects for a 28 Number CDP-0093 , 18 April 2019 diplomatic resolution of the crisis.
On Sunday, the German Chancellor and the French President held a conference call with Poroshenko and Putin, agreeing to meet in the Normandy format in Minsk tomorrow.
Their aim is to reach agreement on an implementation plan for the Minsk ceasefire agreements that the Russians entered into last September, updated, as they need to be, to reflect subsequent changes on the ground.
The UK welcomes these efforts to achieve a peaceful resolution of the situation in eastern Ukraine, while remaining sceptical of Russian commitment to such a resolution.
The consensus within the European Union that Russia must pay a price for its disregard of the international rules-based system remains strong.
Equally, there is a clear consensus that the EU does not, and will not, recognise Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea.
The emergency EU Foreign Affairs Council on 29 January agreed to roll over all the Crimearelated tier 2 sanctions against individuals and companies.
That is another clear sign that the EU remains united in its response to Russian action in Ukraine.
The package of economic sanctions which the European Union and the United States has imposed on Russia, coupled with the catastrophic impact on the Russian economy of the decline in the oil price, is a critical element of the pressure on President Putin to change his behaviour.
Britain was and remains at the forefront of the successful effort to build and maintain an EU-wide consensus on a sanctions regime on Russia, to the evident surprise and dismay of the Kremlin.
Yesterday in Brussels I represented the UK at the EU Foreign Affairs Council, which discussed Ukraine and reconfirmed its decision to apply additional sanctions, but, at the suggestion of the Ukrainian Foreign Minister and as a gesture of support for the political process, decided to delay their entry into force until next Monday.
The informal European Council of Heads of State and Government will have further discussions about Ukraine on Thursday.
Public debt has risen sharply, foreign exchange reserves have fallen and the currency has lost nearly half its value against the United States dollar.
Ukraine clearly needs support from international partners to stabilise the economy, in return for which it must pursue the reforms to which it has committed under the association agreement with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund programme.
Britain is providing £10 million in technical assistance to support economic and governance reforms and the humanitarian effort.
The EU will make a substantial contribution to the immediate estimated $15 billion financing needs of the country, the majority of which will be provided through an IMF-led package.
We shall also continue to work through NATO to offer technical support to the Ukrainian armed forces and reassurance to our eastern NATO Russian annexation of Crimea 29 allies.
The Wales summit also agreed a readiness action plan to reassure our eastern allies.
As part of the package, NATO allies agreed to a new spearhead unit—the very high readiness joint taskforce—within the NATO response force, which, supported by the newly created forward integration units in the Baltic and eastern European states, will be able to deploy at very short notice wherever they are needed.
On 5 February, NATO Defence Ministers agreed the size and scope of that mission.
Friend the Defence Secretary has announced that the UK will lead the force in 2017 and on a rotational basis thereafter.
The UK also made a commitment to contribute to headquarters in Poland and Romania and the six NATO forward integration unit headquarters in the Baltic states, Poland, Romania and Bulgaria.
In addition, the UK will contribute four RAF Typhoons to operate alongside Norway in support of the Baltic air policing mission.
The UK also remains a strong supporter of the OSCE’s monitoring mission in eastern Ukraine.
We have provided funding of more than £2 million, the second largest number of monitors and 10 armoured vehicles to allow monitors to move around dangerous areas in a more secure manner.
Our policy since the start of the crisis has been to supply non-lethal assistance to Ukrainian armed forces, in line with our assessment that there must be a political solution to this crisis.
We have increased our defence engagement with Ukraine and are providing additional support on crisis management, anti-corruption, defence reform and strategic communications.
We have offered three members of the Ukrainian armed forces who were wounded in the Donbass life-changing specialist medical assistance in the form of reconstructive surgery at the Queen Elizabeth hospital in Birmingham.
We are providing a substantial package of nonlethal equipment to Ukraine, comprising medical kits, winter clothing and equipment, body armour, helmets and fuel.
The package is focused on reducing fatalities and casualties among members of the Ukrainian armed forces.
It is a national decision for each country in the NATO alliance to decide whether to supply lethal aid to Ukraine.
The UK is not planning to do so, but we reserve the right to keep this position under review.
Different members of the alliance take nuanced positions on this question, and are entitled to do so.
However, we share a clear understanding that while there is no military solution to this conflict, we could not allow the Ukrainian armed forces to collapse.
By its illegal annexation of Crimea and its destabilising activities in eastern Ukraine, including its direct military support of the separatists, Russia has demonstrated its disregard for international law.
It is clear that President Putin respects only strength, and by standing united, 30 Number CDP-0093 , 18 April 2019 using our combined economic muscle to impose significant economic costs on Russia, the international community has shown its determination to rebuff Russia’s anachronistic behaviour.
Until we see Russia complying with the terms of the Minsk agreement on the ground—withdrawing troops, stopping the flow of weapons and closing the border—there must be no let-up in the pressure.
Fine words in a declaration tomorrow will, of course, be welcome, but we have seen them before.
We will monitor the situation carefully, and we will agree to a relaxation of the pressure only when we see clear evidence of changed Russian behaviour and systematic compliance with Russia’s obligations under the original Minsk agreement.
I represented the United Kingdom at the 21st Ministerial Council meeting of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe , held in Basel, Switzerland on 4-5 December 2014 and hosted by Swiss Federal President and OSCE Chairman-in-Office Didier Burkhalter.
The Council is the key decisionmaking body of the OSCE and was attended by Ministers from across its 57 participating States.
The Council took place in the final month of a year when the OSCE has been at the centre of the international response to the Ukraine crisis, and this subject dominated the Council.
In my interventions in the discussions that took place on 3 and 4 December, I made clear that by its actions Russia was fully responsible for the instability in eastern Ukraine, and that its illegal annexation of Crimea would not be recognised by the international community.
I said that Russia must implement its commitments under the Minsk Protocols, by withdrawing military personnel, equipment and weapons from Ukraine’s sovereign territory, ceasing the supply of separatist factions, and securing its border with Ukraine.
I also commended the role of the OSCE in facilitating dialogue and providing valuable impartial reporting from eastern Ukraine, in particular its Special Monitoring Mission, to which the UK has provided and will continue to provide significant financial and personnel support.
Russian annexation of Crimea 31 Similar sentiments were expressed in plenary by United States Secretary of State Kerry, German Foreign Minister Steinmeier, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Klimkin and EU High Representative Mogherini among others.
It is regrettable that Russian obstruction meant that a declaration on the OSCE’s role in, and support to, Ukraine could not be agreed despite the vast majority of OSCE States’ desire to do so.
In the margins of the Council, I attended a meeting hosted by the Lithuanian Foreign Minister with Crimean Tatar leader Mustafa Dzhemilev, who described the restrictions and violations that the Tatars are now experiencing following Russia’s illegal annexation.
Separately I met representatives of Russia-based civil society groups, who detailed the worrying trends of restrictions and threats that such groups face from the Russian authorities.
Both meetings underlined the need for tough messages to be given to Russia about its conduct both in eastern Ukraine and Crimea, and also within Russia where human rights must be properly respected.
On 25 July, the European Council added 15 more persons and 18 entities responsible for action against Ukraine’s territorial integrity, to the list of those subject to an asset freeze and a visa ban.
The European Council also widened the designation criteria in the legal basis for restrictive measures to be applied.
This paved the way for imposing asset freezes and visa bans on persons and entities that actively support or are benefiting from Russian decision makers responsible for the annexation of Crimea or the destabilisation of eastern Ukraine.
The European Council also on 29 July agreed to a ban on European investment in key sectors in Crimea and to add eight further persons, some which could be considered to fall in to the “crony” category as well as three entities to the list of those subject to an asset freeze and a visa ban.
This will bring the number of persons currently under EU sanctions in connection with the situation in Ukraine to 95, while the number of entities will rise to 23.
The 29 July package reinforces the measures already adopted by the EU since March 2014 on the situation in Ukraine and the illegal annexation of Crimea.
These restrictive measures are a response to the unacceptable Russian behaviour in destabilising another country and are aimed at applying pressure to Russia to change such behaviour.
Work on this package within the European Union has been aimed at ensuring that it is fair and balanced, has economic impact shared evenly across the EU, and has more impact on Russia than on the EU itself.
Any further measures, should these be required, would be proportionate, carefully constructed and designed to keep pressure on the Russian authorities to act to restore and ensure Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
An Amended Regulation on listing further names of entities and individuals—from the 29 July decisions—and a Council Decision and Council Regulation on the Crimea investment ban will be agreed by written procedure today.
A Council Decision and Council Regulation on so-called “Tier 3” sectoral restrictive measures will be agreed by written procedure tomorrow.
Copies of these documents will be deposited in the Libraries of both Houses.
With permission, Mr Speaker, I would like to make a statement on last week’s emergency European Council.
Its territorial integrity has been violated and the aspirations of its people to chart their own future are being frustrated.
This European Council sent a clear and united message to Russia that its actions are in flagrant breach of international law and will incur consequences.
First, as a response to what Russia has already done, we agreed on some immediate steps.
As I told the House last week, my view is that it would be completely wrong for a G8 summit to go ahead at all under current circumstances.
We decided to stop work on a comprehensive new agreement on relations between Russia and the European Union, and we immediately suspended the talks that were under way on a more liberal visa regime in the Schengen area—the thing that Russian Ministers and business delegations have pushed for more than anything else.
Here in Britain, I have ordered an urgent review of all Government business with Russia.
We have already announced that no Ministers or members of the royal family will visit the Sochi Paralympics.
Many other planned ministerial-level contacts will be cancelled in current circumstances.
All bilateral military co-operation is under review, with the presumption that we will suspend it, except for work carried out to fulfil international treaty obligations, such as European arms control inspections.
It is hard to see how anything that could be used in Ukraine could be justified.
As with other measures, it is best if possible to take these decisions in concert with our European allies.
There has been intense work to persuade Russia to come to the negotiating table with the Government of Ukraine and to discuss its stated concerns face to face.
The idea of such a contact group, including other countries and organisations, was one I first proposed to the Polish Prime Minister back in January.
The European Council agreed it was essential for such talks to start within the next few days and for them to deliver progress quickly.
We also agreed that if Russia did not co-operate there would need to be further measures—the so-called second phase—which would need to start rapidly.
We are working closely with our American, European and other international partners to prepare a list of names, and these sanctions, plus the measures already agreed against Yanukovych and his circle, will be the focus of a meeting here in London tomorrow with key international partners.
We are all clear that any referendum vote in Crimea this week will be illegal, illegitimate and will not be recognised by the international community.
In addition, I have to say that any campaign would be completely impractical as well as illegal.
There is no proper register or proper campaign, and the territory is covered with troops.
It is completely impossible for a proper referendum campaign to be carried out.
As I discussed with Chancellor Merkel last night in Hanover, Russia can choose the path of de-escalation by signalling it understands that the outcome cannot be acted on as legitimate.
Chancellor Merkel and I were clear that any attempt by Russia to legitimise an illegal referendum would require us to respond by ratcheting up the pressure further.
Thirdly, and most significantly, we agreed that it was essential to stop Russia taking further unacceptable steps in Ukraine.
The Council agreed that if further steps are taken by Russia to destabilise Ukraine, there will be additional and far-reaching consequences for the relationship between the Russian Federation on the one hand and the European Union and its member states on the other.
Britain played a leading role in helping to reach this agreement, including through a meeting I convened with fellow leaders from France, Germany, Italy and Poland on the morning of the Council.
Such sanctions would have consequences for many EU member states, including Britain, but as I argued at the meeting, the costs of not standing up to aggression are far greater.
Britain’s own security and prosperity would be at risk if we allow a situation where countries can just flout international rules without incurring consequences.
Finally, we decided to send a political message of support to the Ukrainian Government and people.
The interim Ukrainian President spoke at the European Council with great power and force.
The Ukrainian people want the freedom to be able to choose their own future and strengthen their ties with Europe, and they want a future free from the awful corruption that they have endured for far too long.
At the request of the Ukrainian Prime Minister, we therefore agreed to bring forward the signing of the political part of the EU’s association agreement with Ukraine, and we agreed to help Ukraine tackle corruption.
The EU has now frozen the assets of 18 people linked to the former regime, and Britain has deployed a team to Kiev from our Russian annexation of Crimea 35 National Crime Agency to help the new Ukrainian Government go after ill-gotten funds and return them to the Ukrainian people.
It is now vital that Ukraine proceeds towards free and fair elections that enable all Ukrainians, including Russian speakers and minorities, to choose their leaders freely, so Britain is now providing substantial and immediate technical assistance to Ukraine to support elections and assist with reforms on public finance management, debt management and energy pricing.
The EU agreed unilaterally to lower trade tariffs, and to work with the International Monetary Fund on a package of financial assistance to the Ukrainian Government.
As I agreed with President Obama during our call this weekend, there is still an opportunity for Russia to resolve this situation diplomatically.
It should engage in direct talks with the Ukrainians, return Russian troops to their bases in Crimea, withdraw its support for this illegal and unconstitutional referendum in Crimea, and work with the rest of the international community to support free and fair elections in Ukraine in May.
Ukraine should be able to choose its own future and act as a bridge between Russia and Europe.
Britain’s own future depends on a world where countries obey the rules.
In Europe, we have spent the past 70 years working to keep the peace, and we know from history that turning a blind eye when nations are trampled over stores up greater problems for the longer term.
We must stand up to aggression, uphold international law and support the Ukrainian Government and the Ukrainian people, who want the freedom to choose their own future.
This statement was repeated and debated in the House of Lords 36 Number CDP-0093 , 18 April 2019 5.
The report also stated that Russia’s action in a sovereign territory was unacceptable, but that in the run-up to the crisis, mistakes were made by the EU as well as Russia.
Russia and Ukraine House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee 4 September 2014 This was a one-off oral evidence session on Russia and Ukraine to examine Russian foreign policy in Europe and the UK’s policy response so far to the crisis in Ukraine and Russian actions in the region.
United Nations resolution Territorial integrity of Ukraine UN General Assembly Resolution 68/262 27 March 2019 About the Library The House of Commons Library research service provides MPs and their staff with the impartial briefing and evidence base they need to do their work in scrutinising Government, proposing legislation, and supporting constituents.
Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly available research briefings is correct at the time of publication.
Readers should be aware however that briefings are not necessarily updated or otherwise amended to reflect subsequent changes.
Authors are available to discuss the content of this briefing only with Members and their staff.
If you have any general questions about the work of the House of Commons you can email hcinfo@parliament.uk.
Disclaimer This information is provided to Members of Parliament in support of their parliamentary duties.
It is a general briefing only and should not be relied on as a substitute for specific advice.
The House of Commons or the author shall not be liable for any errors or omissions, or for any loss or damage of any kind arising from its use, and may remove, vary or amend any information at any time without prior notice.
The House of Commons accepts no responsibility for any references or links to, DEBATE PACK or the content of, information maintained by third parties.
This information is Number CDP-0093 provided subject to the conditions of the Open Parliament Licence.
