On August 7th, 2008, the leaders of the Russian Federation shocked the world and made the controversial decision to mobilize and invade Georgia, a small, sovereign nation located in the Caucasus Mountains just south of Russia.
The Georgian military had been engaged with separatists from the regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia for just under a week, yet by the time a large batch of Russian military personnel entered their territory through the mountainous Roki tunnel at 11:00 PM, it was too late.
Despite what any news outlets would later report, the international community knew that Georgia had just lost a major chunk of its territory to this aggressor from the north.
What no one knew, however, was that this seemingly minor excursion would begin a decade’s worth of continued Russian belligerence and adventurism toward its neighbors.
Historically, the strained relations between Russia and Georgia are nothing new, and can be traced back as early as the year 1785 when the Russian Empire violated a treaty and refused to defend the eastern Georgian Kingdom during a Persian invasion.
Some decades later, in 1801, Georgia joined the Russian Empire, and it remained a protected member up until 1918 when the independent Democratic Republic of Georgia was established following the Russian Revolution and the abdication of the Russian Tsardom.
This was short-lived, however, as the Bolsheviks and the Red Army overthrew the Georgian government in 1921 and forcibly annexed the region into the newly-established United Soviet Socialist Republic in 1922.
The USSR forced an era of tension, fear and powerlessness upon the citizens of Georgia.
Under the first three years of Soviet control alone, approximately 50,000 Georgians were executed by the government, while an insurmountable 150,000 were purged up through 1951 by Joseph Stalin, a native Georgian himself.
Soviet State Security, 1939-1953, Stalin forced entire Ingush, Chechen, Balkarian and Karachay populations, all native to Georgia, into deportation.
Even when relatively progressive leaders like Nikita Khrushchev took control of the Soviet Union — “progressive” in that he succeeded Stalin — Georgian protests promoting independence from the USSR resulted in the massacring of hundreds of college students and demonstrators.
After the accord’s ratification, a shaky sense of peace was established between Georgia and the separatist regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
It was clearly imperfect, though, as protests and skirmishes continued to break out while political tensions rose unwaveringly; South Ossetia even went so far as to hold an unofficial referendum in which 99% of the public voted in favor of independence, an act ignored by the European Union but supported by the Russia Duma.
Two years later, after hearing direct pleas for support from Abkhazian and South Ossetian officials, Russian President Dmitri Medvedev stated that allying with the separatist regions “is not an easy choice, but it is the only way to save the lives of people,” and pledged both political and military support to both.
Several months later, after the Georgian military responded to another South Ossetian attack, Russia launched its now-infamous military invasion.
Russia’s 2008 seizure of the Ossetian and Abkhazian territories provided eerie foreshadowing for what the Federation’s neighbors had in store.
Six years later, in 2014, a near-identical crisis transpired in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine’s Luhansk and Donbas regions, disputes which continue to the time of this article’s publication.
The primary characteristic that both the Georgian and Ukrainian annexation attempts had in common is that they highlighted deep, pervading insecurities from within the highest ranks of Russian leadership.
These insecurities are two-pronged, with stress placed on both military and political pressures.
However, the more alarming insecurities are political, and they continue to grow increasingly problematic as democracy gains popularity within Russian spheres of influence.
During a 2005 visit, President George W Bush proudly referred to Georgia as a beacon of liberty in a region where freedom is not always to be taken for granted.
He spoke glowingly about the 2003 Georgian Rose Revolution, in which a peaceful change of power allied Georgia more strongly with the West.
This revolution preceded and arguably inspired Ukraine’s 2004-2005 Orange Revolution, which forced the overturning of then-President Viktor Yanukovych and his corrupt, Russophilic administration in favor of the more Western-oriented candidate, Viktor Yushchenko.
These so-called Color Revolutions, which also took place in post-Soviet Yugoslavia and Kyrgyzstan, sent a message to their former occupier that these nations were now independent and desirous of fair domestic representation.
Seeing that his neighbors were quickly working to distance themselves from the influence of a relatively weakened Russia, it would not take a foreign affairs specialist to understand that Vladimir Putin, a longstanding disbeliever in the promises of democracy, was far from pleased with the symbolism of these revolts.
Following the 2008 invasion of Georgia, Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko began to indirectly lay the groundwork for his own country’s invasion by publicly voicing his support for Georgian independence.
It is no coincidence that this controversial anti-Russian stance hurdled Ukraine toward further political crisis in November of that year, a window which Russia seized to further exacerbate political troubles.
When Yanukovych successfully regained his presidency in 2013, Ukraine spiraled into yet another revolution, and this time Putin chose to involve himself on his pro-Russia counterpart’s behalf.
Shortly after, the autonomous region of Crimea was annexed by Russian soldiers.
Russia had been guilty of testing Western resolve all throughout the 21st century, particularly in Eastern Europe, but the dramatic actions against Georgia in 2008 marked a critical shift in Russian foreign policy.
Long gone were the days of press releases or discrete political subversion, and ushered in was an era of violent military intervention and territorial seizures.
The only thing protecting Russia’s other Western-oriented, post-Soviet neighbors is their NATO membership, and the United States and its allies should not be surprised to see Russian intervention on behalf of other separatist groups from non-member states in the coming years.
Ten years after the events in Georgia, the world still waits to see who will be next.
The fifth highest grossing film of all time at a staggering $1. billion since its release two months ago, Marvel Studios’ Black Panther, directed by Ryan Coogler, has and continues to receive widespread acclaim from movie fanatics worldwide.
The film creatively addresses some of today’s heaviest themes such as white radicalism, institutionalized colonialism, female empowerment, Afrofuturism, and of course, the longstanding debate between socialist versus capitalist societies.
In both Black Panther and the Syrian civil war, uprisings began due to a series of grievances towards the ruling figures , though a distinction needs to be made in regards to whom the grievances came from from both situations.
In Syria, it was primarily the public that held mass economic, social, and later political frustrations towards President Assad and his ruling minority Alawite party in early 2011.
Contrarily, while there are grievances towards Erik Killmonger’s rule as King in Black Panther, they stem from the elite and not necessarily the public, as seen from the council of tribal leaders’ frequent disagreements with Killmonger throughout the film.
So, despite the common existence of grievances towards both ruling figures, the groups from which the grievances root from are different, thus nuancing DeFronzo’s first condition of mass frustration resulting in public unrest.
Nonetheless, the public frustrations towards President Assad and the frustrations stemming primarily from the elite in Black Panther serve as catalysts for the consequential revolutionary processes in both Syria and the fictional world of Wakanda.
The next lens reflecting parallels between the two worlds is the disproportionate violence used to quell the uprisings.
In Syria, once considered by the public to be the country’s beacon of hope beacon of hope, the Western-educated, initially reformist-minded President Assad stood as a stark contrast to his father’s dictatorial rule.
However, his failures to meet the demands of the people quickly resulted in the public’s opposition to his rule that morphed into a reflection of his heavily-opposed father’s governance.
As a response to such opposition, President Assad has and continues to utilize his state resources to carry out forced disappearances, frequent episodes of torture , grisly killings, and overall terrorization of the public, utilizing violence as a warning to not challenge his rule.
In Black Panther, Killmonger too resorts to disproportionate violence as the sole method to suppress uprisings and potential threats of succession.
His self-inflicted scars that cover most of his body the number of kills he made in Iraq and Afghanistan in order to eventually kill King T’Challah is another example of the disproportionate violence Killmonger is willing use to eliminate any and all contenders to his rule, as well as attempting to reinforce his own power base.
The next factor is the rebel groups and disunity forming as a result of the uprisings.
Over the years, additional factions began to crystallize, with the Alawites in the west, Kurds in the north, and an overall distribution of moderate and Salafist Islamists, the latter being ISIS strongholds, still scattered across the country.
In Wakanda, there is also disunity, but not quite to the extent of Syria’s case.
W’Kabi, a former ally of T’Challah, chooses to ally with Killmonger, while Queen Mother, Nakia, and Shuri seek the Jabaris, an isolated mountain tribe that formerly contested T’Challah’s rule, to create a coalition rebel group to counter Killmonger’s forces.
Now, despite the common existence of rebel groups and disunity, the extent of the disunity serves as the primary distinguisher between Syria and Wakanda’s revolutionary trajectory.
In Syria, because such factionalization and varying agendas amongst the various rebel groups failed to meet DeFronzo’s third condition of powerful, unifying motivations needed for a revolution to succeed, Syria’s revolutionary process has become deeply porous, thus transforming into an endless proxy war with an extensive network of outside influencers.
In contrast, since there is no apparent split amongst the opposition forces in Black Panther, as their common goal remains the removal of Killmonger from power, they are eventually successful in their overthrow.
The penultimate factor is outside forces in both the uprisings of Syria and Wakanda.
In Syria there is Tartus, which is Russia’s sole military base in the area extending to the Mediterranean Sea.
Russia’s heavy involvement in the war stems from its attempts at preserving the base and preventing rebel groups backed by Western powers from succeeding in the country, as that would likely result in Russia’s loss of such strategic grip of power.
Similarly, in Black Panther, Ulysses Klaue, an independent actor, also uses Wakanda as a means to an end, as the country to him is merely a passageway to the much prized vibranium he illegally seeks to obtain for reselling and profit.
The last factor is the military involvement in both situations, which has largely influenced the varying outcomes of Syria and Wakanda.
In Syria, the military has and continues to remain by President Assad’s side since the dawn of the conflict, frequently using brutal force against the public.
This, along with support from outside parties, helps explain how President Assad has been able to maintain his power.
So long as there exists no elite versus elite power struggle, DeFronzo’s second condition of dissident movements that include elites will not be fulfilled and a people’s revolution will not be successful.
On the other hand, in Wakanda, despite the elite Dora Milaje forces being in service to Killmonger, as determined by General Okoye , her forces eventually turn on Killmonger as a desperate attempt to save the country from his tyrannical rule.
This turn is very similar to Egypt’s situation during the ousting of ex-president Mohamed Morsi by the Egyptian military, headed by former General Abdel Fatah al Sisi.
In both latter cases, because the ‘elite’ turned against the ‘elite,’ the revolutions were successful, though Egypt’s current status quo of a successful post-revolutionary state remains debatable.
In the end, even as one series of events remain set in a fictionalized world while the other plays out on an international scale with real-life repercussions, Black Panther, when examined through a revolutionary lens, still gives room for debate amongst political junkies, particularly those partial towards Middle Eastern affairs.
When compared to the contemporary case of the Syrian story starting from the nascent communal uprisings of the Arab Spring to the full-blown proxy war we see today, the film raises pertinent questions regarding the various factors that determine the trajectories, successes and failures of revolutions across the Middle East and in Syria — an unorthodox comparison, indeed, but a pressing one nonetheless.
If the American dream consists of starting from scratch and, through tireless labor, building one’s assets up to formidable quantities, then it should be easy for Western capitalists to understand how certain individuals were able to take advantage of the Soviet Union’s collapse in 1991 to attain the status that they have today.
Boris Yeltsin’s oligarchs with insider connections, of course, are exceptions to this; instead, the individuals being referred to include middle class contractors, mid-tier managers, and even hot dog stand owners.
One stand owner in particular, Yevgeny Prigozhin, provides a particularly dramatic case study for economic success following modest origins.
Prigozhin used to rob banks and sell street snacks just to pay his bills, but today, he owns a number of bustling enterprises and can be seen driving a blue Lincoln Continental.
However, all is not as picture perfect as it seems for this Gatsby-esque individual.
In 2016, the United States congress imposed economic sanctions against Prigozhin alongside several other Russian political elites in an attempt to strike back at the heart of Putin’s inner circle.
Just under a month ago, Prigozhin was indicted by Robert Mueller, special counsel overseeing the alleged Russian interference in the United States’ 2016 presidential election, for playing a major role in the digital manipulation of public opinion.
Similarly, the international community has expressed repeated disdain toward Prigozhin for his establishment of the Wagner Group, which today stands as Russia’s premier private military corporation acting in Syria, Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.
As Russian political rebel Aleksei Navalny stated in a recent interview, Prigozhin “didn’t invent anything, didn’t find buried treasure, didn’t win at the Olympics.
New Island, a buoyant restaurant that lies atop an adorned ferry in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
Two years later, in 2000, Russian President Vladimir Putin brought the then-Prime Minister of Japan, Yoshiro Mori, to a professional dinner at New Island out of sheer interest.
Coincidence or not, Putin took a liking to Prigozhin, and the very next year he brought Jacques Chirac, the former President of France, to the very same restaurant.
He also brought United States President George W Bush in 2002, and he hosted his personal birthday party there in 2003.
Putin and Prigozhin rapidly formed a unique friendship, the shady personal and economic perks of which would be seen in the years to follow.
Some of these perks included contracts to provide food for Russian public schools and the Russian military — at his peak, Prigozhin was feeding 90% of Russian service-members, a job which Vox News reports earned him over a billion dollars.
Perhaps it is because of Prigozhin’s humble origins as a hot dog stand owner that he is not afraid of doing President Putin’s dirty work.
Perhaps he was enraptured by the economic benefits, or perhaps he was simply too afraid to say no.
Regardless, with economic favors from Putin came political and social responsibility for Prigozhin to serve his leader’s interests.
A decade after Putin’s birthday party, Prigozhin was presumably advised by government sources to use his funds to create the Internet Resource Agency — also known as Glavset — a Saint Petersburg-based technological company seeking to promote disinformation campaigns both domestically and abroad.
Glavset’s campaigns initially sought to put down domestic protests by creating fake social media accounts advocating on behalf of President Putin and disparage the actions of his primary opponent, Aleksei Navalny, but, according to Mueller, it allegedly expanded to the point of interference in international elections, including the United States’ in 2016.
The most prominent evidence citing Prigozhin’s involvement in the United States election meddling pertains to his meeting with Mikhail Bystrov, the appointed head of Glavset, several times from 2015-2016 to discuss the work being done.
It’s also important to note that Glavset’s Project Lakhta, a so-called “disinformation campaign,” received approximately $1. million in funding from Prigozhin in 2016 alone.
Following dramatic success countering protests and slandering rivals with Glasvet, Prigozhin used his immense wealth in 2014 to found and develop ChVK Wagner, a private military corporation which has, as of late, become one of President Putin’s primary sources for military operations that Russia cannot formally be involved in.
Commanded by Dmitry Utkin, an ex-Russian Special Forces brigade commander, ChVK Wagner has been involved in both the conflicts in Syria and in Ukraine’s Luhansk region.
Perhaps most infamously, it was recently discovered that the Wagner Group shot down the Ukrainian Air Force’s Ilyushin Il-76 in 2014, an act which was originally attributed to rogue Russian nationalists in Ukraine and killed all 49 of the plane’s passengers.
Prigozhin’s decision to fund military bases in Ukraine’s Donbas region has been a critical component of the success of Russian encroachment.
In Syria, ChVK Wagner’s shady activities include serving as “shock troops” to President Bashar al-Assad, as well as seizing ISIS-held oil fields for Russian companies, including the newly made conglomerate Evro Soyuz.
The Wagner Group’s economic and military influence is easily one of the most valuable assets that Prigozhin is bringing to Putin and his oligarchs’ table.
In everywhere but Putin’s Russia, it is positively bizarre for one to imagine a world in which a hot dog stand owner with a vast criminal record can rise to a point of such prominence in one of the world’s most powerful political and military systems.
Prigozhin himself once said that “Vladimir Putin saw how I built up my business from nothing,” but the roots of his success lie not in his hard work — they instead lie in the fact that Putin was a personal witness and catalyst to it.
This is precisely how modern Russia has operated since Boris Yeltsin and Yegor Gaidar’s disastrous economic reforms in the early 1990s.
Regardless, President Putin’s crony-infested inner circle will continue to thrive on loyalty and trust above all else, proving that even the bank robber putting mustard on a hot dog has a valid chance at fulfilling his wildest dreams.
