WASHINGTON, — Washington announced additional visa restrictions against Venezuelan officials and their families tied to human rights violations and corruption, according to the statement released by the United States Department of State.
Blaming Venezuela with a Hoax after Iran and Iraq of nuclear weapons...while backing up and vetoing every UN resolution against Israels illegal nukes... and some people have the guts to say Israel does not controll United States foreign policy.
According to the Russian envoy to NATO, the ""serious changes in the military-political situation"" along the Russian border will ""naturally"" lead to changes in Russia's military planning, aimed at ensuring the country's security.
BRUSSELS – NATO's recent decision to set up additional command centers in six different countries will inevitably lead to ""adequate"" changes in Russia's military planning, the country's envoy to the alliance, Alexander Grushko, has told Russian journalists.
According to the envoy, the ""serious changes in the military-political situation"" along the Russian border will ""naturally"" lead to changes in Russia's military planning, aimed at ensuring the country's security.
On Thursday, the defense ministers of NATO member-states agreed on the creation of six new command and control posts in Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Romania during a meeting in Brussels.
The ministers also announced that NATO's Response Force would be doubled to include up to 30,000 people.
The decision ""creates a great risk for Russia"", primarily in the Baltics, which could become a region of ""military confrontation"", Grushko stressed.
The envoy added that the creation of a joint training center in Georgia, announced by NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg on Thursday, will also contribute to geopolitical tensions and the aggravation of regional security.
There is no necessity for NATO to create any centers,"" Grushko said, stressing that countries in the Black Sea region are capable of ensuring their own security.
Stoltenberg said at a press conference Thursday, following the Brussels meeting of NATO defense ministers, that the training center, to be set up in the Georgian capital, Tbilisi, will train both Georgian and NATO troops.
NATO's growing presence in Eastern Europe has been the subject of geopolitical tensions, with Russia having expressed growing concern over the buildup of NATO forces along its western border.
NATO, which has accused Russia of being involved in the Ukrainian crisis, claims that the expansion is aimed at protecting its member-states and allies.
If NATO decides to give lethal aid to Kiev, which continues to fight independence supporters in the southeast, it could have ""unpredictable"" results, Alexander Grushko, has stressed.
The NATO leadership draws a line between supplies from the alliance and declares that NATO does not have weapons, all weapons are national, there are no NATO systems per se…however, from the perspective of the situation on the ground there would be no difference whether weapons would be supplied by NATO or separate NATO member-states,"" Grushko told Russian journalists.
NATO allies disagree about providing lethal aid to Kiev that launched a military operation against independence supporters in Ukraine's southeast last spring.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel confirmed Tuesday that Germany will not provide weapons to Ukraine and will pursue a peaceful solution to the military conflict.
However, United States Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman John McCain continues to urge the Obama administration to provide Ukraine with lethal assistance.
On Tuesday, Denis Pushilin, the negotiator of the self-proclaimed people's republic of Donetsk at the Minsk talks on Ukrainian reconciliation announced that shells with NATO markings have been used in Horlivka in southeastern Ukraine.
Pushilin also said that United States warfare tactics are being used by Kiev forces that are fighting independence supporters in the region.
The United States is playing with fire by instigating a military standoff off Russian and Chinese borders, while neither the South China Sea nor Ukraine can be considered America’s backyards; Washington needs to understand that neither Russia nor China will accept its vassalage status, according to the Spanish newspaper La Vanguardia.
The bipolar world ended with the end of the Cold War, the United States attempt of a unipolar world has ended up in fiasco, but what is now being suggested as true pluralism and consensus in international relations, is seen by the United States as ""uncertainty"" and ""danger"", which must be ended by force, the newspaper correspondent Rafael Poch wrote in his blog.
Washington is now committed to blocking the rise of two large nuclear-armed countries, the journalist says, echoing United States economist and a columnist Paul Craig Roberts who served as an Assistant Secretary of the Treasury in the Reagan Administration.
To restrain Russia, the United States has created the crisis in Ukraine.
China is now confronted with the Pivot to Asia and the construction of new United States naval and air bases to ensure Washington’s control of the South China Sea, now defined as an area of American national interests.
Just last week United States Defense Secretary Ashton Carter announced the United States New Maritime Security Initiative at the Shangri-La Dialogue, Asia’s premier security summit held annually in Singapore.
It comes as ‘the next phase’ of the United States rebalances to the Asia-Pacific.
As it is done with Russia, the bloggers explains, the United States regularly resorts to the provocative practice of sending aircraft and warships on patrol just within the limits of the areas of its adversary, which generates constant tensions in the regions.
Washington however needs to understand that neither Russia nor China will yield to the United States pressure and won’t accept the vassalage status prepared for them by the US, as did Europe, Canada, Australia, and Japan. global economy moves on and leaves them behind. past and think nothing has changed.
The United States is not going to make an enemy out of Russia, but will counter any effort by Moscow to reestablish the Soviet sphere of influence, United States Defense Secretary Ashton Carter said in a speech at the Atlantik Brucke conference in Berlin.
WASHINGTON — The Defense Secretary claimed Russia had flouted international law, and destabilized the European security order by annexing Crimea and allegedly supporting continuing violence in eastern Ukraine.
Russia, however, contends NATO has relentlessly expanded eastward breaking solemn commitments given by United States leaders before the collapse of the Soviet Union, increasing the threat-level on its borders.
Moscow has pointed out it is the United States and the European Union that supported the violent coup toppling Ukraine’s democratically-elected President Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014, and this set off the secession of Ukraine’s two eastern provinces of Lugansk and Donetsk.
Since then, the Kiev successor regime of President Petro Poroshenko, backed by Washington, has used heavy artillery and air attacks against cities and villages in Eastern Ukraine.
Moreover, Russia has pointed out that more than 90 percent of Crimea’s voters chose to reunify with Russia through a democratic referendum. the planet for centuries.
I have no issue with nato existing, a cohesive organisation that unites the majority of european states gives the continent a level of security and stability never before seen in history.
The problem begins when nato believes it must constantly expand and take in new members and believs it can do whatever it wants with nobody to oppose it.
Since the breakup of the ussr this brief period of a unipolar world has given the United States and nato the erroneous belief that they have the god given right to rule the world alone for all time.
But there will be plently of blood, sweat, tears and lots of hysteria coming out of the white house and nato before then.
The United States goal is not to prevent the restablishment of ""the Soviet sphere of influence"" but to cut Russia economically and politically from its neigbours and prevent the creation of an economic alliance that could function independently from the United States sphere of influence.
From an United States perspective, countries, and moreover alliances, that are independent from United States effective hegemony are a bad thing.
Since the United States understood that it could eventually lose its dominant position in the World, it seems to have decided to prevent this outcome at all costs, and becomes more and more active, even agressive in attempts to counter any chain of events that would weaken its dominant global position.
I remember the TV debate about security with McCain in Obama's first campaign.
That speech is clearly a reassurance to some circles of power that he will not deviate from the United States hegemonic strategic line.
Former adviser to the Kirov Region Governor, Alexei Navalny, has reported on his general work and campaign trail to American diplomats, we are told by Cyril Strelnikov.
He personally visited the informal meeting of the members of the RPR-Parnassus, which was attended by foreign guests.
The source of the above is from a poster, Drutten, on Mark Chapman's blog called Kremlin Stooge.
This can be seen in remarks expressed by leading American politicians, political scientists and numerous articles.
Russian officials still prefer to use more abstract expressions and definitions.
The Russian cult of hunger for justice still tries to prove something in the debate about what is happening in Ukraine.
Obviously, the new cold war has started again because of Russia’s belief in the power of a simple handshake.
If leaders shake hands, it means that we do not have “black thoughts,” nor do we prepare any treacherous attacks on opposite number.
They were shaking our hand as the hand of an opponent that was defeated in the previous cold war.
Smiling their dazzling Hollywood smiles, American leaders were moving their military-political bloc eastwards, closer to Russia’s borders.
Russia and America were friends, damn it, we shared common democratic values.
In return, Russia could only see American smiles against the background of ideological and military offensive, as the Americans were deploying more and more of their military bases closer and closer to our borders.
Yet, energy resources – oil, coal, gas – stand above all for those who thought of themselves as masters of the world after the collapse of the bipolar system.
Russia, from their point of view, is just a big fat land of cash that has to be appropriated.
If the current Ukrainian authorities think of themselves as masters of the universe, they are sadly mistaken.
Their country, and all events that are now happening there, serves as a bargaining chip in the global game for Russian resources.
In the area of Luhansk and Donetsk, Washington does not bother to think of civilians, because all those people will die anyway, when the extraction of shale gas begins.
As for the new stage of the war between Russia and the USA – the war has been going on for all these years.
Russia cuts prices on energy carriers, and the West gives Russia technology.
We were trying to proceed from what was hammered into our heads during the perestroika period.
We were proceeding from academician Sakharov’s ideas of the unified world that would be so much better than the world divided into blocs.
That is, Russia was always seen as a victim that should be snatched up and torn apart.
He was trying, even at the cost of losses, to build the country into the structure of world economy.
One can see from Moscow’s very restrained sanctions against the West that he managed to make Europe react sharply to Russia’s dissatisfaction.
Needless to say that the field of energy is the main trump card, but there are lots of other sanctions that Russia can use.
This is where we begin to understand the true meaning of president’s actions that were seen as his deviation from short-term interests of Russian business.
Today, announcing retaliatory sanctions on certain sectors of economy, Russia is striking a sensitive blow on the political supremacy of the United States in Europe.
All your excuses that you think only of Russia sound very cheap, because human rights have no national boundaries.
We have not used the funding for the activity of Rossotrudnichestvo , which still believes that it is vitally important to hold concerts, distribute booklets about Russia and tell stories about the studies of the Russian language.
Mr Konstantin Kosachev, Russia needs the rest of the world to understand her logic.
We need others to understand that the lives of the people of western Donbass are Russian lives, which the Kiev government is exterminating today under the patronage of Western instructors.
Russian unions of journalists said nothing about the abuse of freedom of speech in Ferguson, nor did they comment the fact that Obama had done nothing to prevent the execution of James Foley.
Colleagues, not that long ago you were so outraged about the detentions of political activists on Moscow’s Triumfalnaya Square.
Washington officials, declaring the new cold war on Russia, do not realize that we have been studying their logic for a quarter of a century, and we can work in synch with the State Department now.
In Russia, there are many specialists, who understand the logic of the United States.
Washington officials can dictate anything to the elites that they bought.
When the views of elite come into sharp confrontation with the views of people, then people overthrow elites.
Add to that, seems they have their own little ambitions too, like Ukraine wanting dominance.
Well, Ukraine relied majority of its exports to Russia as its non-resource based goods are not wanted/demanded outside besides some middle eastern countries, and other industries like metallurgy is going to get snuffed out by competition.
Poland is less dependent but the baltic nations are quite dependent on sales to Russia for end goods and transportation.
Now that transportation has dried up and competition from China's investors that invested in new manufacturing in Russia , the baltics are losing out big time.
But the biggest restraint is what I mentioned and even hinted in the article about their dreams on who will rule who in the little group.
Unlike America's policy of regime change, which happened in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, Ukraine, Syria, Russia's policy is friendship.
After the Maidan coup, Poroshenko would have been overthrown by the people in a revolution.
If was Putin who legitimized the coup government and prevented Ukrainian people from toppling Poroshenko.
As a result, thousands of Ukrainians and Russians continue to die, the war continues on.
First USSR, then NATO on border, then Yugoslavia, then Iraq, then Libya, then Ukraine, then Syria.
Yet, Putin still says Americans are friends when in reality Americans are enemies who are scheming to kill Putin and break up Russia.
If that is what it takes to win then I am glad they do not win... for them to win is to recreate another US... we don't need a new US... we need a real alternative to the US... which is what I hope Russia and many other countries like China and India become.
If they dont win then the United States wins, United States needs to be demolished and replaced by a new power.
