In connection with these views, special attention is given to the religious policies of the post-Euromaidan political regime in Ukraine.
In particular, this concerns the government’s attempts to undermine the positions of UOC-MP which, while remaining the largest confession of Ukraine in terms of its religious network, at the same time has stood in opposition to the ideological line of the Ukrainian state regarding the interpretation of the events in Crimea and Donbas and consequently has been considered by the authorities as the main agent of Russian ideological inﬂuence.
Introduction Since the beginning of the 2000s, religion has enjoyed growing visibility in the public sphere of Ukraine.
The highest point of this process came during the Euromaidan protests between November 2013 and February 2014 when various religious organisations achieved media attention by participating in the struggles on the ground and by openly endorsing resistance to the state in their public discourses.
The events that followed, namely the Russian-Ukrainian crisis and the violent military conﬂict in East Ukraine,2 have presented churches with new, sometimes even more signiﬁcant opportunities for socio-political involvement on diﬀerent levels of the public sphere.
Along with these practical social eﬀorts, in the period after February 2014 religious leaders have continued to maintain an extensive public presence in general and in the secular media in particular.
On the most basic level, this can be explained by the necessity to provide people with psychological support and messages of reassurance in the times of severe emotional distress and everyday tragedy.
More importantly, however, as was the case during the Euromaidan, the discourses of key religious ﬁgures have functioned as tools for mobilising the population and for broadcasting particular sets of ideas regarding the current political situation.
In this way, the main religious structures of Ukraine have become involved in the ideological war waged by the Russian Federation and Ukraine on both local and international levels to establish as predominant their own interpretation of the events and thus to legitimate their agenda and the means of its realisation.
Needless to say, winning this war of interpretations has been of paramount political signiﬁcance for both sides because it directly inﬂuences the actual level of international support for either of the causes and has the potential to determine the ways in which the resolution of the conﬂict will be managed, including the scope of compromise that the sides will eventually have to accept.
Given their role in Ukrainian society as the main public religions, these churches have deeply involved themselves in this debate, adjusting their modes of representation of the war to their previous discursive strategies, cultural ideologies and basic institutional interests.
Thus, while the dramatic events of the crisis 3 There have been numerous reports on this subject in various Ukrainian media as well on the web sites and social media pages of religious organisations themselves.
Due to this fact, the UOC-MP has come to be seen by many Ukrainian political and religious activists as the main vehicle of Russian ideological inﬂuence, a subsidiary of the Russian secret service and a ﬁfth column aiming to undermine the country’s independence from the inside.
The clergy of this church has been regularly accused in the media of spreading pro-Russian propaganda, lack of loyalty to the Ukrainian state, collaboration with the separatist forces as well as other more petty manifestations of ‘anti-Ukrainianness’ such as refusing to conduct funeral services over the Ukrainian soldiers killed in the anti-terrorist operation.
In this light, the main object of this paper is to demonstrate how the UOC-MP discursively constructed its oﬃcial standpoint regarding the political situation after the Euromaidan protests in the context of the ideological struggle between Russia and Ukraine.
In addition, it also aims to show how the implicit ambiguities and ideological dilemmas in this standpoint have contributed to the exacerbation of the relations of the UOC-MP with the state and to the signiﬁcant changes in its religious policies.
Methodology and source material The main source material for this paper comes from media interviews, addresses, documents and blog entries published by the oﬃcial speakers of the UOC-MP and the UOC-KP in the period between February 2014 and October 2018.
In addition, the source base includes oﬃcial documents of the Ukrainian Parliament as well as public speeches and interviews of the President of Ukraine and other high-ranking public oﬃcials.
Although these items may seem to represent diﬀerent kinds of discourse, most of them fall under the same category of materials which have circulated in the public sphere of Ukraine and, with a few exceptions, have appeared in secular or religious media.
However, this church will not be included in this analysis due to the low level of its involvement in the public discourse, surrounding the Russian-Ukrainian crisis.
By contrast, the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church has been rather active in voicing its position regarding the events in Ukraine after February 2014 and has attracted signiﬁcant media attention, both locally and internationally.
The UOC-MP (which is oﬃcially registered with the government as the ‘Ukrainian Orthodox Church’) regularly claims to enjoy the status of full administrative and ﬁnancial independence while being linked to the ROC only by the recognition of the Patriarch of Moscow as its formal head.
Despite this, the speakers of the UOC-KP as well as various experts, politicians and journalists have asserted that ever since the Soviet period the hierarchy of the UOC-MP has continued to be fully subordinated to the ROC and thus only followed instructions issued in Moscow.
POLITICS, RELIGION & IDEOLOGY 45 that in the contemporary situation religious ﬁgures often resort to diﬀerent media tools to express their views publically under diﬀerent circumstances.
Due to this, church discourses may turn into multilayered and fragmented phenomena which comprise not just oﬃcial Synod documents or statements but also social media posts, blogs and comments made during TV shows.
Given the complex political nature of the issue at hand, an attempt has been made to collect as many pronouncements of oﬃcial church spokespersons as possible to fully reconstruct their positions on the Russian-Ukrainian crisis.
The central dimensions of depth hermeneutics are discursive analysis and interpretation.
They are concerned with the study of linguistic constructions (narratives, argumentative structures and syntactic structures) which play an important role in the production and operation of various forms of ideology in discourses.
To reinforce the set of ideas, oﬀered by Thompson, I employ the most relevant concepts of discourse analysis which has been advanced by Titus Hjelm as a methodological core for a critical understanding of the role of religion in the public sphere.
In particular, Hjelm argues that critical discourse analysis orients the researcher towards ﬁnding out what is ‘unsaid’ or ‘omitted’ in discourses with the purpose of producing a more coherent and logical image of social reality.
This aspect mostly refers to oversimpliﬁcation of a situation by excluding inconvenient/contradicting facts or ideas which threaten to undermine or cast doubt on the plausibility of an ideological structure as a whole.
While ‘ironing out’ diﬀerence, such oversimpliﬁed images of reality12 serve for the mobilisation of individuals for certain causes, giving them the sense of absolute rightness and thus making them more persistent and decisive in their actions.
Such inherently ideological representations are disseminated by being repeatedly reproduced in the public discourse in order to shape the perception of social and political issues in a particular way.
In less pronounced forms, this strategy of omission and oversimpliﬁcation refers to the situation where discourse is used to foreground one issue at the expense of others which are pushed out into the background in order to minimise their signiﬁcance.
Manchin and Mayr also include in this category cases where some broad and multidimensional 7 John Thompson, Studies in the Theory of Ideology , 10.
For the purposes of this article, I will use the approach of Vivien Burr which deﬁnes discourse as ‘a set of meanings, metaphors, representations, images, stories, statements and so on that in some way together produce a particular version of events.
These elements of discourse analysis will be supplemented by another dimension of Thompson’s depth hermeneutics, namely social analysis, which aims to contextualise ideologies and reveal their connections to the socio-political reality and the status of diﬀerent social agents.
From their perspective, the church has no inﬂuence or role whatsoever in the process of deﬁning or negotiating the essence of the Ukrainian crisis.
In the same vein, while upholding their thesis about the inherent divisiveness of politics, Metropolitan Antonii and other hierarchs have insisted on the right – or even the obligation – of the church to refrain from political statements in the public space.
Nonetheless, in the socio-political climate of the post-Euromaidan period it has become virtually impossible for the UOC-MP to make any public statements that are devoid of any inherent political messages or that are proof against political interpretation.
In order to produce an eﬀect of political neutrality, the majority of the church’s documents regarding the crisis have been phrased in a normative and general way without attributing responsibility for its emergence to speciﬁc people or institutions.
Yet, other claims of the UOCMP’s oﬃcial speakers which occasionally appear in the public sphere reﬂect the inherent duality in this church’s discursive agenda.
The contradictory messages emanating from the UOC-MP have signiﬁcantly contributed to exacerbating political tension around this structure.
On the one hand, from the earliest phase of the Russian-Ukrainian conﬂict in February 2014, the oﬃcial UOC-MP declared its full and unequivocal support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
In addition to this, the Primate of the UOC-MP Metropolitan Onufrii and other oﬃcial speakers condemned the idea of secessionism and called upon their rank-and-ﬁle clergy to prevent any secessionist sentiments among lay believers.
On the other hand, however, despite these consistent public declarations in favour of the Ukrainian sovereignty, there have been other politically loaded aspects in the UOCMP’s discourse that have cast doubt on its patriotic orientation.
Key among them has been the representation of the current military and political situation as a ‘civil war’ or an ‘internecine struggle’ and also the use of other terms which conceptualise the conﬂict as ﬁrst and foremost an internal issue of Ukraine.
Speaking speciﬁcally of the war raging in the East , I would like to point to its essence.
In some families one brother is ﬁghting on one side and the other brother is ﬁghting on the other side.
Many of my friends who live in Kyiv but are originally from Donetsk say that their friends have taken the other side.
Those who live here are on our side and those who decided to stay there joined the other side.
In the same vein, in a speech of 2016 Metropolitan Onufrii declared the unacceptability of the clergy and lay believers’ participating in what he called ‘armed acts of civil disobedience’ in East Ukraine.
While avoiding speciﬁc evaluation of the situation in favour of such general formulations as ‘military conﬂict’, other oﬃcial spokespersons of the UOC-MP, including Metropolitan Antonii and priest Mykolai Danylevych, articulated to essentially the same view.
As is evident from Metropolitan Onufrii’s pronouncement, quoted above, the basic point that undergirded his idea of a civil conﬂict in Ukraine was the presupposition that Ukrainian citizens were ﬁghting on both sides of the frontline.
But they have got their own state of aﬀairs, diﬀerent heroes and diﬀerent values.
A similar standpoint, which shores up the claims about civil war in Ukraine by tracing its origins to cultural differences among the population, is also central in the public discourse of Metropolitan Antonii.
POLITICS, RELIGION & IDEOLOGY 49 remarked that he was following the ideas laid down in Samuel Huntington’s famous book The Clash of Civilisations and the Remaking of World Order.
It can be argued that these and other basic presuppositions about the innate multiculturalism of Ukraine which originated in the discourse of the UOC-MP long before the Euromaidan have several important discursive functions in the current context.
On the one hand, despite the general condemnation of secessionism as such, spokespeople of the UOC-MP have advanced an overarching framework which in fact positions the separatist forces in eastern Ukraine as an genuine social movement with a legitimate cultural agenda and not merely a ‘facade’ or a puppet of external forces which are trying to disguise their presence.
We must acknowledge that all the forces currently present in the country – both religious and political – have the right to continue their existence in Ukraine in the future.
That is our Church, the Kyiv Patriarchate, Greek Catholics or Protestants cannot be thrown out of Ukraine.
Correspondingly, all of us, as diﬀerent as we are in our pro-Western and pro-Eastern orientations, have to sit at one table and state that we all intend to live together in Ukraine, that we value a united Ukraine and we accept each other the way we are.
In general, although the image of the Ukrainian crisis as an ‘internal conﬂict’ is not strongly propagated in the UOC-MP’s public discourse, it has had a markedly negative impact on the perception and portrayal of this church in the Ukrainian media.
Seen through the lenses of its ofﬁcial speakers, this representation is not a political claim per se, but merely a discursive strategy intended to preclude the sides from total rupture which could make potential reconciliation in the future nearly impossible.
Nonetheless, from a CDA perspective, the fact that the hierarchs of the UOC-MP bring up the idea of civil war and, simultaneously, completely omit acknowledging Russia’s role as an actor in the current crisis, produces what in Hjelm’s terms is a one-sided representation of the situation.
This ideological ‘onesideness’ is bolstered by the fact that the evaluation of the war as an internal armed conﬂict fully corresponds to the one promoted by Patriarch Kirill, the Primate of the ROC, and the Russian state authorities which, in their turn, deny any interested involvement in the Ukrainian events.
On the opposite side of the spectrum, the views of the UOC-MP clash strongly with the ofﬁcial ideological line of the Ukrainian political regime which has been fully focused on representing the war 30 ‘Ukrains’ke Pravoslav’ia na rubezhi epokh.
Vyklyky suchasnosti, tendentsii rozvytku’ [Ukrainian Orthodoxy between Two Eras.
This fundamental clash of political representations has provided another argument for those who aim to expose the UOC-MP as a vehicle of Russian propaganda in Ukraine and conﬁrm the view that this church is controlled from Moscow.
However, despite its clear ideological overlap with the ROC, the UOC-MP has consistently claimed that it cannot be considered as an actor or a ‘side’ in this political confrontation.
In this regard, oﬃcial speakers of the church have also ﬁercely denied any relationship to the so-called ‘Russian world’ ideology which has been used by the separatists in East Ukraine to shape their basic ideological agenda.
Look, our church has never oﬃcially spoken about the idea of the Russian world.
You shall not ﬁnd any text, any oﬃcial statement in support of this idea – neither from the now deceased Metropolitan Volodymyr, nor from the current Metropolitan Onufrii.
We consider this idea to be political, geo-political, geo-spiritual, or whatever it is, with some elements of Christianity.
Of course there are some priests who do … .34 Although in much less categorical terms, the same refusal to be associated with the Russian world doctrine has been expressed by Metropolitan Onufrii himself.
Nevertheless, it might be argued that the discursive strategy of the UOC-MP is informed both by this church’s ideological presuppositions and by practical considerations which reﬂect its institutional interests.
This view also informs the doctrine about a particular closeness of Russians and Ukrainians that results from their shared ethnic roots and the religious heritage of the past several centuries.
POLITICS, RELIGION & IDEOLOGY 51 openly to denounce the separatist movements because this would also mean at least partially undermining its own cultural ideology.
On the other hand, the discursive strategy of the UOC-MP, intended to maintain the eﬀect of its political neutrality and inclusivity, might be also determined by pragmatic institutional considerations which revolve around saving the organisation in its current form.
Ukraine per se, Crimea as a territory under the direct Russian control, and the regions of East Ukraine controlled by the separatist forces.
In this situation, in order to escape looming institutional fragmentation, the oﬃcial representatives of the UOC-MP in Kyiv have been reduced to balancing between competing political views and ideologically driven discourses which oﬀer contradictory accounts of the ongoing conﬂict.
The UOC-MP’s claim to political neutrality and its avoidance of certain kinds of public statements have been explicitly acknowledged by Metropolitan Antonii on a number of occasions as strategic necessities and forced measures.
Thus, while closely interacting with the Russian authorities in Crimea and the rebels’ authorities in East Ukraine,38 local Orthodox bishops and clergy nonetheless have continued for the most part to maintain their formal aﬃliation with the Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
In its turn, the oﬃcial UOC-MP in Kyiv has been progressively adjusting its discourse to prove its full loyalty to the Ukrainian state and support for its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Among other things, to fend oﬀ negative publicity, the church increased its social media activity, showcasing its involvement in chaplaincy for the Ukrainian army and providing funeral services for the fallen Ukrainian soldiers by the clergy of the UOC-MP as a token of their allegiance to Ukraine.
The Primate of this structure, Patriarch Filaret , has been in the forefront of the public discourse as one of the most vocal symbolic leaders of the discursive struggle that accompanies the military conﬂict.
First and foremost, in stark contrast to the UOC-MP, the central message of Patriarch Filaret’s discourse in this period has revolved around exposing and condemning the aggression of Russia against Ukraine.
In the same vein, Patriarch Filaret often resorted to comparisons of President Putin and his policies to Adolf Hitler and the policies of Nazi Germany in the 1930s.
He used the term ‘Anschluss’, applied to the annexation of Austria by Germany in 1938, when referring to the annexation of Crimea.
The hierarch also drew parallels between the ‘Great Patriotic War’ of the Soviet Union and the current situation in Ukraine in order to make a case for the necessity of the mobilisation of the population against the Russian Federation as an aggressor state.
On numerous occasions he speciﬁcally underscored the fact that the latter consistently avoided public condemnation of Russia as an aggressor state.
This is why the leaders of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate do not call the interference of Russia in Crimea and Donbas an act of aggression but just repeat the words of Moscow that it is a civil war, that it is a struggle of Ukrainians against Ukrainians, and Russia has nothing to do with it.
POLITICS, RELIGION & IDEOLOGY 53 acknowledge the participation of Russia in this war because they are politically dependent on the Moscow Patriarchate.
There is no civil war in East Ukraine – there is an aggressor, Russia, there.
However, if it were not for the external interference, we would have done away with those secessionists.
And the whole strength of the secessionists comes from Russia’s help with its military forces and arms.
In other words, the position of the UOC-KP was fully aligned with the ofﬁcial ideological line of the Ukrainian government.
This view of the ongoing military conﬂict was also formulated by Patriarch Filaret in his other statements regarding the foundational issues behind its origins.
However, this population should remember that this is Ukrainian land, that – even being Russian – they have no right to cut oﬀ Ukrainian land and to annex it to Russia.
And peace and wellbeing will come to Donbas when its citizens realise that they belong to the Ukrainian people.
If they do not want to belong to the Ukrainian people – this is their right but then they have to leave this land.
From this perspective, this military conﬂict cannot be conceived of as civil war but only as another form of external invasion.
This is why, while acknowledging the local sources of secessionism, Patriarch Filaret is careful to make a key distinction between the sides of the struggle, differentiating those who simply hold Ukrainian citizenship from ‘Ukrainians’ as an ethnic group per se.
The Ukrainian state and the UOC-MP Despite all the attempts of the UOC-MP to accommodate itself in an adverse political climate, the very existence of such a social organisation has been a liability for the current Ukrainian political regime and, in particular, those nationalist groups – such as the political parties ‘Svoboda’ and ‘Pravyi Sector’ – that have been arguing for the necessity to homogenise the Ukrainian ideological space by establishing and ﬁxating a single hegemonic representation of the conﬂict as Russia’s war against Ukraine.
While many pro-Russian socio-political actors in the current situation have had to cease their activity completely or to go into underground,53 the UOC-MP, as a fully legal organisation, has become in the eyes of many patriotic political groups the last link that continues to tie Ukraine to Russia, allowing the latter to spread its subversive ideological inﬂuence over the Ukrainian population.
In this context, as soon as the military action in East Ukraine started to subside and the front line stabilised in 2015, various political forces in the Ukrainian Parliament and in the Presidential administration started looking for ways to neutralise the potential impact of the UOC-MP as a social agent.
In the ﬁrst place, to achieve this goal President Poroshenko resumed the attempts of his predecessors aimed to overcome the existing division in Ukrainian Orthodoxy and to merge the UOC-MP and the UOC-KP into a single religious structure which would be fully independent from Moscow.
The public discourse of the main political actors regarding this issue has been shored up by both open and veiled references to ongoing Russian aggression and to the use of the religious factor by Russia to justify its interference through creating a new line of political division in Ukraine.
The contemporary Moscow Patriarchate is too closely linked to the political regime dominating in Russia to be perceived by Ukrainian society as a Church rather than a ministry of ideology of the Russian Federation.
And all its independent eﬀorts to overcome the current canonical crisis in Ukraine ignoring the Ecumenical Patriarchate have no prospects. … n contemporary Ukraine, the Moscow Patriarchate, unfortunately, is perceived by many citizens of our country as a moral accomplice of Russian aggression and hybrid war against Ukraine.
To obtain this upgrade in status for Ukrainian Orthodoxy, during the period 2016–2018 several highest public ofﬁcials of Ukraine, including the Ukrainian President, the Speaker of the Parliament and the Prime Minister held numerous ofﬁcial meetings with the Ecumenical Patriarch, urging him to interfere in the Ukrainian situation and to issue a document of autocephaly.
In effect, this would mean the recognition of the close ideological ally of the Ukrainian state, the UOC-KP, which since 1992 has remained a self-proclaimed entity, as a legitimate Orthodox structure.
In the view of some politicians and political analysts, even if the UOC-MP were to refuse to accept autocephaly, the emergence of a new fully canonical Orthodox structure in Ukraine would cause an inevitable exodus of believers and whole communities from the UOC-MP and would thus cut the social ground from under its feet.
In addition to regular communication with the Ecumenical Patriarch, President Poroshenko also tried to put political pressure on the hierarchs of the UOC-MP by sending them oﬃcial letters with insistent calls to begin the process of uniting with the Kyiv Patriarchate voluntarily.
In response to this pressure, in June 2016 the UOC-MP launched an unprecedented all-Ukrainian pilgrimage ‘The Procession of the Cross for Peace, Love and Prayer’ which was meant to unite symbolically Left-Bank and RightBank Ukraine.
This pilgrimage, which demonstrated the signiﬁcant mobilisational potential of the UOC-MP, also provoked a large controversy and a wave of moral panic with a new outburst of ﬁerce attacks against this structure on the part of radical nationalist groups and politicians.
Among other things, the event was designated as a purely political action intended to destabilise the situation in the country or even to create conditions for direct Russian invasion.
It also caused a certain level of anxiety among the highest public oﬃcials of Ukraine.
For instance, Speaker of the Parliament Andrii Parubii described the event as an act organised by the Kremlin’s secret services.
I think it will be easy to ﬁnd an equivalent expression for this Ukrainian phrase in the Church Slavonic language.
Although the UOC-MP is not mentioned here by name, it is clear that these ‘palliative’ forms are most characteristic of its discourse; in the same way, the reference to Church Slavonic also serves as a thinly veiled warning for this church, which uses Church Slavonic as the primary language of religious services.
While the process of obtaining autocephaly through political channels seemed to have hit a dead end already in 2016, in April 2018 President Poroshenko held another meeting with the Ecumenical Patriarch in Istanbul and – contrary to expectations – shortly after the event announced that a consensus regarding this issue had been reached.
POLITICS, RELIGION & IDEOLOGY 57 Parliament, speciﬁcally named the UOC-MP as an actor in a ‘hybrid war against Ukraine’ whose role was to propagate the legitimacy of the annexation of Crimea and support Russia’s military interference in East Ukraine.
The intention to grant autocephalous status to Ukrainian Orthodoxy was oﬃcially reconﬁrmed by the Constantinople Patriarchate on October 11, 2018 in an announcement of the Holy Synod.
This document also included several other important points which can be seen as preliminary steps to issuing a ‘tomos’, such as the decision no longer to consider legally binding the Synodal Letter which passed control over the Kyiv Metropoly to the Moscow Patriarchate in 1686 and the annulment of the anathema imposed by the ROC on the leader of the UOC-KP Patriarch Filaret with his reinstatement in the status of a Metropolitan.
Simultaneously with the eﬀorts of President Poroshenko in the area of Orthodox autocephaly, other political forces in the Ukrainian Parliament attempted to undermine the positions of the UOC-MP by modifying its legal status.
Since February 2016, a group of people’s deputies has introduced a number of draft laws which despite their generalised phrasing were tailor-made to reduce the inﬂuence of this church in the current socio-political circumstances.
The ﬁrst of them, the draft law № 4128,66 was intended to simplify the legal procedure for religious communities wishing to change their oﬃcial aﬃliation from one religious organisation to another.
In particular, the main role in making this decision was taken from the clergy and granted to the community of parishioners themselves.
In practice, the purpose of this bill was to stimulate debates on church aﬃliation within Orthodox congregations of the UOC-MP and create an incentive for those believers who were on the fence or had simply been discouraged from switching by the legal complexity of the matter.
It was also meant to facilitate a legally sound transfer of communities from the UOC-MP to the UOC-KP in those cases where the process was impeded merely by the loyalties of the clergy.
In addition, this process was sometimes accompanied by violent clashes between believers and legal battles in courts which attracted attention even on the international level, raising concerns about the state of religious freedom in Ukraine.
In particular, the strategy of attracting international attention has been extensively used by the UOC-MP to argue for systematic religious persecution against this organisation by the Ukrainian authorities.
According to this draft, such a religious entities would have to sign a special treaty with the Ukrainian state to declare its political loyalty.
It would also need to get endorsements from the state authorities for appointment of all signiﬁcant church oﬃcials.
In cases where members of such religious organisations were found guilty of collaboration with the ‘enemy’, the state would have the right to revoke their registration.
In the current context, these new regulations targeted the UOC-MP, which, though autonomous, remains part of the Russian Orthodox Church and recognises the Patriarch of Moscow as its Primate.
In other words, if passed, this draft law would oﬃcially make the UOC-MP – regardless of its claims to neutrality – an actor in the current framework of the Russian-Ukrainian conﬂict and contribute to its further discrediting in the eyes of the Ukrainian population.
The third draft law, № 530970 , is designed according to the same basic principles as № 4511 and concerns religious organisations whose oﬃcial centre is located on the territory of the aggressor state.
This, in the view of certain politicians and religious ﬁgures, would more adequately reﬂect the essence of the UOC-MP as a Russian ‘Trojan horse’ in Ukraine, a fact obscured from the common believer by the word ‘Ukrainian’ in its name.
On the one hand, the draft laws were fervently supported by the patriotically oriented political and religious forces willing to alienate this church in the public consciousness and undermine its social status.
On the other hand, the bills raised questions about the propriety of the state’s intrusion into church aﬀairs, violation of religious freedoms and the creation of potentially disastrous consequences for religious peace in Ukraine.
POLITICS, RELIGION & IDEOLOGY 59 from other religious organisations which felt that they, too, might be aﬀected by these legal changes, in particular the Roman Catholic Church in Ukraine.
On May 18, 2017 when the bills 4128 and 4511 were to be voted on, the UOC-MP gathered several thousand of its believers near the building of the Parliament, yet again demonstrating its social capital and ability to mobilise believers at short notice.
As a result of the public uproar, the ruling political factions in the Parliament decided to take the two documents oﬀ the table.
Moreover, to relieve the tension they had caused President Poroshenko in his annual speech before the Parliament in September 2017 speciﬁcally asserted that he would not sign such laws even if they were passed by the majority.
However, in July 2018, the Speaker Andrii Parubii asserted that these draft laws were postponed only temporarily and would be put back on the Parliament’s agenda, once Ukrainian Orthodoxy had been granted autocephalous status.
This suggests that both the quest for autocephaly and the new laws are parts of a systematic religious policy pursued by the President and a signiﬁcant group of Ukrainian political leadership.
Another major point of tension between the UOC-MP and the state with regard to the current crisis manifested itself in the strained relations of this church with the Department of Religions and Ethnicities in the Ministry of Culture of Ukraine.
On the one hand, the church has accused the Department of waging an open defamation campaign against the UOC-MP in order to discredit it in the eyes of the Ukrainian population.
The head of the legal division of the UOC-MP, priest Oleksandr Bahov, also claimed that since 2014 the Department’s oﬃcials had deliberately impeded the registration of statutory documents of UOC-MP congregations in diﬀerent regions of Ukraine.
As a result of this conﬂict, in February 2017 the UOC-MP ﬁled a law suit against the Ministry of Culture which in some mainstream media was presented as a ‘law suit against Ukraine’.78 In its turn, the Department defended its policies by arguing that the statutes of the UOC-MP were written from Russian templates with the intention of establishing a system of total control by local bishops over priests and their communities.
The Department of Religions and Ethnicities also closely followed the activities of the UOC-MP in Crimea and the rebel-controlled territories of Donbas, gathering facts that in the Department’s view, illustrate the church’s anti-Ukrainian orientations.
Based on such information, in January 2017 the Ministry of Culture issued an oﬃcial letter publically accusing the UOC-MP of open collaboration with the Russian Crimean authorities and the separatist government in the Luhans’k region.
In the same document, the Department called upon law-enforcement agencies to investigate anti-Ukrainian activities of the clergy of this church in general and also called upon the UOC-MP publically to condemn the aggression of the Russian Federation.
In his turn, Metropolitan Mitrofan, who occupies the post of the head of the Department for External Relations of the UOC-MP, stringently denied the accusations as based on a misinterpretation of facts.
This dispute between the hierarch and a government body, however, did not result in any public reaction from the law-enforcement agencies of Ukraine.
POLITICS, RELIGION & IDEOLOGY 61 for social peace and political stability.
Even given the ongoing military conﬂict with the Russian Federation, the positions of this church appeared to be relatively stable.
In particular, despite the fact that various social surveys show a drastic decrease in the level of popular support for the UOC-MP between 2014 and 201786, it was still capable of mobilising large numbers of believers for its defence due to its extensive network around the country.
In the same vein, as the survey of Ilko Kucheriv Democratic Initiatives Foundation shows87, at least as of early 2015 the view that the UOC-MP is ‘the church of the aggressor state that conducts harmful activities in Ukraine’ was supported only by 19.2% of those surveyed.
Yet their strong aspirations to achieve ideological hegemony in the Ukrainian public space pushed them to focus on helping the Kyiv Patriarchate to get oﬃcial recognition in the Orthodox world, even despite the fact that the state’s interference in religious aﬀairs remains an unpopular measure with the population.
Conclusion In sum, given the pivotal ideological signiﬁcance of deﬁning the essence of the current military conﬂict in the political sphere of Ukraine, it is not surprising that in the postEuromaidan period this issue has appeared in the discourses of major Ukrainian religious organisations as well.
While informing an even closer overlap of the religious ﬁeld and the political ﬁelds in general, it has also created yet another fault line between the two major Orthodox structures – the UOC-MP and the UOC-KP – which have been oﬀering opposite approaches to representing this issue in the public space.
Most importantly, though, this ideological struggle has also signiﬁcantly restructured the balance of power in the religious sphere of Ukraine after the presidency of Viktor Ianukovych, transforming the former opposition church, the UOC-KP, into a very close ally of the current state regime and putting the UOC-MP in the position of a major political adversary in strong confrontation with the state and political society of Ukraine.
This strategy has been extensively used by the church’s oﬃcial speakers in order to avoid making explicit statements on certain issues, such as the annexation of Crimea.
At the same time, it has created an inherent ambiguity in the public stance of the UOC-MP regarding the war and its causes.
In this regard, while declaring the full support for the territorial integrity of Ukraine, this church has a) systematically omitted the public acknowledgment of Russia as an actor in the conﬂict and b) has represented the conﬂict as primarily an internal problem of Ukraine which emerged as the result of unresolved cultural tensions inside the country.
In other words, the UOC-MP’s approach – which, as its oﬃcial speakers claim, is based on the principle of political inclusivity (‘the church accepts Ukrainians of all political convictions’) – in eﬀect legitimises the ideological agenda of the secessionist movement.
On both these points mentioned above, the UOC-MP has put itself in strong opposition to the Ukrainian political regime which has been trying to consolidate the country internally by imposing a hegemonic representation of the military conﬂict as the external aggression of the Russian Federation.
More importantly, this deviation from the Ukrainian state’s ideological line has been aggravated for the UOC-MP by the fact that its discursive standpoint fully accords with that of the Russian political regime, which has denied any interested involvement in the Ukrainian situation and represented it as a civil war.
Given such a discursive alignment of forces, the UOC-MP has become even more vulnerable to the attacks of its religious and political opponents who claim that the actual task of this church is to be a ‘Trojan horse’ or to support the ‘ﬁfth column’ used by the Russian political regime as an instrument of the ideological ‘colonisation’ of Ukraine.
In turn, the UOC-MP’s speakers defend their ambiguous position by pointing to the necessity of saving the church’s institutional unity, which is currently threatened by the fact that this structure is divided between three political units.
Be that as it may, despite the mounting political pressure from the state, nationalist political forces, and the majority of mainstream media after 2014, the UOC-MP continued to feel institutionally strong enough to keep maintain its professedly neutral standpoint despite its inherent clash with the predominant ideological paradigm of the Ukrainian state.
This means that the costs of continuing opposition in the Ukrainian political ﬁeld were lower for the UOC-MP than the potential losses caused by full adjustment to the predominant ideological trend, which would jeopardise the church’s relationship with the ROC in general and with those parishes that continued to declare their aﬃliation with Ukrainian Orthodoxy in Crimea and Donbas.
On the other hand, this strategy also reﬂected the conviction of the hierarchy that the Ukrainian government’s attempts to obtain oﬃcial recognition and autocephaly for the Kyiv Patriarchate would not be fruitful and thus the aﬃliation with the ROC would still be a viable option for maintaining the UOC-MP’s religious monopoly as the only ‘canonical’ Orthodox church in Ukraine.
I would also like to thank my four referees for their constructive suggestions for improving the manuscript.
POLITICS, RELIGION & IDEOLOGY 63 Disclosure statement No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.
In 2009–2010, he conducted research in the United States as part of a Fulbright fellowship.
From 2011 till 2016 he worked as a research fellow at the Department of Religious Studies of the Institute of Philosophy of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine.
