What Happened on Day 6 of Russia's Invasion of Ukraine Explosions struck the capital, Kyiv, and an apparent rocket strike destroyed an administration building in Kharkiv, the second largest city, killing civilians.
Russia’s push to seize key Ukrainian cities accelerated on Wednesday, with the Russian military claiming that its forces were fully in control of Kherson, a port near the Black Sea, where the mayor said the city was “waiting for a miracle” to collect bodies and restore basic services.
Ukrainian officials disputed Russia’s claim, saying that while the city of about 300,000 people was surrounded, the municipal government was still in place and the battle was continuing.
If captured, Kherson would be the first major Ukrainian city to fall to Russia since President Vladimir V Putin launched his invasion last Thursday.
Russian forces were also bearing down on several other cities, including Kyiv, the capital, where blasts were reported overnight and Russian forces appeared to be moving closer toward encircling the city.
They continued to lay siege to central Kharkiv, where a government building was hit by an apparent rocket strike on Wednesday morning, and where supplies of food and water are running low in the city of 1. million.
Overnight, Russian troops surrounded Mariupol, a port city in the southeast.
Residents baked 26 tons of bread to help withstand the coming onslaught, according to the mayor.
President Biden predicted that the invasion of Ukraine would “leave Russia weaker and the world stronger” during a fiery State of the Union address on Tuesday night.
He said the United States planned to bar Russian planes from American airspace and that the Justice Department would try to seize the assets of oligarchs and government officials allied with Mr Putin, part of a global push to isolate Russia. e A second round of talks between Russia and Ukraine was scheduled to take place on Wednesday after a meeting on Monday failed to make progress in ending the fighting. 3 hours ago Safak Timur Turkey, enforcing Black Sea rules, asked Russia not to send warships.
A Russian Navy vessel sailing in the Bosporus near Istanbul last month.
Erdem Sahin/EPA, via Shutterstock ISTANBUL — When Turkey asked Russia not to send three warships to the Black Sea in recent days, Russia withdrew its request to do so, the country’s top diplomat said late Tuesday, illustrating Turkey’s delicate position as it tries to walk a fine line between Ukraine and Russia.
Turkey, a NATO member that has strong military and economic relations with both countries, has urged Moscow to stop its aggression but has not followed the West in issuing sanctions against Russia over the war.
Turkey is already trying to assess the potential damage of the sanctions on its economy.
Turkey oversees access to the Black Sea through a 1936 treaty that regulates sea vessels passing through the Bosporus and Dardanelles straits.
The pact, the Montreux Treaty, gives Turkey the right to ban warring-party vessels from access to the Black Sea unless their home base is there.
The demand from Russia, which came on Sunday and Monday, concerned four warships, Mr Cavusoglu said.
Only one was registered to a Black Sea base and therefore eligible to pass, according to the information Turkey had.
But Russia withdrew its request for all four vessels, and Turkey officially informed all of the parties to the Montreux Treaty that Russia had done so so, according to Mr Cavusoglu.
He emphasized that Turkey applies the treaty’s rules for both sides of the conflict, as the accord demands.
Naveen Shekharappa, an Indian medical student, was killed when he left a bunker in Kharkiv, Ukraine.
Sajjad Hussain/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images NEW DELHI — The death of an Indian student in the fighting in Ukraine on Tuesday has brought into focus India’s challenge of evacuating nearly 20,000 of its citizens who were Stranded in the country when Russia’s invasion began.
Naveen Shekharappa, a fourth-year medical student in Kharkiv, was killed when he left a bunker on Tuesday to fetch food, Indian officials and his family members said.
As of late Tuesday, about 8,000 Indian citizens, mostly students, were still trying to make it out of Ukraine, according to India’s Foreign Ministry.
The evacuation process has been complicated by active fighting, with the students struggling to make it to jammed border crossings.
As the conflict has intensified in recent days, Indian students have walked miles in freezing temperatures to cross into neighboring countries.
Many posted videos from their underground bunkers and hostel rooms, pleading for help.
Other students accused security forces at the borders of racism, saying they were made to wait longer only because they were Indians.
India has a huge young population and an increasingly competitive job market.
Seats in Indian government-run professional colleges are limited, and degrees at private universities are expensive.
Thousands of students from the poorer parts of India pursue professional degrees, particularly in medicine, in places like Ukraine, where the cost can be half, if not less, of what they pay in India. | 4 hours ago 2; lvan Nechepurenko Reporting from Sochi, Russia A Kremlin spokesman said that Russia would send its delegation for a second round of talks with Ukrainian representatives late Wednesday afternoon.
Peskov, did not disclose where the talks will take place. 4 hours ago Anton Troianovski S Russia claims to control Kherson, a strategic city, but Ukraine says the battle for it isn’t over.
The Russian military said on Wednesday that it fully controlled Kherson, a regional Ukrainian center with a strategically important location at the mouth of the Dnieper River, just northwest of Crimea.
The claim could not immediately be verified, and Ukrainian officials said that while the city was surrounded, the battle for it was continuing.
If Russia does take Kherson, it would become the first major Ukrainian city captured by Russia during the war.
Russia has sought to portray its military assault as one that is welcomed by most Ukrainians, even as the invasion touches off enormous human suffering.
Oleksiy Arestovich, a military adviser to President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine, said that fighting for Kherson, which provides strategic access to the Black Sea and is near a Soviet-era water canal leading to Crimea, was continuing.
The city is Mr Zelensky’s hometown. 5 hours ago ~~ Sy Marc Santora Reporting from Lviv, Ukraine The Ukrainian Navy accused the Russian Black Sea Fleet of using civilian vessels for cover — a tactic that it said Russian ground forces were also using.
The Ukrainian Navy said the Russians had threatened to fire on the ship if it did not comply.
Ce 5 hours ago 7 | Liz Alderman Reporting from Paris Russia’s war on Ukraine is already creating “significant” economic spillovers to other countries, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank said, warning that a spike in the prices of oil, wheat and other commodities risks fueling already high inflation, which is likely to affect poor people the hardest.
Disruptions in financial markets are likely to get worse if the conflict persists, and Western sanctions imposed on Russia and the flow of refugees from Ukraine are also likely to have major economic repercussions, the agencies said in a statement.
The I.M.F and World Bank added that they were working on finance assistance packages worth a total of over $5 billion to support Ukraine. . 5 hours ago Keith Bradsher China’s top financial regulator, Guo Shuging, said Wednesday at a news conference in Bejing that China would not join financial sanctions against Russia and would maintain normal trade and financial relations with parties in the Ukraine conflict.
He repeated China’s opposition to sanctions. a 5 hours ago i & Marc Santora Reporting from Lviv, Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine sought to rally the nation on Wednesday aiter yet another sleepless night punctuated by explosions and violence.
PB 5 hours ago Bt Anton Troianovski The Russian military says it now controls Kherson, a strategically important city at the mouth of the Dnieper River that would be the first major Ukrainian city that Russia has captured.
The claim could not be immediately confirmed, and Ukrainian officials said that while Russian forces had surrounded the city, the battle for control was continuing.
The United Nations refugee agency said Tuesday that 677,000 people had fled Ukraine, and more than four million people could eventually be forced to leave.
March 2, 2022 Yousur Al-Hlou, Masha Froliak, Michael Downey and Mark Boyer S KYIV, Ukraine — For days, Natalia Novak has sat alone in her empty apartment, watching news of the war that is unfolding just outside her window.
Novak reflected on Tuesday afternoon after learning of President Vladimir V Putin’s plan to further attack the capital.
Show more March 2, 2022 Ne , Austin Ramzy Reporting from Hong Kong An Australian air force transport plane left for Europe on Wednesday carrying military equipment and medical supplies, the joint operations command of the Australian military said on Twitter.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison of Australia said on Sunday that his country would provide weapons to Ukraine through NATO, supplementing nonlethal equipment and supplies it had already contributed.
Following the Prime Minister of Australia’s announcement on 27 February that Australia will provide defensive military assistance to Ukraine.
An @ AusAirForce C-17A Globemaster ITI departed Australia for Europe on 2 March carrying critical military equipment and medical supplies. pic.twitter.com/6D2KibU6M3 — Joint Operations Command March 2, 2022 March 2, 2022 ys Mike Ives Reporting from Seoul Hoosli, a Ukrainian choir based in Winnipeg, Canada, performed the Ukrainian and Canadian national anthems while standing on the ice before the Winnipeg Jets of the National Hockey League faced off against the Montreal Canadiens on Tuesday.
Honoured to represent our Ukrainian community in Canada, our culture, our language, our song and our homeland tonight.
The Central Bank closed the exchange on Monday as the Russian ruble cratered, and later extended the closure to Tuesday.
Svitolina, who is ranked 15th in the world, is the top seed at the Monterrey Open and won the event in 2020.
March 1, 2022 ¥ , Austin Ramzy Reporting from Hong Kong President Vladimir V Putin of Russia banned people from taking more than $10,000 worth of foreign currency abroad starting Wednesday, the official Tass news agency reported, as the country struggles to contain the widespread financial shock from Sanctions over the Ukraine invasion.
Russia’s currency has plunged in value this week, and long lines formed at A.T.M.s as residents tried to withdraw cash.
Russia has tried to control the damage by more than doubling the key interest rate on Monday and forcing exporters to sell 80 percent of foreign currency revenue.
S Ukrainian flags in the House Chamber as President Joe Biden delivers his first formal State of the Union address in Washington, D.C. on Tuesday.
Putin of Russia had “badly miscalculated” by invading Ukraine, and vowed to make Moscow pay a steep economic “price” even as he repeated his pledge to avoid a direct military confrontation.
The speech, originally seen as an opportunity for a struggling president to senda reassuring message on the economy to a domestic audience, was hastily repurposed to send a stark warning to a foreign leader.
As had been widely expected, Mr Biden announced several new moves to further punish Mr Putin, including a ban on Russian aircraft in United States airspace and the creation of a task force inside the Justice Department to aggressively identify, locate and seize the assets of Russian oligarchs and officials in Mr Putin’s inner circle.
Mr Biden was repeatedly interrupted by applause from members of both parties as he addressed the crisis during the opening moments of his speech.
But the Republican cheering dissipated when he warned Americans to expect economic blowback in the form of higher energy prices resulting from the sanctions.
To cushion that blow, he said the United States, in conjunction with 30 allies, would release 60 million barrels of oil from reserves, with half coming from domestic supplies.
He made no mention of the nation’s nuclear deterrence capabilities in response to Mr Putin’s menacing references in recent days to putting Russia’s arsenal on a war footing.
He also did not offer any clear way out of the crisis, or even a possible offramp for an increasingly bellicose and isolated Mr Putin, short of pulling Russian troops out of Ukraine immediately.
While Mr Biden committed to providing Ukraine with enough weaponry, supplies and humanitarian assistance to “fight for freedom,” he said again he was not prepared to directly confront Russian troops by moving NATO forces into Ukraine or imposing a nofly zone, as some Democrats have suggested.
Our forces are not engaged and will not engage with the Russian forces in Ukraine,’ he said.
Everyone it seemed, was impressed that Mr Perepeitsa resorted to poetry — and toa poem in a language other than his native tongue — to capture the mood of the moment.
Mr Perepelitsa is a resident of Kyiv, a husband and a father of a little boy.
He had lived in Tehran for a year and half and studied Persian, according to Alex Lourie, an American photographer in Ukraine who recorded the video.
Mr Lourie said in a telephone interview that he had been shooting photographs of soldiers in the outskirts of Kyiv when he and Mr Perepelitsa started chatting.
They both realized they spoke a little Persian and were familiar with Iranian culture and poetry.
He posted it on his Instagram page, tagging Mr Perepelitsa, who has since told him that he is getting flooded with messages from Iranians in support and solidarity.
The last post from Mr Perepelitsa’s Instagram page, a landscape photograph of Ukraine, had 1,468 messages written Tuesday after the video went viral.
I wish I could see it I ask myself Who would believe Your love burned to ashes The jungle of my soul March 1, 2022 ~™ Yu Young Jin Reporting from Seoul Ata United Nations General Assembly meeting on Tuesday, the representative from North Korea blamed the conflict in Ukraine on the United States and other Western countries, saying that they had undermined Europe’s security by resisting Russia's demands and continuing NATO’s eastward expansion.
South Korea's representative denounced Russia's actions, saying the war was a choice made by the Russian Federation.
At least two people were killed, three others were injured and three of the 10 homes caught fire, the embassy said.
S Watching President Biden deliver his State of the Union speech from the United States Capitol on Tuesday.
Here are some excerpts from his prepared remarks, as released by the White House.
Six days ago, Russia’s Vladimir Putin sought to shake the foundations of the free world, thinking he could make it bend to his menacing ways.
From President Zelensky to every Ukrainian, their fearlessness, their courage, their determination, inspires the world.
Everyone from students to retirees teachers turned soldiers defending their homeland.
Let each of us here tonight in this chamber send an unmistakable signal to Ukraine and to the world.
Please rise if you are able and show that, yes, we the United States of America stand with the Ukrainian people.
Throughout our history we’ve learned this lesson when dictators do not pay a price for their aggression they cause more chaos.
We spent months building a coalition of other freedom-loving nations from Europe and the Americas to Asia and Africa to confront Putin.
We shared with the world in advance what we knew Putin was planning and precisely how he would try to falsely justify his aggression.
Along with 27 members of the European Union, including France, Germany, Italy, as well as countries like the United Kingdom, Canada, Japan, Korea, Australia, New Zealand, and many others, even Switzerland.
Together with our allies — we are right now enforcing powerful economic sanctions.
We are cutting off Russia’s largest banks from the international financial system.
Preventing Russia’s central bank from defending the Russian ruble, making Putin’s $630 Billion “war fund” worthless.
We are choking off Russia’s access to technology that will sap its economic strength and weaken its military for years to come.
The United States Department of Justice is assembling a dedicated task force to go after the crimes of Russian oligarchs.
We are joining with our European allies to find and seize their yachts their luxury apartments their private jets.
And tonight I am announcing that we will join our allies in closing off American air space to all Russian flights, further isolating Russia and adding an additional squeeze on their economy.
The Russian stock market has lost 40 percent of its value, and trading remains Suspended.
Together with our allies, we are providing support to the Ukrainians in their fight for freedom.
We are giving more than $1 billion in direct assistance to Ukraine, and will continue to aid the Ukrainian people as they defend their country and help ease their suffering.
Our forces are not engaged and will not engage in conflict with Russian forces in Ukraine.
Our forces are not going to Europe to fight in Ukraine, but to defend our NATO Allies — in the event that Putin decides to keep moving west.
For that purpose we’ve mobilized American ground forces, air squadrons, and ship deployments to protect NATO countries including Poland, Romania, Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia.
The United States and our allies will defend every inch of territory of NATO countries with the full force of our collective power.
But while he may make gains on the battlefield, he will pay a continuing high price over the long run.
And a proud Ukrainian people, who have known 30 years of independence, have repeatedly shown that they will not tolerate anyone who tries to take their country backward.
To all Americans, I will be honest with you, as I always promised I would be.
A Russian dictator, invading a foreign country, has costs around the world.
And I’m taking robust action to make sure the pain of our sanctions is targeted at Russia’s economy.
And I will use every tool at our disposal to protect American businesses and consumers.
Tonight, I can announce that the United States has worked with 30 other countries to release 60 million barrels of oil from reserves around the world.
America will lead that effort, releasing 30 million barrels from our own Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
When the history of this era is written, Putin’s war on Ukraine will have left Russia weaker and the rest of the world stronger.
While it shouldn’t have taken something so terrible for people around the world to see what’s at stake, now everyone Sees it clearly.
We see the unity among leaders of nations, a more unified Europe a more unified West.
And we see unity among the people who are gathering in cities in large crowds around the world even in Russia to demonstrate their support for the people of Ukraine.
In the battle between democracy and autocracy, democracies are rising to the moment, and the world is clearly choosing the side of peace and security.
So let us continue to draw inspiration from the iron will of the Ukrainian people.
To our fellow Ukrainian Americans who forge a deep bond that connects our two nations we stand with you.
Putin may circle Kyiv with tanks, but he will never gain the hearts and souls of the Ukrainian people.
March 1, 2022 ""2 f Austin Ramzy Reporting from Hong Kong Oil prices continued to climb and markets in Asia fell on Wednesday as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the impact of expanding sanctions continue to unnerve investors.
Oil futures were up Sharply, with American West Texas intermediate crude futures rising 5. percent, while the Brent benchmark was up 5. percent.
S March 1, 2022 Niraj Chokshi and Neal E Boudette Boeing and Ford suspend operations in Russia.
Two major United States manufacturers, Boeing and Ford Motor, have suspended their business activities in Russia as the country escalated its war in Ukraine.
Boeing said on Tuesday that it had halted major operations in its Moscow office and temporarily closed another office in Kyiv, Ukraine.
The company also said it had ceased providing parts, maintenance and technical support services to Russian airlines.
In recent days, countries around the world have imposed sanctions on Russian carriers, limiting their ability to use leased planes; fly over Western Europe; or buy spare parts.
Boeing employs several thousand people in Russia, Ukraine and a handful of former Soviet states, an operation that includes a major design center in Moscow.
The company also runs a flight training campus and research and technology center in the city and has a joint venture in Russia with VSMPO-AVISMA, Boeing’s largest titanium supplier.
Boeing has been trying to diversify its titanium supply in recent years, and it said it had enough of the metal on hand to keep making commercial aircraft in the near term.
Ford, which once had three plants in Russia, is suspending its remaining operations in the country indefinitely because of the invasion.
Ford shut down its three plants in Russia in 2019 as part of an effort to turn around its struggling European operation.
The videos show that parts of both five-floor buildings had collapsed, including a section roughly 65 feet wide.
The buildings surround a large courtyard containing Pinocchio Kindergarten, whose playground was also damaged.
The country’s schools have been closed since Feb. according to the Ukrainian government.
Diplomats have been relocated to Lviv, near the border with Poland, where they are working to evacuate Japanese nationals seeking to leave Ukraine.
March 1, 2022 oO Michael D Shear and Niraj Chokshi v Russian aircraft will be banned from American airspace, United States officials Say.
Aeroflot airplanes at the Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow, Russia, on Tuesday.
Mr Biden will announce the ban during his State of the Union address Tuesday evening.
It would prohibit planes that are owned or registered by Russians from flying over the United States, hampering their ability to travel.
It was the latest coordinated effort by Mr Biden’s administration and the NATO allies to inflict pain on President Vladimir V Putin and his closest supporters.
It was not clear how quickly the ban, which was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal, will be put in place.
Mr Putin has already retaliated against the European ban by canceling flights from European airlines over Russian territory.
The ban would prevent Aeroflot, Russia’s national airline, from making flights to the United States, or from traveling over the United States on its way to other destinations.
Aeroflot is the only Russian airline that flies between that country and the United States, according to flight information from Cirium, an aviation data provider.
Russian airlines also have little need to traverse the skies over the United States to get to other destinations.
Russia is widely expected to retaliate with a reciprocal ban, as it has with flight bans imposed by dozens of other countries, according to experts.
American Airlines, which had used Russian airspace en route to India, started rerouting flights before the war began.
United Airlines, which was similarly exposed, said on Tuesday that it had temporarily stopped flights to India and will avoid Russian airspace.
Cargo carriers UPS and FedEx had already stopped deliveries to Russia, though a ban on flying over the country could slow some shipments as flights are rerouted.
The move is the latest in a series of steps Mr Biden has taken to punish Mr Putin after similar actions by his counterparts in Europe and Canada.
The president issued Sanctions on a Russian-owned natural gas line last week, days after Germany took a similar action.
The International Skating Union, figure skating’s world governing body, said it would bar all Russian and Belarusian skaters from international events, a ban that apparently will include the world championships later this month in France.
That would prevent Anna Shcherbakova, the Olympic women’s singles champion, from defending her 2021 world title.
Russia ran into trouble at the Winter Games when the star skater Kamila Valieva tested positive for a banned substance, but the skating body has now dropped Russia not because of doping but in response to the country’s invasion of Ukraine.
The top tennis organizations will bar Russia and Belarus from team events but will continue to allow their players to compete as individuals, though without national identification.
Similarly, the Russian F1 driver Nikita Mazepin will be allowed to race for Haas under rules announced Tuesday by the Fédération Internationale de Automobile, motorsport’s world governing body.
The world governing body for track and field barred Russian and Belarusian athletes and officials from events “for the foreseeable future,” including this summer’s World Athletics Championships, which will take place in Oregon, as well as the World Athletics Indoor Championships in Belgrade, Serbia, and other competitions.
And the International Cycling Union, as part of a broad range of measures announced on Tuesday, banned teams from Russia and Belarus from international competition.
The measure will effectively shut down a professional team co-sponsored by Gazprom, the Russian state-controlled energy company, which normally makes appearances in toplevel events including the Giro d’Italia.
These images are a visual documentation of a populace coping with the initial stages of an invasion, struggling with newfound uncertainty and fear.
March 1, 2022 Farnaz Fassihi S E Iran’s supreme leader blames the United States for the conflict in Ukraine.
Abedin Taherkenareh/EPA, via Shutterstock Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, blamed the United States for the current crisis in Ukraine in a live speech broadcast to his nation on Tuesday.
Mr Khamenei, who considers Russia an Iranian ally, did not condemn President Vladimir V Putin for invading Ukraine.
He said Iran had a general policy of opposing wars and invasions of sovereign States, and called for an end to the conflict in Ukraine.
He compared the United States government to a collective mafia of weapons, economics and politics, and said the United States created, thrived and fed on crises around the globe.
Mr Khamenei said that the United States had interfered with Ukraine’s domestic politics, fueling covert coups and so-called “color revolutions” against pro-Russian leaders, and Sending its senators to participate in Ukrainian protests.
The Islamic Republic has long been paranoid about foreign interference and has cracked down on dissent and anti-government protesters by labeling them agents of foreign coups and color revolutions.
The majority of the Iranian public, however, is deeply suspicious of Russia’s motives in cozying up to Iran and is decidedly against the invasion of Ukraine.
In recent days, some Iranians have taken to social media and to the streets to protest Russia’s actions.
On Saturday night, demonstrators chanted “Death to Putin” and “Death to supporters of Putin” at a rally in front of the Ukrainian Embassy in Tehran, in defiance of the government.
The families held photos of the loved ones they lost and chanted, “Death to warmongers,” “Death to criminals” and “Death to Putin and supporters of Putin,” according to videos posted on the social media accounts of the Association of Families of the flight.
The association said in a tweet that security forces had attacked the families and injured some of the parents of the victims.
The Mirror Field monument, part of the Babyn Yar Holocaust Memorial Site, in Kyiv, Ukraine, last year.
It was not clear to what extent the memorial was damaged by the strike.
The memorial is close to Kyiv’s main radio and television tower in Kyiv, which was hit by a projectile.
President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine said at least five people were killed in the area.
On Facebook, the Babyn Yar Holocaust Memorial Center said that Russian forces had struck the site but did not describe whether there was damage.
More than 33,000 Jews were killed at the site over a two-day period according to historians.
In addition, mass shootings, including of Roma people and Soviet prisoners of war, took place there throughout the war.
Yair Lapid, Israel’s foreign minister, said on Twitter that the country would help with repairing damage to the memorial.
The Holocaust Memorial Day Trust, a British charity, said it was “horrified” to learn of the strike.
The massacre at Babyn Yar, also known as Babi Yar, took place in late September 1941.
Soon after the German army entered Kyiv, the city’s Jews were told to gather near a train Station in order to be resettled.
Crowds were forced to undress and gather in a ravine, where they were shot.
The Nazis wiped out nearly the entire Jewish population of Kyiv over the course of the war.
Last year, on the 80th anniversary, Mr Zelensky unveiled a modern art installation at the site.
Serhii Nuzhnenko/Associated Press Lawmakers at a congressional hearing Tuesday discussed the possibilities of having American intelligence provide more direct assistance to the Ukrainian military, including potentially on the ground operatives to help stop a Russian military column moving toward Kyiv.
Using American covert intelligence operations to assist Ukraine was first raised ata hearing of the Senate Armed Services Committee by Roger Zakheim, the Washington director of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation and Institute.
Mr Zakheim, a former general counsel for the House Armed Services Committee, said that the United States should use intelligence agency assets to covertly advise the Ukrainian military and help them destroy the troops moving on Kyiv.
An American president can authorize the C.I.A. to operate covertly in a conflict, though American officials have, unsurprisingly, declined to comment on whether such options are under consideration.
Mr Zakheim also said that intelligence forces could continue advising Ukrainian forces as they had previously been doing before being ordered to leave the country in mid February.
The idea caught the interest of several lawmakers, including Senator Joe Manchin III, Democrat of West Virginia.
Mr Zakheim responded that the United States should use intelligence forces to “sabotage the roads” using either people on the ground or unmanned drones.
But other senators seemed at least intrigued by putting operatives closer to the front lines.
Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas, said that the United States should provide intelligence to help Ukraine strike at Russian forces, but suggested it should be American operatives working near or alongside the Ukrainian military rather than officials in Washington.
Later in the hearing, lawmakers discussed ways of increasing support for the Ukrainians without making the United States a direct party to the conflict.
Elsewhere on Capitol Hill, Senator Ben Sasse, Republican of Nebraska and a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, told reporters that the United States should provide more intelligence to the Ukrainian military.
Johanna Geron/Reuters French authorities are working to identify and seize homes, luxury cars, yachts and other France-based assets held by Russian oligarchs targeted for European Union Sanctions, as well as Russians close to President Vladimir V Putin who “might be hit” by new penalties, Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire said Tuesday.
French banks and insurance companies are also combing through millions of accounts to identify Russians on the sanctions list, as well as members of their families and any holding companies they may have set up to hide their identities, he said.
As the E.U. has imposed harsh new sanctions stemming from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, France has been one area of focus.
The country has long been a destination for ultrawealthy Russians, who have flocked to buy villas on the French Riviera and yachts to sail in the waters off the Mediterranean coast.
This week, the front gates of a multimillion-dollar villa near Biarritz belonging to Mr Putin’s former wife, Lyudmila Aleksandrovna Ocheretnaya, was spray painted with the Ukrainian flag and anti-Putin slogans.
S March 1, 2022 Haley Willis and Ainara Tiefenthdaler Videos show Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrolling a strategic city in southern Ukraine.
Another video captures Russian military vehicles near a central roundabout in the city.
Other footage, filmed a few miles away, shows Russian foot soldiers patrolling the streets.
Ukraine’s emergency services agency Said on its Facebook page that two residential buildings in Kherson had been damaged by projectiles, causing injuries to four people.
Kherson’s mayor, Igor Kolykhaev, wrote on Tuesday morning that Kherson was “still Ukraine” and that Russian forces had not captured the city.
March 1, 2022 Glenn Thrush and Peter Baker @ Oo Ukraine’s ambassador to the United States will attend the State of the Union as Jill Biden’s guest. <i wee EN Sets i ses Re a Ae 2 3s ek Oksana Markarova, Ukraine’s United States eealennanice at her embassy in Washington last week.
Over the past week, the ambassador, Oksana Markarova, has emerged as an outspoken critic of President Vladimir V Putin of Russia and a prod to United States lawmakers as they consider President Biden’s request for $6. billion in emergency funding to address the crisis.
Biden said in a Twitter post that she and the president were “honored to welcome” Ms.
Oksana Markarova, Ambassador of Ukraine to the United States, to sit with me and @SecondGentleman for the State of the Union.
She was last there on Monday, pleading with a bipartisan gathering of senators for increased military aid, telling them — Starbucks coffee in hand — that Ukraine was close to running short of Javelin and Stinger antitank missiles.
Biden’s guest list, which includes a roster of Americans selected to illustrate her husband’s long list of other policy priorities.
Those include mustering national consensus on the coronavirus response, promoting his infrastructure law, reviving his stalled social spending bill and, above all, reassuring a jittery public that he has a plan to tackle rising inflation as his approval ratings on the economy slide.
Inviting a foreign national as a guest to the annual speech, while unusual, is not without precedent.
President George W Bush invited several officials and activists from Afghanistan and Iraq after the United States invaded those countries in the early 2000s.
Among them were the Afghan leader Hamid Karzai in 2002, and in 2005, the Iraqi human rights activist Safia Taleb al-Suhail, whose father was killed by Saddam Hussein.
In 2020, during the presidency of Donald J Trump, the first lady, Melania Trump, hosted Juan Guaido of Venezuela, a leading political opponent of that country’s autocratic leader, Nicolas Maduro.
At the time, Mr Trump was seeking to show his opposition to socialism and leftist governments.
Her appearance represents a direct challenge to a nuclear superpower and a cause — Ukraine’s independence — that is increasingly embraced by the two major parties in the United States, which can agree on little else.
March 1, 2022 @ Maciek Nabrdalik In Medyka, a city in Poland, a group of refugees, including young children, crossed the border to escape the fighting in Ukraine.
Sberbank, a Russian banking group, had been paying Venable $20,000 a month to lobby on sanctions-related bills, according to a Senate disclosure.
But “Venable no longer represents Sberbank,” a firm spokesman confirmed.
VTB Bank, another Russian financial firm, paid Sidley Austin about the same sum last year for similar work, according to Foreign Agent Registration Act filings analyzed by the Center for Public Integrity.
But the firm has dropped VTB “in compliance with United States Sanctions,’ a Sidley representative said.
Mercury Public Affairs dropped Sovcombank, McLarty Inbound no longer represents investors in Europe’s Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline, and two lobbying firms, Roberti Global and BGR Government Affairs, cut ties with the Russian company behind Nord Stream, news reports said.
Some of the new sanctions have made it illegal to engage in transactions with particular Russian firms.
But the Treasury Department hit other institutions with lesser sanctions, including Alfa Bank, which was founded by the Ukrainian-Russian oligarch Mikhail Fridman.
Skadden Arps has helped Alfa Bank obtain dozens of subpoenas for documents and depositions as it investigates data scientists who raised concerns during the 2016 campaign about internet data they said suggested links between the Trump Organization and the bank — a topic under parallel scrutiny by the Trump-era special counsel, John H Durham.
Skadden Arps did not respond to emails and phone messages asking about the firm’s intentions.
But dockets show that Skadden lawyers have not withdrawn from the Alfa Bank litigation.
As the Russian assault has intensified, Ukraine’s government has enacted martial law, requiring men to stay in the country and either join the fight or face the prospect of conscription.
Eugene, an I.T. worker from the northeastern city of Kharkiv; Tigran, an animator who tried to cross the border into Poland; and Andrew, who signed up for the territorial defense force two weeks ago.
S r March 1, 2022 ‘ Michael Schwirtz An explosion rocks Kharkiv a day after shelling in a residential neighborhood.
A large explosion struck central Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, on Tuesday, directly in front of the city’s administrative building, creating a huge fireball that appeared in a video to engulf several cars driving through an area called Freedom Square.
The cause of the blast and number of casualties were not immediately clear, though the city’s mayor said there were dead and wounded.
CCTV footage of the attack captured what appeared to be a rocket striking directly in front of the building.
Video of the aftermath showed a large crater in the middle of the city’s cobble-stoned central square.
The blast hit around 8m., about two hours after the city’s curfew had lifted, according to Anton Gerashchenko, an adviser to Ukraine’s interior minister.
It appeared to damage the administrative building as well as the opera house, the philharmonic theater and a part of a large apartment block, Ukraine’s emergency services agency said in a Facebook post.
The explosion came a day after Russian forces shelled a residential neighborhood in Kharkiv, killing at least nine people, including a family of five who were burned alive in their car, according to the city’s mayor, Igor Terekhov.
Aiter the capital, Kyiv, no Ukrainian city has suffered more attacks from the Russian military than Kharkiv since the invasion.
The city of 1. million people is not far from the Russian border, and most residents prefer to Speak Russian.
When Mr Terekhov posts daily video updates about the destruction, he speaks to his audience in Russian and at times seems on the verge of tears.
Military analysts are divided over whether Russian forces hope to occupy Kharkiv or simply surround it.
The goal appears to be to cut off the bulk of Ukraine’s forces, which are mostly deployed in the east, from Kharkiv as well as areas around the Sea of Azov in the south and in the Donbas region in the east, where Ukraine’s forces have been fighting Russian-backed separatists for eight years.
Until this week, Russian troops had been pounding outlying areas with artillery but had largely avoided attacking the city center.
A seemingly haphazard effort by what appeared to be Russian special forces to enter central Kharkiv over the weekend was easily repelled by the Ukrainian military, which captured several Russian soldiers and their vehicles.
Since the war began, residents of Kharkiv have been living in bomb shelters, many of them in the city’s metro stations, where trains have been parked to serve as makeshift hostels.
If Russian forces expected to be greeted as liberators, as Kremlin officials insisted they would, they have been sorely mistaken.
She said that in phone calls to her counterparts asking for support for Ukraine she had received pushback.
E March 1, 2022 William J Broad S Many nuclear power reactors in Ukraine are no longer producing electricity.
A photo from 2008 of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power complex of six reactors in the town of Enerhodar, in eastern Ukraine.
Reuters Six of Ukraine’s 15 working nuclear reactors have stopped sending power into the nation’s electrical grid — a high rate of disconnection compared with routine operations before the Russian invasion.
The reduction in output might result from the war’s interference with operation of the plants, which require a wealth of industrial supplies and care.
The cutbacks, Western experts say, may spiral into rolling blackouts that could further cripple the beleaguered country.
Ukraine has four sprawling complexes in different parts of the country that host its 15 operational reactors.
The disconnections from the nation’s power grid are being reported by the State Nuclear Regulatory Inspectorate of Ukraine, which is in Kyiv and files daily updates.
For instance, on Feb. it reported that all of Ukraine’s nuclear reactors were sending power into the electrical grid.
It is not unusual for individual reactors to go offline for maintenance and other purposes.
The inspectorate’s updates give bare-bones facts and no reasons for the outages.
The Zaporizhzhia nuclear power facility in eastern Ukraine is the site with the most reactors offline.
The site is the largest nuclear reactor complex in not only Ukraine but Europe, and three of its six reactors are currently generating no electricity.
On Monday, the International Atomic Energy Agency, which sets safety standards for the world’s nuclear reactors, reported that Russian forces “were advancing close” to Zaporizhzhia but had not entered the complex.
Videos verified by The Times show bodies and damaged buildings in the area next toa TV tower that was struck on Tuesday in Kyiv by what is believed to be a Russian projectile.
Ukrainian authorities released a statement saying that at least five people were killed and five were injured in the attack.
March 1, 2022 oO Kellen Browning Apple said it had paused the sale of all of its products in Russia and pulled the RT News and Sputnik News apps from its App Store outside Russia.
It’s the latest tech company to pull back from some Russian operations in response to the invasion of Ukraine.
March 1, 2022 Megan Specia Reporting from London The British government announced measures directed at Belarus for involvement in Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, imposing sanctions on four senior defense officials and two military enterprises.
NP An air defense base in Mariupol, Ukraine, on Thursday, after Russian troops launched an attack.
Evgeniy Maloletka/Associated Press One Key to Russia’s military strategy in Ukraine is to enable separatist forces it backs in eastern Ukraine to link up and join forces with fighters from the Russian-annexed Crimean peninsula to the southwest.
To make that plan work, Moscow needs to seize control of the port city of Mariupol.
On Tuesday, Russian-backed forces were advancing from two directions on the historic southern Ukrainian city, which lies on the Sea of Azov near the Russian border and has a population of around 430,000.
Russia’s state-run RIA Novosti news agency reported that Denis Pushlin, a separatist leader in eastern Ukraine, said that his forces aimed to encircle Mariupol.
Mariupol’s fall would clear the way for the pro-Russian soldiers in Crimea to join up with the separatist forces, which have been fighting Ukrainian government forces since 2014, according to defense analysts.
At the same time, Ukraine’s army east of the Dnieper River could face encirclement, and Russia would be able to take control of the Sea of Azov and its rich industrial infrastructure.
Ground fighting Airstrikes or shelling Areas occupied by Russian forces A projectile hit the An enormous main radio and explosion hit the television tower in city’s central square. the capital.
Kyiv Okirtyrka Kharkiv Intense fightin critical port cit lacks heat anc electricity.
Intense fighting for a critical port city that lacks heat and electricity.
He referred to Mr Putin’s wider aims to extend Russia’s territorial reach.
Russian forces have also attacked the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, from the north and east, as well as the country’s second-largest city, Kharkiv.
But Mariupol is a “strategic objective” for Moscow because it acts as a rail and road communications point as well as being a port, said Stuart Crawford, a defense analyst.
He said that taking Mariupol might not be easy despite Russia’s superiority in numbers and armaments, and noted that Ukrainian forces had so far defended cities fiercely.
An initial attempt to take control of the city via an amphibious landing at the beginning of the conflict was thwarted, Ukrainian officials said.
Russian forces landed about 70 kilometers, or 43 miles, from Mariupol, a Pentagon official said, describing it as a sign of risk-averse behavior by Moscow.
The distance allowed the Russians extra time and space to organize an invasion force, but also gave the city’s defenders time to prepare, the official said.
A Satellite imagery from Monday shows part of a Russian military convoy, stretching approximately 40 miles, on a road heading towards Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv.
Satellite images have shown a military convoy stretching 40 miles long on a roadway north of Kyiv, with a number of homes and buildings seen burning nearby.
Experts fear the convoy, which includes supply and armored attack vehicles, could be used to encircle and cut off the capital or to launch a full-on assault.
While the Ukrainian military has air power and missiles capable of striking the convoy, its abilities are limited.
Targeting such a long convoy would present its own challenges, as well as risk inciting Russia to retaliate.
He noted that the Russian military is likely defending the convoy aggressively.
It was also possible that Ukrainian commanders are waiting to engage the armored vehicles until they enter Kyiv, where they could be more easily destroyed while confined on city streets, and where neighborhoods could provide plenty of hiding places and protection for soldiers firing anti-tank missiles.
Experts cautioned that it was still too early to tell the convoy’s exact purpose, saying that it was also possible that the convoy could be used as part of a pincer movement to cut off the northeast of the country.
But they said that Russia appeared to be adapting its initial Strategy.
Under that strategy, Kremlin leaders had wrongly assumed Ukrainian forces would suffer a swift defeat against a Superior Russian military, and that Russian forces could quickly take major cities without much fighting.
Instead, Russian forces were stalled by stiff resistance from both Ukraine’s military and citizens who took up arms.
Cloud cover has made it difficult to geta continuous or complete view of the area or a clear sense of the convoy’s movement.
It was not clear whether the buildings and homes seen burning had been attacked.
The convoy is dotted along a roadway that stretches from Antonov airport to the north toward the village of Prybirsk for approximately 40 miles, according to Maxar Technologies, which released the images.
It includes food supply trucks for soldiers and fuel for vehicles, but the bulk of it, in Mr Boulégue’s assessment, is made up of miles upon miles of heavy artillery.
Some vehicles are spaced far apart from one another, while in some sections two or three military vehicles are moving alongside each other across the road.
Mr Kagan said it was notable that the convoy was not made up entirely of attack vehicles.
A Pentagon official said on Tuesday that Russian forces had been plagued by shortages of fuel, food and spare parts.
Mr Kagan said a number of trucks in the column likely contained such essential supplies to avoid more logistical problems.
Mr Kagan observed that when Russia initially concentrated its forces, in particular on the Belarusian border ahead of its advance, it didn’t appear to have built up the kind of logistical base usually mobilized before an attack was launched.
That, he said, helped to explain why Russia’s incursion had failed to quickly capture the capital.
While it was not unusual for an invading force to have such logistical challenges, he said it was unusual for them to persist several days into an invasion and in a military operation in which President Vladimir V Putin had spent at least months preparing.
Despite Russia’s superior firepower and resources, visible in the miles of weaponry outside Kyiv, Mr Kagan said the outcome of the battle was not a forgone conclusion, noting how Ukraine’s forces and civilians had shown unexpected resilience.
Ariana Cubillos/Associated Press Russia’s Latin American allies have distanced themselves from President Vladimir V Putin’s war in Ukraine, underscoring how even his staunchest diplomatic supporters appear concerned about the consequences of the cataclysmic invasion of a neighbor.
The governments of Cuba, Nicaragua and Venezuela have all blamed the United States and NATO for stoking tensions in Ukraine and disregarding Russia’s security interests.
Cuba, Bolivia and Venezuela, in official statements, have called for a diplomatic resolution to the crisis.
Similarly cautious diplomatic stances were taken by President Nicolas Maduro of Venezuela and his Nicaraguan counterpart, Daniel Ortega, both of whom spoke to Mr Putin by telephone in the days before the invasion.
The governments of Cuba, Nicaragua and Venezuela have all relied on Russian support in their defiance of the United States, becoming some of Mr Putin’s most ardent international allies.
All three have touted Russian investment as an antidote to the economic pain inflicted on them by American sanctions.
Cuba has long relied on Russian tourism for foreign revenue, which is likely to fall dramatically following the collapse of Russia’s currency and international restrictions on Russian flights.
And Mr Maduro has used Russia’s banking system to bypass American sanctions and continue exporting oil and importing basic goods to Venezuela, allowing him to stay in power.
Russia’s dramatic exclusion from the international financial system will likely complicate this trade, wrote the Venezuelan economist Asdrutbal Oliveros.
Earlier this year, Mr Putin sought to further expand Russia’s influence in Latin America, building ties in the region to countries like Brazil and Argentina that have traditionally been close to Washington.
President Jair Bolsonaro visited Moscow just days before the invasion, and said Brazil stood in “solidarity” with Russia, though he didn’t clarify what that meant.
But in a news conference on Sunday, Mr Bolsonaro said Brazil must remain neutral in the conflict because of the potential economic fallout, including Brazil’s dependence on Russia for fertilizers.
S 2 March 1, 2022 Christiaan Triebert A popular mapping tool is under a denial-of-service attack.
It was set up in 2014 by software developers and journalists as protests gripped Ukraine, but has since expanded to track other conflict zones, including in Afghanistan and Gaza.
Russia has deployed its military might to try to bring Ukraine into its orbit and decapitate the Ukrainian government.
But Ukrainian officials are also concerned that Russia might seek to destabilize the country through cyberwarfare.
Ukraine’s ambassador to Belgium, Mykola Tochytskyi, center, applauded on Tuesday after a video address by the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, during a special plenary session of the European Parliament in Brussels.
President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine this week asked for his country to join the European Union, the world’s biggest trading bloc, which also has helped preserve peace in Europe for decades.
A day earlier, he submitted a formal application for Ukraine’s admission into the union, which is headquartered in Brussels, the Belgian capital.
Joining the bloc is a painstaking and arduous process that can take as long as a decade.
Poland, for example, made a formal request to join the bloc in 1994 and was finally admitted in 2004.
To join, a country needs its candidacy to be unanimously approved by all E.U. member states, which now number 27.
It must also make its political system, judiciary and economy compatible with the bloc by adopting the E.U.’s system of common law, as well as more than 80,000 pages of rules and regulations on everything from environmental standards to food hygiene rules.
One senior E.U. official explained that it can take as long as 18 months for the European Commission to evaluate a country’s application before it goes to member countries.
And while there are precedents for fast-tracking — Sweden and Finland managed to join the Union in a few years aiter applying — a speedy approach is rare.
Moreover, other countries have been waiting for years to join, including Albania, Bosnia and Serbia, making it difficult for the E.U. to move faster on Ukraine.
Beyond that, the E.U. also has expansion fatigue after being buffeted by economic crises, Brexit and the pandemic, as well the misbehavior of rule-breaking member countries like Hungary.
At the moment, Ukraine hasn’t been made an official candidate, but rather has an association agreement with the E.U., signed in 2014 and concluded in 2017, in which it agreed to intensify economic and political ties with the bloc.
Ukrainians have been ardent in wanting to forge closer links with Europe, and in 2013, hundreds of thousands of them took to the streets to protest when the president at the time, Viktor F Yanukovych, who leaned toward Russia, backtracked on signing an association agreement with the union.
Whatever the challenges for Ukraine’s E.U. hopes, Russia’s aggression has engendered an outpouring of solidarity in the bloc, drawing some of the toughest sanctions in its history.
East and central European countries like Poland and the Baltics, which lived for decades behind the Iron Curtain and where memories of Russian subjugation run deep, have been among the most enthusiastic in backing Ukraine’s membership.
Most Europeans welcomed the E.U’s eastward expansion in May 2004, when the bloc admitted 10 mostly former Communist countries — including the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland — because, among other reasons, it cemented the demise of the Soviet bloc, and helped spread economic and political liberalism across the continent.
The European Union’s ability to offer membership to a country has been one of its greatest foreign policy tools in the post-Cold-War world.
The prospect of joining motivated Bulgaria and Romania to tackle corruption and accelerated the arrest of war criminals in Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro.
Even though Ukraine’s E.U. membership process is likely to be gradual, the country’s attempt to forge closer ties with NATO and the European Union underlines that President Vladimir V Putin’s attempt to bring Ukraine back into Russia’s orbit by force appears to be having the opposite effect.
Mr Kozyrev was the first head of Russian diplomacy following the collapse of the Soviet Union. (“y March 1, 2022 gS Adam Satariano Reporting from London A cyberwar between Ukraine and Russia is escalating, according to Ukraine’s vice prime minister, Mykhailo Fedorov.
Earlier on Monday, Russia’s foreign ministry said the country was facing a major increase in cyber attacks.
S March 1, 2022 Monika Pronczuk and Ruth Maclean Africans say Ukrainian authorities hindered them from fleeing.
Africans who had been living in Ukraine say they were stuck for days at crossings into neighboring European Union countries, huddling in the cold without food or shelter, held up by Ukrainian authorities who pushed them to the ends of long lines and even beat them, while letting Ukrainians through.
At least 660,000 people have fled Ukraine in the five days following the start of Russia’s invasion, the United Nations refugee agency U.N.H.C.R. said.
Most are Ukrainians, but some are students or migrant workers from Africa, Asia and other regions who are also desperate to escape.
Chineye Mbagwu, a 24-year-old doctor from Nigeria who lived in the western Ukrainian town of Ivano-Frankivsk, said she had spent more than two days stranded at the PolandUkraine border crossing in the town of Medyka, as the guards let Ukrainians cross but blocked foreigners.
The African Union and President Muhammadu Buhari of Nigeria have condemned the treatment of Africans fleeing Ukraine following social media reports about border guards hindering them from leaving.
Africans have also reported being barred from boarding trains headed to the border.
Ukraine’s deputy interior minister, Anton Heraschenko, denied that his country was obstructing foreigners from leaving.
We will release all foreigners without hindrance,” he added, in a written response to questions.
Martin Mpofu, center, a student from Zimbabwe living in Ukraine, is helped to walk by his brother, Maneedi, right, and Hatim Redouani, 27, from Morocco, as they take the pedestrian border crossing into the small Polish town of Medyka.
Mbagwu, the Nigerian doctor, managed to reach Warsaw, but said she crossed the border only by struggling and pushing her way through.
She said her 21-year-old brother, a medical student, had been blocked at the border since Friday, but made it into Poland after four days of trying.
Not all foreigners reported ill treatment by Ukrainian authorities at the border crossings.
A Pakistani student and an Afghan national who crossed from Ukraine into Poland on Saturday said the only problem was very long lines.
And a group of Vietnamese workers crossed easily into Moldova on Monday.
Mohammed Saadaoul, a 23-year-old Moroccan pharmacy student who traveled from the Ukrainian city of Odessa to Warsaw, said he did not have any problems.
The International Organization of Migration estimated that there are more than 470,000 foreign nationals in Ukraine, including a large number of overseas students and migrant workers.
At least 6,000 of them have arrived in Moldova and Slovakia alone over the past five days, according to the I.O.M., and many more have crossed into Poland.
Many of the foreigners fleeing Ukraine said they were warmly welcomed in neighboring Poland, Moldova, Hungary and Romania.
But Mr Buhari, the Nigerian president, said there were reports of Polish officials refusing Nigerians entry.
Piotr Bystrianin, head of the Ocalenie Foundation, a Polish refugee charity, said that so far, “problems were on the Ukrainian side.” —— > 2 % Mohammed Amin, a pharmacy student in Dnipro, Ukraine, calling his family in Morocco from a makeshift reception center in Przemysl, Poland.
Makeshift accommodation is being set up across the country, and Poles are helping Ukrainians on a massive scale, transporting them through the border, hosting them in their homes, feeding and clothing them.
On Monday, Poland’s ambassador to the United Nations, Krzysztof Szczerski, said his country welcomed all foreign students who were studying in Ukraine, and invited them to continue their studies in Poland.
In the years leading up to the Russian invasion, Poland had taken a hard line on migrants trying to enter the country.
The army and border guards have pushed asylum seekers from the Middle East and Africa back into Belarus.
Last week, aid organizations said a 26-year-old man from Yemen froze to death at that border.
Some of the foreigners arriving in Poland from Ukraine over the past few days were exhausted and freezing, according to local aid organizations on the ground.
Ahmed Habboubi, a 22-year-old French-Tunisian medical student, said all foreign nationals, including Africans, Israelis, Canadians and Americans, were told to go to one gate at the Medyka crossing from Ukraine to Poland, which would only process four people every couple of hours, while Ukrainians were allowed to pass freely through another gate.
Dennis Nana Appiah Nkansah, a Ghanaian medical student, said he saw the same discrimination at the crossing from Ukraine into the Romanian town of Siret — one rule for Ukrainians and another for everyone else.
Thousands of foreigners, including Zambians, Namibians, Moroccans, Indians and Pakistanis, were directed to one gate that was mostly closed, while another reserved for Ukrainians was open and people flowed through.
Over about three hours, four or five foreigners were allowed to leave, while there was a “massive influx” of Ukrainians crossing, he said.
Mr Nkansah, 31, said he had organized 74 Ghanaian and Nigerian students to pitch in and hire a bus to flee together.
They reached the border early Saturday morning, he said, but it took them 24 hours to cross over.
He said he was in a group with two other Moroccans and many other Africans and he asked a Ukrainian border guard to let them through.
The guard started firing his gun in the air to scare them and so they stepped back.
He said the Romanians were taking good care of him and other foreigners and providing them with food and other necessities.
Abdi Latif Dahir contributed reporting from Nairobi, Kenya, Valerie Hopkins from Kyiv, Ukraine, Ben Novak from Zahony and Beregsurany, Hungary and Aida Alami from Rabat, Morocco.
Advisory to Indians in Kyiv All Indian nationals including students are advised to leave Kyiv urgently today.
Preferably by available trains or through any other means available. — India in Ukraine March 1, 2022 The embassy said earlier that it had helped more than 1,000 students leave Kyiv for western Ukraine on Monday. r.
March 1, 2022 ‘ Michael Schwirtz Reporting from Ukraine An enormous explosion hit central Kharkiv on Tuesday morning, directly in front of a government building in Ukraine’s second largest city, Ukraine's Interior Ministry said, creating a large fireball that appeared in a video to engulf several cars driving through the area.
The blast hit at about 8m., two hours after the city’s curfew had lifted, according to Anton Gerashchenko, an advisor to Ukraine’s interior minister.
It was not immediately clear if there were any injuries or what caused the blast.
S “If I were an oligarch, in Russia or France, I’d be worried,” France’s foreign minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, said late Monday.
S March 1, 2022 Haley Willis and Ainara Tiefenthaler Videos show Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrolling a strategic city in southern Ukraine.
Kherson’s mayor, Igor Kolykhaev, wrote on Tuesday morning that Kherson was “still Ukraine” and that Russian forces had not captured the city. he March 1, 2022 « Livia Albeck-Ripka Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine as “unprovoked and unjustified,” describing Vladimir V Putin’s actions as those of a bully.
March 1, 2022 ~™ Yu Young Jin Reporting from Seoul The South Korean government will donate $10 million worth of humanitarian aid to the Ukrainian government and refugees.
S & March 1, 2022 ‘ Michael Schwirtz An explosion rocks Kharkiv a day after shelling in a residential neighborhood.
After the capital, Kyiv, no Ukrainian city has suffered more attacks from the Russian military than Kharkiv since the invasion.
Unless there was a legal requirement to do so, the move would violate bitcoin’s “libertarian values, which strongly favor individualism and human rights,” Jesse Powell, the chief executive and co-founder of the U.S.-based Kraken Exchange, said on Twitter.
March 1, 2022 @ Brendan Hoffman About 35 people, including Lena Honchar and her 2-month-old daughter, Veronika, are living at School Number 5 in Vinnytsia, Ukraine.
Yves Delhommeau, the general manager of the museum, told Francebleu radio that the wax sculpture had been vandalized by visitors over the weekend.
It was the first time in the museum’s history that a sculpture was removed over current events, he said.
Julien De Rosa/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images S March 1, 2022 Eric Schmitt and Julian E Barnes Some Russian troops are surrendering or sabotaging vehicles rather than fighting, a Pentagon official says.
Pro-Russian troops in the separatist-controlled settlement of Mykolaivka, Ukraine, on Tuesday.
Alexander Ermochenko/Reuters WASHINGTON — Plagued by poor morale as well as fuel and food shortages, some Russian troops in Ukraine have surrendered en masse or sabotaged their own vehicles to avoid fighting, a senior Pentagon official said on Tuesday.
Some entire Russian units have laid down their arms without a fight after confronting a Surprisingly stiff Ukrainian defense, the official said.
A significant number of the Russian troops are young conscripts who are poorly trained and ill-prepared for the all-out assault.
And in some cases, Russian troops have deliberately punched holes in their vehicles’ gas tanks, presumably to avoid combat, the official said.
The Pentagon official declined to say how the military made these assessments — presumably a mosaic of intelligence including statements from captured Russian soldiers and communications intercepts — or how widespread these setbacks may be across the sprawling battlefield.
The official spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss operational developments.
But taken together, these factors may help explain why Russian forces, including an ominous 40-mile convoy of tanks and armored vehicles near Kyiv, UkKraine’s capital, have come to a near crawl in the past day or two, United States officials said.
Besides dealing with shortages of fuel, food and spare parts, the Pentagon official said, Russian commanders leading that armored column toward Kyiv may also be “regrouping and rethinking” their battle plans, making adjustments on the fly to gain momentum for what United States intelligence and military officials say is an inevitable push in the next several days to encircle and ultimately capture the capital.
But United States analysts have been struck by the “risk-averse behavior” of such a large force, the Pentagon official said.
Russia launched an amphibious landing to seize Mariupol, a pivotal port city on the Sea of Azov, but landed forces around 40 miles from the city.
That allowed the Russians extra time and space to mount an invasion, but also gave the city’s defenders time to prepare.
Russia’s vaunted air force has yet to gain air superiority over Ukraine, with Russian warplanes thwarted by Ukrainian fighter jets and a surprisingly resilient and potent array of air defenses, from shoulder-fired Stinger antiaircraft missiles to much larger surface-to-air weapons, the Pentagon official said.
For Russian forces coming out of Belarus, logistics problems have proved stubborn, a European official said on Tuesday.
Ahead of the invasion, United States and British intelligence had raised questions about the supply chain for the Russian troops in Belarus.
During military exercises there, some of the soldiers were getting inadequate supplies of food and fuel, according to independent analysts.
But American officials told allies that the Russians had fixed those problems by mid-February, which was one reason that American warnings about the invasion intensified in the middle of last month, according to the European official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss operational developments.
But the challenges that Russian forces have faced show that their supply chain troubles have not been completely resolved, the European official said.
The logistics failures may help explain the presence of the long, slow-moving convoy of military equipment that is coming toward Kyiv, a tactical failure that is presenting a key target for the Ukrainian military, the European official said.
Russian officials, the European official said, expected to have secured air supremacy, at least around Kyiv.
But the fact that Ukrainian air defense systems were still operating has put both Russian aircraft and the convoy of equipment in danger.
March 1, 2022 Melissa Eddy Reporting from Berlin The German subsidiary of the Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline has ceased operations, a spokesman said Tuesday, a week after Germany’s government mothballed the $11billion undersea link over Russia’s attack on neighboring Ukraine.
The pipeline’s operator, Nord Stream 2 AG, is owned by Gazprom, Russia’s natural gas company, but based in Switzerland.
Switzerland’s economy minister told local television on Monday that all the employees at Nord Stream 2’s headquarters had also been dismissed.
Farnaz Fassihi South Africa’s ambassador to the United Nations, Mathu Joyini, called for reform at the Security Council while addressing the General Assembly’s special session on Ukraine.
She said other conflicts raging around the world deserved as much global attention as Ukraine.
United States Secretary of State Antony J Blinken will attend in person and also meet with E.U. officials, before visiting Moldova and the three Baltic nations.
March 1, 2022 Nick Cumming-Bruce United Nations asks for $1. billion for emergency needs in Ukraine.
S Volunteers filling sand bags on Tuesday at a marina in Odessa, Ukraine.
Show more S March 1, 2022 Haley Willis and Ainara Tiefenthaler Videos show Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrolling a strategic city in southern Ukraine.
Show more S & March 1, 2022 \ Michael Schwirtz An explosion rocks Kharkiv a day after shelling in a residential neighborhood.
Show more S March 1, 2022 Haley Willis and Ainara Tiefenthdaler Videos show Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrolling a strategic city in southern Ukraine.
Show more March 1, 2022 Christiaan Triebert, Haley Willis, Ainara Tiefenthaler and Aleksandra Koroleva S Kyiv’s main radio and TV tower is hit by projectile, with other explosions nearby.
Other videos captured at least two more explosions in the immediate area next to the tower.
Television channels would be off the air temporarily because broadcasting hardware related to the communications tower was damaged, Ukraine’s Interior Ministry said ina Statement on Facebook.
The tower, northwest of the city center, stands near the Babyn Yar Holocaust Memorial Site, where during World War II the Nazis shot tens of thousands of Jews, Roma, Ukrainian and Russian prisoners of war.
History repeating... — Bosonumup 3emeHcbKun March 1, 2022 e March 1, 2022 Laetitia Vancon and Patrick Kingsley In Moldova, a welcome sight for Ukrainian refugees.
In Palanca, Moldova, near the Ukrainian border about two hours west of Odessa, a refugee camp of 30 tents was built to help incoming Ukrainian refugees.
At the camp, refugees can stay warm and organize before they move on to buses or are picked up by friends or relatives.
Customs agents are on hand to help — or carry — refugees across the border.
Ukrainians, some pushing prams on foot and others driving sport cars, lined up for hours in the snow to enter Moldova on Tuesday morning.
Show more Stanley Reed Reporting from London i March 1, 2022 With oil prices spiking to well above $100 a barrel, the International Energy Agency said Tuesday that member countries had agreed to release 60 million barrels of oil from their emergency reserves.
The IEA said that the release was the fourth in its history and would provide the equivalent of 2 million barrels a day, or about 2 percent of global consumption, for 30 days.
March 1, 2022 fa Sy, +3 Lara Jakes The top United States diplomat questions whether Russia should remain on the United Nations human rights council.
The United States’ top diplomat pointedly questioned whether Russia should remain on the United Nations’ human rights council on Tuesday, in a speech that also criticized those who have sought to portray Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine as a conflict in which both sides bear responsibility.
Show more March 1, 2022 Mujib Mashal Reporting from New Delhi The Indian government said about 12,000 of the country’s citizens have managed to leave Ukraine, from an estimated 20,000 stranded in the country when the Russian invasion began.
Half of the remaining 8,000 are in areas of conflict, while the other half have made it to or were on the way to Ukraine’s western borders, India’s foreign secretary Harsh Vardhan Shringla said.
March 1, 2022 Xx Steven Lee Myers China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, spoke to his counterpart in Ukraine, Dmytro Kuleba, calling on Russia and Ukraine to seek a negotiated settlement and expressing concern about the harm to civilians.
Although Mr Wang merely restated China’s public stance, the call appeared to be part of an effort to distance Beijing somewhat from explicit Support for the Russian invasion.
Nearby, a personal security guard for Gennadiy Trukhanov, Odessa's mayor, walked a patrol.
March 1, 2022 Nick Cumming-Bruce Reporting from Geneva Secretary of State Antony J Blinken told the United Nations Human Rights Council that Russia Should be held to account for human rights abuses in its invasion of Ukraine.
Delivering America’s first statement to the council in Geneva since it returned this year as a full member, Mr Blinken questioned Russia’s fitness for council membership, citing the flow of more than half a million refugees from Ukraine and Moscow’s bombardment of civilian targets.
Zurab Kurtsikidze/EPA, via Shutterstock The Russian Defense Ministry warned on Tuesday that it planned to conduct strikes against facilities belonging to Ukraine’s security service and a special operations unit in Kyiv, aiming “to prevent information attacks against Russia,” and urged people in the Surrounding areas to leave.
The warning reflected the growing Russian threat against the Ukrainian capital, which is also being menaced by a 40-mile-long convoy of hundreds of military vehicles that was seen in satellite imagery moving north of Kyiv on Monday.
In the statement, carried by the Interfax news agency, the ministry said it planned to conduct “high-precision” strikes against the facilities belonging to Ukraine’s security service and a special military information operations unit.
It did not list the locations, but said that people living near unspecified communication facilities should leave their homes.
The ministry said it had observed a vast increase in the number of attacks against Russian state institutions since President Vladimir V Putin ordered the launch of a “special military operation” in Ukraine last week.
Show more March 1, 2022 Haley Willis and Ainara Tiefenthaler S @ Videos show Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrolling a strategic city in southern Ukraine.
Last week, the Council suspended Russia’s representation rights, but decisions of the court, the European Court of Human Rights, remain legally binding on the Russian government.
Daria Kliuieva returning to Ukraine via the Medyka border crossing with Poland on Tuesday.
She is one of a growing number of Ukrainians who are making their way home as Russia uses increasingly aggressive tactics in its invasion.
She graduated in 2019 from a military school in Kharkiv, requiring her to enlist during a time of crisis.
Kliuieva, who is originally from Kakhovka, moved to Poland six months ago after she landed a job cleaning rooms in a hotel in Gdansk, Poland.
Her plan, she said, had been to Save enough money to purchase an apartment back home in Kharkiv.
A picture of Daria Kliuieva’s relatives hiding ina Daria Kliuieva returning to Ukraine on Tuesday.
Kliuieva was driven to Medyka by a 35-year-old carpenter, Artem Zhebrovskyl, also Ukrainian, who had taken a few days off from his day job in Gdansk to help.
Kliuieva had responded to a post he put on a Ukrainian community Facebook group, offering to Shuttle people to the border.
They were joined by another young woman who was hoping to retrieve her family.
Kliuieva showed a photo on her phone of her cousins, four young children, bundled in jackets and blankets, sitting in the basement bunker of their home in Kakhovka.
But Mr Zhebrokvskyi found another man, from Canada, who was driving to Lviv to retrieve his mother and he offered to give her a ride. e.
March 1, 2022 3 Lara Jakes Secretary of State Antony J Blinken, in a speech to the U.N.’s Human Rights Council, criticized foreign diplomats who have portrayed Russia’s invasion as a conflict in which all sides bear responsibility.
March 1, 2022 2— Liz Alderman Reporting from Paris The French finance minister, Bruno Le Maire, backpedaled on his declaration earlier Tuesday that Europe was ready to wage a “total economic and financial war against Russia,” in an apparent bid to defuse tensions after former Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev of Russia responded with a warning.
Marc Santora Reporting from Lviv, Ukraine Near the City Council in the heart of Lviv, adults and children were stringing fabric together to make camouflage nets to send off to help Ukrainian soldiers.
Not long after I talked to the volunteers there, the first air-raid alarm of the night went off.
There are usually two to three minutes between alarms, though it varies.
About 660,000 refugees have fled Ukraine in the last six days, an increase of more than 150,000 in the last 24 hours.
TotalEnergies owns 19 percent of Novatek, a Russian company that has developed a large liquefied natural gas facility on the Yamal peninsula in northern Russia.
Maxim Shemetov/Reuters TotalEnergies, the French oil company with large natural gas investments in Russia, said on Tuesday that it would no longer provide capital for new projects in the country in response to the invasion of Ukraine.
But its announcement stopped short of following BP, Shell and Equinor, which had said in recent days that they would exit their Russian investments.
TotalEnergies has played a Key role in developing Russia’s capabilities in liquefied natural gas.
Unlike other western companies, TotalEnergies continued to forge ahead in Russia after the annexation of Crimea in 2014 prompted Western sanctions.
Now pressure may continue for the company to further disengage from Moscow.
TotalEnergies said in its statement that it would implement sanctions put in place by Europe “regardless of the consequences” for its activities in Russia.
TotalEnergies has a large stake in the state-of-the art Yamal LNG facility in the Russian Arctic, which shipped its first cargoes in 2017.
Gas from the Yamal facility is important to the French giant’s status as a major producer and distributor of LNG, a fuel whose consumption is expected to grow strongly in the coming decade.
The Yamal facility is controlled by Novatek, a Russian gas company in which TotalEnergies holds a 19. percent stake.
The partners are planning another giant LNG project called Arctic LNG-2 across the Gulf of Ob from Yamal.
Shell said on Monday that it would exit its joint ventures with Gazprom, the Russian natural gas giant, a day after BP said it would sell its nearly 20 percent stake in Rosneft, the Russian state-controlled oil company.
The decision by the oil giants to back away from their oil ventures with Russia puts pressure for a Similar response from Exxon Mobil, which has a sizable Russian project.
Preferably by available trains or through any other means available. — India in Ukraine March 1, 2022 The embassy said earlier that it had helped more than 1,000 students leave Kyiv for western Ukraine on Monday.
The embassy said earlier that it had helped more than 1,000 students leave Kyiv for western Ukraine on Monday. f March 1, 2022 ‘ Michael Schwirtz Reporting from Ukraine An enormous explosion hit central Kharkiv on Tuesday morning, directly in front of a government building in Ukraine’s second largest city, Ukraine's Interior Ministry said, creating a large fireball that appeared in a video to engulf several cars driving through the area.
The explosion comes a day aiter Russian forces shelled a residential neighborhood in Kharkiv, killing at least nine people, including a family of five, who were burned alive in their car, according to the city’s mayor, Igor Terekhov. f March 1, 2022 ‘ Michael Schwirtz Reporting from Ukraine An enormous explosion hit central Kharkiv on Tuesday morning, directly in front of a government building in Ukraine’s second largest city, Ukraine's Interior Ministry said, creating a large fireball that appeared in a video to engulf several cars driving through the area.
The explosion comes a day aiter Russian forces shelled a residential neighborhood in Kharkiv, killing at least nine people, including a family of five, who were burned alive in their car, according to the city’s mayor, Igor Terekhov.
Show more fiMarch 1, 2022 « Livia Albeck-Ripka Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine as “unprovoked and unjustified,” describing Vladimir V Putin’s actions as those of a bully.
The embassy said earlier that it had helped more than 1,000 students leave Kyiv for western Ukraine on Monday.
The explosion comes a day aiter Russian forces shelled a residential neighborhood in Kharkiv, killing at least nine people, including a family of five, who were burned alive in their car, according to the city’s mayor, Igor Terekhov. f.
March 1, 2022 « Livia Albeck-Ripka Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine as “unprovoked and unjustified,” describing Vladimir V Putin’s actions as those of a bully.
On Sunday, Mykhailo Fedorov, Ukraine's minister of digital transformation, had asked all major crypto exchanges to block Russian addresses.
Feb., 2022 % , Austin Ramzy Reporting from Hong Kong Markets in the Asia Pacific region opened mostly higher on Tuesday after a day of turbulence over the crisis in Ukraine.
The Hang Seng index in Hong Kong was down by less than 0. percent, while in mainland China the Shanghai composite index climbed by 0. percent and Shenzhen component fell by 0. percent. f.
The Hang Seng index in Hong Kong was down by less than 0. percent, while in mainland China the Shanghai composite index climbed by 0. percent and Shenzhen component fell by 0. percent.
S A large explosion struck central Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, on Tuesday, directly in front of the city’s administrative building, creating a huge fireball that appeared in a video to engulf several cars driving through an area called Freedom Square.
Show more March 1, 2022 Haley Willis and Ainara Tiefenthdaler S E Videos show Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrolling a strategic city in southern Ukraine.
Show more | 4 March 1, 2022 ‘ Michael Schwirtz An explosion rocks Kharkiv a day after shelling in a residential neighborhood.
Show more S March 1, 2022 Nick Cumming-Bruce Diplomats walk out of Lavrov’s speech at the United Nations in Geneva.
Ukraine’s ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva led the walkout, which left a largely empty conference hall to hear the remarks by Foreign Minister Sergey V Lavrov at a conference on disarmament.
Mr Lavrov, who had planned to attend the Human Rights Council session in person, delivered his speech by video link, because he said that European countries’ bans on flights from Russia had blocked his travel to Geneva.
He accused Ukraine of seeking to acquire nuclear weapons, an unsubstantiated claim that Moscow has used as one of the justifications for its invasion.
Ukraine gave up its Soviet-era nuclear arsenal in 1994 in exchange for security guarantees.
Speaking days after Russia raised the alert level of its nuclear forces, Mr Lavrov said that Russia believed a “nuclear war cannot be won and should never be fought,” repeating a statement adopted by Presidents Biden and Vladimir V Putin of Russia in their July 2021 Geneva summit.
But Mr Lavrov added that the United States should pull its nuclear weapons out of Europe and dismantle the associated infrastructure.
The current “hysteria” in NATO and the European Union confirmed that “it was and still is the aim of the United States and all its allies built by Washington to create an ‘anti-Russia,” he Said.
Mr Lavrov’s statement was “yet another example of his government’s duplicity in invading Ukraine,’ Michele Taylor, America’s ambassador to the Human Rights Council, Said in a Statement.
Secretary of State Anthony J Blinken was scheduled to address the Human Rights Council by video link later on Tuesday.
And because the figures reflect only casualties that the United Nations’ staff verified, the true figure is almost certainly higher.
An explosion from an apparent rocket strike devastated a large administrative building in Ukraine’s second largest city, Kharkiv, on Tuesday, killing seven people and injuring 24, according to emergency officials.
A day earlier, at least nine people were killed in Russian shelling in the eastern city.
Those attacks raised fears that Russian forces could increasingly target civilian areas with more powerful weapons.
Today, some French minister has said that they declared an economic war on Russia.
And don’t forget that in human history, economic wars quite often turned into real ones — Dmitry Medvedev March 1, 2022 March 1, 2022 Kevin Granville Reporting from London With oil prices spiking to well above $100 a barrel, the United States energy secretary, Jennifer Granholm, on Tuesday will lead a meeting of energy officials from around the globe on the impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on energy supplies.
Vasily Fedosenko/Reuters With oil prices soaring to well above $100 a barrel, the International Energy Agency said Tuesday that member countries had agreed to release 60 million barrels of oil from their emergency reserves.
The decision was made at a meeting of energy ministers chaired by the United States energy secretary, Jennifer Granholm.
The energy agency said that the release was the fourth in its history and would provide the equivalent of two million barrels a day, or about 2 percent of global consumption, for 30 days.
Oil prices have been turbulent since they hit a seven-year high of $105 a barrel last week after the Russian attack started.
The meeting was called amid concerns that sanctions imposed on Moscow by Western nations could result in reduced flows of energy from Russia, which supplies one in 10 barrels of oil globally as well as around one-third of the European Union’s natural gas.
Barring a breakthrough in peace negotiations between Russia and Ukraine, there was a risk of a large portion of Russian oil exports being crimped as a result of the sanctions, even though Western governments have said that they do not intend to disrupt energy flows, analysts at Goldman Sachs said in a research note.
If so, oil prices could go as high as $120 a barrel, the analysts forecast.
So far, loadings of tankers of oil and liquefied natural gas from Russia are proceeding as normal, said Alex Booth, head of research at Kpler, which tracks shipping.
But, he added, a liquefied natural gas tanker coming from a facility partly owned by TotalEnergies in Russia and named for Christophe de Margerie, the French giant’s former chief executive who was killed in a plane crash in Moscow in 2014, had recently changed its destination from Britain to France after London barred Russian-linked ships from British ports.
Potential relief could come from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its allies, which are expected to meet on Wednesday to discuss the oil markets.
So far, there is little indication that the group is willing to do more than agree to go ahead with its usual 400,000 barrels a day of additional supply in April.
Saudi Arabia, the co-leader of the group, called OPEC Plus, has been talking with Biden administration officials about the oil markets, but a deal does not yet seem to have been reached.
Discussions are likely to be complicated because Russia is the co-leader of OPEC Plus.
And it is uncertain if there will be enough support at the meeting for an increase in production beyond 400,000 barrels a day.
The United Arab Emirates, which along with the Saudis would be expected to be a source of additional oil supplies, recently abstained from the United Nations Security Council resolution condemning Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
That decision “underscores the likely unwillingness” of some countries to bolster production at this time, Ms.
S iA March 1, 2022 ‘ Michael Schwirtz An explosion rocks Kharkiv a day after shelling in a residential neighborhood.
S Volunteers sorting donated items at an arts center in Lviv, Ukraine, on Tuesday.
So Yuri Viznyak, the director of the arts center, now finds himself leading a logistical operation aimed at helping sustain those on the front lines — from formally trained soldiers to members of newly formed territorial defense units.
They are also helping care for those displaced from their homes by war.
Every day, more volunteers join the group as they pack and send supplies from Odessa to Kharkiv, to Kyiv to Mariupol.
It is one center in an emerging network, where volunteers and the police work together to ensure that supplies can be moved swiftly through dangerous battle zones.
That includes both the front lines and the camps that are forming outside the city for those fleeing their homes.
By afternoon, there are usually so many people showing up to help that they have to turn people away.
He offered a quick tour, zipping between stacks of toilet paper, trash bags full of clothes and crates of foodstuffs as he took phone calls.
Volodommr, 27, a volunteer, said that as more time had passed, people had moved from panic to action.
The security people checking passports and identification were a reminder that even as the volunteers came together to provide relief, they are on guard against any Russian Spies who might be in their midst.
Volodomir, who works for a neighborhood watch group, said that on a recent night he had found strange markings on a tree that he thought could have been placed there by a Russian agent.
But things as simple as whether a person can say “palinitsya” — a word for a sweet bread — can trigger suspicion.
Volunteering, he said, was one of the ways he coped with the stress of the war.
Show more March 1, 2022 Matina Stevis-Gridneff Reporting from Brussels The European Union has finalized the list of Russian banks that it plans to ban from using the SWIFT interbank transfer system.
March 1, 2022 Maria Varenikova Reporting from Ukraine Ukraine’s state emergency service reported that seven people were killed and 24 wounded in the shelling of the regional administration building in Kharkiv on Tuesday morning.
Amid fears of rising inflation and supply chain issues, futures on Wall Street pointed to a drop when trading starts.
Opposition lawmakers and rights groups have criticized the government for not waiving visas for Ukrainians. s March 1, 2022 ; Amy Qin Reporting from Taipei, Taiwan Taiwan’s interior minister said on Tuesday that the government would allow Ukrainians to extend their stays on the island and that there would be no limits on the number of extensions granted, according to Taiwan’s official Central News Agency.
Stanley Reed Reporting from London i March 1, 2022 TotalEnergies, the French oil company with large natural gas investments in Russia, said on Tuesday that it would no longer provide capital for new projects in the country, in reaction to the invasion of Ukraine.
But its announcement stopped short of following BP, Shell and Equinor, which said in recent days that they would exit their Russian investments.
Latest Intelligence update on the situation in Ukraine. pic.twitter.com/1 Ynzlps2dY — Ministry of Defence 2 March 1, 2022 March 1, 2022 « Mike lves Reporting from Seoul In a bid to bolster morale, Ukraine’s foreign ministry released a video on Tuesday of children in a bunker in Kyiv singing the city’s anthem.
Children are singing Kyiv anthem, while hiding 1n a bomb shelter during rocket fire. t Kyiv pic.twitter.com/POX2E06FzK — MFA of Ukraine ™ March 1, 2022 March 1, 2022 Choe Sang-Hun Reporting from Seoul South Korea said it was banning financial transactions with Sberbank, VEB and five other major Russian banks and their affiliates.
Its finance ministry also “strongly” urged South Korea’s public and financial institutions to suspend any trading of Russian treasury bonds to be issued from Wednesday.
South Korea had earlier said it supported the move to ban major Russian banks from the SWIFT system.
The embassy said earlier that it had helped more than 1,000 students leave Kyiv for western Ukraine on Monday. f.
A March 1, 2022 ¥ Michael Schwirtz Reporting from Ukraine An enormous explosion hit central Kharkiv on Tuesday morning, directly in front of a government building in Ukraine’s second largest city, Ukraine's Interior Ministry said, creating a large fireball that appeared in a video to engulf several cars driving through the area.
ET Haley Willis and Ainara Tiefenthdaler S Videos show Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrolling a strategic city in southern Ukraine.
The Hang Seng index in Hong Kong was down by less than 0. percent, while in mainland China the Shanghai composite index climbed by 0. percent and Shenzhen component fell by 0. percent. ff; March 1, 2022 « Livia Albeck-Ripka Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine as “unprovoked and unjustified,” describing Vladimir V Putin’s actions as those of a bully.
Ardern called for Russia’s immediate withdrawal from Ukraine and for an end to the “pointless war.” — Freptinet Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine as “unprovoked and unjustified,” describing Vladimir V Putin’s actions as those of a bully.
According to a statement from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the South Korean government plans to “actively contribute to resolving the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine.” — Friptinett Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine as “unprovoked and unjustified,” describing Vladimir V Putin’s actions as those of a bully.
Jieipteints Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine as “unprovoked and unjustified,” describing Vladimir V Putin’s actions as those of a bully.
ET \ Michael Schwirtz An explosion rocks Kharkiv a day after shelling in a residential neighborhood.
Javier C Hernandez Valery Gergiev, a Putin ally, is fired as chief conductor in Munich, and the diva Anna Netrebko is dismissed from the Bavarian State Opera.
Putin of Russia, was removed Tuesday from his post as chief conductor of the Munich Philharmonic after he refused to denounce Mr Putin’s invasion of Ukraine.
And Anna Netrebko, the Russian diva who Is one of opera’s biggest international stars and also has ties to Mr Putin, saw her upcoming engagements with the Bavarian State Opera canceled, and the Zurich Opera House announced that she had withdrawn from her next performances there.
Mr Gergiev’s abrupt dismissal, three years before his contract was set to expire, was the biggest setback yet for the conductor, who has been the target of widespread anger and condemnation in recent days for his long record of support for Mr Putin, whom he has known for three decades.
Dieter Reiter, the mayor of Munich, said that Mr Gergiev, who had held the post of chief conductor there since 2015, had failed to respond to a demand issued on Friday by Mr Reiter that he condemn Mr Putin’s “brutal war of aggression” by Monday or be fired.
Mr Gergiev was also dismissed on Tuesday from his position as honorary conductor of the Rotterdam Philharmonic Orchestra.
The orchestra’s managers, who had also recently asked Mr Gergiev to denounce Mr Putin, said in a statement that they had spoken with Mr Gergiev but could not resolve an “unbridgeable” divide.
Anna Nerebko, one of opera’s biggest stars, lost engagements in Munich and Zurich over her ties to Mr Putin.
Netrebko also came under fire for her ties to Mr Putin, who has awarded her prizes and praised her artistry.
Netrebko endorsed his re-election bid, and has at times appeared to lend support to his policies, including in 2014, when she was pictured holding a flag used by some Russian-backed separatist groups in Ukraine.
While she had in recent days sought some distance from the invasion, issuing a Statement over the weekend saying she opposed the war, she has remained silent on Mr Putin.
I have therefore decided to take a step back from performing for the time being.
Netrebko posted a picture on Instagram of herself with Mr Gergiev smiling after a concert.
Before the Met performed Verdi’s “Don Carlos” on Monday evening, the company performed the Ukrainian national anthem.
The fast-moving events showed how quickly arts organizations around the world had moved to sever ties with some of Russia’s most prominent cultural ambassadors since the start of Mr Putin’s invasion on Thursday.
Mr Gergiev had lost a number of engagements in the days that followed, but the loss of his leadership position at the helm of a major European orchestra suggested much more serious ramifications for his international career.
The two have Known each other since the early 1990s, when Mr Putin was an official in St.
Petersburg and Mr Gergiev was beginning his tenure as the leader of the Mariinsky, then called the Kirov.
Mr Putin has played an important role in Mr Gergiev’s success, providing funding to the Mariinsky Theater, where Mr Gergiev serves as general and artistic director.
Mr Gergiev’s international engagements began drying up last week, when Carnegie Hall and the Vienna Philharmonic dropped him from a series of performances.
On Sunday, Mr Gergiev’s manager announced he was ending his relationship with his client.
On Monday, the fallout continued, with the Verbier Festival in Switzerland saying it had asked for and accepted the resignation of Mr Gergiev as music director of the festival’s orchestra.
The Edinburgh International Festival in Scotland, where Mr Gergiev served as honorary president, also said Monday that he had resigned his position after being asKed to do so.
Philharmonie de Paris, a performing arts complex in France, announced it was canceling two concerts in April with Mr Gergiev and the Mariinsky Orchestra.
And the Lucerne Festival in Switzerland said it was canceling two performances in August with Mr Gergiev and the Martiinsky.
Shortly after the mayor of Munich announced his decision on Tuesday, a spokesman for the Elbphilharmonie in Hamburg, Germany — another major concert hall — said it, too, had canceled Mr Gergiev’s future engagements.
Several other institutions are considering similar moves, including Teatro alla Scala, in Milan.
The donations will be transferred to the needs of victims of ms aggression. pic.twitter.com/YAmiIMQTwjx — Dmytro Ponomarenko March 1, 2022 Ms.
Lee, who played a super-star role in the South Korean TV series ”Dae Jang Geum,” or “Jewel in the Palace,” helped spread South Korean entertainment through Asia to Eastern Europe.
S March 1, 2022 Valerie Hopkins, Andrew E Kramer, Marc Santora and Michael Schwirtz Zelensky accuses Russia of war crimes as Kyiv braces for a renewed assault.
KYIV — As President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine accused Russia of war crimes for deliberately targeting civilians in its unrelenting bombardment of his country, a huge convoy of Russian tanks and mechanized vehicles — stretching some 40 miles in length — massed menacingly just north of Kyiv on Tuesday morning.
With Russian soldiers facing stiff resistance from the Ukrainian Army and confronting millions of furious Ukrainian citizens across the nation, Western officials warned that President Vladimir V Putin might turn to even more powerful weapons to force his will on Ukraine.
Russian forces have already begun to employ siege tactics in their bid to take control of Ukraine’s second-largest city, Kharkiv.
On Tuesday morning, a huge explosion was reported directly in front of the city’s administrative building.
As Mr Putin’s forces struggle to encircle and subdue the nation’s capital, Kyiv, there is a growing concern that he may step up his bombardment of the city to break the public’s resolve.
On Tuesday morning, the Ukrainian military said it continued to have control over the outer borders of the city and was preventing Russian units from approaching the suburbs of the capital.
The military warned that Russian agents were dressing in Ukrainian military and police uniforms in an attempt to penetrate Kyiv.
It also said that Russia was employing agents to sabotage and attack civilian and military infrastructure.
Overnight, many of Kyiv’s 2. million inhabitants huddled in bomb shelters as air raid sirens wailed through the darkness.
In a bid to bolster morale, UKraine’s foreign ministry released a video on Tuesday morning of children in a bunker singing the city’s anthem.
Mr Zelensky said that 16 Ukrainian children had died as a result of the Russian shelling over the first four days of fighting, and on Tuesday there were more reports of hospitals and other civilian structures damaged or destroyed by Russian forces.
Moscow is also facing increasingly vigorous global opposition, from both national governments and multinational corporations.
The ruble has cratered, losing a quarter of its value, and Russia’s central bank shuttered stock trading in Moscow through Tuesday.
Aeroflot, the national airline, canceled all its flights to Europe after countries banned Russian planes from using their air space.
Mastercard has blocked multiple financial institutions from its payment network, and Shell, Volvo and Mercedes-Benz all took steps to cut ties with Russian business partners.
As Russians deal with the economic fallout of their country’s war, an increasingly desperate race to flee the fighting has led some 500,000 Ukrainians to seek safety in European Union member states that border Ukraine.
Many others have stayed to fight and have proven essential in helping an outgunned army frustrate the Russian war plans.
But Western military analysts say that Mr Putin has yet to unleash the full ferocity of the arsenal at his disposal. “y March 1, 2022 gs Adam Satariano Reporting from London YouTube said it would block channels connected to RT and Sputnik across Europe, effective immediately.
E March 1, 2022 Yan Zhuang Reporting from Melbourne, Australia Australia will commit $50 million to Ukraine in lethal and nonlethal military support, in partnership with NATO, Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced on Tuesday.
The “overwhelming majority” of that money will be used for lethal support, he said.
ET 3 Michael Schwirtz Reporting from Ukraine An enormous explosion hit central Kharkiv on Tuesday morning, directly in front of a government building in Ukraine’s second largest city, Ukraine's Interior Ministry said, creating a large fireball that appeared in a video to engulf several cars driving through the area.
March 1, 2022 Adam Satariano and Sheera Frenkel The war is testing the power of tech giants.
Commuters checking their phones as they ride an escalator in the subway in Moscow on Saturday.
On Friday, Ukrainian leaders pleaded with Apple, Meta and Google to restrict their services inside Russia.
Then Google and Meta, which owns Facebook, barred Russia’s state-run news media from selling ads on their platforms.
Sundar Pichai, Google’s chief executive, also spoke with top European Union officials over how to counter Russian disinformation.
And on Monday, Twitter said it would label all posts containing links to Russian stateaffiliated media outlets, and Meta said it would restrict access to some of those outlets across the European Union to ward off war propaganda.
For many of the companies, including Facebook, Google and Twitter, the war is an Opportunity to rehabilitate their reputations after facing questions in recent years over privacy, market dominance and how they spread toxic and divisive content.
They have a chance to show they can use their technology for good in a way not seen since the Arab Spring in 2011, when social media connected activists and was cheered as an instrument for democracy.
Any missteps could be costly, adding more momentum to efforts in Europe and the United States to regulate their businesses or leading Russia to ban them altogether.
Z The police detaining an antiwar protester in central Moscow on Friday.
The protests are a remarkable display of defiance in a country where prosecutors sometimes seek prison sentences for demonstrators.
Early last year, there were nationwide demonstrations in the days after the Russian authorities arrested the opposition leader Aleksei A Navalny.
Monday’s unrest unfolded amid growing public alarm in Russia over how sanctions imposed by the West in retaliation for the invasion would affect the country’s financial Stability.
As the currency cratered, some people rushed to withdraw cash from A.T.M.s.
Livia Albeck-Ripka Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine as “unprovoked and unjustified,” describing Vladimir V Putin’s actions as those of a bully.
ET ~™# Yu Young Jin Reporting from Seoul The South Korean government will donate $10 million worth of humanitarian aid to the Ukrainian government and refugees.
S March 1, 2022 & Mike lves Satellite internet terminals, sent by Elon Musk, arrive in Ukraine.
A SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket lifts off at Kennedy Space Center, Fla., in February, carrying a batch of Starlink satellites.
Craig Bailey/Florida Today, via Associated Press Ukraine’s vice prime minister said on Monday that internet terminals sent by Elon Musk, which were designed to work with satellites orbiting in space to provide online access, had arrived in the country.
Satellite internet services like Mr Musk’s, which is known as Starlink, can be useful in parts of the world where people cannot easily access conventional internet providers, whether because of technical limitations, government restrictions or other barriers.
There have been a number of internet disruptions in Ukraine since the Russian invasion began last week.
On Saturday, Vice Prime Minister Mykhailo Fedorov of Ukraine, who is also the minister of digital transformation, wrote to Mr Musk on Twitter to ask for Starlink stations.
Mr Musk, a billionaire entrepreneur who Is also the chief executive of the electric-car maker Tesla, said that the Starlink service was now active in Ukraine and that he was sending more of the terminals users would need to access a Satellite internet signal through the system.
Mr Fedorov posted a photo on Twitter on Monday that appeared to show a military truck loaded with Starlink terminals.
It was unclear as of early Tuesday how many Starlink terminals had arrived in the country, where they would be available or who would be allowed to use them.
Feb., 2022 é Mark Landler The global repudiation of Russia echoes the Cold War.
In Australia, the national swim team said it would boycott a world championship meet in Russia.
At the Magic Mountain Ski Area in Vermont, a bartender poured bottles of Stolichnaya vodka down the drain.
From culture to commerce, sports to travel, the world is shunning Russia in myriad ways to protest President Vladimir V Putin’s invasion of Ukraine.
Not since the frigid days of the Cold War have so many doors closed on Russia and its people — a worldwide repudiation driven as much by the impulse to show solidarity with besieged Ukrainians as by any hope that it will force Mr Putin to pull back his troops.
The boycotts and cancellations are piling up in parallel with the sanctions imposed by the United States, Europe, and other powers.
Although these grass-roots gestures inflict less harm on Russia’s economy than sweeping restrictions on Russian banks or the mothballing of a natural gas pipeline, they carry a potent symbolic punch, leaving millions of ordinary Russians isolated in an interconnected world.
ET ~ John Yoon Some cryptocurrency exchanges said they were refusing calls to suspend Russian accounts.
ET } Austin Ramzy Reporting from Hong Kong Markets in the Asia Pacific region opened mostly higher on Tuesday after a day of turbulence over the crisis in Ukraine.
Feb., 2022 Anton Troianovski and Ivan Nechepurenko As sanctions batter their economy, Russians face the anxieties of a costly war.
On Monday, those perks of modern life were abruptly disappearing, replaced by a crush of anxiety as sanctions imposed by the West in retaliation for Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine rattled the foundations of Russia’s financial system.
The ruble cratered, losing a quarter of its value, and the central bank shuttered stock trading in Moscow through Tuesday.
The public rushed to withdraw cash from A.T.M.s, and Aeroflot, the national airline, canceled all its flights to Europe after countries banned Russian planes from using their air space.
Concern about travel was so great that some people rushed to book seats on the few international flights still operating.
Compounding the pain was the decision by Western countries to restrict the Russian Central Bank’s access to much of its $643 billion in foreign currency reserves, undoing some of the Kremlin’s careful efforts to soften the impact of potential sanctions and making it difficult for the bank to prop up the ruble.
Shell, a company that for years helped Russia profit from its energy riches, said it was exiting all its joint ventures with Gazprom, Russia’s largest state-owned natural gas company — following BP’s announcement Sunday it would sell its stake in the Russian state-run oil giant Rosneft.
Volvo said it would stop production at its truck factory in Russia, and Mercedes-Benz Said it would drop its partnership with a Russian truck maker.
And in a sign of how the sanctions were hitting regular Russians in ways big and small, Apple Pay and Google Pay stopped working at many of Moscow’s subway turnstiles — the ones operated by a bank on the American sanctions list.
Explore the causes of the conflict and the history of the relationship between the two countries. e Russia’s attack was preceded by months of military buildup on the border with Ukraine and rising tensions.
Here is how the invasion unfolded. e The fate of Ukraine could have enormous implications for the world.
Learn more about what's at stake. e To receive the latest updates and expert insight on the Russia-Ukraine war straight to your inbox, sign up here.
In Ukraine e Photographers around the country are documenting the effects of the invasion on the ground. e Ukraine’s army and a growing corps of civilian volunteers are mounting a spirited defense of the city of Kyiv, while a grass-roots movement Is underway in countryside villages. e Though some fear cryptocurrency could help Russia evade sanctions, it has also provided a way for investors to quickly move funds to Ukrainian fighters.
In Russia e As Western sanctions kick in and the ruble plunges, Russian citizens are facing the anxieties of a costly war. e Russian artists are speaking out and signing petitions against the war, even though doing so could damage their career or lead to jail.
Around the World e India has refrained from joining the West in condemning Ukraine’s invasion.
Here are the considerations driving that decision. e Several countries, including traditionally neutral Switzerland, have adopted broad measures against Russia.
