Status as an Indigenous People........................26 A Background...............................................................4 2.
The Situation in Eastern and Members of his Administration......................6 Ukraine........................................28 E Extradition From Russia to Ukraine......................7 A Military Invasion by Russia...................................28 1.
European Convention on Extradition..............8 B Military Intervention Leading 2.
The Role of Energy Security B Deployment of Russian Troops............................32 and Investment Protection.........11 C Black Sea Fleet Treaties Between Ukraine A Ukraine on the European Energy Map................11 and Russia................................................................34 B European Gas Supply.............................................12 The Uncertain Constitutionality 1.
Pipelines and Transit of Gas.........12 of the Black Sea Fleet Agreements....................34 2.
Ukraine’s Possible C Projects in Mainland Ukraine...............................14 D Projects in Crimea..................................................15 Countermeasures........................36 1.
Different Balance of Power on the Global Against Ukrainian and Natural Gas Market...........................................16 Russian Officials..........................37 3.
Reversal of the Pipeline.....................................16 A United States............................................................37 4.
Nationalization of Ukrainian B European Union.....................................................38 Energy Assets in Crimea..................................17 C Canada.....................................................................44 5.
Crimea’s Energy Dependence D Australia...................................................................39 on Mainland Ukraine........................................17 6.
Kosovo................................................................23 Recommendations..............................49 2.
Republika Srpska...............................................24 Executive summary The political, military, economic, and social crisis Northern Cyprus; and the rights of Crimean Tatars as an in Ukraine is severe.
Because law students and a recent NYU graduate researched and Russia currently maintains a significant troop presence drafted this Report for Razom, a Ukrainian-American at the Eastern border, these issues are pertinent to human rights organization.
The Report attempts to understanding the situation fully. provide relevant background and a legal context for the current situation.
Ukraine and Crimea in requirements for combatant identification. particular are critical to the Russian infrastructure to supply natural gas to Eastern and Western Europe.
European Union and other countries have already adopted The Report analyzes this critical energy dimension. against key Ukrainian and Russian figures.
I DOMESTIC AND INTERNATIONAL ELEMENTS OF THE CRISIS Parliament annulled the anti-protest laws and passed an A Background amnesty bill, but protesters rejected the government’s proposed deal.
Ukraine’s acute crisis began in November 2013 when President Yanukovych failed to sign a popular On February 21, 2014, the day before abandoning trade agreement with the European Union and instead his post, President Yanukovych and three opposition sought closer ties to Russia.
Hundreds of thousands of people leaders, Arseniy Yatsenyuk, Vitaliy Klitschko, and Oleh protested peacefully on Kyiv’s central square against the Tiahnybok, signed an agreement to resolve the longPresident’s dramatic policy change.
Witnessed by foreign ministers from to arrest demonstrators, the number of protesters grew, and Poland, Germany, France and a representative of Russia, Independence Square turned into a tent city.
Protesters then the agreement called for adopting a law within 48 hours took over several major government buildings. to restore Ukraine’s 2004 Constitution.
The agreement On January 16, 2014, the Ukrainian Parliament passed mandated a government of national unity, constitutional anti-protest laws, dubbed “Dictatorship Laws,” that reforms, and new presidential elections.
By that point, sparked further clashes between protesters and police, clashes between protesters and government forces had left leading to several deaths.
Western Information Agency Corporation 4 Source: pravda.com.ua On February 22, 2014, the Parliament adopted an as Mr Yanukovych had abandoned his post.
Presidential unprecedented resolution on Mr Yanukovych’s departure authority then vested in the Head of Parliament until the and the need for new presidential elections.
The Parliament resigned and to hold early presidential elections on May also reinstated the 2004 Constitution,9 thus finally limiting 25, 2014.
In the case of resignation, the Constitution European Union and the United States.
Many critical requires the President to announce his resignation to legal and political issues remain unresolved, however.
That did not occur in this case. example, in recent public statements from Russia,12 Mr Yanukovych has stated that he did not resign and that he Since his departure from Kyiv, Mr Yanukovych has remains Ukraine’s rightful President. made three public appearances at press conferences in Rostov-on-Don, Russia, making clear that he is neither ill nor dead.
In this case, there was no need for impeachment for Mr Yanukovych’s continuing authority.
The High 5 Administrative Court dismissed the case, finding that only and indirect power to resolve the issues around the the Constitutional Court has jurisdiction.
Members of Parliament can request that the Court hear a case regarding Mr Yanukovych’s The reinstatement of the 2004 Constitution is also departure.
Parliament grounded its resolution to constitutional unless the Constitutional Court accepts a reinstate it in the Constitution itself and referenced challenge to their actions and finds them unconstitutional. a Council of Europe Venice Commission report.
The Constitutional On November 30, 2013, the Presidential Administration Court’s Role used deadly force against peaceful protesters on Kyiv’s Independence Square.
Law-enforcement agents As in many civil-law countries, Ukraine has a attacked and severely beat hundreds of people, mostly Constitutional Court to resolve exclusively constitutional students.
It alone decides whether laws are instructions to clear the Square in order to erect a constitutional.
To satisfy popular demands for justice and to stabilize Thus, the Constitutional Court has some authority in the the situation, the newly appointed government initiated current circumstances. prosecution of many former officials.
In addition to former President Yanukovych, the Prosecutor 1) Interpret the scope of the President’s powers.
If found guilty, these people acts themselves; 20 could serve sentences of ten years to life imprisonment.
Prysyazhnyk, former Chief of special unit Alpha; as well as other Security Service and Interior Ministry officers.
Therefore, the Constitutional Court has significant direct None has yet been arrested.
RTE In addition, the Prosecutor General has formed a special Under the Criminal Code, there are four relevant group to investigate the shootings during the Kyiv categories for conspiracy to commit mass murder: protests.
This group will investigate deaths among both organizer, abettor, accessory and principal offender.
It is protesters and law-enforcement officers,30 investigating very unlikely that the General Prosecutor will charge all who gave and followed orders, as well as those who had of these actors as principal offenders, but most may face the power to stop the use of deadly force and did not. charges of aiding and abetting or organization.
The actual Under the Criminal Code, a person’s act or omission is charges will depend on investigations, which remain deemed lawful, even if it caused harm to legally protected incomplete.
In addition to these crimes, it seems likely interests, if that person obeyed a lawful command.
A that several former officials may face additional criminal command is lawful if the appropriate officials, acting charges of state treason, encroachment on the territorial within their scope of authority, give a command, and if integrity and inviolability of Ukraine, and embezzlement. that command does not violate the law or constitutional rights.
In addition to mass murder, the government has If law enforcement fails to bring Mr Yanukovych to named Mr Yanukovych and other high-ranking officials as justice, the General Prosecutor must drop charges after criminal suspects for money laundering, abuse of power, the applicable statutes of limitations have run.
The statute and illegally seizing power. of limitations for money laundering is 15 years and for abuse of authority, 10 years.
For crimes punishable by The Prosecutor General’s Office has filed all of the criminal life imprisonment, including mass murder, the statute of charges above in a public investigation register.
Arrest limitations may run indefinitely. warrants have issued for all those on the “wanted list,”33 and arrests are critical, as current law does not permit conviction in absentia.
While Mr Yanukovych remained in office, however, Parliament adopted amendments, known as the “Dictatorship Laws,” in January 2014 E Extradition from Russia to permit criminal trials in absentia.
Under those provisions, an investigator, prosecutor or judge could to Ukraine initiate a criminal trial against an absent defendant if the accused had been issued a subpoena and had failed to In February 2014, Ukraine’s Prosecutor General requested appear.
Today, prosecutions in absentia are unlawful as the extradition of former President Yanukovych from Parliament revoked the “Dictatorship Laws” shortly after Russia.
On March 5, 2014, Interpol, the international law Mr Yanukovych’s departure. enforcement agency, received a Ukrainian request for a 7 Red Notice, an international alert for a wanted person who 2) the extradition might cause an individual to face torture has not yet been issued an international arrest warrant. or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment; Interpol is still reviewing this request.
We The European Convention supersedes the provisions consider both treaties below. of any other agreements between the two state parties to the extent that the provisions are in conflict.
If the provisions are not conflicting, then the CIS provisions are supplementary.
The Commonwealth of Independent All 47 member states of the Council of Europe and States Convention on Legal Israel, South Africa and South Korea have ratified the Assistance and Legal Relations in European Convention on Extradition.
The Convention envisions a general obligation to extradite following Civil, Family and Criminal Matters a valid request from one state party to another for crimes punishable with imprisonment of at least one Russia and Ukraine are both parties to the CIS year by both parties.
Despite overarching obligations, Convention on Legal Assistance and Legal Relations in there are many exceptions.
A party may refuse to Civil, Family and Criminal Matters,51 as are Armenia, extradite if it considers the offense political or military; Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, subject to an amnesty or the death penalty; beyond the Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.
The 1993 applicable statute of limitations; or serving as a pretext CIS Convention imposes the obligation to extradite for persecution on actual grounds of “race, religion, an individual criminal prosecution or execution of nationality or political opinion.”46 sentence upon any other party’s demand.
Extradition for prosecution applies only to acts punishable under the Ukraine and Russia have each ratified the first two of laws of both parties by at least one year of imprisonment. four additional protocols.
Russia’s Reservation and Comments state parties may agree on prosecution in either state.
The Convention envisions no consequences or sanctions in the to the European Convention on event of non-compliance.
In addition to the Convention Extradition provisions, both Russia56 and Ukraine57 have applicable Criminal Procedure Code provisions on extradition.
On March 17, 2014, the day after the Crimean secession 1) the requesting state relied on an “ad hoc tribunal” or vote, the Parliament approved a Presidential Decree to “summary proceedings”; partially mobilize the army.
This mobilization covers 8 all Ukraine, except Crimea and Sevastopol, where only Pavlo Petrenko stated on March 17 that the government volunteers were called up. expects to resolve the crisis peacefully.
He further stated that current government measures, including creating the The Decree requires army reservists to report for 45 days’ National Guard, partial mobilization, and new military service.
Parliament approved the mobilization of 40,000 funding, are sufficient at this time. reservists and agreed to allocate $600 million for training, weapons, and equipment over the next three months.
Twenty thousand reservists are to deploy as part of the armed forces, and twenty thousand are to serve in the newly created National Guard.
G The International The Constitution envisions army mobilization and Criminal Court’s empowers Parliament to approve decrees on martial law and states of emergency within two days of the Potential Jurisdiction submission of the decrees to the President.
Parliament The Rome Statute, adopted in 1998, created an may impose martial law throughout Ukraine for up to International Criminal Court . 30 days or, in specific regions, for up to 60 days.
The National Security and Defense Council must consult The treaty came into effect on July 1, 2002.
The “Svoboda” party called for acting President Turchynov 1) The accused is a national of a state party or a state to introduce martial law in the beginning of March.
Vice otherwise accepting the ICC’s jurisdiction; Speaker of Parliament Ruslan Koshulinkiy also endorsed the imposition of martial law.
Nonetheless, there have 2) The crime took place on the territory of a state party or been no decrees on martial law, and Justice Minister a state otherwise accepting the Court’s jurisdiction; or 9 3) The United Nations Security Council has referred has confirmed that “a government can make a declaration the situation to the ICC Prosecutor, regardless of the accepting the court’s jurisdiction for past events.”81 accused’s nationality or the location of the crime.
On February 25, 2014, the Parliament passed a resolution Ukraine is not a state party.
Although it signed the Rome requesting “the ICC to hold Viktor Yanukovych and other Statute in 2000, it has not yet ratified the treaty.
The ICC has confirmed that its General must amend the Constitution to ratify the Rome Statute.
Prosecutor has the discretion to decide whether to The Court concluded that for Parliament to ratify the intervene.
The General Prosecutor’s decisions hinge Rome Statute, a Constitutional Amendment is required. on the gravity of the crimes, local conditions, and the Although Ukraine is not a state party, the Rome Statute availability of information to support criminal cases. still plays a role because Ukraine signed it.
Security Council Despite the ICC’s lack of direct jurisdiction, Ukraine can The Rome Statute allows the UN Security Council to request and accept ICC jurisdiction.
Such a Rules, a request would require accepting jurisdiction for all referral seems exceedingly unlikely, however, as Russia potential ICC crimes.
The Ivory Coast recently made such is a member of the UN Security Council and would a request.
In addition, ICC spokesperson Fadi El Abdallah presumably veto any ICC intervention.
The Bratstvo pipeline is it has largely failed to explore the role of energy in the Russia’s largest pipeline to Europe.
This section examines that role. to Slovakia and splits into two directions to supply northern and southern European countries.
Ukraine on the European The Soyuz pipeline links Russian pipelines to natural gas networks in Central Asia and supplies additional volumes energy map to central and northern Europe.
Ukraine’s geographic position and proximity to Russia A third major pipeline, the Trans-Balkan, cuts through explain its importance as a natural gas and petroleum Ukraine and delivers Russian natural gas to the Balkan transit country.
In the past, disputes between Russia natural gas flowed through Ukraine in 2013 to Austria, and Ukraine over natural gas supplies, prices, and debts Bosnia-Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, resulted in interruptions to Russia’s natural gas exports Germany, Greece, Hungary, Moldova, Poland, Romania, through Ukraine.
The image to the right illustrates the three major gas pipelines flowing through Ukraine.
Russia may continue to use Ukraine dominates Europe’s energy transport corridors, gas prices to influence Ukrainian politics99 and could put making its energy relations with Russia a vital concern to its geopolitical interests in Crimea ahead of international Western Europe.
The EU imports over 54 percent of its law and any views of the international community.
About one-fourth of Europe’s oil possibility underscores the need for European leaders to and gas originates in Russia.
Russia has disrupted supplies develop alternative sources of natural gas. when it had disputes with transit countries, including disputes with Ukraine in 2006 and 2009.
In light of past conflicts with Ukraine that led to gasThis crisis highlights Europe’s energy dependence on supply disruptions, Russia initiated the construction and Russia.
The Nord Stream, security plan that would ramp up new imports, including which runs from Russia to Germany, has already cut down United States shale gas and traditional gas from Iraq. the proportion of EU-bound gas shipped through Ukraine from 80 percent in 2011 to about 50 percent today.0 Germany is the most dependent of all the EU member states on natural gas imports from Russia.
While Angela The South Stream pipeline is particularly relevant to the Merkel, Chancellor of Germany, dismissed “dependency,” Crimean crisis.
This pipeline is critical for Russia’s supply saying that 30% imports is not a dependency,96 she has chain diversification.
After the Nabucco pipeline project declared97 a need to respond to Russia’s annexation of stalled, the field was open for Russia’s Gazprom to cement Crimea even if it goes against Germany’s energy interests. its dominant role in the region.
It did this by building the South Stream pipeline to pump gas through the Black So far, the fateful events in Kyiv and the military Sea into Southeast Europe to meet about 10 percent of occupation of Crimea have not affected the flow of gas.
Using the Crimean sea shelf to lay production-sharing agreements for hydrocarbons. pipeline instead of the Black Sea seabed would enable These initiatives aim to improve the Ukrainian economy Russia to complete the project much earlier and at lower and reduce dependence on Russian natural gas. cost.
Before the annexation, Russia would have had to strike a deal with Ukraine and pay transit costs.
Now, if Various commentators have opined that the Crimean Crimea remains under its control, it no longer has to do crisis derives at least in part from Russia’s fears about so.
Western Europe’s reaction to the annexation, however, shale-gas production in Ukraine.
A shale-gas makes unclear102 whether Russia will reap the benefits it revolution could bring Ukraine a certain degree of energy intended. independence and economic security.
Comtransit tariffs. mentators predicted a radical change in EU energy policy as its staff prepared to shield Europe from energy blackmail.
Ukraine signed PSAs with Shell and Chevron in January and November 2013, respectively.
Both projects aim to explore and produce unconventional gas in the Yuzivska and Oleska shale gas fields with the use of fracking, 2.
Exploration of natural resources the technology behind the recent natural gas boom in the United States.
The image below illustrates the on the sea shelf unconventional gas exploration projects in Ukraine.
Projects in Crimea and Shell, won a bid to develop the undersea field that extends westward along the Black Sea coastline to Two major developments in natural gas exploration on Romania.
The PSA signing was delayed several times the Crimean sea shelf are of geopolitical significance. and was not signed before the occupation of Crimea.
First, Italian ENI was engaged in exploring both shale This PSA could add $325 million to the Ukrainian gas and conventional gas in Ukraine.
It also entered state budget and increase midand long-term national into a PSA with French company EDF in November natural-gas production by 5-10 billion cubic meters per 2013 to develop the Subbotina, Abikha, Mayachna, and year.
The map below illustrates the deep-water natural Kavkazka blocks off the eastern coast of Crimea in the gas exploration areas in Crimea.
The Shell withdrew from its project in January 2014.114 After United Kingdom expected investment of approximately the occupation of Crimea, ExxonMobil representatives $4 billion, with oil production of two to three million told the press that they were putting their project on tons a year.
Executives at ExxonMobil remain interested in waiting for the crisis to end and expect any government exploring the area and have stated that they will not take in control of the Crimea to honor its predecessor’s sides in the dispute.
It can be argued that Russia orchestrated and as Foros, could reach about 20 percent of Ukraine’s current fueled the Kyiv protests and change of government to annual gas imports, which come mainly from Russia.
A create a pretext for annexation of Crimea and potentially number of other smaller ongoing or planned projects are other parts of Ukraine.2 on the Crimean sea shelf.
Another international energy project is in the Skifska area, where a group of companies, led by ExxonMobil 15 1.
Foreign investors are likely to seek more substantial investment protection guarantees going in the energy sector forward and to take account of the obvious geopolitical risks.
If Russia succeeds in annexing Crimea, it will gain access to the major part of the explored offshore gas deposits and prospective hydrocarbon resources in the Black Sea.
Ukraine also appears to be losing an important piece of its economic and energy future under Crimean global natural gas market waters.
Exploiting the Black Sea fields would reduce its dependence on Russian gas imports.
These developments Globally, the crisis in Crimea may position the United States as a new inevitably deter foreign investment in the exploration leader in natural gas production; potentially, it could start of natural resources critical to the development of the exports to Europe.
It also harms the general help Russia control the energy flows from the Middle East investment climate. and secure its role as a gas exporter to Europe, the United States might try to deploy its vast supply of natural gas as a weapon to The presence of separatist movements in Eastern undercut Russian influence in Ukraine and Europe.0 Ukraine and the threat of further military occupation also undermine Ukraine’s attempts to reduce energy Two United States Senators already have announced a bipartisan dependence.
The Yuzivska and Skifska PSA projects plan to expedite the United States Department of Energy’s review of likely carry price tags of US$10 billion each, while the applications to export liquefied natural gas.
This process Subbotina-Prykerchenska project could absorb US$4 has been so slow that some might consider it equivalent to billion in investment.
The presence of a new source of investment is a hardship, considering Ukraine’s cashnatural gas would decrease prices on the European market strapped state of affairs.8 and adversely affect Russian interests.
Nevertheless, the economic feasibility and availability of required Experts believe that the Crimean crisis will have a infrastructure to accommodate United States exports of liquefied dampening effect on future shale exploration, and many natural gas exports remain problematic. projects will stall until the investment climate improves and 3.
Reversal of the pipeline Russia’s efforts to bypass Ukraine with its energy exports to pressure Ukraine have led to the idea of reverse gas transport from Europe to Ukraine.
The UK and the EU have discussed these initiatives in the context of becoming less dependent on Russian gas.
Ukraine must increase domestic production by attracting foreign investment and technology, and the EU must diversify its supply sources further.
According to Ukraine’s energy minister, Ukraine has paid “politically motivated” prices for natural gas.
That is why Ukraine has talked to the EU about upgrading its pipeline network and adding reverse flow capability.
In case of further Naftogaz, which was involved in the development of escalation of conflict and suspension of Russian gas, the hydrocarbons in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.7 reverse supply would fail to keep up with demand in a Following “nationalization,” the Crimean government short time.
Ukraine appears to have gas reserves that handed the company over to Gazprom, which effectively could suffice for approximately 4-5 months if transport took control.
The reality, however, is that Russia called this robbery, and the Ukrainian government currently supplies more than half of all Ukraine’s natural threatened to respond with the nationalization of Russian gas supply, and any alternative supply is too small to assets in Ukraine.9 suffice.
Nationalization of Ukrainian energy mainland Ukraine assets in Crimea Crimea heavily depends on mainland Ukraine for supplies With Crimea’s annexation, Ukraine faces the loss of other of nearly all of its electricity, food and water.
The self-proclaimed has not voiced any intention to cut off these supplies, but a Crimean government has nationalized two major shutoff could happen if the conflict escalates further. energy companies,126 Chernomornaftogaz, a subsidiary 17 6.
Potential investment protection claims As its legal status remains in dispute, it is not clear which state may be a respondent in arbitration on foreign The Russia-Ukraine conflict is likely to result in several investments claims. nationalizations and expropriations on both sides.
It could further lead to investment-protection claims by foreign Before the military occupation, Crimea was an integral investors against host states under various bilateral and part of Ukraine, and Ukraine had treaty obligations multilateral investment treaties.
Unlike Ukraine, Russia has not ratified this treaty to foreign investors by expropriating or otherwise and may be subject only to arbitration under separate impairing those investments.
Whether foreign bilateral investment treaties. investors will be able to use investment treaties to protect their investments in Crimea remains an open As the conflict develops, it is not yet possible to assess its question, but energy-related issues will continue to full potential impact on foreign investment in Crimea. play a key role.
The Stalinist government deported other ethnic minority groups as well, including Armenians, an “autonomous” region Bulgarians, and Greeks.
Hence, in 1954, when the Russian SSR transferred Crimea to the Ukrainian SSR, it was more In 1954, the Soviet Union transferred the Crimean “Russian” than it had been in centuries because of the peninsula from the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet massive deportations.4 Republic to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic administratively.
First, the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Since 1991 and the end of the Soviet era, 300,000 Crimean Federation approved the transfer, and then the Supreme Tatars have returned and resettled in Crimea.
The Soviet of the Ukrainian accepted it on June 17, 1954.131 Mejlis, or Crimean council, asked Crimean residents Such transfers were purely administrative and routine in and Tatars to boycott the March 16 referendum.
Following the request, Parliament adopted a resolution recognizing them on March 20, 2014. “the legal system in the Soviet Union was mostly Parliament instructed the Cabinet of Ministers to start a fiction, but the transfer did occur in accordance the process to have Ukraine join the UN Declaration on with the rules in effect at the time.
Moreover, the Rights of Indigenous People and to develop laws to regardless of how the transfer was carried out, define and reinforce the status of Crimean Tatars as an the Russian Federation expressly accepted indigenous people.
Ukraine’s 1991 borders both in the December 1991 Belovezhskaya Pushcha accords of the Ukrainian Constitution provides that precipitated and codified the dissolution of the that Ukraine is a unitary state and that its territory is Soviet Union) and in the December 1994 Budapest indivisible and inviolable.
The Autonomous Republic of Crimea enjoys special status Originally, Crimea was an “autonomous republic” in the with significant independence, yet it remains a constituent RSFSR; however, its status changed to oblast, or province, part of Ukraine.
Under the Constitution, Parliament controls Ukraine’s territory and sovereignty through its lawmaking powers.
Article 73 regime deported them en masse for alleged collaboration provides that any change to the country’s territory requires 19 a referendum of the whole country, similar to the situation Autonomous Republic is an integral part of Ukraine and of Quebec in Canada.
Article 72 outlines the mandatory must govern itself in accordance with the Constitution.1 procedure for such a nation-wide referendum.
The Ukrainian Constitution is supreme over to this article, Crimea may pass laws and hold referenda all other laws and regulations. regarding its domestic agriculture, public works, housing, tourism, cultural institutions, public transport, In the event of the Crimean Parliament’s noncompliance and hospitals.
Under the Constitution, only Parliament may and simultaneously appeal to the Constitutional Court. order a nationwide referendum related to territorial Thus on March 7, 2014, acting President Turchynov signed changes. a decree halting the Order of the Crimean Parliament of March 6, 2014 to hold a referendum on territorial integrity On March 6, 2014, the Supreme Council of the as a violation of the laws and the Constitution.
On March Autonomous Republic of Crimea adopted a resolution, 7, he also suspended the Crimean Parliament’s resolution “On the All-Crimean Referendum” on the basis of authorizing the March 16 referendum.
Article 26 provides that the Supreme On March 14, the Constitutional Court ruled that the Council may “pass a resolution upon holding a republican Crimean referendum was unconstitutional and ordered referendum.” the Crimean authorities to cease all preparations for it immediately.
Further, Ukraine’s Minister of Justice Pavlo The Crimean Autonomous Republic Constitution Petrenko, Ombudsman Valeriya Lutkovska and Chair unequivocally states, however, that any referendum to of the Council of Judges Vasyl Onopenko all publicly make changes to territorial boundaries must comply condemned the Crimean referendum as unconstitutional with the Ukrainian Constitution.
Forbes 20 through Law opined that the unconstitutional and ceases to be effective as of referendum was illegitimate.2 the day of this decision.
The Commission of the Autonomous Republic referendum, other issues tainted the referendum’s legitimacy of Crimea shall cease all activity regarding the as well.
The Council of Ministers of the Autonomous for the referendum with ten days’ notice.
The terms of the Republic of Crimea shall cease financing any referendum were peculiar, as discussed below.
Crimean activity regarding the Referendum in question, authorities permitted no international election monitors or destroy all ballots and “advertising” materials. experts to observe.
Furthermore, armed soldiers, without national or other insignia but widely deemed to be Russian, 4.
On March 21, 2014, the Venice Commission issued its own written opinion.
The March 16 Referendum It found that “the Constitution of Ukraine does not allow for a referendum on secession . . . t is typical The March 16 referendum asking Crimeans to join Russia for constitutions of Council of Europe member states was illegal under both domestic and international law.
The Venice Commission further also violated the Constitution, domestic legislation and noted that “self determination is understood primarily the basic principles of democracy.
Only ten days before the vote, on March 6, 2014, the Crimean Parliament adopted a resolution “On the all“1.
These provisions, in conjunction after the Soviet collapse but quickly thrown out by postwith Chapter X, show that this prohibition also Soviet Ukraine, would effectively provide for Crimea’s applies to the decision of the Autonomous Republic independence, while technically allowing it to remain part of Crimea.
Voters had to mark one option affirmatively, but allow the Supreme Soviet of Crimea to call such a had no option to vote for the status quo.
Only a consultative referendum on voters the right to make a legally meaningful choice. increased autonomy would be permissible under the Ukrainian Constitution.
Moreover, circumstances in Crimea did not allow the holding of a referendum in line with “The Resolution of the Supreme Rada European democratic standards.
Any referendum of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea ‘On the on the status of a territory should have been all-Crimean Referendum’ dated March 6, 2014 is preceded by negotiations among all stakeholders. not in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine Such negotiations did not take place.”144 and therefore is unconstitutional.
The Resolution of the Supreme Rada questions were invalid because they failed to offer a status quo of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea ‘On the choice.
Crimean Tatars of an ethnic group that did not also have a firm territorial largely boycotted the referendum on March 16, 2014, but claim against a pre-existing political entity.
In essence, authorities did not even provide voting booths in Tatar the debate turns on whether ethnic groups that qualify regions.
By holding the referendum in this manner, as minorities may also qualify also as “peoples” enjoying Crimean authorities violated the rights of Crimean Tatars a right to self-determination.
The general rule applies that self-determination is a right linked to a historically defined territory.
A majority may decide its political status in a plebiscite, and neighbors must accept C Right of Secession the clearly defined boundaries according to the principle of uti possidetis juris.2 The historical evolution of the right to self-determination has a core area where the right to self-determination This is not to say that there is no controversy; the is beyond dispute.
In the case of decolonization, for members of the previously dominant group usually do example, state practice has shown that non-self-governing not wish to separate from their kin-state and become a territories as well as trusteeship territories enjoy a minority in a new state, as was the case with Russians in clear right to self-determination.
Nevertheless, the international circumstances are the autonomous population of the noncommunity accepted the claims of those republics, as well self-governing territories grouped together in colonial as those of the former Yugoslav republics, to form their times to form a distinct political entity.8 own states.
Although in both cases recognition rested on arguments of dismemberment of former federations, the These territories became recognizable as independent international community had no problem accepting their states under the principle of uti possidetis juris, or territory-based claims of self-determination.3 recognition of the legal boundaries at the time of independence, because their geographical territories took Other cases have been more controversial, like the shape when they were colonies.
They simply inherited unilateral declaration of independence by the former those boundaries from their colonial rulers.
Forbes 22 international practice has been clear: Subjects of selfthere might be reasonable grounds for political entities determination must have a clear territorial basis and not to seek secession.
Ongoing or pending genocide may simply be “peoples.”154 be such a case, as well as gross and consistent patterns of discriminatory crimes against humanity, targeted Unilateral secession, unlike self-determination, does not massacres among an oppressed population, and large-scale involve the exercise of a right generally recognized under ethnic cleansing.1 international law.
The government of a state may oppose the unilateral secession of part of that state by all lawful Whether such exceptional circumstances can lead to a means.
Third states should remain neutral during such clear right to secession is an open question.
It is up to the a conflict, as assistance to an unrecognized group may international community to judge the legitimacy of any be perceived as intervention in internal affairs or as a attempt.
On the other hand, international a particular situation, international actors might still law may acknowledge the political reality once the prefer internal self-determination or autonomy instead independence of a seceding entity has been firmly of secession.
The Canadian Supreme Court addressed this policy might demand such a situation, and a clear legal issue in its Quebec Secession decision in 1998.156 entitlement, a “right” to secession, would create obstacles for all attempts at international mediation.
It is thus better The Commission of Jurists, appointed by the League of to view situations of exceptional legitimacy of secession Nations in the 1920s to examine the Åland Islands157 case, not in terms of a clear-cut collective right, but in broader arrived at the same view as is generally accepted today, terms of legitimacy, open to international moderation and notwithstanding subsequent developments in the principle judgment.3 of self-determination.
Furthermore, since its Normally, a right to self-determination supports only independence from the former Soviet Union, Ukraine has internal self-determination.
Several efforts, including Kosovo, reasons, most states have not wanted to legitimate Republika Srpska, and Northern Cyprus provide useful secessionist movements.
Secession usually does not solve comparisons to the Crimean case. the political problems lying beneath the surface, and often tends to escalate them.
Claims of secession regularly produce counterclaims of secession of smaller sub-entities 1.
Kosovo and lead to endless conflicts over territory, boundaries, and resources.
As a result, it is not only an ethnic group Kosovo, formerly in southern Serbia, has an ethnically that is seceding, but also a certain a territory that must mixed population, the majority of which is ethnic separate from the territory of the former sovereign in Albanian.
Until 1989, the region enjoyed a high degree of order to form a new state.
In the end, a territorial entity Slobodan Milosevic altered the region’s status, bringing it is seceding, not the ethnic group per se.0 under the direct control of Serbia.
In 1998, open conflict If one concludes that only territorial entities of a prebetween Serbian military and police forces and Kosovar determined, historical nature can assert rights to selfAlbanian forces resulted in over 1,500 Kosovar Albanian determination, this does not mean that the issue of deaths and 400,000 displaced persons.
In exceptional cases, community became concerned about the escalating 23 conflict, its humanitarian consequences, and the risk of international law require states to ensure respect its spread.
President Milosevic’s disregard for diplomatic for the rights of minorities.
When NATO carried out air Chapter II of the Draft Convention of 4 November strikes against Serbian forces in 1999 to bring an end 1991, which has been accepted by these Republics. to massive human rights violations against civilians without Security Council authorization, this raised the 3.
Article 1 of the two 1966 International issue of whether international law supported the use of Covenants on Human Rights establishes that the force for humanitarian intervention.
Subsequently, the principle of the right to self-determination serves commitment of UN and NATO forces in civil and security to safeguard human rights.
By virtue of that right capacities also raised issues of nation building.
The every individual may choose to belong to whatever principle of self-determination, however, was not at the ethnic, religious or language community he or she forefront. wishes.
In the Commission’s view one possible consequence of this principle might be for the Although Kosovo has proclaimed its independence, its members of the Serbian population in Bosniainternational legal status remains unclear and will likely Hercegovina and Croatia to be recognized under remain so for the near future.
Many states are unwilling to agreements between the Republics as having the recognize Kosovo formally, even if they are willing to form nationality of their choice, with all the rights and working relationships with it.
Kosovo’s future participation obligations which that entails with respect to the in multilateral organizations, fora, and agreements is states concerned.”167 uncertain.6 The Commission treated the Serbian population as a minority and denied that they had any right to form an 2.
On the other hand, it did not deny the right of self-determination at the internal level.
As a In January 1992, the Serbian population in Bosniaresult, all people may choose to belong to whatever ethnic, Herzegovina, which made up about thirty-five per cent religious, or language community they wish and might of the Republic’s population, formed its own parliament, have the right to adopt the nationality of choice, under conducted a plebiscite, and on 9 January, 1992 proclaimed agreements between the various republics.
The EU Arbitration the Commission denied external self-determination to Commission was specifically asked whether the Serbian Republika Srpska, a position expressly confirmed in the population in Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina had a right Dayton Agreement largely resolving the war.8 of self-determination.
The Turkish Republic law as it currently stands does not spell out all the implications of the right to self-determination. of Northern Cyprus However, it is well established that, whatever the circumstances, the right to self-determination must On February 13, 1975, the Turkish Cypriot administration not involve changes to existing frontiers at the time reorganized itself by proclaiming a Turkish Federated of independence except where State of Cyprus under the Turkish Cypriot leader the states concerned agree otherwise.
Most of the Turkish Cypriots who had lived in the southern part of Cyprus resettled to the north.
Where there are one or more groups within a Moreover, Turkey and the TFSC encouraged additional state constituting one or more ethnic, religious Turkish settlers to move to northern Cyprus, thereby or language communities, they have the right to changing the demographic composition of the island. recognition of their identity under international law.
Turkey 24 recognized the TRNC as an independent state, a move because of the threatened use of force.
The UN triggered Article 41 of ILC Articles on State Responsibility, Security Council declared that the proclamation of the which prohibits all countries from recognizing Crimea.
TRNC was “null and void” and called upon all states not Foreign states are now required to withhold recognition, to recognize it.
Moreover, when Turkey established because Russia created an illegal territorial situation diplomatic relations with the TRNC, the UN Security by the use or the threat of use of force.
In the case of the TRNC, it fulfilled at least two of the which created an international territorial administration objective criteria of statehood, territory and population. for Kosovo and established its governance separate from Whether there is an independent government in view of Yugoslavia and Serbia.
Nevertheless, as far as general the close ties with Turkey is an open question.
The UN international law is concerned, paragraph 81 of the ICJ Security Council’s call for collective non-recognition still Kosovo Advisory Opinion Advisory Opinion implicitly stands.
In the ICJ’s view, the access to international organizations nor any international declaration of independence did not follow from a use agreements with any state, except Turkey. of force, but rather from the subsequent legal regime established by Resolution 1244.
The Resolution thus The legal status of the TRNC – both as a non-state and as interrupts the link between the illegal use of force in 1999 an illegal, unrecognized state – today resembles the status and the declaration of independence in 2008.
Other states are free to situation in Crimea therefore is different and its change of engage with this secessionist entity as long as they do not legal status flows directly from Russia’s military activities. confer recognition, facilitation, or assistance, the exact Although Crimea sought integration with Russia rather meaning of which falls within the discretion of states.1 than independence, the territorial illegality is closer to What happened in Northern Cyprus seems to be the what happened in Northern Cyprus than Kosovo.4 closest precedent situation to Crimea today.
Evaluating the Precedents Tatars as indigenous people Under international law, the people of Crimea are not precluded from holding a referendum and Crimean Tatars are a Turkic ethnic group native to even declaring independence and their willingness to Crimea.
However, international law does to Crimean antiquity, descending from Scythian, not give them a right to secession from Ukraine or Samartian, Turkic Hun, Kipchak, Ostrogoth, Italian integration with Russia.
The influences of all these myriad expressed at the referendum, however democratically and cultures are evident to this day among contemporary overwhelmingly, changes this position.
Absent widespread Crimean Tatars, underscoring roots that predate the international recognition, the Crimean attempt at 13th century arrival of Islam and Mongol conquests.
Even if Russia contested After the Russian defeat of the Ottoman Empire, Crimea allegations of its use of force, its actions still constituted at became independent, conducting its own internal and least a threat of the use of force, which Article 2 of the foreign affairs.
According to paragraph 81 of the when Crimean Tatars constituted ninety eight percent of ICJ Kosovo Advisory Opinion, Russia’s actions removed the population.
Oppression, restructuring and restrictive this case from being a simple unilateral declaration land reforms led to large numbers of Crimean Tatars of independence and turned it into a violation of a fleeing their native land.
This emigration continued peremptory norm of international law, or jus cogens, unabated until the Russian Bolsheviks sealed the Crimean 25 borders.
Status as an indigenous people approximately 1. million Crimean Tatars took refuge and settled in Romania, Turkey and other parts of the Indigenous peoples under international and national Ottoman Empire. legislation have a set of specific rights based on their historical ties to a particular territory and their cultural In the 19th century, Crimea became Russia’s Black Sea or historical distinctiveness from other, often politically bridgehead.
There is no more specific, universally deportations, especially from 1850-60, forced a large accepted definition of indigenous peoples because of number of Crimean Tatars to emigrate to Turkey.
The Crimean War of 1853– 1856, regressive laws of 1860–63, the Tsarist policy against • priority in time; Crimean Tatars and the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78 all caused a further exodus of Crimean Tatars.
About 200,000 • the voluntary perpetuation of cultural distinctiveness; out of 300,000 Crimean Tatars emigrated.8 • an experience of subjugation, marginalization and In 1921, the Communists won the Russian civil war.
The dispossession; and Russian Council of People’s Commissars adopted a decree establishing the Soviet Socialist Republic of Crimea.
Soviet • self-identification.8 policies, however, were hostile to the Crimean Tatars.
Stalin supported the imprisonment and execution of The United Nations issued a Declaration on the Rights their political leaders and intellectuals.
The Soviet regime of Indigenous Peoples to guide member-state national deported or killed thousands of Crimean Tatars during policies on the collective rights of indigenous peoples, the forced collectivization of 1928-29.179 The first famine such as culture, identity, language, and access to in the early Soviet years of 1921-1923 and the second employment, health, education, and natural resources.9 famine of 1932-1934180 destroyed hundreds of thousands of Crimean Tatar lives.1 The Crimean Tatars fall within this definition of indigenous peoples.
They are descendants from populations that The 1930’s represented a second decade of the Soviet have long inhabited a defined geographical region within authorities’ repression and systematic “extermination” of its present state boundaries.
Within that decade over cultural, linguistic and religious group identity apart from 20,000 people were expelled from Crimea, deported to the identities of the dominant nation and other national Siberia and the Ural Mountains.3 minorities and continue to express the desire to maintain and develop their identity.
They have their own During World War II, the remaining Crimean Tatars faced historical traditions, social institutions, self-government deportation en masse.
And finally, there is no other the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic and other eastern national state or homeland beyond Ukraine’s boundaries parts of the Soviet Union.
Their attempts to return to for Crimean Tatars.0 their homeland began anew in 1987 with petitions and protest demonstrations.
In 1989, the Supreme Soviet of Ever since Ukraine’s independence, the Crimean Tatars the Soviet Union adopted a formal decision allowing have struggled for their status as an indigenous people. the Crimean Tatars and Volga Germans to return to Some authors believe that the Law on National Minorities their homelands.
It was only after Ukraine declared does not sufficiently guarantee the rights of Crimean independence in 1991 that Crimean Tatars returned to Tatars because it protects only cultural and linguistic reclaim their homeland.6 but not political, social, and economic rights.
Ukraine has not supported the UN Declaration on the Rights of The Crimean Tatars started returning in large numbers.
The Crimean Tatars demanded the restoration of the Autonomous Socialist Republic of Crimea.
The 2014 Crisis Tatars had returned, they would have constituted about twenty percent of the whole population; they were unable The Crimean Tatars fear a return to Russian reoccupation to do so, however, and today constitute only fourteen of Crimea.
After the referendum, there have been reports percent of the population.7 that Tatars have had their front doors marked to designate 26 their ethnic identity.
They fear that this may foreshadow On March 17, the day after the referendum, the Crimean a new wave of ethnic cleansing or deportation.
Crimean Deputy Prime Minister Parliament passed a resolution recognizing them as such.
Parliament instructed the Cabinet of Ministers returning to the peninsula in 1991, the Crimean Tatars to initiate the adoption of the UN Declaration on the were forced to build makeshift homes on unauthorized Rights of Indigenous Peoples and to develop legislation property.
These circumstances constitute violations of that would define and reinforce their rights in Ukraine.7 indigenous peoples’ rights.
It does not appear likely that Nevertheless, any single resolution is unlikely to protect Russia will recognize the Tatars as indigenous to Crimea them.
Crimean Tatars did not favor rejoining Russia, and since it has repeatedly tried to populate the region with politicians continue to exploit past enmity between proRussians instead.
THE SITUATION IN EASTERN UKRAINE Possible further escalation of the conflict may occur in B Military intervention Eastern Ukraine,199 where a large Russian-Ukrainian population resides.
There have been periodic proleading to a frozen conflict Russia demonstrations201 and Russian troop movements on the Russian side of the Ukraine-Russia border.
The If Russia invades Eastern Ukraine, it could lead to another situation is murky, however, with many divisions among “frozen conflict,” analogous to what happened in the the pro-Russia groups203 and a partial Russian troop Russia-Georgia conflict in 2008, in which Russia argued withdrawal.
According to news reports, contentious that it did not invade Georgia but was exercising a right future issues might include recognizing Russian as of self-defense.
Declaring that Russia was exercising its an official language,205 creating a federated Ukrainian rights under UN Charter Article 51, President Medvedev state,206 and Russian use of force to annex Eastern responded to a Georgian attack on Russian peacekeepers Ukraine.
This Report does not seek to predict future in Tskhinvali, who were present pursuant to a 1992 Sochi events or assess the probability of any risks.
Russia also argued that it intervened outline, though, some of the legal issues that might arise to protect Russian citizens.1 in certain potential scenarios.
Military invasion by Russia Georgia, declared themselves independent from Georgia.
This is a potential outcome in Eastern would arise as occurred in the Crimean annexation.
Scholars define “frozen conflicts” as those Russia might be culpable for the international crime in which violent ethno-political conflict over secession of aggression, as defined in the UN General Assembly leads to the establishment of a de facto regime recognized Resolution 3314 and customary international law.8 neither by the international community nor the state from which the territory seceded.
Examples in addition Resolution 3314, Article 2, provides that the use of to South Ossetia and Abkhazia include Northern Cyprus, armed force by a state shall constitute prima facie Kosovo, Transdniestria and Nagorno-Karabakh.4 evidence of an act of aggression.
Article 3 lists actions that may constitute aggression, including an armed Potential solutions to frozen conflicts include legislation attack; blockades of ports or coastlines; and sending to protect minorities; arbitration; adopting a federal armed bands or groups to carry out acts of armed system; and even a power-sharing arrangement, as in force.
Managing frozen conflicts is not easy, though. these acts, so it is plausible that Russia might follow Both structural and ethnic issues are complex, and given the same pattern in Eastern Ukraine.
The crime of Russia’s significant security, economic and political aggression constitutes a clear violation of a peremptory interests in the region, frozen conflicts pose serious international law norm.0 challenges to regional security.6 28 A police station in Sloviansk was taken over on April 14, 2014 by unidentified gunmen.
That support Crimea and its accusations against Western countries would violate a UN General Assembly declaration217 of allegedly engineering the ouster of former President and resolution.
Russia has also asserted that the United further elaborated these principles of nonintervention States has been responsible for aggression in Iraq and in Nicaragua United States.
There, the Court stated excessive use of force in Libya and Afghanistan.
These categorically that “he principle of non-intervention arguments may be correct, but they are nonetheless involves the right of every sovereign state to conduct its beside the point.
The use of force or wrongdoing of affairs without outside interference; though examples one state does not justify the wrongdoing of another.3 of trespass against this principle are not infrequent, the Russian efforts to destabilize Ukraine might qualify as court considers that it is part and parcel of customary international acts of aggression.
As such, it created legally binding obligations successor in the international community and assumed its for the guarantor states and could become the subject role as a nuclear weapons state.
However, the new nations of inter-state litigation before the International Court of of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine also emerged as Justice.
It gives signatories resolve of the international community to reduce nuclear only the right to take action, not the obligation to act on weapons became stronger.
Although it is a countries, including Russia, declared their commitment to multilateral document, it is a written document reflecting defend and respect the sovereignty and economies of the the will and commitment of all the signatories.
Ukraine signed the Treaty on the Nonare owed have relied on such obligations; the extent Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons with reservations.5 to which there has been a fundamental change in the In reservation 4, Ukraine pointed out that aggression by circumstances.”242 any nuclear power would constitute an extraordinary circumstance that would serve as an attack on the national The ILC’s Commentary on the “Guiding Principles” security interests of the country.
In these circumstances, contains an extensive analysis of the ICJ’s case law on Ukraine reserved the right to withdraw from the treaty the topic and references many relevant precedents. under Article 10.246 A draft resolution is now before They include declarations by Egypt on the Suez Canal Parliament to require Ukraine to withdraw from the and French statements on nuclear testing; Jordan’s treaty.
Military law On February 28, 2014, about fifty armed gunmen marched prisoners of war, military necessity, and the principles of into Simferopol’s airport after arriving in Kamaz trucks.
They distinction and proportionality. cordoned off the domestic terminal and then moved on to other areas.
In Sevastopol, armed men set up a perimeter Distinction is a principle under international around the city’s airport.
Soon after, in Simferopol, men humanitarian law that governs the legal use of force in dressed in fatigues stormed Crimea’s administration, hoisting an armed conflict.
Under it, belligerents must distinguish a Russian flag above the Crimean Parliament building.
The men described above bore no insignias on their “In order to ensure respect for and protection of uniforms, and it was unclear who they were and who the civilian population and civilian objects, the commanded them.
Russian soldiers also surrounded the Ukrainian air force base in Sevastopol.1 Toni Pfanner, an international-law scholar, explains that the term “fixed distinctive recognizable at a distance” in On March 1, 2014, with the stated reason of saving Russian the Hague Regulations255 and Third Geneva Convention256 lives, President Vladimir Putin announced the invasion include a traditional military uniform.
Although uniforms of Crimea and then warned of wider use of military force can be of various designs and colors, what matters for against Ukraine.
The upper chamber of Russia’s Parliament international humanitarian law is that one can distinguish supported these actions unanimously.
President Putin’s combatants from the civilian population.7 statement came after Russia’s military intervention had already begun in Crimea.
International Law on Military Uniforms B Deployment of Russian The international law of war reflects international troops humanitarian treaties and customary laws.
It provides the rules that govern the conduct of war and the limits of International law is clear that troops must wear uniforms. acceptable wartime conduct.
The apparent deployment It is clear that these men were trained, under command, of unmarked Russian troops in Crimea violates and doing regular shifts, meaning that they were not international law. guerrilla forces.
In Crimea, the Russian artillery pieces and armored vehicles also bore no insignias.
In fact, the Jonathan Eyal, the international director at the Londonmilitary removed or covered the identification marks. based Royal United Services Institute, has written that “ Eyal believes that “t shows they have been planning t is a gross violation.
There appears to have been a clear intent to “The basic principle in every conflict is combatants breach international law. must have clear markings and they must belong to a state.
If they do not belong to a state, they are A minority view in the international community classified as mercenaries or petty criminals.
They does not characterize Russia’s actions as violating are not entitled to prisoner of war status.”260 international law.
Russia’s denial of a military presence in his view, there were lots of different armed groups Crimea appears to have been misleading.
In in Crimea was not clear-cut as no shots were fired. these circumstances, acting President Turchynov appears The minority view therefore holds that the laws of to have been justified in calling the men in Simferopol war do not apply.
The Ukrainians would be entitled to distinguish combatants from civilians.
In the present shoot them on sight or arrest them as they would any case, one can argue that the Russian soldiers were in bank robbers.
It shows a wanton disregard by Russia for green uniforms and were at all times distinguishable international law.”262 from civilians.
All of the bases and facilities in Ukraine became These are Russian troops.
As part of the deal, Ukraine agreed to the themselves as Russian marines from Sevastopol, continuation of the Black Sea Fleet presence.3 all are wearing standard Russian uniforms and although number places have been blanked out, Under the Black Sea Fleet Agreements, Russia agreed to some of them have lost their covers and are clearly lease extensive air and naval facilities for twenty years at Russian armed forces number plates.
There is about $100 million annually, which Ukraine agreed to no requirement about details of uniforms.
Wearing be Sevastopol, with other stations located in designated someone else’s uniform is perfidy.
Russian troops could not interfere in internal relations, and Russian troops had to obey Ukrainian law.
Since the an additional 25 years, commencing May 28, 2017, thus collapse of Soviet Union, Ukraine and Russia disputed lasting until 2042.
They also modified the commercial the proper division of the Black Sea Fleet between the provisions and provided for additional payments as two newly formed countries.
Subsequently, the two discounts on gas purchases, which would depend on the governments signed an interim treaty, establishing a actual price for gas.8 joint Russo-Ukrainian Black Sea Fleet under bilateral command.7 1.
The fourth 1) the Agreement on the status and conditions of the 2010 Black Sea Fleet Agreement, under which the Russian presence of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet in Ukraine;269 Black Sea Fleet would be in Ukraine until May 28, 2042, raised many concerns.
The Ukrainian opposition 2) the Agreement on the parameters of the division of the called it unconstitutional.
They argued that Article Black Sea Fleet;270 and 17 of the Constitution banned foreign military bases.
The Court dismissed On March 24, 1999, the Ukrainian Parliament finally both applications on the same day in 2010 that former ratified the three 1997 intergovernmental agreements.
President Yanukovych signed the Kharkiv Agreements.2 34 The Constitutional Court found that these applications that the 2010 Kharkiv agreements violated not only did not require constitutional interpretation of the Constitution Article 17, but also Article 16 of the 1997 above provisions but rather an evaluation of Kharkiv Black Sea Fleet Agreement, which contains its own Agreements.
On June 9, 2010, the Constitutional prolongation procedures.7 Court dismissed yet another application for an official interpretation of conflicting language in the Transitional The 1997 Black Sea Fleet Agreements were Provisions and Constitution Art. and thus ducked unquestionably valid.
Following these applications, no those agreements in exchange for discounted gas further petitions have requested review of the Kharkiv prices in 2010.
The issue will remain unresolved until Agreements or the Black Sea Fleet Agreements. the Constitutional Court takes on a relevant case and delivers a judgment.
There are two possible positions on the validity of the 2010 Kharkiv Agreements.
Mr Yanukovych and supporters of There are even more conundrums around the Black Sea the 2010 Kharkiv Agreements argued that Constitution Fleet.
Mr Yanukovych stated that already consider those Agreements, as well as the 1997 Transitional Provisions Section 14 allows the temporary Black Sea Agreements, void because Ukraine no longer presence of foreign military bases because Parliament had controls Crimea and Sevastopol.
Ukraine, for its part, approved the lease agreements.5 also wants to denounce the Kharkiv Agreements, as Russia has already violated them by military occupation, seizing The opposition, by contrast, argued that Section 14 of territory and property, and increasing gas prices.
On the Transitional Provisions allowed only foreign military March 31, 2014, Russia denounced all four Black Sea Fleet bases,e. the Russian Black Sea Fleet, until 2017, based Agreements based on its annexation of Crimea.
Because the situation continues to evolve, the final scope of countermeasures Ukraine might adopt is unclear.
The act constituting a countermeasure must be taken above; and in response to a previous intentional wrongful act of another state and must be directed against that state; • other measures within Ukraine’s discretion that are in accord with the rules of international law.1 2.
The countermeasure must be proportionate to the in• denouncing treaties with Russia; jury suffered; and • filing claims with international institutions and 4.
The purpose behind evoking the countermeasure courts like the International Court of Justice, the Eushould be to induce the wrongdoing state to comply ropean Court of Human Rights and other internawith its obligations under international law.
INTERNATIONAL SANCTIONS AGAINST UKRAINIAN AND RUSSIAN OFFICIALS Several nations and international bodies have imposed subsection or of this section or of an sanctions on Russian and former Ukrainian officials entity whose property and interests in property are because of recent events.
I hereby find that the unrestricted immigrant and non-immigrant entry into the United States of actions or policies that undermine democratic aliens determined to meet one or more of the criteria processes or institutions in Ukraine; in subsection 1 of this order would be detrimental to the interests of the United States, and I hereby suspend actions or policies that threaten the peace, seentry into the United States, as immigrants or noncurity, stability, sovereignty, or territorial inimmigrants, of such persons.
Any transaction that evades or avoids, has the integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and purpose of evading or avoiding, causes a violation of, or natural or legal persons, entities or bodies associated with attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this them. order is prohibited.
Annex I shall include the grounds for the listing of Any conspiracy formed to violate any of natural or legal persons, entities or bodies concerned. the prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited.
With regard to natural persons, in property are blocked pursuant to this order who such information may include names including aliases, might have a constitutional presence in the United date and place of birth, nationality, passport and ID States, I find that because of the ability to transfer card numbers, gender, address, if known, and function funds or other assets instantaneously, prior notice or profession.
It shall be prohibited to participate, knowingly and intentionally, in activities the object or effect of which is to On March 16, 2014, ten days later, the President imposed circumvent the measures referred to in Article 2. additional sanctions against more individuals.5 Article 10 1.
European Union carried out in good faith on the basis that such action is in accordance with this Regulation, shall not give The Council of the European Union imposed sanctions rise to liability of any kind on the part of the natural under the Treaty on the Functioning of the European or legal person or entity or body implementing it, or Union, and Council Decision 2014/145/CFSP of March its directors or employees, unless it is proved that the 17, 2014 concerning actions undermining the sovereignty funds and economic resources were frozen or withheld and independence of Ukraine.
Actions by natural or legal persons, entities or bodies “Article 2 shall not give rise to any liability of any kind on their part if they did not know, and had no reasonable 1.
The unauthorized vote in Crimea on 16 March, Application carried out while Russian forces were effectively in control of the territory, cannot form the legitimate basis for any 1.
Section 2 applies in respect of the property of the alteration of the status of Crimea. politically exposed foreign persons listed in the schedule.
The situation in Ukraine remains serious, with the Prohibitions – Asset freeze potential for military confrontation.
The fatal attack on a Ukrainian serviceman in Crimea is deplorable and 2.
A person in Canada or a Canadian outside Canada must underlines the volatility of the crisis Russia is fuelling. not deal, directly or indirectly, in any property, wherever situated, of any politically exposed foreign person; Australia’s financial sanctions and travel bans will cover 12 Russian and Ukrainian individuals at this point.
These enter into or facilitate, directly or indirectly, any actions reaffirm Australia’s clear and unequivocal support financial transaction related to a dealing referred to for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine. in paragraph ; or Australia stands with the international community in provide financial services or other related services in taking action.
We have remained in close contact with respect of any property of any politically exposed friends and allies, including through our membership foreign person. of the United Nations Security Council, where we have delivered strong protests to Russia about its conduct in Application before publication relation to Ukraine.
For the purpose of paragraph 11 of the statutory I continue to urge the Russian government to abide by instruments Act, these Regulations apply before they are its international obligations, including its responsibility published in the Canada Gazette.” as a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Sanctioned by Country Name Reasons CA EU US Crimea Aksyonov Sergey ✓ ✓ ✓ Aksyonov was elected “Prime Minister of Crimea” in the Crimean Verkhovna Rada on 27 February 2014 in the presence of proRussian gunmen.
Ukraine Azarov Mykola ✓ ✓ Former Prime Minister of Ukraine Yanovych Ukraine Azarov Oleksii ✓ ✓ Son of former Prime Minister of Ukraine Mykola Yanovych Mykolayovych AZAROV Russia Bank Rossiya ✓ The personal bank for senior officials of the Russian Federation.
Bank Rossiya’s shareholders include members of Putin’s inner circle associated with the Ozero Dacha Cooperative, a housing community in which they live.
Bank Rossiya is ranked as the 17th largest bank in Russia with assets of approximately $10 billion, and it maintains numerous correspondent relationships with banks in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere.
The bank reports providing a wide range of retail and corporate services, many of which relate to the oil, gas, and energy sectors.
Ukraine Berezovsky Denis ✓ Berezovskiy was appointed commander of the Ukrainian Navy Valentinovich on March 1, 2014 and swore an oath to the Crimean armed force, thereby breaking his oath.
Ukraine Bohatyriova Raisa ✓ Former Minister of Health of Ukraine Vasylivna Russia Bushmin Evgeny ✓ ✓ Deputy Speaker of the Federation Council of the Russian Viktorovich Federation.
Russia Dzhabarov Vladimir ✓ ✓ First Deputy-Chairman of the International Affairs Committee of Michailovich the Federation Council of the Russian Federation.
Russia Fursenko Andrei ✓ An aide to the President of the Russian Federation and has been in that position since May 21, 2012.
Fursenko has held a number of positions in the Government of the Russian Federation since 2001, including Minister of Education and Science from 2004 2012.
Although not being designated for being a member of the Russian leadership’s inner circle, Fursenko first met Putin in 1993 and they remain closely associated.
Russia Glazyev Sergey ✓ ✓ ✓ Adviser to the President of the Russian Federation.
Russia Gromov Alexei ✓ First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Executive Office.
Russia Ivanov Sergei ✓ Chief of Staff of the Presidential Executive Office Russia Ivanov Victor ✓ Director of the Federal Drug Control Service of the Russian Federation since May 15, 2008; he was appointed as a member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation on May 25, 2008.
Ivanov has served in a number of other government positions prior to that; he was Assistant to the President of the Russian Federation from 2004 2008; and Deputy Chief of the Administration of the Russian Federation from 2000 2004.
Ivanov joined the KGB in 1977 and eventually rose to become the Deputy Director of the Federal Security Service.
Ivanov is a close ally of Putin and served alongside Putin as the chief of staff of the St.
Petersburg Mayor’s office in 1994 when Putin was first deputy head of the city’s administration.
Russia Klishas Andrei ✓ ✓ ✓ Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Law of the Aleksandrovich Federation Council of the Russian Federation.
Ukraine Kliuiev Andrii ✓ Former Head of Administration of the former President of Ukraine Petrovych Viktor Fedorovych YANUKOVYCH Ukraine Kliuiev Serhii ✓ Brother of Andrii Petrovych KLIUIEV Petrovych Crimea Konstantynov ✓ ✓ ✓ As speaker of the Supreme Council of the Autonomous Republic Volodymyr of Crimea, Konstantinov played a relevant role in the decisions Andriyovych taken by the Verkhovna Rada concerning the “referendum” against territorial integrity of Ukraine and called on voters to cast votes in favor of Crimean Independence.
Russia Kozhin Vladimir ✓ Appointed the Head of Administration under the President of the Russian Federation by Putin on January 21, 2000.
Kohzin is responsible for overseeing a staff of 60,000, over a hundred enterprises and institutions including the Kremlin and several other government buildings, and over four thousand vehicles.
Kohzin’s positions have been variously referred to as Head of Administration, Head of the Presidential Affairs Office, Head of the Presidential Business Management Directorate of the Russian Federation, and head of the Presidential Property Management Directorate.
Russia Kulikov Valery ✓ Deputy-Commander of the Black Sea Fleet, Rear-Admiral Vladimirovich Responsible for commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory.
Ukraine Kurchenko Serhiy ✓ Businessman and close associate of former President of Ukraine Vitaliyovych Viktor Fedorovych YANUKOVYCH Ukraine Lukash Olena ✓ Former Minister of Justice of Ukraine Leonidivna Russia Malyshev Mikhail ✓ Chair of the Crimea Electoral Commission Responsible for administering the Crimean referendum.
On March 1, 2014, publicly Ivanovna supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Ukraine Medvedchuk Viktor ✓ ✓ Ukrainian oligarch Russia Medvedev Valery ✓ Chair of the Sevastopol Electoral Commission Responsible for administering the Crimean referendum.
Russia Mironov Sergey ✓ ✓ Member of the Council of the State Duma; Leader of Fair Russia Mikhailovich faction in the Duma of the Russian Federation.
Initiator of the bill allowing Russian Federation to admit in its composition, under the pretext of protection of Russian citizens, territories of a foreign country without a consent of that country or of an international treaty.
Russia Mizulina Elena ✓ ✓ ✓ Deputy in the State Duma Borisovna Originator and co-sponsor of recent legislative proposals in Russia that would have allowed regions of other countries to join Russia without their central authorities’ prior agreement.
Publicly supported the deployment of Evgenevich Russian forces in Ukraine.
Publicly supported the Russia-Crimea reunification treaty and the related federal constitutional law Russia Nosatov Alexander ✓ Deputy-Commander of the Black Sea Fleet, Rear-Admiral Mihailovich Responsible for commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory.
Evgenevich On March 1, 2014 Panteleev publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine.
Russia Rotenberg Arkady ✓ Provided support to Putin’s pet projects by receiving and executing high price contracts for the Sochi Olympic Games and statecontrolled Gazprom with Boris Rotenberg.
They have made billions of dollars in contracts for Gazprom and the Sochi Winter Olympics awarded to them by Putin.
Both brothers have amassed enormous amounts of wealth during the years of Putin’s rule in Russia.
The Rotenberg brothers received approximately $7 billion in contracts for the Sochi Olympic Games and their personal wealth has increased by $2. billion in the last two years alone.
Russia Rotenberg Boris ✓ Provided support to Putin’s pet projects by receiving and executing high price contracts for the Sochi Olympic Games and statecontrolled Gazprom with Arkady Rotenberg.
Russia Ryzhkov Nikolai ✓ ✓ Member of the Committee for federal issues, regional politics and Ivanovich the North of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation.
Russia Sergun Igor ✓ Head of Russia’s military intelligence service and is Deputy Chief of the General Staff.
Russia Sidorov Anatoliy ✓ Commander, Russia’s Western Military District, units of which are Alekseevich deployed in Crimea.
Commander of Russia’s Western Military District, units of which are deployed in Crimea.
Russia Surkov Vladislav ✓ ✓ ✓ Aide to the President of the Russian Federation.
He was an Yurievich organizer of the process in Crimea by which local Crimean communities were mobilized to stage actions undermining the Ukrainian authorities in Crimea.
Ukraine Tabachnyk Dmytro ✓ Former Minister of Education and Science of Ukraine Volodymyrovych Crimea Temirgaliev Rustam ✓ As Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Crimea, Temirgaliev played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the Verkhovna Rada concerning the “referendum” against territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Russia Timchenko Gennady ✓ One of the founders of Gunvor, one of the world’s largest independent commodity trading companies involved in the oil and energy markets.
Timchenko’s activities in the energy sector have been directly linked to Putin.
Russia Totoonov Aleksandr ✓ ✓ Member of the Committee on culture, science, and information of Borisovich the Federation Council of the Russian Federation.
He drew into this endeavor Vladimir Konstantinov, threatening him with his dismissal.
Russia Vitko Aleksandr ✓ Commander of the Black Sea Fleet, Vice-Admiral.
Viktorovich Responsible for commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory.
Russia Yakunin Vladimir ✓ Appointed as chairman of the board of the Russian state-owned company Russian Railways on June 15, 2005; he has remained as head of the company ever since.
Yakunin is being designated because of his official position in the Russian government, but he is also a close confidant of Putin.
Yakunin regularly consults with Putin on issues regarding the Russian Railways company.
In addition, Yakunin accompanies Putin on many domestic and international visits.
Yakunin decided to create a business center in the city and contacted Putin for his support.
In addition, Yakunin became a member of the board of the Baltic Maritime Steamship Company on Putin’s instructions.
Yakunin and Putin were also neighbors in the elite dacha community on the shore of Lake Komsomolsk and they served as cofounders of the Ozero Dacha Cooperative in November 1996.
Crimea Zherebtsov Yuriy ✓ Counselor of the Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea, one of the leading organizers on March 16, 2014 “referendum” against Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
Crimea Zima Pyotr ✓ Zima was appointed as the new head of the Crimean Security Anatoliyovych Service on March 3, 2014 by “Prime Minister” Aksyonov and accepted this appointment.
The following table summarizes information on sanctions available as of May 2, 2014.
Country Name Sanctioned by Reasons Switzerland EU US Russia Aquanika (Russkoye ✓ A Russia-based mineral water and soft drink company.
Aquanika Vremya LLC) is being designated because it is owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko.
Russia Avia Group LLC ✓ Avia Group LLC is involved in ground infrastructure for the Business Aviation Center at Sheremetyevo International Airport in Moscow offering aircraft maintenance services, including aircraft storage and organization support services for flight operations.
Avia Group LLC is designated for being owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko.
Russia Avia Group Nord LLC ✓ Provides management services for corporate aviation at Pulkovo International Airport in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
Avia Group Nord LLC is designated for being owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko.
Ukraine Bolotov Valeriy ✓ ✓ One of the leaders of the separatist group ‘Army of the SouthEast’ which occupied the building of the Security Service in the Lugansk region.
Russia Chemezov Sergei ✓ Chemezov was appointed by a presidential decree on November 26, 2007 as the Director General of the State Corporation for Promoting Development, Manufacturing and Export of Russian Technologies High-Tech Industrial Products, also known as Rostec.
Rostec is a Russian state-owned holding company and has not been sanctioned.
Chemezov is a trusted ally of President Putin, whom he has known since the 1980s when they lived in the same apartment complex in East Germany.
Sergei Chemezov was one of the Russian Government’s nominees for the Board of Directors of Rosneft, a Russian state-owned oil company.
Russia CJSC Zest ✓ CJSC Zest is being designated for being owned or controlled by Bank Rossiya.
Russia Gerasimov Valery ✓ ✓ Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Vasilevich Federation, First Deputy Minister of Defence of the Russian Federation, General of the Army.
Russia InvestCapitalBank ✓ Controlled by Arkady and Boris Rotenberg who were designated on March 20, 2014 pursuant to E.O. 13661 for acting for or on behalf of or materially assisting, sponsoring, or providing financial, material, or technological support for, or goods and services to or in support of, a senior official of the Government of the Russian Federation.
Russia JSB Sobinbank ✓ JSB Sobinbank is being designated for being owned or controlled by Bank Rossiya.
Russia Kozak Dmitry ✓ ✓ ✓ Kozak is a Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation, a Nikolayevich position that he has held since October 2008, and to which he was reappointed by presidential decree in May 2012.
Kozak has served in a number of capacities in the Russian Federation since 1999, including as Chief of the Government Staff and Minister of Regional Development.
Responsible for overseeing the integration of the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimean into the Russian Federation.
Russia Kovatidi Olga ✓ ✓ Member of the Russian Federation Council from the annexed Fedorovna Autonomous Republic of Crimea.
Russia Menyailo Sergei ✓ ✓ Acting governor of the Ukrainian annexed city of Sevastopol.
Ivanovich Russia Neverov Sergei ✓ ✓ Deputy Chairman of State Duma, United Russia.
Responsible Ivanovich for initiating legislation to integrate the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Murov has worked in Russian state security services since 1971 and became Head and Director of the Federal Protective Service in May 2000.
Ukraine Purgin Andriy ✓ ✓ Head of the ‘Donetsk Republic’, active participant and organizer of separatist actions, coordinator of actions of the ‘Russian tourists’ in Donetsk.
Russia Pushkov Aleksei ✓ Pushkov has been a Deputy of the State Duma since December 4, 2011.
He is also the Chairman of the State Duma Committee on International Affairs.
Ukraine Pushylin Denys ✓ ✓ One of the leaders of the Donetsk People’s Republic.
Russia Sakhatrans LLC ✓ A transportation company engaged in the construction of the bulk terminal for coal and iron ore exports in Muchka Bay near Vanino in Russia’s far east.
Sakhatrans LLC is designated for being owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko.
Responsible for the integration of Genrikhovich the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Russia Sechin Igor ✓ Sechin is the President and Chairman of the Management Board for Rosneft, Russia’s leading petroleum company, and one of the world’s largest publicly-traded oil companies.
Sechin was formerly the Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation from 2008 until 2012.
Additionally, from 2004 until 2008, Sechin was the Deputy Chief of Staff for President Putin.
Sechin has shown utter loyalty to Vladimir Putin a key component to his current standing.
Russia Sergun Igor ✓ ✓ Director of GRU , Deputy Chief of Dmitrievich the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, Lieutenant-General.
Russia Shvetsova Ludmila ✓ ✓ Deputy Chairman of State Duma, United Russia.
Responsible Ivanovna for initiating legislation to integrate the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Russia SMP Bank ✓ Controlled by Arkady and Boris Rotenberg who were designated on March 20, 2014 pursuant to E.O. 13661 for acting for or on behalf of or materially assisting, sponsoring, or providing financial, material, or technological support for, or goods and services to or in support of, a senior official of the Government of the Russian Federation.
Rotenberg created SGM Group in 2008 after acquiring multiple Gazprom contractors.
Russia Stroytransgaz Group ✓ A Russian construction group, comprising a number of business entities that specialize in different aspects of the construction industry.
Stroytransgaz Group is designated for being owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko.
Russia Stroytransgaz Holding ✓ A holding company for construction assets.
Stroytransgaz Holding is designated for being owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko.
Stroytransgaz LLC is designated for being owned or controlled by the Stroytransgaz Group, the Volga Group, and Timchenko.
Russia Stroytransgaz-M LLC ✓ An industrial construction company focused on oil, gas, petrochemical, and other civil engineering projects.
Stroytransgaz-M LLC is designated for being owned or controlled by the Stroytransgaz Group, the Volga Group, and Timchenko.
Stroytransgaz OJSC is designated for being owned or controlled by the Stroytransgaz Group, the Volga Group, and Timchenko.
Bank Rossiya was Company Investment designated on March 20, 2014 pursuant to E.O. 13661 for Company Abros acting for or on behalf of or materially assisting, sponsoring, or providing financial, material, or technological support for, or goods and services to or in support of, a senior official of the Government of the Russian Federation.
Russia Transoil ✓ A Russia-based rail freight operator that specializes in the transportation of oil and oil products.
Transoil is designated for being owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko.
Ukraine Tsyplakov Sergey ✓ ✓ One of the leaders of ideologically radical organization People’s Gennadevich Militia of Donbas.
Russia, Volga Group ✓ The Volga Group is being designated for being owned or Luxem­ controlled by Gennaddy Timchenko.
Timchenko was designated burg on March 20, 2014 pursuant to E.O. 13661 for acting for or on behalf of or materially assisting, sponsoring, or providing financial, material, or technological support for, or goods and services to or in support of, a senior official of the Government of the Russian Federation.
Timchenko is the sole shareholder of the Volga Group, an investment strategy group that holds interest in a variety of assets on behalf of Timchenko.
Russia Volodin Vyacheslav ✓ Volodin is the First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Executive Office.
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s decision to move into Crimea is believed to have been based on consultations with his closest advisors, including Volodin.
We recommend that the international community refrain from recognizing Crimea as a part of Russia.
We recommend that Ukraine consider bringing a claim to the International Court of Justice seeking an 12.
We recommend that the international community advisory opinion on Russia’s annexation of Crimea. uphold the sanctions that it has imposed to date on Russian and former Ukrainian officials and that it 4.
We recommend that Ukraine ask Russia to extradite consider new and harsher sanctions if Russia further President Yanukovych and other high-ranking officials violates international law. for the crimes for which they face charges.
If Russian troops cross into Eastern Ukraine, we Interpol to bring Ukrainian former officials to justice. recommend that the international community condemn such action and consider appropriate 5.
We recommend that Ukraine minimize its dependence countermeasures. on Russian energy supplies through reverse gas flows from Europe and the development of alternative 14.
We recommend that the international community energy sources. provide as much technical assistance to the Ukrainian government, including training, capacity building and 6.
We recommend that Ukraine continue to consider all other civilian support, as reasonably possible. potential countermeasures during this crisis.
We urge Ukraine to step up to increase its efforts to increase and prosecute crimes committed since November 2013.
We recommend Ukraine to enhance its national security by all available legal means.
They also thank Matthew Mosner, Gerald Lebovits, Stephen Holmes, Ethan Burger 10.
Viktor Yanukovych no longer leading Ukraine, United States declares, com/news/world-europe-26289318.
Constitution Art.7. під особистим контролем керівництва Генеральної прокуратури України” [The Prosecutor General per18.
Id. on Legal Assistance and Legal Relations in Civil, Family and Criminal Matters, Minsk, Jan 22, 1993], avail60.
European Convention on Extradition Art.. mobilisation-idINDEEA2G08320140317.
European Convention on Extradition Art.. politics/963647-chrezvychaynoe_polozhenie_v_ukraine_ chto_eto_znachit_dlya_grazhdan.htm.
There is a difference in terminology used in 1993 CIS Convention and 2002 CIS Convention.
Opinion of the Constitutional Court on the Conformity of the Rome Statute with the Constitution of Ukraine, Case N 87.
International Criminal Court by National Constitutional Courts, Supreme Courts and Council of States” ICRC Re90.
ICC Rules of Procedure and Evidence, Rule 44. security-and-russias-natural-gas-supply-disruption.
To date, two declarations have been lodged trump-possible-european-sanctions./ with the Registrar accepting exercise of the jurisdiction of the Court pursuant to Article 12 of the Rome 93.
Peter Spiegel, UK urges EU to cut energy reliance on Rusted from September 19, 2002.
Merkel sees no Germany’s dependence on Russian gas, World/News/Ukraine-wants-fugitive-president-to-faceUkrinform ICC-20140225-2 97.
Russia has offered cheaper gas in order to bolster the former President Yanukovych during the protest in Ukraine 111.
Seeg., Kremlin Analysts Push For Ukraine Annexation, The 2014 due to the change of Ukrainian government.
Ukraine Economy Hangs on Investments From Exxon to velopment/ukraine-s-gas-upstream-sector-focus-on.html.
Laurence Norman, United States Official Says Ukraine Could Import elected by Qurultay among its delegates.
Crimea to hand over Chornomornaftogaz to Russia’s Gazprom deputy CEO, Interfax Ukraine (Mar., 2014, avail141.
Ukraine robbed of hundreds of billions from Russia’s nationalization of Crimean property, Kyiv Post 143.
TM Franck, ‘Postmodern Tribalism and the Right to Secesplenipotentiary representative and executive body of the sion’ in C Brölmann and others , Peoples and MinoriCrimean Tatar people, between the sessions of Qurultay, ties in International Law 3–27.
In Stefan 55 Oeter, ‘Self-determination’, Oxford Scholarly Authorities on 161.
James R Crawford, The Creation of States in International Cyprus ; Tamil Elam ; Somaliland (SoLaw, OUP Oxford , 389, the Alabama Arbitration. malia); Bougainville ; Kurdistan (Iraq/ Turkey); Republika Srpska ; Chech156.
Id. at 390. nya ; Kosovo ; Abkhazia ; South Ossetia ; Anjouan (the 157.
Daniel Thurer, supra note 157. inhabited a group of islands in the Baltic Sea, expressed their desire in a referendum to separate from the newly 167.
Conference on Yugoslavia, Arbitration Commission, Opinconstituted State of Finland and to join Sweden.
International Commission of Jurists designated by the Council of the League of Nations first found in 1920 that 168.
The Rapporteurs’ finding was based , page 407. mainly on the sovereignty of Finland and disregarded ethnic, geographical, and plebiscitary arguments.
LNOJ, Sp Supp 3 ; James R Crawford ‘The Creation of States in International Law’, OUP Oxford , 391.
The Forgotten Tragedy, supra note 178. perience and the Forging of a Nation.
Crimean Tatars, Still Living in the Shadow of 1944, Invoke Russian Empire.
World Congress of Crimean Tatars (Ukrainian Non-Government Organization established in 2009), Kirim Tatarlari 197.
A/8082 . that other State for perpetrating an act of aggression against a third State; 218.
A/6012 ; see also Charter amount to the acts listed above, or its substantial involveof the Organization of the American States, 2 U.S.T. 2394, ment therein.
Did cash fund russians-coming-russians-coming/. troops who shot protesters?”, Tim Shipman, to Daily Mail, Mar., 2014.
Principle 1 ances-1994/p32484. of the ‘Guiding Principles applicable to unilateral declarations of States capable of creating legal obligations’ , 225.
Ratification of the Agreement between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States on the reduc239.
In ) signed in Moscow on 31 July 1991 and the Protocol the case of doubt as to the scope of the obligations resulting thereto, signed at Lisbon on behalf of Ukraine on May 23 from such a declaration, such obligations must be inter, 1992 “ of 18 November 1993 and Resolution preted in a restrictive manner.
In interpreting the content of the Verkhovna Rada Ukraine “On the performance of of such obligations, weight shall be given first and foremost the President of Ukraine and the Government of Ukraine to the text of the declaration, together with the context and recommendations contained in paragraph 11 of the Resoluthe circumstances in which it was formulated.” tion of the Verkhovna Rada Ukraine “On Ratification of the Agreement between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 240.
Frontier Dispute , I.C.J. and the United States of America Reduction and Limitation Reports 1986. of Strategic Offensive Arms, signed in Moscow on 31 July 1991 and the Protocol thereto, signed at Lisbon on behalf of 241.
As recognized in Principle 9, unilateral declarations cannot Ukraine on May 23 , 1992 of 3 February 1994 , result in obligations for other States.
Articles the Parliament of Ukraine REGULATION: 34–5 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (on the im“Join the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weappossibility for treaties to entail obligations for third parties). ons on July 1, 1968 with reservations: 1.
Ukraine owns nuclear weapons inherited from the instruments/english/draft%20articles/9_9_2006.pdf.
After the dismantling and destruction of weapons controlled Ukraine and procedures precluding ability to use 243.
A Regime shall be transferred Countries Depositary Agreement after for the Unilateral Acts Of States at International Law. its entry into force this Act.
All Members shall refrain in their internait decides that extraordinary events, related to the subject tional relations from the threat or use of force against the matter of this Treaty, have jeopardized the supreme interterritorial integrity or political independence of any state, ests of its country.
Such notice shall documents/charter/chapter1.shtml include a statement of the extraordinary events it regards as having jeopardized its supreme interests.” available at 245.
July 16, 1990 Applications of the Verkhovna Rada Ukraine “On the non-nuclear status of Ukraine “ (1697247.
Assembly may call the attention of the Security Council to situations which are likely to endanger international peace 258.
Id. tensions-rise-in-armed-standoff-in-crimea-between-ukrainian-and-russian-backed-forces-337942.html.4.
To have a fixed distinctive emblem recognizable at a disrada.gov.ua/laws. tance; To carry arms openly; and 268.
I Watson, M Tkachenko, Russia, Ukraine agree on zakon4.rada.gov.ua/laws. naval-base-for-gas deal, CNN (April 21, 2010 4:43m.
Government of the Russian Federation on the mutual financial transactions with respect to division of the Black 284.
Constitutional Court of Ukraine regarding the official interpretation of Section 14 of the Transitional Provisions 279.
