Many states and international organisations have reacted to the ongoing war in the Donbass region of Ukraine, which began in April 2014.
In August 2014 when the intervention of Russian troops in Donbass scaled up, many states condemned this violation of Ukraine's sovereignty.
The EU began imposing sanctions on Russia in March 2014, following the annexation of Crimea, with the lists of sanctioned individuals and entities having been expanded multiple times concurrently with escalations in Donbass.
NATO published a statement on the war in Donbass and the Crimean Crisis in August 2014.
It attempted to debunk the Russian government's accusations against the Ukrainian government, and also other statements made by Russia to justify its presence in Ukraine.
In response to the unauthorised entry of the Russian ""humanitarian convoy"" on 22 August, NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen stated that this incident could ""only deepen the crisis in the region, which Russia itself has created and has continued to fuel.
NATO general Philip Breedlove said on 20 September that the ceasefire implemented as part of the Minsk Protocol was ""a ceasefire in name only"", and criticised Russia for allowing men and equipment to flow freely across its border into Donbass.
A press release issued on behalf of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon stressed the importance of ""constructive and results-oriented dialogue between all concerned"", and of adherence to the terms of the Geneva Statement on Ukraine.
In March 2014, Australia's foreign affairs minister Julie Bishop said that ""International law does not allow one state to steal the territory of another on the basis of a referendum that cannot be considered free or fair,"", after disputing the legitimacy of the Crimean referendum which voted to secede from Ukraine.
The opposition's foreign affairs spokeswoman, Tanya Plibersek also said ""Australia has a special responsibility as a member of the security council to join the international community in taking strong action to make clear our condemnation of the moves by Russia to annex Crimea and of the fatal attack on the Ukrainian serviceman in Crimea"" firmly reiterating Australia's condemnation of Russian intervention across both parties in Parliament.
Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko encouraged peace talks from the start of the Ukrainian crisis, and hosted the summits that produced the Minsk Protocol in September 2014 and Minsk II in February 2015.
At the same time Russian business and financial institutions observed ""ambiguous position regarding Russian banks in the wake of United States and EU sanctions"" from the Chinese financial institutions, meaning in practice reduced willingness of Chinese banks to finance trade and execute interbank transactions with their counterparts in Russia.
His words were at odds with statements by Prime Minister Bohuslav Sobotka and Defence Minister Martin Stropnický, who both said there were at least 5,000 Russian troops in Ukraine.
France was criticised at the time of the annexation of Crimea for continuing to prepare two Mistral class amphibious assault ships for delivery to Russia.
France eventually decided to place the delivery on hold in September, following increasing escalation in the Donbass, and reported Russian intervention there.
In April 2014, Georgian president Giorgi Margvelashvili said in an interview, ""I don't think it's a right choice to alienate Russia, to cut relations with Russia.
According to the German Foreign Office, Merkel said that the war was never a conflict ""within Ukraine"", but a confrontation between Russia and Ukraine.
In November 2014, Merkel stated that ""old thinking about spheres of influence, which runs roughshod over international law"" put the ""entire European peace order into question"" and said that if Ukraine had chosen the Eurasian Economic Union, the West would not have responded by making 'noise' on the Ukrainian-Polish border.
In November 2014, she stated that ""We know that today Ukraine is fighting for peace in Europe, for all of us.
In April 2015, Polish president Bronisław Komorowski said, ""Today, when the sons of Ukraine are dying in the east of their country in the defence of national independence, they are also defending Europe.
Romanian president Klaus Iohannis condemned attacks on the city of Mariupol, stating that the responsibility for these attacks did not fall only on the separatists, but also on the Russian Federation.
He added that Romania condemned the violation of Ukraine's territorial sovereignty, and supported further sanctions against Russia.
The Russian Foreign Ministry accused Ukrainian authorities of ""blaming"" the Russian government for all its troubles and stated ""Ukrainian people want to get a clear answer from Kiev to all their questions.
It also stated it was ""carefully observing"" events in the east and south of Ukraine, and again called for ""real constitutional reform"" that would turn Ukraine into a federation.
On 4 September 2015 the Investigative Committee of Russia published an insulting letter to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine with treats of the Nuremberg-2 trials against the government of Ukraine and calling Ukrainian language retarded.
In September 2014, then Swedish foreign minister Carl Bildt said that "" Putin's actions threaten the entire basis of the post-Cold War order in Europe"" and that ""Ukraine is an independent nation.
In May 2015, Turkish foreign minister Mevlut Cavusoglu said that ""Nothing can justify what Russia has been doing in its neighbourhood.
In a statement at a meeting of the UN Security Council on 6 August, UK Permanent Representative to the United Nations Sir Mark Lyall Grant said: ""The truth of the matter is that this is not an insurrection born in the Donbas; it is an insurgency manufactured in Moscow.
Defence Secretary Michael Fallon announced on 7 March 2015 that Britain would send an additional £850,000 in non-lethal aid following Ukraine's request.
This included first-aid kits, night vision goggles, helmets, GPS units and laptops.
On 19 January 2016, Michael Fallon said that Ukraine will receive 3,500 first-aid kits equal to £500,000 in April before the British training of Ukrainian troops.
The Queen pledged that her government will continue to work to resolve the conflict in Ukraine.
United States Secretary of State John Kerry said on 7 April 2014 that the events ""did not appear to be spontaneous"" and called on Russia to ""publicly disavow the activities of separatists, saboteurs and provocateurs"" in a phone call to his Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov.
A spokeswoman for the United States National Security Council noted that the separatists appeared to be supported by Russia.
The United States government is sending military advisors to Ukraine to aid the Ukrainian government in its fight against the insurgents.
In April, the United States Defence Department shipped a 7 million United States dollar package of non-lethal military equipment to the Ukrainian forces.
Plans for another 8 million dollar million aid package were announced on 1 August 2014.
The package was meant to include armoured personnel carriers, goods and patrol vehicles, binoculars, night vision goggles and small patrol boats.
On the same day, the Defence Department also proposed a 19 million dollar aid package to help train the National Guard of Ukraine.
This proposal required congressional approval, and would come into effect in 2015.
It had been announced in July that a group of Defence Department specialists in strategy and policy would visit Kiev to evaluate the military needs of the Ukrainian government.
On 11 March 2015, the American government said it would send an additional 75 million United States dollars worth of non-lethal aid to Ukraine.
A joint declaration on the Ukrainian crisis by the defence ministers of Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden and the foreign minister of Iceland was released in Norwegian newspaper Aftenposten on 9 April 2015.
The declaration stated that Russian aggression against Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea are violations of International law and other international treaties, and that the Nordic countries will evaluate Russia on the basis of its actions, rather than on rhetoric promoted by the Russian government.
After pointing out that Russia had increased military exercises and intelligence gathering activity in the Baltic and the North Sea, violating Nordic borders and jeopardising civilian air traffic, the declaration stated that the Nordic countries intended to face these threats with solidarity and increased cooperation.
The document said that this collaboration would be extended to include solidarity with the Baltic countries, work with the EU, and to collaboration with NATO, to maintain the transatlantic link.
In contrast to the unanimous condemnation by western governmental spokespeople of the Russian role in the conflict, European politicians representing euroscepticism, mainly on the right of the political spectrum, criticised the role of western governments in allegedly precipitating the crisis, in some cases supporting Russian president Vladimir Putin's position.
The shoot-down of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over the Donbass conflict zone in mid-July moderated these opinions.
Reviewing votes in the EU Parliament on resolutions critical of Russia or measures not in the Kremlin's interests , Hungary's Political Capital Institute found that future members of Europe of Nations and Freedom voted ""no"" in 93% of cases, European United Left–Nordic Green Left in 78% of cases, and Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy in 67% of cases.
Russian opposition leader Boris Nemtsov said that Russian president Vladimir Putin sought to ""punish"" Ukraine to prevent an anti-corruption revolution like Euromaidan from taking place in Russia.
Former Georgian president Mikheil Saakashvili said that Ukraine ""is West Berlin – the taking of which was a matter of principle for Stalin and the successful protection of which ultimately reversed the spread of communism in Europe.
This is Putin's war, which was initiated by him, which has been supported by him, which is being implemented by him, and which can only be stopped by him.
In April 2014, historian Timothy D Snyder wrote that Russia's foreign policy was ""based openly upon the ethnicization of the world.
Although majorities in all regions voted to be part of an independent Ukraine during the 1991 referendum, former Czech president Václav Klaus, said that Ukraine was an artificially created state, and that Ukraine was in a state of civil war.
Writing in World Affairs, Mariana Budjeryn also dismissed Mearsheimer's argument, saying ""That the Russians failed to design a model of development and a security arrangement that would be equally attractive and did not require arm-twisting to keep together is not the west's fault.
In April 2014, a survey by infratest dimap found that 49% of Germans preferred a ""middle position"" for Germany between the west and Russia.
This was reflected in the policy of moderation and mediation that Chancellor Angela Merkel espoused over the course of the Ukrainian crisis.
After the war escalated, German public opinion turned against Russia, with 79% saying they had an unfavourable view of Russia and 82% saying Russia could not be trusted in an August 2014 poll.
Some minor organisations have been formed to support the pro-Russian militants in the Donbass region, among them the Donbass Association in Sweden.
EU leaders warned that Russia faced harsher economic sanctions than the EU had previously imposed if it failed to withdraw troops from Ukraine.
They later condemned the Russian actions at a summit in Brussels, and announced a new round of sanctions.
The Russian government's decision to send what it called a ""humanitarian convoy"" into Luhansk on 22 August without Ukrainian consent was condemned by NATO and several NATO member states, including the United States.
Late in August, NATO generals met and revised their assessment of the military situation in Donbass.
They said that, from the Ukrainian government's point of view, the war is already lost.
It was anticipated that the late-August offensive in southern Donetsk Oblast could be used to create a Russian land corridor to Crimea, consolidating the illegal annexation of the peninsula.
Estonian president Toomas Hendrik Ilves called the situation an ""undeclared war,"" and stated that Russia's actions violated the UN Charter, the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of Paris.
At an EU summit in late August 2014, Chancellor Angela Merkel warned that Russian president Vladimir Putin was moving toward a military escalation that could threaten Latvia and Estonia.
Her stance was reported to reflect conclusions drawn from extensive conversations with Putin over the preceding nine months, together with evidence of bad faith on the part of Putin.
Lithuanian president Dalia Grybauskaite said Russia's actions meant it was at war with Ukraine, and ""practically"" at war with Europe.
United States Ambassador to the United Nations Samantha Power commented on the invasion by noting that ""At every step, Russia has become before this council to say everything but the truth.
In response to the August events, the American government also said that it supported stronger sanctions against Russia.
This organisation said that it considered the war to be ""an international armed conflict"", and presented independent satellite photos and analysis that it said proved the involvement of regular Russian soldiers in the conflict.
It said that both Ukrainian and separatist forces were responsible for war crimes, and called on all parties, including Russia, to stop violations of the law of war.
