News, Page 4 VOLUME CLXXXVI Mask mandate appeal DOJ files appeal to overturn judge’s decision to void mandate.
News, Page 6 > UNDED IN See Rentschler project Work may begin this fall on redevelopment of Rentschler Field.
Connecticut, Page 1 COURANT.COM Trooper charged with manslaughter Connecticut State Police officer accused in deadly shooting of Mubarak Soulemane in 2020 Omo Klusum Mohammed, mother of Mubarak Soulemane, holds a photo of her slain son May 20, 2020.
COURANT FILE PHOTOS ‘Let this arrest set an example; civil rights attorney says By Christine Dempsey Hartford Courant The state trooper who investigators say fatally shot a 19-year-old driver after a high-speed chase into West Haven two years ago has been arrested on a manslaughter charge.
Trooper Brian D North was charged with first-degree manslaughter with a firearm, Inspector General Robert J Devlin Jr. said Wednesday.
Mubarak Soulemane, 19, was fatally shot at the end of a high-speed chase in a stolen car on Jan., 2020.
Footage from the scene shows troopers and a West Haven police officer descend on the car after it was stopped off Exit 43 of Interstate 95 North and blocked by police cars.
A video of the shooting shows North firing into the car after the trooper allegedly saw Soulemane with a knife.
In his report, Devlin concludes that neither North nor two other officers outside the car were in imminent danger of having deadly force used against them.
He added that due to the police car blocking his door, Soulemane would not have been able to get out.
The state police union extended condolences to Soulemane’s family in a statement on Wednesday, saying, “No Connecticut state trooper ever intends to or has the desire to take the life of another human Turn to Charges, Page 3 Mariyann Soulemane, the sister of Mubarak Soulemane, appears May 11, 2021, with attorneys Sanford Rubenstein, left, and Mark Arons and the Rev.
Use of deadly force ‘not justified’ By Taylor Hartz Hartford Courant At 5:04m.
Jan., 2020, a 19-year-old veered the car he’d stolen from his Lyft driver off Interstate 95 North in West Haven.
Now, the trooper who shot him could face up to 20 Turn to Force, Page 3 Seasonable tan Slight chance for a shower late; high of 60.
Sports, Page 6 * Courant THURSDAY, APRIL 21, 2022 Supreme Court finds loophole in state gun law Some out-of-state drug offenders can get handgun permits from Connecticut By Edmund H Mahony Hartford Courant The state Supreme Court has ruled that an out-of-state drug conviction can’t prevent someone from obtaining a pistol permit in Connecticut.
Had the applicant for the permit been convicted of a similar, non-felony crime in Connecticut, the permit would have been denied under state law establishing fitness requirements for gun owners.
But the court said that because the General Assembly did not include convictions for equivalent, out-of-state crimes as disqualifiers for obtaining permits, the pistol permit application was wrongly denied.
Legislators were talking about plugging the apparent loophole in the law hours after the court published the decision.
With the holdouts coming under punishing new bombing attacks, another attempt to evacuate civilians trapped in the pulverized port city failed because of continued fighting.
Meanwhile, the number of people fleeing the country topped 5 million, the Kremlin said it submitted a draft of its demands for ending the war, and the West raced to supply Ukraine with heavier weapons to counter the Russians’ new drive to seize the industrial east.
With global tensions running high, Russia reported the first successful test launch of anew type of intercontinental Turn to Ukraine, Page 2 Lawmakers tout fair rent commissions in larger communities By Christopher Keating Hartford Courant HARTFORD — At a time of rising rents, Connecticut legislators were debating Wednesday night on mandating fair rent commissions for all communities with more than 25,000 residents.
Currently, the commissions are voluntary, and 24 municipalities statewide already have them, legislators said.
Democrats said the mandatory commissions are needed now to help renters around the state at a time when many rents are increasing as the coronavirus pandemic continues.
The commissions would have the power to investigate complaints about rents, Breeze Airways sets nonstop destination from Bradley Breeze Airways will launch nonstop service from Bradley International Airport to Las Vegas beginning Sept. and will operate Wednesday and Saturday.
Connecticut, Page 1 convene public hearings, issue subpoenas to force people to appear, and eventually force landlords to lower rents under certain circumstances.
The commissions can be created in each municipality through action by the local city council or board of selectmen by July 1, 2023.
The debate was continuing past 9:15m., but a vote was expected in the following Rep.
Quentin Williams, a Middletown Democrat who co-chairs the legislature’s housing committee, said the bill strikes a balance of helping renters and providing protections for small landlords as some rents are increasing faster than inflation.
Without a commission, Williams said, “Right now, their only option would be to hours.
Re) a \-| 5 News 2 Hiartiorde , | | | Hl || | | CIASSITION seccsccsinctcaes News 13 artiora ee 6 04209 00200 ctbhi.org 2 Hartford Courant | Section] | Thursday, April 21,2022 FROM PAGE ONE Loophole from Page 1 ciary committee.
McDonald, the court said that the legislature enacted a law with about dozen factors disqualifying an applicant from gun ownership.
Since a misdemeanor drug convicUkraine from Page 1 ballistic missile, the Sarmat.
The Pentagon described the test as “routine” and said it wasn’t considered a threat.
On the battlefield, Ukraine said Moscow continued to mount assaults across the east, probing for weak points in Ukrainian defensive lines.
Russia said it launched hundreds of missile and air attacks on targets that included concentrations of troops and vehicles.
The Kremlin’s stated goal is the capture of the Donbas, the mostly Russian-speaking eastern region that is home to coal mines, metal plants and heavy-equipment factories.
Detaching it would give Putin a badly needed victory two months into the war, after the botched attempt to storm the capital, Kyiv.
Analysts say the offensive in the east could devolve into a war of attrition as Russia runs up against Ukraine’s most experienced, battle-hardened troops, who have been fighting pro-Moscow separatists in the Donbas for the past eight years.
Russia said it presented Hartford Courant A TRIBUNE PUBLISHING COMPANY tion in another state is not among them, the court said it must conclude lawmakers did not intend for it to bea bar to gun ownership.
He gave no details on the draft, and it was not clear when it was sent or if it offered anything new to the Ukrainians, who presented their own demands last month.
The court based the decision on a state law requiring that laws be interpreted on the plain meaning of the text.
The court effectively told the legislature that if it wants out-of-state, non-felony convictions to block the issuance of permits, it must write laws that say so explicitly.
Out-of-state felony convictions already are a bar to permitting under the law.
Anthony Leo of Stratford applied to the local police department for a handgun permit about six years ago.
Ukraine has said it would agree to that in return for security guarantees from a number of other countries.
In devastated Mariupol, Ukraine said the Russians dropped heavy bombs to flatten what was left of the sprawling Azvostal steel plant, believed to be the last pocket of resistance in the city.
A few thousand Ukrainian troops, by the Russians’ estimate, remain in the plant Hartford Courant equivalent of a Connecticut offense that is.
Leo appealed to the state Board of Firearms Permit Examiners, which reversed the police department and granted the permit.
The Superior Court also criticized the firearms board for its failure to consider “factors” such as the danger posed by providing pistol on Wednesday in Moshchun, northwest of Kyiv.
GENYA SAVILOV/GETTY-AFP and its labyrinth of tunnels and bunkers spread out across about 4 square miles.
The Russian side issued a new ultimatum to the defenders to surrender, but the Ukrainians have ignored all previous demands.
All told, more than 100,000 people were believed trapped with little if any food, water, medicine or heat in Mariupol, which had a prewar population of over 400,000.
Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister Iryna Vereshchuk said the latest effort to open a safe corridor for women, children and the elderly to escape failed because the Russians did not observe a cease-fire.
Many previous such agreements have fallen apart because there was no halt in the fighting.
As Russia sent more troops and equipment into the Donbas, Western nations rushed to boost the flow of military supplies to Kyiv for this new phase of the war, which is likely to involve long-range artillery attacks and tank battles across relatively open terrain.
President Joe Biden is expected to announce a new weapons package in the coming days that will include additional artillery, and Canada and the Netherlands also said they would send more heavy weaponry.
For same-day redelivery, please call before 10 billing period when the section publishes.
Mary Lou Stoneburner otherwise noted. scheduled to date: 1/9/22,2/13/22,3/27/22,4/17/22,5/15/22, LUCKY FOR LIFE Vice President, Advertising SovaENE sess) 6/12/22, 7/10/22, 8/7/22, 9/4/22, 10/9/22, 1/20/22, 12/18/22.
We Ys) mats fi rst Ke) know ee Mike Sheehan may increase home delivery rates with 15 days notice.
Only publication of the advertisement shall 2 9 33 47 53 mMB:24 MP:3 NEWS ACCURACY AND FAIRNESS CONCERNS constitute acceptance of the advertisement.
The Hartford Courant’s liability shall be limited to the amount paid by the advertiser for the first insertion only.
In no event shall The Hartford Courant be liable for consequential damages of any kind.
You can join us by recycling this newspaper. thekate.or 860.510.045 old saybrook 4/22 Suzzy Roche & Lucy Wainwright Roche From a dazzling musical family, Suzzy Roche and Lucy Wainwright Roche have shared a life on the road.
Their show is a fun filled evening of smart, thoughtful, songs with plenty of familial harmo— nies.
Vincent Van Gogh Delving deep into his fascinating and sometimes deeply troubled world comes this definitive, de a al documentary by David Bicker4 staff.
Trooper North instructed another Trooper to switch from his firearm to his taser, in an attempt to use less than lethal force to effect the arrest.
Tragically, due to Mr Soulemane’s sudden movements, Trooper North was forced to discharge his duty weapon to defend the other officers who were attempting to enter the stolen vehicle to effect an arrest.
Force from Page 1 years in prison if convicted on the charge of first-degree manslaughter with a firearm.
More than two years after Soulemane was fatally shot in the chest, state trooper Brian D North turned himself in on a warrant Tuesday following an extensive investigation by the Office of the Inspector General that found that North’s use of deadly force was unjustified.
The Office of Inspector General assumed responsibility for the investigation on Nov., 2021.
It included body camera and dashboard camera footage from North and other state troopers, witness statements, surveillance footage from the AT&T store and a Shell gas station and an autopsy report among other evidence.
At the time of the shooting, Soulemane was armed with a kitchen knife he’d taken from his girlfriend’s house, it stated in the report.
According to the report, troopers said the knife was tightly gripped in his fist as he sat inside the stolen car with the doors locked and the windows rolled up.
Joe Polletta, the ranking House Republican on the housing committee, said during the floor debate that the measure is “an unfunded mandate” that would generate extra expenses for towns.
The commissions will need to gather a large amount of information before deciding whether the rent meets the standard of “harsh and unconscionable” when compared to similar properties, according to legislators.
As part of police reforms in Connecticut following the death of George Floyd and calls to defund the police, Devlin, a former judge, was appointed as inspector general to investigate every use of force case and death involving police or correction officers.
Soulemane’s family had called for an independent investigation and for the trooper’s arrest after the shooting.
Mark Arons, a lawyer for the family, said there was a cloud over the family’s head since the shooting, and they look forward to Trooper North being convicted.
Soulemane had been reported missing by his family that same morning, according to the report.
The family told police he has been diagnosed with schizophrenia at age 14.
Loved ones said he was acting erratic and paranoid and likely wasn’t taking his medication, according to the report.
Police in New Haven made contact with Soulemane over the phone around 8:15 a.m., according to the report.
His older brother told police they had gotten into a fight and he left their Blatchley Avenue apartment.
His mother, Omo Mohammed, was out of the country and was worried about him.
Ten hours later, multiple police cruisers surrounded him under a highway overpass.
The Sonata he stole was smashed in on the passenger side, dented and scraped on the driver side.
Multiple police cars blocked the car in, according to the report, one was pushed up against the driver’s side, preventing the door from opening.
According to statements in the report from police on the scene and body camera footage, Troop G trooper Joshua Jackson commanded Soulemane to get out of the car multiple times.
He was sitting back in the reclined driver’s seat with his hands in his lap and his in many ways” and provide a hardship for landlords, said Polletta, a Watertown Republican.
The NAACP and other groups joined the family in protesting the shooting.
Al Sharpton said something about the killing didn’t “smell right” and he vowed to fight for answers for the family.
McCall added that he was with family members when they heard the trooper would be charged.
To hear that an officer was going to get arrested is definitely in the direction of justice that they have been waiting for,’ McCall said. eyes closed, according to a report by North.
With at least one firearm and a Taser aimed on Soulemane, West Haven police officer Robert Rappa smashed the passenger side window with a baton.
The window shattered loudly, glass spilling into the car and onto the road, body camera footage shows.
According to the report and body camera footage, North called to Jackson to switch to his Taser.
According to North’s report after the shooting, Soulemane was “startled” when the window smashed.
Immediately the suspect, using his right hand, removed a silver-colored object from his right pants pocket,’ North reported.
According to the report, North stated he heard someone yell out, “He’s reaching.
Other factors include whether state and local laws are being followed and how the money from the rent hike would be used.
Smaller towns under 25,000 would be allowed to establish a joint commission under the bill.
Currently, the towns with fair rent commissions include higher-income suburbs such as Glastonbury, Simsbury, FarmingThe head of Connecticut’s NAACP, Scot X Esdaile, said he was pleasantly surprised to hear about the arrest.
Ned Lamont said he had not met with Soulemane’s family and added that he trusts the judicial system to provide an independent outcome for Soulemane and North.
Thirty six seconds passed between the time that North positioned himself near the driver’s side of the crashed car and the time he pulled the trigger.
An autopsy performed by the Connecticut Office of the Chief Medical Examiner, found that Soulemane died from four gunshot wounds to his chest.
The medical examiner retrieved three bullets from his body, the other three were found at the scene.
In his statements to investigators, Jackson said that he thought he was in imminent danger.
Soulemane had a knife in his fist and his gaze was fixed on him, he said according to the report.
According to state statute, a police officer is justified in using deadly physical force on another person when the officer believes such force is needed to protect themselves or another person from deadly force.
Devlin’s investigation found that North could not have reasonably believed that Rappa or Jackson faced an immediate threat to their lives.
Devlin found that North never claimed he used deadly force to defend himself — they described how the position of one of the police cruisers would have fully blocked Soulemane from getting out of the car.
The investigation also found that even though Soulemane was _ holding a knife, he didn’t pose ton, and West Hartford.
Others include Hartford, New Haven, Bridgeport, Stamford, Bloomfield, Enfield, Manchester, New Britain, and Norwalk.
Asked what he would say to the Soulemane family, Lamont said, “My heart goes out to the family.
New Haven Mayor Justin Elicker called Soulemane’s death a tragedy in a statement released Wednesday.
This is now reinforced by the charges brought by the Inspector General,” he said in the statement.
And it is critical that all our law enforcement officers are held to a high standard.
Claudine Constant, public policy and advocacy direcan immediate dangerous threat to Rappa or Jackson.
The trooper and officer were outside, Soulemane was inside, and all the car’s doors and windows were closed, it states in the report.
North, in his statement, claimed that he thought Rappa or Jackson was going to reach into the vehicle to pull Soulemane out.
He said he was worried that if they did, Soulemane would use the knife on them.
And if they weren’t reaching in, they wouldn’t need protection from the knife, the report notes.
No reasonable officer, the report says, would have expected a colleague to do what North says he thought Rappa and Jackson were doing.
On the off chance that they did, the report states, they would have told others on the scene what they were doing.
The report also noted that when North was first questioned about his use of deadly force, he said he shot at Soulemane because he saw the knife.
If that had been his reasoning, Devlin said, the shooting wouldn’t have mony on the bill.
The Connecticut Conference of Municipalities, a longtime lobbying group at the Capitol, said it opposes the “unfunded mandate” that the bill would impose.
Does the municipality have the capacity, staff, and finan~ SPRING SALE tase tor of the ACLU of Connecticut, believes that even witha conviction, justice can never be achieved in this case.
North is on paid administrative leave, and his police powers have been suspended, pending criminal proceedings, state police said.
First-degree manslaughter with a firearm is a Class B felony punishable by up to 20 years in prison and $15,000 in fines.
Christine Dempsey may be reached at cdempsey@ courant.com. been justified.
In such circumstances, the shooting would not be defensive,” he said in the report.
The report also critiques North for not trying to de-escalate the situation before using deadly force.
Devlin also said that the number of shots North fired was unreasonable.
Devlin acknowledged that when investigating an officer’s use of deadly force, investigators should take into account the split-second decisions officers are faced with.
They should also consider whether the actions they do take are reasonable.
Amy Eppler-Epstein, an attorney with the New Haven Legal Assistance Association, testified recently at a public hearing in favor of the bill.
Their dwelling for now is a huge convention center in Poland’s capital.
From a camp bed in a foreign country, the 40-year-old bookeeper thinks about restarting her and her children’s lives from square one.
With the war in Ukraine approaching eight weeks, more than 5 million people have fled the country since Russian troops invaded Feb., the United Nations refugee agency reported Wednesday.
When the number reached 4 million March 30, the exodus exceeded the worst-case predictions of the Geneva-based office of the United Nations high commissioner for refugees.
The millions of people who left Ukraine because of the war “have left behind their homes and families,” United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Filippo Grandi tweeted Wednesday.
Ukraine had a pre-war population of 44 million, and UNHCR says the conflict has displaced more than 7 million people within Ukraine along with the 5.03 million who had left as of Wednesday.
According to the agency, another 13 million people are believed to be trapped in the war-affected areas of Ukraine.
More than half of the refugees, over 2. million, fled at least at first to Poland.
They are eligible for national ID numbers that entitle them to work and receive free health care, schooling and bonuses for families with children.
The hotel — which for much of former President Donald Trump’s four years at the White House served as his dining-out spot, a gathering place for his allies and a bazaar of sorts for those seeking influence and access — is set to be sold in the coming days to a Florida investor group that will take down the Trump name and rebrand it as a Waldorf Astoria.
The sprawling lobby turned into a gathering spot for Trump’s Cabinet, Republicans in Congress, foreign dignitaries, religious conservatives and Trump fans from across the United States, as well as Trump himself.
The hotel generated millions of DON’T SHOOT THE MESSENGER We A Julian Assange supporter protests outside of court Wednesday in London.
JUSTIN TALLIS/GETTY-AFP dollars in direct payments to Trump’s family, starting from even before he was sworn in, as his own inaugural committee paid the venue more than $1 million.
The hotel is being sold to a Miami-based investment firm, CGI Merchant Group, for $375 million, delivering an estimated profit of more than $100 million to the Trump family, even after it pays off its debts and accounts for other money spent on the hotel since it opened.
The sale is expected to close before the end of the month, according to an executive involved in the transaction.
The transfer of the lease has been approved by the General Services Administration, the federal government’s landlord, after the agency confirmed that CGI and Hilton, which controls the Waldorf Astoria brand, have the financial capacity to own and manage the hotel.
The building, on Pennsylvania Avenue, is owned by the federal government.
Even before Trump was sworn in, the hotel became a magnet for foreign officials, including from Saudi Arabia, whose government rented out a block of rooms, spending $190,000 on its room tab and another $78,000 for meals and beverages, lobbying disclosures show.
Soon enough, foreign business and government groups from Bahrain, Kuwait, Turkey and Azerbaijan, among others, followed by hosting events at the hotel, with representatives from at least 33 nations sighted there by Zach Everson, a journalist who created an online newsletter tracking social media posts from the hotel during Trump’s presidency.
In total, at least 29 Trump Cabinet members and at least 35 Republican senators were spotted at the hotel, according to Everson’s count.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin lived there for a while after he first relocated to Washington; the stayed there, an unknown number have traveled on to other countries.
Savyichkina said she is thinking about taking her daughters to Germany.
If “everything goes well, if the children like it first of all, then we will stay.
Out of more than 465,000 who arrived, some 16,400 have applied for protected status, meaning they want to stay.
Hungary’s government says it has provided around $8. million to several charitable organizations and is giving subsidies to companies that employ Ukrainians granted asylum.
In March, a non-governmental organization, Migration Aid, rented a five-story building in Budapest, a former workers’ hostel, to provide temporary accommodation for people escaping the war in Ukraine.
Tatiana Shulieva, 67, a retired epidemiologist aie fled from Kharkiv in eastern Ukraine and wants to travel on to Egypt, said the night she spent in the hostel was “like a fairytale” after having sheltered in a basement for weeks to escape constant shelling.
Oxana Cotus, who fled the southern Ukrainian city of Mykolaiv with her four small children, initially decided to go to Denmark but ended up in Bucharest because she speaks Romanian and didn’t want to be far from Ukraine.
She praised the help she received from the International Red Cross in helping her relocate and get settled.
The European nations hosting refugees say they need international help to manage the challenge, especially now as Russia has intensified attacks in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region.
About 300,000 war refugees are in the city of some 1. million, most of them staying in private homes, Trzaskowski said.
Warsaw residents expected to host refugees for a few months, but not indefinitely, he said.
Thousands of civilians, including children, have been killed or wounded in shelling and airstrikes.
The Trump International Hotel in Washington is being sold to a Miami-based investment firm for $375 million.
ALEX BRANDON/AP 2019 federal government even covered the $33,000 tab for members of the Secret Service who stayed at the hotel to guard him.
Jon Meacham, a presidential historian, said that never before had there been a venue like the Trump hotel, where supporters ofa sitting president could effectively pay tribute to him by frequenting a business he owned a few blocks from the White House.
Eric Trump, a son of the former president and an executive vice president at the Trump Organization, has repeatedly pointed out that the hotel donated to the United States Treasury any profits collected as a result of stays by foreign government officials at the hotel and took other steps to avoid ethics questions, such as not actively soliciting business from foreign governments.
In an interview this week, Eric Trump said he could not discuss details of the sale.
But he said he remained proud of the work that the Trump family did after leasing a rundown gem of a federal building and turning it into what he called one of the most beautiful public spaces in Washington.
During Trump’s presidency, spending at the hotel became a target for legal action, with attorneys general in Maryland and the District of Columbia, among others, filing lawsuits citing the hotel as the primary exhibit in claims that Trump was violating the Constitution’s emoluments clause by accepting payments from foreign governments.
The cases were deemed moot by the Supreme Court once Trump left the White House.
Judge sends Assange extradition decision to UK minister By Jill Lawless Associated Press LONDON — A British judge on Wednesday formally approved the extradition of Julian Assange to the United States to face spying charges.
The case will now go to Britain’s interior minister for a decision, though the WikiLeaks founder still has legal avenues of appeal.
Supreme Court last month refused Assange permission to appeal against a lower court’s ruling that he could be extradited.
District Judge Paul Goldspring issued the order ina brief hearing at Westminster Magistrates’ Court, as Assange watched by video link from Belmarsh Prison and his supporters rallied outside the courthouse, demanding he be freed.
Home Secretary Priti Patel will now decide whether to grant the extradition.
The move doesn’t exhaust the legal options for Assange, who has sought for years to avoid a trial in the United States on charges related to WikiLeaks’ publication of a huge trove of classified documents more than a decade ago.
His lawyers have four weeks to make submissions to Patel, and can also seek to appeal to the High Court.
Assange lawyer Mark Summers told the court that the legal team had “serious submissions” to make.
The United States has asked British authorities to extradite Assange so he can stand trial on 17 charges of espionage and one charge of computer misuse.
American prosecutors say Assange unlawfully helped United States Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning steal classified diplomatic cables and military files that WikiLeaks later published, putting lives at risk.
Supporters and lawyers for Assange, 50, argue that he was acting as a journalist and is entitled to First Amendment protections of freedom of speech.
Assange has been held at Britain’s Belmarsh Prison in London since 2019.
RALEIGH : VAIL : ARTHUR Rocking: HighLeg : Rocking — : Rocking Recliner Recliner Recliner Recliner $699 $749 $799 $999 wee OFig. °999 orig.99 orig. *1699 ) orig.
Fourth item purchased will be discounted 40%. 20%/40% discount pattern will be repeated as additional items are purchased.
La-Z-Boy is committed to accurate advertising, but errors in product descriptions, photographs, pricing or dates may occur.
We are not bound by any such errors, and we reserve the right . to correct them prior to any sale of merchandise.
JUSTIN SULLIVAN/GETTY Diplomats Russia’s embassies, consulates are keys to propaganda push By David Klepper Associated Press As governments and social media companies have moved to suppress Russia’s state media and the disinformation it spreads about the war in Ukraine, the Kremlin’s diplomats are stepping up to do the dirty work.
Russian embassies and consulates around the world are prolifically using Facebook, Twitter and other platforms to deflect blame for atrocities while seeking to undermine the international coalition supporting Ukraine.
Tech companies have responded by adding more labels to Russia’s diplomatic accounts and by removing the accounts from its recommendations and search results.
But the accounts are still active and are disseminating disinformation and propaganda in nearly every nation, in part because their diplomatic status gives them an added layer of protection from moderation.
With hundreds of social media accounts on every continent, Russia’s diplomatic corps acts as a global network for propaganda, in which the same claims can be recycled and tweaked for different audiences in different nations.
And, so far, steps to substantially curtail that effort have fallen short.
Some Russian embassies, like those in the U.K. and Mexico for example, are especially active, churning out pro-Russian propaganda and spreading falsehoods intended to support the invasion.
DOJ to appeal order tossing mask mandate By Michael Balsamo and Zeke Miller Associated Press WASHINGTON — The Justice Department is filing an appeal seeking to overturn a judge’s order that voided the federal mask mandate on planes and trains and in travel hubs, officials said Wednesday.
They’re actually Nazis operating under United States orders, the embassy alleged.
The Russian Embassy in London tweeted out those and other conspiracy theories all on one day last week.
Each post received hundreds or thousands of retweets, comments and likes, including dozens from other Twitter users pushing back on the propaganda.
It requires censorship at home, and it requires your own messaging, both for a domestic and foreign audience.
As representatives of their countries empowered to speak on their behalf, diplomats have always been known for pushing their nation’s talking points.
Russian diplomats in particular have long been known for spreading the Kremlin’s disinformation.
Russian diplomats used social media to spread disinforAVANTE WACO ANYTUNN ICA April 21, 22 & 23 Were buying by a federal judge in Florida earlier this week.
It remained unclear whether the Biden administration would ask the appeals court to grant an mation about the invasion of Crimea in 2014 and about the poisoning of Russian dissidents.
Their status as representatives of a foreign government has often given them the freedom to speak.
Since the start of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, tech companies and even governments have taken other actions to stop the flow of disinformation coming from Russia’s state-controlled media.
Meta barred those outlets from platforms it owns, including Facebook and Instagram.
Tech companies also cut off the outlets from ad revenue and expanded efforts to label their accounts.
A message seeking comment from the Russian Embassy in the United States was not immediately returned.
A noticeable increase in pro-Russian propaganda regarding Ukraine began in the weeks and months before the invasion even began in February.
The accounts were tweeting about 2,000 times per week immediately after the invasion, resulting in more than 1 million likes, retweets and comments, according to Schliebs’ research. emergency stay to immediately reimpose the mask mandate on public transit.
An emergency stay of the lower court’s ruling would be a whiplash moment for travelers and transit workers.
Most airlines and airports, many public transit systems and even ride-sharing company Uber lifted their mask-wearing requirements in the hours following Monday’s ruling.
A federal judge in Tampa had struck down the mask mandate for public transit Monday, leading airlines and airports to repeal their requirements that passengers wear face coverings.
The Transportation Security Administration said Monday that it would it will no longer enforce the requirement.
The CDC had recently extended the mandate until May 3 to allow more time to study the BA. omicron subvariant, which is responsible for the vast majority of United States cases.
The Russian Embassy in the U.K. blamed Ukraine for a recent rocket attack that killed dozens at a rail station in the city of Kramatorsk.
Yet despite Twitter’s action, the accounts Schliebs monitored are still earning about half a million likes, retweets and comments per week.
Twitter and Facebook have added “Russian government organization” labels to many of these accounts to ensure users know the source of the information.
Schliebs compared the response by tech companies to Russia’s invasion with their actions following the 2020 United States election, the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the United States Capitol and the COVID-19 pandemic.
Then-President Donald Trump was kicked off Twitter for inciting violence ahead of the Jan. riot.
But the Russian diplomats — they have spread wild conspiracy theories and blamed Ukrainians for Russian atrocities — stay on.
After ter Hold, Diamonds, Silverware and Coins Was Now Instant Savings NIKKOR Z 28mm #/2.
Instant Savings Offers do not apply to any used, refurbished or reconditioned products.
The phrase to this day hangs over the doors of Iran’s Foreign Ministry.
Russia’s war on Ukraine, however, has exposed just how much Tehran has tilted toward Moscow in recent years as the collapse of its nuclear deal with world powers stoked decades-old, hard-line anger at America.
Members of Iran’s paramilitary Revolutionary Guard train on Russian surface-to-air missile systems and aircraft.
Hardline President Ebrahim Raisi visited Russian President Vladimir Putin on one of his first trips abroad.
The war also exposes deeper fault lines even within Iran’s domestic politics.
Among ordinary Iranians, there is a great deal of sympathy for Ukraine, a nation that staged a pro-democracy “Orange Revolution” similar to the “Green Revolution” that shook Iran more than a decade ago but was forcefully put down.
Iran’s historic enmity with Russia has combined with a wider feeling among some that backing Moscow betrays the Islamic Republic’s often-stated message that it stands against the world’s major powers.
Iran’s state-controlled television network, whose English-language service Press TV describes itself as “the voice of the voiceless,” hews close to Russian talking points.
It used Moscow’s euphemistic term “special operation” to describe the war’s early days.
Tehran denied for days it shot down the plane before saying troops made a mistake after Iran fired ballistic missiles at United States forces in Iraq in response for the killing of a top general.
That’s something Tehran’s Friday prayer leader, Kazem Sedighi, mentioned in a March sermon after Russia began its war on Ukraine.
Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who has final say on all matters of state, said his nation opposed “war and destruction” while blaming America for the conflict.
He also brought up alongtime suspicion that he shares with Putin — that the U.S., rather than ordinary citizens, fuels what he described as the “color coups” that back democracy.
For Khamenei, it is memory of the Green Movement protests that followed Iran’s disputed 2009 presidential election that directly challenged the theocracy he leads.
For Putin, it is Ukraine’s 2004 Orange Revolution and its later Maidan protest movement that dislodged the Kremlin-leaning politician Viktor Yanukovych.
But others from within Iran’s Shiite theocracy have raised concerns about Tehran’s stance on the war.
Mohsen Aminzadeh, a former deputy foreign minister under reformist President Mohammad Khatami who was later imprisoned after the disputed 2009 election, went as far as to call Iran’s position “very bad” in a recent interview.
On the streets of Tehran recently, 17 people were willing to speak to a journalist about the war, with others declining.
Of them, 12 supported Ukraine, three reiterated Iran’s official stance and two supported Russia.
Like others, he spoke on condition he be identified only by his first name for fear of reprisals.
A retired Iranian captain, Mehrdad, called Russia’s reasons for the war “ridiculous” and similar to those used by Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein to launch a bloody eight-year war on Iran in the 1980s.
Saddam at the time pointed to supporting Iran’s Arab minority in its oil-rich southwest as a justification for his invasion.
Putin as “very brave” for challenging NATO, also a new preoccupation of Iran’s hard-line government under Raisi.
However, Iran has been living quietly next to Turkey, which joined NATO in 1952.
However, in its imperial past, Russia fought multiple wars against Persia, which ceded territory to the czar.
Russia invaded Iran alongside Britain in World War II to secure oil and trade routes in their war against Germany.
After the war, Russia refused to leave, sparking the first global crisis of the newly formed United Nations.
Russia’s brief use of an Iranian air base amid the war in Syria, in which both backed embattled Syrian President Bashar Assad, similarly sparked widespread anger.
Now, Iran may be feeling like a poker chip in a wider game rather than a player at the geopolitical table.
A demand by Russia for sanctions-relief guarantees threw negotiations in Vienna over Iran’s tattered nuclear deal into disarray.
Russia’s demand seems to have eased, while now it appears American sanctions on the Guard remain the last hurdle.
Hoping to avoid attention, he ran out into the hallway and collected the shoes that he and his colleagues had left outside the operating room door — a telltale sign that surgery was underway.
Kyaw Swar’s close call last month came as Myanmar’s security forces intensify their crackdown on doctors who oppose the military junta that seized power in February 2021.
Doctors have been at the forefront ofa nationwide civil disobedience movement that has crippled the economy, and the regime has targeted health care workers from the start.
In recent weeks, security forces have arrested doctors at their homes and hospitals, revoked the licenses of prominent physicians, searched hospitals for wounded resistance fighters and threatened to close health care centers that employ doctors opposing the regime.
For Myanmar soldiers, who are notorious for stealing from citizens, going after doctors is also a convenient way to make money, since doctors are among the country’s wealthier people.
During arrests, soldiers have — i Patients with gunshot wounds in an emergency ward in Yangon, Myanmar.
The staff had shut down the hospital as part of mass Cth protests against the military coup weeks earlier, but were secretly treating injured protesters.
THE NEW YORK TIMES 2021 seized cash, gold, jewelry and vehicles worth tens of thousands of dollars.
In some cases, army officers have demanded as much as $5,000 not to shut down a private hospital, officials said.
The harassment and arrest of doctors who oppose the regime comes as the country faces a continuing health emergency because of asevere shortage The Tunnel Fire burns Tuesday near Flagstaff, Arizona.
The wildfire nearly tripled in size of doctors, a chronic lack of resources and the closing of many hospitals and clinics.
Throughout the country, barely 40% of the population is fully vaccinated for COVID-19, and many patients are left without routine care.
Doctors say that health care has improved somewhat in recent months in Yangon, Myanmar’s largest city, with many physicians returning to work.
But anti-regime doctors estimate that hundreds of people are still dying each week because of the collapse of the health care system.
One regime tactic has been to release doctors from prison on the condition that they disavow the civil disobedience movement and agree to work at a military-controlled, government hospital, doctors said.
Wai Myo, who was fired from Mandalay General Hospital last year for joining the protest movement.
COCONINO NATIONAL FOREST Southwest wildfires prompt hundreds to flee, officials say By Felicia Fonseca Associated Press FLAGSTAFF, Ariz. — An Arizona wildfire nearly tripled in size as relentless winds pushed the flames through neighborhoods on the outskirts of a college and tourist town, keeping hundreds of residents away from their homes and destroying more than two dozen structures.
The blaze continued its run Wednesday through dry grass and scattered Ponderosa pines around homes into volcanic cinder fields, where roots underground can combust and send small rocks flying into the air, fire officials said.
Fire managers are contending with tight resources as wildfires burn around the Southwest.
The United States has 16 top-level national fire management teams, and four of those are dedicated to blazes in Arizona and New Mexico — something Fleishman said is rare this early in the wildfire season.
Hundreds of people have been evacuated because of the wildfires north of Flagstaff and south of Prescott in Arizona.
In New Mexico, the Mora County Sheriff’s Office issued mandatory evacuations for more residents as winds fueled a blaze that has burned more than 14 square miles since Sunday.
Red flag warnings were on tap across New Mexico on Wednesday and through the rest of the week.
Winds were expected to be lighter Wednesday in Arizona but will strengthen Thursday and Friday, said Mark Stubblefield of the National Weather Service.
The number of acres burned in the United States this year is about 30 percent above the 10-year average — a figure that has gone up from 20 percent just earlier this month as the fire danger shifted from the Southern United States to the Southwest.
Popular national monuments, including Sunset Crater Volcano and Wupatki, were closed because of the wildfire.
Some homes burned to the ground, though Coconino County hasn’t said how many.
One man who reportedly was trapped in his home by the flames was able to get out, Coconino County sheriff’s spokesman Jon Paxton said Wednesday.
Firefighters were expected to move through neighborhoods to cool down any smoldering spots and assess what’s most at risk.
After the coup, thousands of doctors refused to work for the regime and left jobs in government facilities.
Many began offering their services free at private hospitals and underground clinics.
In its attempt to force doctors to work in centers it controls, the military has shut down at least a dozen clinics offering free medical treatment and demanded that private hospitals and clinics hand over the names of patients and their medical history.
I want to be a good citizen, so I joined the civil disobedience movement.
Mandalay General Hospital, amajor teaching hospital in Myanmar’s second-largest city, has been at the center of the protest movement since the start.
Doctors in Mandalay have been much slower than those in other regions to return to work at government-controlled centers.
Last month, the city’s health director and the army general who is Mandalay’s chief commander summoned private hospital owners to a meeting and informed them that the licenses of 14 medical professors and leading specialists at Mandalay General Hospital would be revoked, according to hospital owners who attended the meeting.
They warned that any private hospital that hired them — or other doctors known to support the civil disobedience movement — would be shut down.
The loss of highly trained doctors can have life-ordeath consequences for some patients.
But Mandalay General Hospital, the only place in the region where such surgery could be done, no longer has a team of doctors capable of performing the operation.
Lieu Shin, 64, was given only days to live, but continues to hang on with dialysis, which is exhausting his family’s savings.
He blames the regime for his inability to get treatment, not the doctors.
NM agency issues $136,793 fine in fatal Baldwin shooting By Morgan Lee Associated Press SANTA FE, N.M. — New Mexico workplace safety regulators on Wednesday issued the maximum possible fine of nearly $137,000 against a film production company for firearms safety failures on the set of “Rust,” where a cinematographer was fatally shot in October by actor and producer Alec Baldwin.
New Mexico’s Occupational Health and Safety Bureau said Rust Movie Productions must pay $136,793, and distributed a scathing narrative of safety failures in violation of standard industry protocols, including testimony that production managers took limited or no action to address two misfires on set prior to the fatal shooting.
The bureau also documented gun safety complaints from crew members that went unheeded and said weapons specialists were not allowed to make decisions about additional safety training.
Ataranch on the outskirts of Santa Fe on Oct., 2021, Baldwin was pointing a gun at cinematographer Halyna Hutchins inside a small church during setup for the filming of a scene when it went off, killing Hutchins and wounding the director, Joel Souza.
Baldwin said in a December interview with ABC News that he was pointing the gun at Hutchins at her instruction on the New Mexico set of the Western film when it went off without his pulling the trigger.
HONG/AP 2021 was handed to Baldwin by an assistant director, David Halls, without consulting with on-set weapons specialists during or after the gun was loaded.
Regulators note that Halls also served as safety coordinator and that he was present and witnessed two accidental discharges of rifles on set, and that he and other managers who knew of the misfires took no investigative, corrective or disciplinary action.
As a result of these failures, Director Joel Souza and cinematographer Halyna Hutchins were severely injured.
Rust Movie Productions said through a spokesperson that it would dispute the findings and sanction.
At least five lawsuits have been filed over the shooting, including a wrongful death suit brought by Hutchins’ family against Baldwin and the movie’s other producers.
The lawsuit on behalf of widower Matt Hutchins and his 9-year-old son alleges a “callous” disregard of safety complaints on set.
James Kenney, secretary of the Environment Department that oversees occupational safety, said the agency dedicated 1,500 staff hours to its investigation, examined hundreds of documents and conducted at least a dozen interviews with cast and crew members.
Investigators found production managers placed tight limits on resources for a small team that controlled weapons on set and failed to address concerns about a shotgun left unattended twice.
Armorer Hannah Gutierrez Reed was limited to eight paid days as an armorer to oversee weapons and training, and was assigned otherwise to lighter duties as a props assistant.
As her time as an armorer ran out, Gutierrez Reed warned a manager and was rebuffed.
Kenney said the separate investigations into possible criminal charges are still underway.
The Santa Fe County sheriff and local prosecutors had no immediate comment.
WORLD & NATION NEWS BRIEFING Biden expected to tap Arizona prosecutor as interim ATF director From news services The Biden administration plans to pick Gary Restaino, the top United States prosecutor in Arizona, as the interim director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives until a permanent leader is confirmed, according to officials with knowledge of the situation.
This month, President Joe Biden nominated Steven Dettelbach, who served as a federal prosecutor in Ohio under President Barack Obama, to run an embattled agency that has had one permanent, Senate-confirmed director in the past 15 years.
The bureau’s current acting director, Marvin Richardson, a career official who drew criticism over an appearance in January with the head of the gun industry’s main trade group, will remain at the agency as deputy director to advise Restaino, the officials said.
Officials are cautiously optimistic that Dettelbach can be confirmed by the fall.
But they are also tapping Restaino, who has led some of the highest-profile federal prosecutions from the Justice Department’s Phoenix office in recent years, to provide a more immediate boost to an underfunded agency responsible for enforcing the nation’s gun laws and regulations.
It is unclear whether Restaino will remain at ATF if Dettelbach is confirmed.
But he could remain at the helm if Dettelbach’s nomination fails, which the White House and Justice Department view as highly unlikely.
Last fall, Biden’s first choice to run the bureau, David Chipman, a fiery former agent turned gun control advocate, was forced to withdraw after Sen.
A HOUSE BUILT ON VALUES Angus King, I-Maine, who caucuses with Democrats, opposed his nomination.
Chipman later accused Biden’s team of failing to defend him from attacks by the National Rifle Association and other pro-gun groups.
But he has worked in the Arizona office for nearly two decades, serving as the chief of the criminal division in Phoenix and the head of the white-collar crime section.
In 2009, he had a brief stint at the Justice Department’s headquarters in Washington, where he worked in the public integrity section.
The last stockpiles of adeadly chemical agent in the United States have been safely eliminated, according to Kentucky offcials in charge of destroying the Cold War-era weapons.
The final M55 rocket containing VX nerve agent was destroyed Tuesday at the Blue Grass Chemical Agent plant.
Officials at the Kentucky plant began disassembling about 18,000 of the rockets and draining the VX agent in July, according to a news release from plant officials.
VX is considered the deadliest of the chemical agents that was produced by the U.S., much of it in the 1960s.
It has a consistency similar to motor oil and even a tiny amount causes victims’ bodies to flood with fluids, producing a feeling of drowning before death.
Law enforcement prevented the marchers from reaching dense Palestinian neighborhoods in and around the Old City after a similar event last year helped trigger an Israel-Gaza war.
Arocket was later fired into Israel from the Gaza Strip, Israel’s military said.
ARIEL SCHALIT/AP to kill the brother of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un in a Malaysian airport.
South Carolina’s highest court Wednesday issued a temporary stay blocking the state from carrying out what was set to be its first firing squad execution.
The order puts on hold the planned April 29 execution of Richard Bernard Moore, who drew the death sentence for the 1999 killing of a convenience store clerk in Spartanburg.
Attorneys for the 57-yearold inmate had sought a stay, citing pending litigation in another court challenging the constitutionality of South Carolina’s execution methods, which also include the electric chair.
The most recent execution by firing squad was that of Ronnie Lee Gardner in 2010 in Utah.
Shop owners searched through the rubble of their shops afterward to collect their belongings.
But for nearly an hour after the Supreme Court order, officials continued to demolish structures, including the outer entrance and stairs leading into a mosque.
Anti-Muslim sentiment and attacks have risen across India in the past 10 days, including stone-throwing between Hindu and Muslim groups during religious processions and demolitions of a number of properties, many belonging to \ FINANCING [ice F AVAILABLE 4 LIFETIME LIMITED WARRANTY* | Muslims, in another state in the Southeast Asian nation last week.
United States Secret Service officers shot and killed an intruder who was smashing windows at the residence of the Peruvian ambassador to the United States on Wednesday, authorities said.
The ambassador and his family were inside the residence in northwest Washington when they heard several windows being smashed just before 8m. and called the Secret Service for a “burglary in progress,” authorities said.
The uniformed officers encountered a man, armed with a metal stake, and deployed a Taser in an effort to detain him, but “those weapons appear to not have any effect on the person,” Metropolitan Police Department Chief Robert Contee said.
President Joe Biden plans to attend the White House Correspondents’ Association’s annual dinner, the first time a sitting president will be at the event since Barack Obama in 2016.
The organization said in a tweet that it was pleased to host Biden and first lady Jill Biden at the dinner April 30 that will honor the First Amendment.
The event was canceled in 2020 and last year due to the coronavirus pandemic.
Trevor Noah, host of Comedy Central’s “The Daily Show,” is serving as the event’s entertainer.
PES iel pai 4G Serving most of the state of Connecticut This Window World® Franchise is independently owned and operated by Window World of Connecticut LLC under license from Window World Inc.
Mask mandate for passengers still popular 56% of Americans favor practice in survey taken before federal judge’s ruling By Dave Kolpack Associated Press FARGO, N.D. — A majority of Americans continue to support a mask requirement for people traveling on airplanes and other shared transportation, a new poll finds.
A ruling by a federal judge had put the government’s transportation mask mandate on hold.
The poll by Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research finds that despite opposition to that requirement that included verbal abuse and physical violence against flight attendants, 56% of Americans favor requiring people on planes, trains and public transportation to wear masks, compared with 24% opposed and 20% who say they’re neither in favor nor opposed.
Interviews for the poll were conducted Thursday to Monday, shortly before a federal judge in Florida struck down the national mask mandate on airplanes and mass transit.
Airlines and airports immediately scrapped their requirements that passengers wear face coverings.
The Transportation Security Administration had stopped enforcing the mask requirement, but the Justice Department announced Wednesday that it would appeal the judge’s ruling after the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention asked the department to do so.
Among Republicans, 45% are opposed compared with 33% in favor, with 22% saying neither.
The continued support among Americans overall for mandating masks on transportation comes even as worries about COVID-19 are among their lowest points of the past two years.
Just 20% now say they’re very or extremely worried that they or a family member will be infected.
That’s down slightly since 25% said the same just a month ago and from 36% in December and January as the omicron variant was raging.
Another 33% now say they are somewhat worried, while 48% say they’re not worried at all.
The poll also shows about half of Americans favor requiring masks for workers who interact with the public, compared with about 3 in 10 opposed.
Support is similar for requiring people at crowded public events such as concerts, sporting events and movies to wear masks.
Seventy-two percent of Democrats favor requiring people attending crowded public events to wear masks, while among Republicans, 25% are in favor and 49% are opposed.
Employed Americans are divided on whether people working in person at their own workplaces should be required to wear masks.
Thirty-four percent say they’re in favor of that requirement, 33% are opposed and 33% are neither in favor nor opposed.
Among workers who are Republicans, 53% are opposed and 18% are in favor.
One seller offered 10 days access to Netflix in Ultra HD for $1 instead of $19.99 a month for a Netflix premium account.
Another seller pitched access to HBO Max for just $1.09 amonth, compared with its $14.99 a month price tag.
Someone else was offering a Disney+ subscription (typically costing $7.99 a month) for as low as 90 cents.
As competition for customers among streaming services heats up, so has the proliferation of online marketplaces where passwords are being sold illegally at bargain-basement prices, according to companies that manage digital content protection for Hollywood studios.
Such marketplaces have sprouted in response to the popularity of password sharing — which has become a growing headache for streamers that rely on subscription revenue to finance the rising cost of producing content.
Account sharing and piracy cost streamers and pay TV providers $9. billion in lost revenue in 2019.
That’s expected to grow to $12. billion in lost revenue by 2024, according to market research and consulting firm Parks Associates.
A Citi analyst estimated streaming services lose roughly $25 billion a year due to password sharing, with Netflix representing 25% of that amount.
Netflix last month took a major step to crack down on password sharing among people who don’t live in the same home.
The streamer said it was testing features that would allow its subscribers in Chile, Costa Rica and Peru to add up to two users outside of their household, for an additional $2 or $3 per account.
Last year, Netflix also tested a prompt during the login process that would remind some nonpaying viewers that if they don’t live in the same house as the account holder, they would need to get their own Netflix subscription.
Netflix on Tuesday reported its first subscriber loss in more than a decade.
The company’s customer base fell by 200,000 subscribers during the January-March period, according to its latest quarterly earnings report.
It’s the first time that Netflix’s subscribers have fallen since the streaming service became available throughout most of the world outside of China six years ago.
The drop stemmed in part from Netflix’s decision to withdraw from Russia to protest the war against Ukraine, resulting in a loss of 700,000 subscribers.
Netflix is projecting a loss of another 2 million subscribers during the April-June period.
People who tend to share passwords are aged 18 to 24, according a study by the Advertising Research Foundation that surveyed 10,400 adults.
Younger consumers may be more cash-strapped and are looking for ways to save money from paying for multiple streaming services, despite exposing themselves to security risks, especially if they use the same password for other services like a bank account, industry experts said.
CSX to hike pay ahead of expected raises By Josh Funk Associated Press OMAHA, Neb. — CSX has agreed to start paying some of its employees more in advance of raises the railroad expects to agree to as part of ongoing national contract talks.
CSX said the payments of up to $600 a month are expected to start next month for members of the Sheet Metal, Air, Rail and Transportation Workers, Transportation Division union.
The Jacksonville, Florida-based railroad plans to reach similar agreements with its other unions.
The side deal that CSX announced late Tuesday may be an encouraging sign for the larger contract talks between the National Railway Labor Conference coalition of railroads that has been negotiating with unions since the fall of 2019.
A spokesman for the NRLC group that is negotiating on behalf of more than 30 railroads didn’t immediately respond to questions about the talks Wednesday.
All the major freight railroads, including CSX, Union Pacific, BNSF, Norfolk Southern and Kansas City Southern, are involved in those negotiations.
CEO Jim Foote said the railroad decided to start paying its employees more to help them deal with skyrocketing inflation that is driving prices of food and gas higher.
A spokesman for the SMART-TD union didn’t immediately respond to questions Wednesday.
The unions are reluctant to make significant concessions in the negotiations after the major freight railroads cut nearly one-third of their workforce over the past six years as they overhauled their operations.
The workers also remained on the job throughout the pandemic to keep freight moving.
Morgan Stanley, the investment bank working with Musk on the potential deal, has been calling banks and other potential investors to shore up financing for the offer, four people with knowledge of the situation said.
Musk is first focused on raising debt and has not yet begun to seek equity financing for his bid, one of the people said.
Musk, 50, is evaluating various packages of debt, including more senior debt known as preferred debt and a loan against his shares of Tesla, the electric carmaker that he runs, two of the people said.
Apollo Global Management, a private equity firm, is among the parties considering offering debt financing in a bid for Twitter.
Musk is aiming to pull together a fully funded offer as soon as this week, one of the people said.
The people with knowledge of the discussions were not authorized to speak publicly because the details are confidential and in flux.
Last week, Musk, the world’s wealthiest man, made an unsolicited offer for the social media company, saying that he wanted to take it private and that he wanted people to be able to speak more freely on the service.
But his offer was regarded skeptically by Wall Street because he did not include details about how he would come up with the money for the deal.
While Twitter’s board has not rejected Musk’s offer, it responded days later with a “poison pill,” a tactic that would effectively prevent Musk from owning more than 15% of Twitter’s shares.
Musk owns more than 9% of Twitter, making him its single-biggest individual shareholder.
BUSINESS BRIEFING Mexico’s Senate OKs lithium plan MEXICO CITY — Mexico’s Senate passed a bill Tuesday to nationalize lithium mining and extraction.
The bill was submitted by President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, who is expected to sign it into law.
The law says a state-run company will have exclusive rights to mine lithium, a mineral used in electric car batteries and other devices.
Such a company does not yet exist, and the Mexican government has no experience in mining lithium.
Only one lithium mine in Mexico, operated by a Chinese firm, is anywhere close to starting production.
It was not clear if that mine in northern Mexico would be taken over by the government.
Russia shunned at G-20 meeting WASHINGTON — Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen and Ukrainian Finance Minister Serhiy Marchenko walked out ofa Group of 20 meeting Wednesday as Russia’s representative started talking.
Several finance ministers and central bank governors also left the room, according an official familiar with the meetings, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the event was not public.
Some ministers and central bank governors who attended the meeting virtually turned their cameras off when the Russia representative spoke, the person said.
The incident came amid the International Monetary Fund and World Bank spring meetings, in which finance heads gather to tackle the world’s most pressing issues.
National Association of Realtors TNS A S$ 0 N D J F MAR Standing this week on a houseboat that he’s been living in while his home is being repaired, ee <« ¥ ~~ 2 WA me en Ae. ““s Ted Falgout points out the waterline from Hurricane Ida in 2021.
LOUIS — When Hurricane Ida hit last summer, a storm surge overwhelmed a levee and gushed into Ted Falgout’s coastal Louisiana home, destroying his furniture and the beloved framed photos of his twin sons kissing him on their first day of school, then again when they graduated high school.
As climate change makes hurricanes stronger and increases storm surges, cities on the Louisiana coast and Mississippi River are hoping President Joe Biden’s $1. trillion infrastructure package will provide badly needed funding to fortify locks, levees and other flood protections.
But community groups and advocates fear smaller cities will struggle to navigate the maze of government programs and miss out on the rare chance to protect against rising waters and heavy rains.
While many swaths ofthe country are at risk for flooding, the Louisiana coast has long been especially vulnerable and the Upper Mississippi is part of a region where flood severity is increasing faster than in any other area of the country.
La Crosse, Wisconsin, is among the cities trying to figure out how to benefit as infrastructure funds start rolling out.
The city’s levees were built after devastating flooding in 1965 and don’t meet federal standards that would help lower insurance rates and make it easier for residents to fix up their homes without having to spend more to protect against floods, said Brad Woznak of SEH, a flood planning consultant for the city.
Upgrading the levees would be so expensive it’s hard for the city to know how to get started, he said.
Some advocates want agencies to make it easier for communities to learn about funding opportunities and ensure that simple applications from small towns will be able to compete against more sophisticated proposals from richer cities.
They also want more clarity into how the Biden administration considers factors like economic and environmental inequality.
The Environmental Protection Agency also said it will offer assistance to disadvantaged areas and states have money to help small communities access funding for drinking and wastewater projects.
Rural communities are also getting special guidance on tapping into the money.
But further complicating the scramble for funding is debate about the best approaches for protecting against floods.
In addition to protections like levees and floodgates, Congress directed the Army Corps to consider natural solutions like the restoration of wetlands.
Britain 1.3057 .7659 | Primerate 3.50 3.50 D tic Ind Canada .7996 1.2507 | 3-mo.T-Bill 0.83 0.76 omestic ingexes China 1558 6.4192 | 6-mo.
For more than two years, ever since the pandemic began, Disneyland’s furry inhabitants have been off limits.
When it reopened in April 2021 with extensive health-related modifications, Mickey and Minnie and their cohorts were kept at a distance from guests.
But on Monday, Rory, 2, trained her eyes on someone coming around the corner in red trousers and big, white gloves.
Squeal-screaming, she picked herself up off the pavement and ran toward him with arms outstretched.
Her mother, father and uncle chased after her and scrambled to unlock their iPhones to catch a photo of their embrace.
Rory shouted toward her paparazzi, as Mickey knelt to rub noses with her.
ALEX WELSH/ THE NEW YORK TIMES over the past month by the culture wars.
Employees revolted over the company’s initial silence on an anti-LGBTQ law, and rightwing protests broke out after the company did speak up.
In this hyperpartisan moment, both sides of the political divide have been pulling on Disney, leading to some not-so-magical moments around a brand that is supposed to symbolize happily ever after.
Some people find Disney’s extra-syrupy, tightly managed theme parks to be extra-creepy.
The character hugging, which has been part of the Disneyland experience since its earliest days in the 1950s, may seem particularly odd.
But a lot of American families consider it a rite of childhood to hug one of Disney’s cartoon characters.
Some characters, including the Disney princesses, are so mobbed that the company has built indoor, heavily themed environments for them to inhabit.
Disneyland has roughly 50 costumed characters in rotation, Vossen said.
With the return of character hugs, operations have been almost fully restored at Disney’s domestic resorts after a lengthy period in which social distancing and other coronavirus safety measures took priority.
The division of the company that includes theme parks had $16. billion in revenue last year, down from $26 billion in 2019, according to financial filings.
With that, Mickey Mouse headed “offstage,” as Disney refers to its behind-thescenes areas.
Vossen, who has worked at Disneyland for 42 years, frowned and offered a correction.
This Vacs J anki is, broadly speaking a Goldberg contest between good guys and bad guys.
The world is made up of nation-states with interests and those states act rationally on their interests.
Yes, nations have interests, but the way they define their interests is not always strictly rational.
History is full of examples of nations committing vast resources to causes that are extrarational.
For months, he’s had the secondworst approval rating of any polling-era president at the same point in their presidencies, trailing only Donald Trump.
Yes, those are three of the four sitting presidents to lose a presidential election during the polling era.
Biden began his presidency witha period of unusual approval stability, and he may have entered into a second such stretch this year.
His approval rating was at 41.9% on Jan., marking the end of his first year in office.
It’s 41.8%, as I write this, and he’s been within a percentage point of where he is now on almost every day over the last three months.
It’s possible to look at the day-to-day approval chart and see Biden hit bottom soon after, with his all-time low point of 40.4% at the end of February.
His numbers improved as the pandemic eased — only to be hit again by the big surge in gasoline prices in March that he’s slowly recovering from as prices moderate.
The numbers are compatible with that interpretation ... but they’re also compatible with the view that he’s just held steady over the last three months and any fluctuations are just statistical noise.
It’s possible that Biden’s low approval is soft, and that a few months of good news about the pandemic and inflation could produce a solid rally, meaning he would no longer be a major drag on Democratic candidates this fall.
But it’s also possible that opposition has hardened, and that he’s unlikely to rally even with a run of positive news.
So far, nothing has pushed Biden below the 40% mark that four of his 13 predecessors had reached at this point in their presidencies and that three others would hit before the end of their first two years in office.
Maybe this line will hold, even if there’s further bad news — and maybe Biden is just as much at risk of reaching the 30s or worse as all presidents have been.
To claim that, say, North Korea’s foreign and domestic policy is an expression of its rational self-interest is to declare you don’t know anything about North Korea.
Realists tend to conflate the interests of rulers with the interests of the ruled.
It’s hard to find a sane analyst who argues that Putin invaded Ukraine solely in the name of Russia’s rational self-interest rather than his own notions of glory and historical retribution, and it’s even harder to find one who thinks the invasion is objectively in the interest of the Russian people.
Again, while it would have been in everyone’s interest — however you define it — for Putin not to have committed this monstrous crime, his choice makes it easy to call him and his enablers the bad guys.
Deliberately targeting civilians, sanctioning mass executions and rape, not to mention the intentional wholesale erasure of cities, is objectively evil.
The Russian state tacitly admits this when it refuses to tell its own people what it is doing.
With media voices like Simonyan, it’s no wonder Putin allegedly polls well in Russia.
I think the realist case for doing everything possible to assure a Russian defeat is obvious.
It is Russian policy to undermine our interests and the interests of our allies around the world.
In the 1990s, we pushed Ukraine to relinquish its nuclear weapons in exchange for security guarantees.
In 2005, a bipartisan effort resulted in Ukraine \ \ destroying vast amounts of its conventional weapons, on the assumption those security guarantees would be honored.
Putin said those guarantees — which Russia signed on to — were null and void because the Ukrainian Euromaidan protests in 2013 ushered in anew Ukrainian state.
Whether you buy that garbage is immaterial, Putin’s betrayal of his commitments doesn’t release us from ours.
And it is in our interest to be seen asa nation that honors its commitments.
None of this is to say we should send our own troops into Ukraine — not that we wouldn’t be morally justified.
Besides, Ukraine is asking for the modern equivalent of the arsenal of democracy, and we should give it to them, fast.
Because Putin is now doubling down on his crimes in eastern Ukraine just to save face.
PATRICK SEMANSKY/AP in a relatively narrow range during this period of intense partisanship.
I’m among what I think is the minority who think very high and very low approval ratings are still possible.
Survey respondents said, by wide margins, that they would be happy to pay more for gasoline in order to support Ukraine and punish Russia.
Again, the changes aren’t large enough to prove anything, but this certainly appears to be an example of the finding that people aren’t good at predicting their own reactions to potential news events.
That’s something to take into consideration when it comes to other areas as well.
People have all sorts of things they might say they want to do about inflation, but if inflation recedes they’ll be more favorable toward Biden regardless of whether he followed their policy preferences or not, and whatever they predicted about their own reactions to hypothetical scenarios.
People may say they want to keep or eliminate mask mandates or anything else, but it’s more likely that outcomes — case counts, hospitalizations, deaths — determine whether people think Biden has done a good job or a bad job in dealing with the coronavirus.
But overall it is outcomes that heavily influence presidential popularity.
Lots of things, whether it’s a policy position or the ability to give a good speech or how well this or that government agency functions, have the potential to affect presidential popularity at the margins.
And in many cases those are the things under the control of the president, whereas many big-picture outcomes may be far harder to influence.
So, all else equal, it makes sense for presidents to tout their accomplishments, give speeches, emphasize their popular policies and stay relatively quiet about their unpopular ones.
We tend to spend plenty of time checking on how the president is doing on such things because, again, they’re what the White House can usually control.
Tell me what’s going to happen with the pandemic and with the economy — including inflation — over the next six months, and then over those same months two years from now, and Ill give you asurprisingly accurate guess as to how Democrats will do in November and in the 2024 election.
Aitchison’s analysis is correct — and the party’s prescription is a good one.
Left to their own devices, localities tend to overweigh purely local interests in their land-use planning and don’t approve enough new homes.
This may help them avoid costs such as traffic jams and school crowding, but it imposes large economic costs on nonresidents.
Meanwhile, people who don’t move to town because there aren’t enough new homes don’t just vanish — they live elsewhere, which makes the savings in terms of infrastructure illusory.
In Canada, as in the U.S., the federal government finances a fair amount of local government activity.
If towns and cities want money for infrastructure, they need to do their share to add to the national housing supply.
President Joe Biden endorsed a version of this approach during his campaign, and at one point it was part of his “Build Back Better” proposal.
And it’s been the subject of a yearslong fearmongering campaign from the right.
Earlier this month, while Canada’s conservatives were pushing more density, Sen.
Tom Cotton, R-Ark., went on Fox News to complain that Democrats “want to make us all poor.
In terms of the culture war, it’s easy to see where Cotton is coming from.
American cities are full of Black people, immigrants, LGBTQ people and people who like art galleries and weird food.
To many people of a conservative temperament, that’s not very appealing.
On the economics, however, Cotton could learn a lot from his conservative friends north of the border.
An apartment building is a more efficient use of land and material than a detached single-family home.
Walmart’s large and efficient supply chain helps it offer “always low prices,” which are appealing to lower-income people.
But no self-respecting Republican would think that allowing Walmart to exist makes people poor.
Walmart has a downscale customer base, so banning Walmart would be bad for low-income people.
And ultimately it would be bad for everyone — even fancy city snobs benefit in the long run from the existence of efficient retail operations that raise productivity.
Prohibiting the use of productivity-enhancing building types — duplexes, rowhouses, small apartments and, yes, the dread high-rise — in those places makes the country as a whole poorer.
That’s not a question of what kind of lifestyle people ought to prefer, or about whether city dwellers or rural folks are more virtuous.
And with housing accounting for more than one-third of household consumption spending, regulatory burdens on the housing sector are a huge deal.
It’s an idea articulated years ago by conservative Harvard economist Edward Glaeser.
It used to be difficult to get progressive-minded people interested in zoning reform, because talking about the virtues of deregulation smacked of right-wing politics and neoliberalism.
That’s the kind of thinking that poisons America’s political system and hurts the United States economy.
Dark green American, Emeralds, Green Giants for beautiful privacy borders.
With our expansive network of distinguished employers from coast to coast and advanced Job matching technology, you'll find opportunities that match your skills, your personality and your life.
Request within the 100’ regulated area: construction of deck on piers; Location: 20 Henderson Drive, Avon, CT; Parcel 2640020.
EMILY KYLE AUTHORIZED WETLANDS AGENT 4/21/22 7194210 TOWN OF ENFIELD, CONNECTICUT REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS WATER POLLUTION CONTROL DIVISION SODIUM PERMANGANATE 20% Sealed proposals for the services named above will be received at the Office of the Director of Finance until 11:00m., Tuesday May 10, 2022.
Thereafter, proposals will be opened in public and read aloud or opened and read aloud pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Governor’s Executive Orders.
The Town of Enfield reserves the right to accept or reject any, all, or any part of proposals, to waive formalities or The Capital Region Development Authority , a quasi-public agency of the state of Connecticut, is seeking a qualified consultant to provide project coordination services in the Parkville neighborhood.
A proposal package can be requested from dgurvich@mercyhousingct. org and the final proposal needs to be sent to dgurvich@mercyhousingct.org by April 28 2022 by 4:00 pm Connecticut LEGAL NOTICE MIDDLETOWN WATER POLLUTION CONTROL AUTHORITY HEARING ON SEWER BILLING & SEWER USE CHARGES The Middletown Water Pollution Control Authority will hold a Hybrid/Webex Meeting on Thursday, May 5, 2022 at 7:00p.m.
All public comments will be read into the official record of the meeting.
Please send all public comments to joe.fazzino@middletownct.gov. and place the following into the subject line; Public comment for the Middletown Water Pollution Control Authority Special Meeting May 5, 2022 7:00p.m.
Properties Accepted The following billing schedule and use charges shall apply to all properties which are now connected, directly or indirectly to the Middletown sanitary sewerage system including all properties located within the limits of the City of Middletown and all properties in the Town of Middlefield which are or may be connected to the Middletown sanitary sewer system pursuant to agreement between the City of Middletown and Town of Middlefield.
Billing dates as of August 1, November |, February 1, and also May | shall apply to Residential, Commercial, or Industrial units having a meter size 5/8” to and including 1 “ meters.
Billing dates shall be the 1 st day of the following month for Residential, Commercial, or Industrial units having a meter size 1 1/2” and above. c.
Sewer Use Charges The sewerage use charge shall be at the rate of $6.84 per one hundred cubic feet of water charged for by the City of Middletown as having been consumed on or in any lots, lands, building, or premises as shown by the water bills rendered to the owner of such lots, lands, building, or premises connected with said sewerage system.
Properties not using City water, shall be charge the said rate and shall be applied to an estimated total water consumption of said WEST HARTFORD PLAN AND ZONING COMMISSION LEGAL NOTICE The Town of West Hartford Plan and Zoning Commission also acting as the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency, will hold its Regular Meeting at 7:00 PM. on Monday, May 2, 2022.
New Street — Petition for the honorary and historic renaming of a public street.
Associated site improvements include construction of a gathering space area and entry to the fields, new parking for 21 cars, paved sidewalks, new retaining and seating walls, and a new scoreboard.
Joseph, , requesting approval of an Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Permit to conduct certain regulated activities, which may have an adverse impact on a wetlands regulated area.
The applicant proposes to replace an existing natural grass softball field with a synthetic turf playing field along with associated site improvements.
The minimum charge EOE/AA per monthly and semi-annual period shall 4/21/22 7196170 be $34.22 for consumption less than five hundred cubic feet.
All previous sewer use charges established by the Water Pollution Control Authority of the City of Middletown are hereby repealed effective as of the effective date of the new charges.
Burnham Street and also known as lot no. on a certain map entitled, ""Property of KATE A BURNHAM, East Hartford, Conn.
North: by Burnham Street, fifty five feet; Northeast: by a curve connecting the south street line of Burnham Street and the West street line of Pheasant Lane, thirty one and 42/100 feet; East: by Pheasant Lane, one hundred thirty feet; South: by lot no. on a subdivision entitled ""Burnham Estate"", seventy five feet; and West by lot no. on said map, one hundred fifty feet.
Subject to building and zoning regulations of the Town of East Hartford and a 20' sanitary sewer easement in favor of the MDC as of record appear.
The Secretary reserves the right to adjourn the time and place of the sale by announcement made to those present.
There will be no proration of taxes, rents or other income or liabilities, except that the purchaser will pay, at or before closing, his pro rata share of any real estate taxes that have been paid by the Secretary to the date of the foreclosure sale.
If the successful bid is oral, a deposit of $17,695.00 must be presented before bidding is closed.
The remainder of the purchase price must be delivered within 30 days of the sale or at such other time as the Secretary may determine for good cause shown, time being of the essence.
This amount, like the bid deposits, must be delivered in the form of a certified or cashier’s check.
If the Secretary is the highest bidder, he need not pay the bid amount in cash.
The successful bidder will pay all conveying fees, all real estate and other taxes that are due on or after the delivery date of the remainder of the payment and all other costs associated with the transfer of title.
At the conclusion of the sale, the deposits of the unsuccessful bidders will be returned to them.
The Secretary may grant an extension of time within which to deliver the remainder of the payment.
All extensions will be for 15-day increments for a fee of $500.00, paid in advance.
If the high bidder closes the sale prior to the expiration of any extension period, the unused portion of the extension fee shall be applied toward the amount due.
If the high bidder is unable to close the sale within the required period, or within any extensions of time granted by the Secretary, the high bidder may be required to forfeit the cash deposit or, at the election of the Foreclosure Commissioner after consultation with the HUD representative, will be liable to HUD for any costs incurred as a result of such failure.
The Commissioner may, at the direction of the HUD representative, offer the property to the second highest bidder for an amount equal to the highest price offered by that bidder.
There is no right of redemption, or right of possession based upon a right of redemption, in the mortgagor or others subsequent to a foreclosure completed pursuant to the Act.
Therefore, the Foreclosure Commissioner will issue a Deed to the purchaser upon receipt of the entire purchase price in accordance with the terms of the sale as provided herein.
Tender of payment by certified or cashier’s check or application for cancellation of the foreclosure sale shall be submitted to the address of the Foreclosure Commissioner provided below.
Joseph, , requesting approval of a Special Use Permit for the replacement of an existing natural grass softball field with a synthetic turf playing field along with associated site improvements (Submitted for TPZ receipt on April 4, 2022.
Club Application of Peter timothy root 1662 Joyce on behalf of Wampanoag Country Club, Tyrell Hudson 1056 , requesting approval of a Special Use Pedro Contreras 1070 Permit for the installation of platform tennis Starr Lee 1630 courts along with associated utility and site Joshua Ortiz 0250 improvements.
Doris Yasin 1048 At this hearing, interested person may Karen Jones 0112 be heard or submit written communication IONIE BECKFORD 1374 received.
Purchases to be paid for at the time of purchase, a $100.00 CREDIT OR DEBIT ONLY deposit will be needed on EACH room purchased.
Auction service provided by www.storageauctions.com Absolutely NO U-Haul Storage customers, or their family or friends on their behalf, whose units are listed in auction, may participate in any auction proceedings.
There will be no proration of taxes, rents or other income or liabilities, except that the purchaser will pay, at or before closing, 1is pro rata share of any real estate taxes that have been paid by the Secretary to the date of the foreclosure sale.
The -emainder of the purchase price must be delivered within 30 days of the sale or at such other time as the Secretary may determine for good cause shown, time being of the essence.
The successful didder will pay all conveying fees, all real estate and other taxes that are due on or after the delivery date of the remainder of the payment and all other costs associated with the transfer of title.
At the conclusion of the sale, the deposits of the 4insuccessful bidders will be returned to them.
If the high bidder closes the sale prior to the expiration of any extension period, the unused portion of the extension fee shall be applied toward the amount due. lf the high bidder is unable to close the sale within the required period, or within any extensions of time granted by the Secretary, the high bidder may be required to forfeit the cash deposit or, at the election of the Foreclosure Commissioner after consultation with the HUD representative, will be liable to HUD for any costs incurred as a result of such failure.
The Commissioner may, at the direction of the HUD representative, offer the property to the second highest bidder for an amount 2qual to the highest price offered by that bidder.
Therefore, the Foreclosure Commissioner will issue a Deed to the ourchaser upon receipt of the entire purchase price in accordance with the terms of the sale as provided herein.
Waltena Bobo George Vukasinovic Ellington Suffield Darcey, John Alton, Joan R Alice L Smith Thomas L Wardell PZ on Friday, April 29, 2022 at WH Joan LaCroix-Alton age 88, Glastonbury Tolland 4:30m., there will be an life-long resident of Joan R Alton Alice L Smith informal gathering at Charter Glastonbury ascended to Hartford Torrington Oak International Academy, § heaven on Monday April 18th Rev.
She was a Theresa Garbich Daniel P Sullivan Darcey, who passed ~ school bus driver for many Daniel P Sullivan West Hartford away on January 9, 2022.
As years for the Glastonbury Marlborough Andre Brodeur Theresa Garbich William P Mcgovern Newington Windsor Bryan W Hicks Gloria M Henry Other Towns in CT John Darcey Elizabeth B Robida * Denotes name listing only.
OBITUARIES Garbich, Theresa Theresa “Terry” Garbich, 77, of Marlborough, CT passed away on April 18, 2022.
She was born in Hartford, CT, the daughter of the late Henry and Anastasia Jarvis.
She Spent countless hours at the hockey rink, softball sidelines and school functions proudly watching her grandchildren.
Terry enjoyed working on her family genealogy and most enjoyed her outings with her siblings to the casino.
Terry’s love of animals began at young age growing up on a farm with bunnies, pigs and chickens.
She is survived by her daughter Roseann Pelletier and her husband, Bailey; daughter Victoria Flynn and her husband, Kevin; and son Max Garbich and his wife Judy; Grandson and United States Marine, Spencer, and Granddaughters Caitlyn and Anastacia; and her Sister Elaine Martocchio.
She was predeceased by her Brothers, Raymond and Henry Jarvis and Sister Bertha Sanzaro.
Her graveside service will be Thursday, April 28, 2022 at 2:00pm at St.
Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries Sullivan, Daniel ""Dan’ P Daniel P Sullivan of Vernon, loving father, grandfather, ""brother and friend passed | away peacefully with his loved ones at his side on Saturday, April 16, 2022 at the age of 77.
Dan was born on June 14, 1944 in Milford, CT, one of four children of the late Daniel P Sullivan Sr. and Edith Sullivan.
Dan and his family lived in Newfoundland for several years when he was a young boy while his father was Director of Financial Services at the Argentia Naval Air Station.
After a career with the State of Connecticut that included serving as Director of Human Resources for the Connecticut Department of Public Health, Dan retired in 1997 and became the Director of Human Resources for the Town of Vernon, Connecticut.
Following his retirement in 2009, Dan was elected to the Vernon Town Council.
Dan loved Vernon and through the years he also proudly served on the Zoning Board and the Board of Education.
He was a past Trustee and lifetime member of the Rockville Elks , a member of the Rockville Fish & Game Club, a lifelong member of the National Rifle Association, a member of the Town of Vernon Memorial Day Committee and an avid military enthusiast.
He is survived by his two daughters Tara Mendyka and her husband Andrew of Manchester, Shannon Sullivan and her son Christopher Rich both of Vernon, his two sisters Barbara Walsh and her husband Dennis and Jane Crogle and her husband Alan all of Mystic, several nieces and nephews including Dan’s godson Paul Lizak Il and Dan’s long time dear friend Barbara Yard of Manchester.
In addition to his parents, Dan was predeceased by his sister Sharon Lizak and her husband Paul.
Funeral services will be on Saturday April 23, 2022, at 10:00 am at the funeral home followed by burial with Military Honors in Valley Falls Cemetery in Vernon.
To leave an Online condolence please visit www.carmonfuneralich CARMON Community Funeral Homes Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries Every life story deserves to be told.
Share your loved one’s story at placeanad.courant. com/obituaric Hartford Courant Ha tford ph ip In partnership with ~ Legacy.com’ teacher, department leader, and Board of Education member and chair, Jack impacted the lives of many people.
There will be no formal agenda, but there will be an Opportunity for anyone so inclined to speak about what their relationship with Jack meant to them.
Light refreshments will be served and as the day chosen will be Arbor Day, a tree will be planted on school property in Jack's honor.
Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries Henry, Gloria M Gloria Mavis Henry born October 8, 1931 to the late Alexander and Estella Lewis of St.
She gracefully entered the kingdom of glory Thursday, April 7, 2022 peacefully surrounded by family and holding her daughter's hand.
She was predeceased by her husband Seymour Henry of 18 years until his death in November of 1987.
Before migrating to the United States Gloria worked as the secretary for the mayor of Montego Bay.
After arriving to the states she held several positions of employment which began at Savitt Jewelry store.
She was a faithful member of Faith Congregational Church and served on various committees.
Her husband was also one of the original founding fathers of the West Indian Social Club.
Gloria is predeceased by siblings Walter, Astley, Beres, Albert, Joe and Carmen.
Gloria is survived by her son Merton Boswell, daughter Chelsea Boswell-Neal and husband Thomas Neal, step-daughter Shirley Taylor and husband Owen Taylor.
Grandchildren Chantel Boswell, Chelsea Bianca Neal, Tony Taylor and Dr.
Along with a host of nieces, nephews, greatnieces, great-nephews and their families.
Gloria was Known for her big heart and her caring spirit, she displayed this by entertaining family and friends with delicious holiday dinners especially Easter Sunday.
Gloria loved to donate to various charities as well as her time to those in need.
She would provide transportation, purchase groceries, and was always willing to lend a helping hand.
For online condolences visit, www. carmonfuneralhome. com ich CARMON Community Funeral Homes Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries Smith, Alice LaPoint On Saturday, April 16th, 2022, Alice Boyce LaPoint Smith, of Framingham, MA (formerly of Tolland and Ellington, CT), loving mother, grandmother and great-grandmother, passed away at age 93, Surrounded by her loving family.
Alice, also Known as “Dabi"" “Dabs” or “Grammy” to her grandchildren and countless others, made friends everywhere with her radiant smile, and warm, giving nature.
Alice later married her childhood sweetheart, Richard Lawless Smith, of Leominster, MA, and they adored each other for 22 years until his death in 2006.
Alice and her husband were dedicated longtime parishioners of Saint Matthew Parish in Tolland, where she served both as a Lector and Eucharistic Minister for many decades.
Alice was predeceased by her parents, Charles and Hannah, and her brothers, Charles Jr., Ralph, and Donald.
A Mass of Christian Burial will be held at 10 AM on Saturday, April 23, 2022 at St.
The Alzheimer's Foundation of America For online condolences please visit: www. pietrasfuneralhome.com Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries isit the obituary section on courant.com to share memories of loved ones.
Joan was most happy when her family gathered for birthdays and holidays and weekend card games.
Alton, who was her rock and sisters Marjorie Barker, Pauline LaCroix and Susie Esposito.
She is survived by her sister Bonnie Sargent and brother Richard LaCroix and her 5 children Charles and Jeffrey Alton of East Hartford, Pamela VanSoest, Judith Simpson and Thomas Alton of Glastonbury as well as many grandchildren, great grandchildren, nieces and nephews.
The family will be having a private funeral service followed by a Mass of Christian Burial at Ss.
Isidore and Maria Parish at St Paul Church, 2577 Main St., Glastonbury, CT 06033.
Andre served his country as /a mechanic in the United States Air Force.
He was a security guard | for the State of Connecticut and was a long-haul cross-country tractor trailer driver for many years.
He enjoyed being in his workshop creating gifts and spiritual crosses for others.
Andre is survived by his mother Germaine Brodeur as well as numerous cousins in both Connecticut and Canada, which was one of his many favorite places to visit.
Visitation is prior to the funeral from 9:00m. to 10:00m. at the Church.
Sheehan Hilborn Breen FUNERAL HOME Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries i Uriel O'Connor Uriel O'Connor Myles departed this world peacefully on April 3, 2022, surrounded by loved ones.
He was born on_ July 7,1940 in Ramble, in the parish of Hanover, Jamaica, WI to the late Morris Myles and Gertrude Arnold Myles.
He later moved to the parish of Saint James and worked for many years in the accounting department of the Water Commission section of the Saint James Parish Council.
Uriel, affectionately called Super by his siblings, proved that, indeed, he was super.
At the tender age of 12, he assumed the super responsibility of taking care of his younger siblings after the death of his beloved mother.
Due to his affectionate care and support of his siblings throughout their lives, he won their love, admiration and respect.
The couple raised five children, Orrette , Andrea, Shaunette, Rochelle and Annya.
His influence has helped to shape them into the kind adults they have become.
While in the United States, he worked at various employments, including Sealtest.
Although his marriage ended in divorce, his wife of 21 years, was Supportive of him until his death.
Uriel is an ardent reader of all types of genres and later developed into a skilled puzzle player.
It was not unusual to see him reading the overseas edition of the Jamaican Gleaner and Star on weekends, most naturally, keeping up with the latest political issues of the day.
Uriel leaves to cherish his memory, his loving exwife, Gweneth Myles, son, Orrette, daughters, Andrea , Althea, Shaunette, Rochelle and Annya.
Shalaiyah, Naheem, Danesha, Javian, Christyna, Najay, Nathaniel, Gwen, Jayden and Peyton.
Sisters, Verline and Eileen, a brother, Boysie, and a host nieces and nephews.
Uriel was predeceased by his father, Morris, Mother, Gertrude, sisters, Laurel, Carmel, Dorothy, Blossom, Pearl, Una, and brother Lloyd.
Besides her husband, she leaves to mourn her passing a daughter, Auletta Rochelle Bobo of Bloomfield; a son, Clyde Bernard Bobo of Willimantic; a brother, Charles E Bates and his wife Gail of Bloomfield; six grandchildren; a great-granddaughter; and a host of foster children, nieces, nephews, other relatives and friends.
For online condolences and to view the complete obituary, please visit, WWW. panne Talo ie com. tj CARMON —.— Community Funeral Homes Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries Hicks, Bryan W Bryan William Hicks, 57, of Newington went to be with his Sweet Lord on Monday, April 18, 2022 after a long battle with metastatic melanoma.
He . worked most of his life in the ‘ automotive industry but his life's calling was to be the if rock of the Hicks family.
He leaves his loving siblings, Dale and Tracy, who cared for him at home throughout this long journey.
He also leaves his niece Harleigh and her father Dane Wider; goddaughter Nicole McCormack; and many lifelong friends, and family.
Calling hours will be held Friday, April 22nd from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00m. followed by a prayer service at the Duksa Family Funeral Homes at Newington Memorial, 20 Bonair Avenue, Newington.
To Share a condolence with his family, please visit www. newingtonmemorial.com.
Y DUKSA Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries McGovern, William P William P McGovern, 82, of West Hartford, passed away on Sunday, April 17, 2022, after a period of declining health.
Born December 6, 1939, in Hartford, CT, he was a lifelong resident of West Hartford.
Bill retired from the State of Connecticut and enjoyed music, playing his records and boating.
He enjoyed sharing this enthusiasm to the delight of family and friends.
Brian McGovern and Bonnie Bowes of West Hartford, Marie Hilliard and her husband Douglas of Westfield, MA, and Joan Barrieau and her husband Gerard of West Hartford.
Gib Barrieau and his children, Lulu and Max of West Hartford, Morgan Barrieau, wife Danielle and daughter, Whitley of Boston, MA, and Jackie lacovazzi, her husband Drew and daughter, Paige of West Hartford.
The McGovern family wishes to extend their heartfelt thanks to Richard and all the caregivers at Hughes Health and Rehab for their time, Kindness and compassion.
Memorial donations in William's name can be directed to the CT Humane Society.
Sheehan Hilborn Breen FUNERAL HOME Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries Picard, Jr., Onezime Joseph Onezime Joseph Picard, Jr., of Torrington, CT passed away on April 8, 2022.
Ozzie was born in Caswell, Maine on November 28, 1937, the ninth child of eleven children born to the late Onezime and Helen Picard.
While dancing the night away at the French Club in New Britain, CT, he met Judy Shearer.
It was always important that he did his best for his family and encouraged them to put one foot in front of the other.
Ozzie loved his 1964 Mustang and enjoyed camping, fishing, throwing horseshoes, and bowling.
He is survived by his loving wife, Judith Picard, three children, Onezime Picard Ill and his wife Gwen Spencer, Alan Picard, and Theresa Campanelli, and his five grandchildren, Travis Campanelli, Tricia Campanelli, Ashley Picard, Alex Picard, and Robert Picard.
The Funeral Liturgy will be celebrated Friday, April 22, 2022 at 10:00am in the Church of St.
Arrangements are being handled by The Ahern Funeral Homes, Inc., www.ahernfuneralhome. com.
Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries , ¥ Vii the obituary section on courant.com fo share memories of loved ones.
OBITUARIES Robida, Elizabeth “Betty Jo"" Elizabeth Robida, 81, of Moodus, beloved wife of William J Robida, Sr. passed peacefully at Middlesex Hospital on Monday April 18th after suffering a stroke.
Bette Jo was born in Oxford Maine, daughter of the late Frank and Stella Mills.
Bette Jo and Bill married in 1959 and lovingly raised their three children and centered their lives on their family and loved ones.
For 37 years Bette Jo hosted weekly Wednesday Night dinners for her extended family to keep the family close.
She was employed as a bookkeeper for decades with Nichols Bus Service prior to her retirement.
Bette Jo enjoyed bowling, visiting with friends and family, doing needlepoint and hosting Holidays for the family.
She spent many hours with her husband meticulously caring for their property.
Besides her husband Bill, Bette Jo is survived by two daughters, Vickie Lynch and her husband Jim, Debbie Shumbo and her husband Stan, a son, Bill Robida, Jr. and his wife Liz, six grandchildren, Abbey Lynch, Kyle Josephs, Brandon Shumbo, Cailyn Tischbein, Jack Beman, and Kristy Robida, a great grandchild, Mathew Beman, two sisters Romalea Burg of Marlborough, CT and Teresa Patch of Denver, CO; brother, Joseph Mills of Cape Coral, FL, and many nieces and nephews.
A funeral liturgy will be held Monday, April 25th at 10m. at Saint Bridget of Kildare Church, 75 Moodus Leesville Road, Moodus.
To share memories or express condolences online please visit www.biegafuneralhome.com.
Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries Vukasinovic, George George “Dura” Vukasinovic, 91, of Southington, Known to his family and friends as Georgie, passed away Ssurrounded by his family on Monday, April 18, 2022.
One of his favorite pastimes was Spending time with his beloved family.
He leaves his four children, Cynthia Kelleher and husband John of Avon, Vesna Violette and husband Henry of Southington, Marianne Slade of Southington and Nick Vukasinovic of AZ; seven grandchildren, Philip, Andrea, Matthew, Rebecca, Mallory, Paul and Morgan; four great-grandchildren, Samuel, Mia, Eloise, and Adelaide.
He also leaves his sister-in-law, Betty Stewart of Plantsville and two nephews, Jeremiah and Jonathan.
Our hearts go with him as he journeys to China, as he always told his family and friends would be his final destination.
For online condolences and directions please visit, www. dellavecchiasouthington.com Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries Wardell, Thomas Thomas Lee Wardell, born December 22, 1947 died Friday March 18, 2022 after a short and courageous battle with lung cancer.
Beloved husband of Anita Wardell, proud father of two daughters, Jennifer Edmonds of Wellesley, MA and Elizabeth Kaplan of Suffield, CT; wonderful grandfather to his 4 granddaughters, Zoe and Phoebe Kaplan and Courtney and Alysse Edmonds.
Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries Wardell, Thomas L Thomas Lee Wardell, born December 22, 1947 died Friday March 18, 2022 after a short and courageous battle with lung cancer.
Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries In Loving Memory Of CANLIS MCCREE Happy Birthday We have loving thoughts and memories of you every day.
Share your loved one’s story. placeanad.courant.com/obituaries Hartford Courant eeeee Media group In partnership with Legacy.com’ ” Stories liv ve on.
Breeze Airways pushes fast-paced expansion at Bradley International Airport By Kenneth R Gosselin Hartford Courant WINDSOR LOCKS — As Breeze Airways on Wednesday announced adding an 11th nonstop route in a fast-paced expansion at Bradley International Airport, the CEO of the low-fare airline said the elimination of the federal mask mandate will further the appetite for air travel that nosedived in the thick of the pandemic.
The destination is the seventh nonstop route added by Breeze this year at Bradley.
Round-trip fares to Las Vegas range from introductory, one-way fares that start at $149 to $249 for first class, according to the airline.
Introductory fares must be purchased by April 26 for travel by Nov., the airline said.
Only one other airline, discount carrier JetBlue, flies to Las Vegas out of Bradley, three days a week.
The federal mask mandate for airplanes, trains and buses was struck down this week by a Florida judge, who ruled the Centers of Disease Control and PrevenTurn to Airport, Page 2 of a personnel matter involving a school nurse placed on administrative leave for online comments about LGBTQ students.
Tuesday’s meeting was the board’s first since a school nurse was placed on administrative leave for what the district described as inappropriate comments about LGBTQ students posted using the nurse’s personal Facebook account.
Ina March 28 letter to the school community, Superintendent Leslie Torres-Rodriguez said the comments described private and personal details about a specific student.
The incident attracted a wide range of media attention, extending from local outlets to The Daily Mail, a British newspaper.
An article also appeared in The Blaze, a conservative online media outlet.
District officials have since Turn to Allies, Page 2 i F tian, wield Al ok ie.
Known as a founder of American landscape architecture, a conservationist and creator of major urban parks, Frederick Law Olmsted was born in Hartford in 1822.
His father and a trip to Europe influenced Olmsted’s career path as a writer and editor and later as alandscape architect, eventually working as the superintendent of Central Park and later as that park’s architect-in-chief.
In Connecticut, Olmsted made his mark at Walnut Hill Park in New Britain, Beardsley Park in Bridgeport and the Connecticut State House.
COURANT FILE Exhibit among events spotlighting world famous landscape architect By Jesse Leavenworth Hartford Courant HARTFORD — Pastoral scenes from his Connecticut boyhood inspired Frederick Law Olmsted’s vision of public space as a calming and rejuvenating “third place” apart from home and work.
To honor the father of landscape architecture on his 200th birthday, the Hartford Public Library’s History Center is hosting an exhibit titled, “Returning From dumpster to display Works of Francis Hines will be on exhibit at Mattatuck Museum By Susan Dunne Hartford Courant Five Francis Hines artworks that were part ofa stash rescued in 2017 from adumpster in Watertown will be on exhibit April 22 to June 15 at the Mattatuck Museum in Waterbury.
The trove of paintings, drawings and sculptures were found by George Martin of Naugatuck while “picking” on the grounds of a barn that had recently been sold.
Elements of the collection was exhibited in September 2021 at the Mattatuck.
The Art of Francis Hines,” will feature a complete series of five studies created for a Union Square Park public installation created by Hines.
One of this series was shown at the museum in an exhibit in 2021, and the other four were not.
An opening program featuring John Alexopoulos, associate professor of landscape architecture at UConn, is set for Thursday from 4-6m.
Gilberto DeLeon, 56, is charged with first-degree robbery, conspiracy to commit first-degree robbery and sixth-degree larceny, according to the Farmington Police Department.
The department has identified two other suspects involved in the robbery and expect to make additional arrests, police said.
DeLeon is being held in lieu of $500,000 bail and is scheduled to appear in court in Hartford on Wednesday.
Man charged with robbing same bank he robbed 5 years ago By Taylor Hartz Hartford Courant A man who allegedly robbed a Southington bank during last year’s Apple Harvest Festival — after being convicted of robbing that same bank five years before — was charged earlier this month while in court for other charges, police said.
David Latino, 50, of Sandra Lane, Plantsville, was arrested on a warrant while appearing in New Britain Superior Court on April 7 and charged with second-degree robbery and fifth-degree larceny, according to the Southington Police Department.
He took an unknown amount of cash and then ran toward Town Hall, eventually escaping police, leading multiple schools and learning centers in the area to enter lockdown.
During their investigation, multiple residents called police to identify Latino as the robber, police said.
DNA evidence and cellphone records also helped investigators connect Latino to the robbery, police said.
He has other cases pending in Connecticut criminal court, including charges of threatening, assault and breach of peace in Waterbury and second-degree kidnapping and resisting arrest in Newington, records show.
He has been held at the Hartford Correctional Center since Oct., 2021 in lieu of a $245,000 bond, according to the state Department of Correction.
He is scheduled to appear in court next on May 10 in New Britain, court records show.
Federal authorities charge Hartford man with drug dealing, gun crimes By Edmund H Mahony Hartford Courant A federal grand jury has indicted 26-year-old Traevaughnn Morrison of Hartford for drug and gun crimes.
Federal prosecutors said said that on April 5, members of a federal drug task force made undercover purchases of fentany] and crack cocaine from Morrison in Bristol.
After the drug sales, investigators followed Morrison as he drove to a condominium parking lot, where he was arrested.
Airport from Page 1 tion did not have the authority to impose such a mandate.
Soaring fuel prices are pushing fares higher throughout the airline industry, however, Neeleman said.
Bloomberg News reported that Architect from Page 1 Emerald Necklace and many other parks, college campuses, cemeteries and private grounds throughout the nation.
Olmsted’s sons carried on his work and the family firm’s credits in Hartford include Goodwin Park, Keney Park, Pope Park and Riverside Park, as well as grounds of the Institute of Living and Trinity College.
Jobs from Page 1 jobs at a massive logistics center and accompanying high-tech research and development buildings.
The planning and zoning commission this month unanimously approved National Development’s plan to create two mega-warehouses of more than 1 million square feet each on the former airfield.
National Development isn’t publicly naming the two prospective tenants it’s negotiating with, but said they are well-known industry leaders drawn partly by the site’s proximity to I-84 and I-91.
Being During a search of the car, authorities allegedly found fentanyl, crack cocaine and a Polymer handgun known as a “shost gun” manufactured on a hi-tech copy machine, along with an extended magazine loaded with ammunition, federal prosecutors said.
The prosecutors said Morrison has a criminal record that includes felony drug offenses.
It is a violation of federal law for a person previously convicted of a felony offense to possess a firearm or ammunition that has moved in interstate or foreign commerce. domestic, round-trip flights cost an average of $300 in late March, citing travel company Hopper.
The fares were up 36% from the start of 2022 and nearly in line with pre-pandemic levels in 2019, Bloomberg reported.
Higher air fares come on top of higher priced meals, car rentals and hotels, Neeleman said.
So far, however, Neeleman said, “Demand is strong” Neeleman said a resolution to soaring fuel prices is “more geopolitical.
If you have a resolution in Ukraine, that’s going to have abigger effect than what the Biden Administration can do” Breeze’s announcement Wednesday about the new route at Bradley was paired with the roll-out of Son of a successful dry goods merchant, Olmsted tried his hand as a seaman, farmer and writer before coming into park design amid the grime and sprawl of the industrial revolution.
In 1850, a walking tour and visit to an English park was to prove life-changing, according to Olmsted 200, a project of the Washington, D.C.-based National Association for Olmsted Parks.
Birkenhead Park in Liverpool was a rare public park, open to all, and Olmsted concluded that park access should be a right of all Americans.
The two warehouse buildings will take up acombined 2. million square feet of space, and the property will have also have two 100,000-square-foot buildings for research and development, he said.
It’s hard to find talented employees today, and there are going to be 1,800 to 2,000 jobs created out of the projects here,” he said.
When it’s fully built out, the project will generThe indictment charges Morrison with one count of possession with intent to distribute, and distribution of, cocaine base and fentanyl, which, if convicted, carries a maximum prison term of 20 years; one count of possession of a firearm in furtherance of a drug trafficking crime, which carries a possible mandatory prison term of at least five years; and one count of unlawful possession of ammunition by a felon, which carries a maximum possible prison of imprisonment of 10 years.
When asked, Neeleman said Breeze was not considering serving Tweed-New Haven Airport, which had been suggested ata press conference at the airport earlier this year.
All but Nashville — currently designs, “which he intended to serve as the setting for ‘unconscious or indirect recreation, “ Olmsted scholar Charles E Beveridge said in an interview with The Courant in 2003.
Central to Olmsted’s philosophy was the idea of “communitiveness,” a belief that a healthy civil society brings people together in service to each other.
Marsteiner said National Development’s Forge Park in Franklin, Massachusetts, has much of what the company envisions for Rentschler.
We developed a mix of R & D and technology buildings and logistics buildings,” he said.
National Development describes Forge Park as a mixed-use project with 2.75 million square feet of commercial space, a retail center, a child care center, a hotel, a commuter rail station and residential development.
New housing on the heavily industrial East Hartford site doesn’t work because of the expense of environmental remediation, according to the company.
Allies from Page 1 received a wave of violent threats, now under investigation by Hartford police, which included disturbing calls and emails calling for their lives.
Torres-Rodriguez said Tuesday that the majority of threats have been directed toward her.
The threats appear to stem from inaccurate interpretations of the nurse’s comments, which have led to false allegations that Hartford school staff is indoctrinating students or providing puberty-blocking hormone inhibitors without parental consent.
According to district policy, Hartford school staff are prohibited from administering medication to students without the authorization of a medical provider and the written consent of a parent or guardian.
In spite of the threats, Torres-Rodriguez insisted that the district’s commitment to providing a safe, inclusive environment for students regardless of identity is unwavering.
Jennifer Quaye-Hudson, director of external affairs for Connecticut Voices for Children, highlighted the organization’s 2018 report on youth identity development, which found that adolescence is a critical time for the development of gender identity.
But young people often lack supportive environments to develop and express their orientations safely.
In 2014, more served by Southwest Airlines — were new nonstop routes for Bradley.
All the new Breeze routes announced last month will begin flying June 3, with the exception of Sarasota/Bradenton, which launches on June 4.
Olmsted made landscape architecture a profession for the public good, New Haven-based landscape architect Oliver Gaffney said.
Gaffney also noted that the pandemic brought a reawakening of the value of public spaces.
Set for Saturday from 9:30m. to 12:30m., the event And large-scale retail development isn’t financially feasible now, even though the roughly 200,000-square-foot Cabela’s currently on the Rentschler site will remain, Marsteiner said.
In the foreseeable future there’s no goal of moving them along,” he said.
That leaves other commercial development as the best use of the sprawling Rentschler property, he said.
Meanwhile, sexual orientation is one of several other primary risk factors for youth homelessness.
Support for transgender youth is particularly crucial, as the Trevor Project’s 2021 survey on LGBQT youth mental health found that more than half of transgender and nonbinary youth seriously considered attempting suicide in the previous 12 months.
Ace Ricker, a transgender man and Q Plus board member, said he sees himself in those statistics.
Cordner, the Q Plus founding director, said that the suicide risk for transgender youth can be virtually eliminated, so long as young people have at least one supportive adult in their lives.
Ricker and other speakers encouraged the Hartford school board to pursue education and trainings for students and staff, and strengthen policies around protecting transgender and nonbinary youth.
Tuesday’s board meeting did include first reading on a new curricular exemption policy, which allows parents to opt out of lessons on certain sensitive material.
The policy would expand the current list of permitted exemptions to include substance abuse education, bilingual education and for religious or medical purposes.
Board members did not discuss the policy, but Torres-Rodriguez said it serves as an example of the strong partnership between the district and families.
We know that we need the support of our families to accomplish that,’ Torres-Rodriguez said.
The airline was founded with the strategy of offering “point to point” service from smaller, secondary airports.
Kenneth R Gosselin can be reached at kgosselin@courant. com. includes talks at the Isham-Terry House, a tribute at the Keney Clock Tower and a memorial at Olmsted’s burial site in Old North Cemetery.
Preservation Connecticut and the Connecticut State Historic Preservation Office have teamed up to study Olmsted’s heritage in the state.
Also, check preservationct.org/olmsted for a schedule of lectures and tours.
The Olmsted Legacy Trail maps out the work of the man and his firm throughout Connecticut.
Jesse Leavenworth can be reached at jleavenworth@courant.com side has really taken off,” he said.
The buildings will be a quarter to a half a mile away from the nearest businesses and residences — that’s unheard of,” he said.
National Development emphasized that all traffic will reach the property from East Hartford Boulevard, with no access from Brewer or Main streets.
The planning and zoning commission voted 7-0 to approve the master plan.
National Development still needs to get wetlands approval as well as an OK for a detailed site plan.
CONNECTICUT Al Basha Market and Restaurant in Manchester sells foods from several Middle Eastern countries and has a 30-seat restaurant.
SUSAN DUNNE/HARTFORD COURANT PHOTOS Al Basha By Susan Dunne Hartford Courant Like most restaurant owners during the pandemic, Omair Shalo saw customer visitation plummet in 2020 and 2021 at his Palestinian-Yemeni restaurant in Manchester.
Alcohol is against our religion,” said Shalo, a devout Muslim who emigrated from Nablus, in the West Bank of the Palestinian Territories, to the United States.
Blue Moon Mediterranean restaurant was renamed Al Basha market and restaurant and reopened in March.
People come from all over the state and from Massachusetts and they are so excited and happy we are here,” Shalo said.
The market sells packaged foods from Palestine, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia, Lebanon, Jordan, Sudan, Syria, Turkey and other countries.
Among the groceries are hardto-find items such as maftoul, freekeh, lupini beans, shankleesh cheese, basbousa, mohalabia, sesame fudge and molokhia leaves.
It also sells Middle Eastern sweets and snacks and enough medjool dates to filla small warehouse.
On the shelves behind the cash register are items such as prayer rugs, pretty Ramadan decorations, elegant teapots and teacups, hookahs, incense, flags of Middle Eastern nations, copies Blue Moon restaurant re-imagined as a halal market, eatery combo of the Quran and Quran holders.
The restaurant, in a walled-off section with six tables, is decorated with paintings of beautiful mosques.
Appetizers, from $5.99 to $7.99, include hummus, baba ganoush, falafel, stuffed grape leaves, veggie skewers and other items.
Entrees, which range from $14.99 to $19.99, are centered on chicken, beef, lamb, liver, shrimp, salmon, tilapia and Cornish hen.
Palestinian dishes include shawarmas, kuftahs, kebabs, farouj chicken, chicken tawouk, gyros, lamb chops and musakhan rolls.
Yemeni entrees, for $14.99 to $16.99, are mandi lamb and chicken, haneeth lamb and chicken, and kabsa lamb and chicken.
An American portion of the menu offers burgers, from $6.99 to $8.99, in beef, chicken, vegetarian, falafel, shrimp, tilapia and sujak, a spicy fermented sausage.
Breakfast is also available, with items ranging from $4.99 to $8.99, with hummus, pita, yogurt, veggies, fava beans, cheese, eggs, falafel, baba ganoush, sujak, shakshukah and fruit.
Before he transitioned to a market, Shalo said he tried to keep his business afloat using delivery through third-party apps.
Transitioning to his new arrangement has been a blessing, he said, and he is surprised by its success.
Alex Jones’ trial delayed as Infowars seeks bankruptcy Associated Press AUSTIN, Texas — A Texas judge on Wednesday pushed back the first jury trial over how much conspiracy theorist Alex Jones should pay the families of Sandy Hook victims after his Infowars company sought bankruptcy protection this week.
The delay ordered by state District Judge Maya Guerra Gamble comes days after Infowars and two other companies tied to Jones filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in Texas.
Hines’ work also will be shown at the Hollis Taggart cut over his comments that the 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre was a hoax.
The first trial over how much he should pay the families had been scheduled to begin Monday in Austin, where Infowars is headquartered.
Attorneys for Sandy Hook families have accused Jones of trying to hide millions of dollars in assets.
Creditors listed in Infowars’ bankruptcy filing include relatives of some of the 20 children and six educators killed in the 2012 school shooting in Connecticut.
Hartford Courant | Section 2 | Thursday, April 21,2022 3 Pratt Street Salsa Socials return for five Friday nights during summer By Susan Dunne Hartford Courant Pratt Street Salsa Socials are coming back for the summer, with five Friday evenings for dancing in the streets of downtown Hartford.
Events, which are free of charge, will take place May 27, June 17, July 8, Aug. and Sept. from 5 to 8m.
The series is presented by Hartford Business Improvement District and Hartford HealthCare.
The free summer dances were started in 2016 by the Hartford Business Improvement District to cater to the salsa community and establish a sense of culture across the city, says Chip McCabe, the district’s events director.
Instructors from Arthur Murray Dance Center will be there to teach beginners the basics.
SEAN FOWLER/SPECIAL TO THE COURANT “We look forward to these Pratt Street Salsa Socials that add vitality to our capital city and engage so many people in a celebration of civic and cultural pride,’ says Mike Daglio of Hartford HealthCare.
Instructors from Arthur Murray Dance Center will be there to teach people the basics of salsa dancing.
Towns in Connecticut’s richest area could pay to meet affordable housing goals By Ginny Monk Ct Mirror A regional affordable housing plan for some of the wealthiest communities in Connecticut could allow towns to pay a fee and count housing units in neighboring towns towards their affordability goals, a move that critics say could worsen segregation.
Under the plan, atown would be able to count certain housing units in other towns toward its own affordable housing goals under Section 8-30g of a decades-old state law that gives developers the ability to challenge towns in court if their affordable housing proposals are denied.
Towns are exempt from 8-30¢ if at least 10% of their units are set aside as affordable or are government assisted.
The payment suggestion in the draft of the Western Connecticut Council of Governments’ affordable housing plan would mean towns that haven’t reached the goal — most of the towns in the region — could pay an undetermined amount to towns that have reached the goal, such as Stamford, Danbury and Norwalk, for the right to apply certain housing units to their 10% threshold.
Bethel, Bridgewater, Brookfield, Danbury, Darien, Greenwich, New Canaan, New Fairfield, New Milford, Newtown, Norwalk, Redding, Ridgefield, Sherman, Stamford, Weston, Westport and Wilton.
WestCOG staff said the idea was included because of transportation costs and job opportunities.
Some municipalities have seen more demand for affordable housing because they have more jobs.
The added transportation cost for low-income families to get to work from rural areas could make living in those areas unaffordable, said Francis Pickering, the council’s executive director.
Pickering said details such as whether the policy would be applied retroactively to housing stock that the city already has or whether it would have to be built new have not been decided.
But, he added, renovating existing stock is cheaper than building new housing.
They say it will serve to increase segregation and allow some towns to avoid having to make real changes to address the problem.
Pickering declined to respond to specific criticisms, saying they hadn’t been brought to the council yet.
The council is accepting public comments on the document through Wednesday.
The plan also includes measures such as evaluating inclusionary “zoning concepts” to increase the supply of housing, conducting an inventory of people experiencing homelessness, considering the fiscal and service advantages of creating a regional housing authority and developing an ongoing inventory of lowand moderate-income housing managed by housing authorities, among several other actions.
The plan, which council staff say aims to address the need for more affordable housing in the region, is the result of a 2017 law that requires towns to develop fiveyear plans to address the need for affordable housing.
The need for more housing for people with low incomes has gotten more attention nationally in recent years as demand has outpaced supply and housing prices and rents have spiked.
The legislature is considering a handful of bills that aim to increase the affordable housing stock or lower rents, including one that would have towns to plan and zone for a certain number of affordable housing units based on a regional need.
Many advocates and experts say restrictive zoning laws in Connecticut make it difficult to develop multifamily housing, which is typically more affordable to those with low incomes.
The WestCOG report shows that about 42.5% of renters in the region spend more than 35% of their incomes on rent.
Plan details Some of the municipalities in the council will develop their own plans that can incorporate some elements of the WestCOG plan, while others will adopt their own versions of the plan, Pickering said.
Those strategies include suggestions to finance more housing, evaluate adjustments to zoning, increase home ownership rates and establish a regional housing authority.
But housing advocates say it doesn’t include enough tangible steps to address the need.
A lack of access to affordable housing has reinforced segregation and kept families with low incomes from accessing schools and other amenities in wealthier towns, advocates said.
Darien’s school board recently rejected a proposal, through the state’s Open Choice Program, that would have allowed 16 Norwalk kindergarteners to attend school in Darien.
Dice Oh, amember of the group People Friendly Stamford, said the problem arises partly because schools and amenities are funded through local taxes.
Wealthier suburbs have better-funded schools, and if lower-income families can’t afford to live in the district, their children can’t access the schools.
Pickering said the council consulted with the Department of Housing on the decision to develop a regional plan, which council officials believe will be more effective at addressing the need.
He added that the plan aims to address factors that influence home costs outside of zoning, including financing and building standards.
The council also wants to consider access to transportation and transportation costs for low-income families when adding housing.
The plan also includes information on funding for homeownership and Connecticut Housing Finance Authority programs that finance housing.
Staff said finding financing, particularly for homeowners who want to add an accessory dwelling unit to their home, can be challenging.
Pickering added that the council plans to commission an affordable housing financing study to begin this year.
Advocates said the plan doesn’t include enough specific targets to be effective.
They expressed particular concern with the action items that said officials would “evaluate” or “consider” moves rather than make changes.
What towns are doing After the plan goes through its public comment period, the council will consider changes, and municipalities can decide whether to use it.
Some are developing their own plans and considering the suggestions in the WestCOG draft.
Westport is drafting its own plan, although the Planning and Development Commission plans to use the WestCOG research and attach the plan as an addendum, commissioner Danielle Dobin said.
We’re not going to pretend that there’s some sort of moat around Westport,’ Dobin said.
Westport’s plan is going to be very granular with specific zoning recommendations for the town and particular ways to encourage multifamily development, Dobin said.
The city likely won’t meet the deadline to submit its plan and will let the state know in the next few days, said Steve Kleppin, planning and zoning director.
Although the city won’t make the deadline, staff said they take the issue seriously and are more concerned with developing a plan that meets the need.
The city has a request out for a consultant to assist in developing the plan and is about a year away from having a complete plan, Kleppin said.
Danbury has already developed its plan, and while there are some similarities between it and the WestCOG plan, the city will use its own plan.
There’s a hearing set for next month on the Danbury plan, said Sharon Calitro, the city’s planning director.
Interested firms are required to submit one original copy via digital media of the proposal to Roger Rousseau, Purchasing Agent, no later than the date and time noted above.
The successful bidder shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, gender, or national origin.
The Contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their race, color, religion, gender, or national origin.
Bids received after the opening date and time will not be considered for award.
The City reserves the right to waive any informalities in the bid, to reject any or all bids, and to accept the bid that in its judgment is in its best interest.
Each bid shall be accompanied by a Bid Security in the amount of 10% of the bidders base bid amount, in the form of a Bid Bond made payable to the City of Bristol.
Michael A Carrier, Judge of the Court of Probate, District of Berlin Probate Court, by decree dated April 14, 2022, ordered that all claims must be presented to the fiduciary at the address below.
Failure to promptly present any such claim may result in the loss of rights to recover on such claim.
Barbara Gardner Riordan, Judge of the Court of Probate, District of Tolland Mansfield Probate Court, by decree dated April 14, 2022, ordered that all claims must be presented to the fiduciary at the address below.
These decisions have been filed in the office of the Town Clerk, Old Saybrook, Town Hall.
DENIED 21/22-22C Peter J Connerton, seeks a variance of Par 10.8. (non-conforming lot size/12,500f. required/ 5,122 s.f. proposed) and Par 68.1.2.9b (tidal wetlands setback/50’ required/25.5’ proposed) of the Zoning Regulations to permit the construction of a 1,609 s.f. house with a deck at 54 Vincent Avenue, Map 14/Lot 1, Residence A District, Coastal Area Management Zone.
H. of the Zoning Regulations to allow for the waiver of a loading dock.
Alice Kelly Chairman Dated in Cromwell, Connecticut this the 15th day April of 2022.
Jennifer L Berkenstock, Judge of the Court of Probate, District of Region # 14 Probate Court, by decree dated April 1, 2022, ordered that all claims must be presented to the fiduciary at the address below.
Purchases must be made with cash only and paid at the above referenced facility in order to complete the transaction.
Extra Space Storage may refuse any bid and may rescind any purchase up until the winning bidder takes possession of the personal property.
Jeannine Lewis, Judge of the Court of Probate, District of Saybrook Probate Court, by decree dated April 11, 2022, ordered that all claims must be presented to the fiduciary at the address below.
In 2017, according to an analysis in The New England Journal of Medicine, home surpassed the hospital as the most common place of death — 30.7% of deaths occurred at home, compared with 29.8% at the hospital.
Haider Warraich, a cardiologist at the Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System and an author of the study.
Technically, the proportion was even higher, since some people who died in nursing facilities were long-term residents and the nursing home effectively was their home.
Warraich credited the change to the rise of hospice care, for which Congress authorized Medicare coverage 40 years ago.
By 2019, more than half of Medicare beneficiaries who died were enrolled in hospice.
Lynda Hollander, her niece, hired an aide to supplement the hospice staff.
But Zeiontz’s pain eventually intensified and her older relatives were uneasy about administering morphine.
They moved Zeiontz to an inpatient hospice unit at Mount Sinai Beth Israel Hospital, where she died a day anda half later, at 70.
Similarly, Alan Mironer had vowed to care for his wife, Lynne, with hospice help in their home in Edina, Minnesota, as she died of breast cancer.
But as she weakened and became unable to walk to the bathroom, he said, “suddenly, it was so much more work to take care of her” The Alan Mironer, then 81, became overwhelmed.
Neighbors told them about a small hospice facility in Edina, with room for eight patients.
Melissa Wachterman, a palliative care specialist at Harvard Medical School, and her co-authors argue that alternative locations, including free-standing inpatient hospice facilities and hospice units within hospitals, could better care for some terminal patients with difficult symptoms and provide relief for exhausted families.
They also contend that financial incentives play arole in where death occurs.
A handful of hospice patients receive “continuous home care,” which means nurses and aides are provided eight to 24 hours a day; this accounts for 0.2% of hospice days, according to the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, an independent agency that advises Congress on Medicare issues.
Another handful receive inpatient services in a hospice facility, hospital or nursing home.
But inpatient care is hard to secure, accounting for just 1.2% of all hospice days in 2019.
To be covered under Medicare, the patient must be diagnosed with a symptom that cannot feasibly be managed in any other setting, and “that’s a pretty high bar,” Wachterman said.
SOE PR eas ( QUANTUM | — —, eae Ca end-of-life care, in hospice facilities (the national organization estimates that about 30% of hospices have them) or hospice units within nursing homes and hospitals.
My mother died at 80, with uterine cancer and after a major stroke, in her own bed.
He died at 90, when sepsis overwhelmed him in a hospital before I could arrange for hospice care at home.
Disabled by late-onset Tay-Sachs disease, a neurological condition, she had been hospitalized with an uncertain prognosis.
As she declined, she developed such severe pain that, between sobs, she was calling for our long-dead parents.
I immediately enrolled her in hospice and began planning to move her back to her assisted-living facility, so that she could Survey shows 1 in 5 Medicare patients use medical marijuana HealthDay News One in five Medicare recipients use medical marijuana and two-thirds say it should be covered by Medicare, a new survey reveals.
Medical marijuana is legal in 37 states, four territories and the District of Columbia, but it isn’t covered by Medicare, the federal health insurance program for older Americans.
The poll of 1,250 Medicare recipients was conducted in April and found that one in five use medical marijuana and 23% have used it in the past.
Respondents use it to treat a variety of physical and mental health conditions, including 32% for anxiety and 31% for chronic pain.
Roughly one-quarter said they use it to treat depression, glaucoma, and symptoms associated with HIV/AIDS, including nausea, appetite loss and pain.
Among respondents, support was strong for Medicare coverage of medical marijuana.
Two-thirds said they “strongly agree” or “agree” that medical marijuana should be covered.
Nearly six in 10 supporters of Medicare coverage said they do so because medical marijuana can be effective when other treatments fail.
Surprisingly, support for Medicare coverage was lower among current medical marijuana users , compared with 63% of previous users and 71% of those who said they’ve never used it.
Nearly four in 10 said they fear Medicare coverage would increase the drug price.
Pollsters found that current users’ out-ofpocket costs were wide-ranging.
The online poll was commissioned by MedicarePlans.com, a group that examines Medicare issues.
In the hospital, hospice nurses visited twice a day, constantly raising the dose of her morphine drip before switching to more potent medications.
Having staff nurses always nearby allowed us to provide comfort, relying on a team we never could have duplicated on our own.
It arranged fora private room with 24-hour access for my cousin and me.
We turned off the TV and the intercom, dimmed the lights, played soothing music, allowed family and friends to come and kept the vigil.
My sister, just 62, died after 24 days in the hospital and 14 in hospice care.
Far more hospice patients and families could probably benefit from a similar option when home care proves too difficult.
Harry and Megan visited the queen at Windsor Castle on April 14 for their first joint visit to the United Kingdom since they gave up formal royal roles and moved to Santa Barbara, California, in 2020.
Harry said like a lot of working parents, he and his wife found it hard to separate work and parenting — they have two children, Archie, who is almost 3, and 10-monthold Lilibet — during the pandemic.
The couple visited Harry’s 95-year-old grandmother on their way to the Netherlands to attend the Invictus Games.
Harry is founder and patron of the international sports competition for wounded military veterans.
Harry said he wanted to return to the U.K. with his kids for the queen’s upcoming platinum jubilee, but warned that “security issues” could get in the way.
Harry is suing the British government for refusing to let him pay for his own police security on his U.K. visits.
His lawyers say Harry wants to bring his children to visit his home country but that it is too risky without police Prince Harry, seen with Meghan Sept., said the couple had tea with Queen Elizabeth II on April 14.
Harry has made solo trips to the U.K. to attend the funeral of his grandfather, Prince Philip, in April 2021 and to unveil a statue of his late mother Princess Diana in July.
He also said he has found himself thinking of his late mother even more.
But definitely more so in the last two years more than ever before, without question.
Rapper A$AP Rocky was taken into custody Wednesday at Los Angeles International Airport in connection with a shooting in Hollywood last year, authorities said.
The performer, whose real name is Rakim Mayers, was detained on suspicion of assault with a deadly weapon, the LA Police Department said in a statement Wednesday.
Mayers, 33, was wanted in connected with a Nov., 2021, shooting after an argument escalated, authorities said.
Mayers is accused of firing a handgun at an acquaintance, who sustained a minor injury, police said.
Ezra Miller was arrested on suspicion of assault Tuesday, the second time the actor known for playing the Flash in “Justice League” films has been arrested in Hawaii in recent weeks.
Miller became irate after being asked to leave a get-together at a Big Island home and threw a chair, hitting a woman in the forehead, according to anews release from the Hawaii Police Department.
Miller, 29, was arrested during a traffic stop and released pending further investigation.
Animals get extreme close-up in ‘Our Great National Parks’ By Karla Peterson San Diego Union-Tribune Behold, the monito del monte.
Weighing in at less than 2 ounces, this small opossum has been around since dinosaurs roamed the Earth.
A resident of Chile and Argentina, the monito del monte is the only surviving species of the order Microbiotheria.
And thanks to its extremely messy eating habits, it helps spread the seeds of more than 20 plant species in the forests of Chile and Argentina.
The monito is also one of the many animals getting an extreme close-up in “Our Great National Parks,” anew Netflix series devoted to the eyepopping, heart-stopping, consciousness-raising wonders of the world’s most astounding national parks.
Arriving just in time for Earth Day on April 22, the five-episode series focuses on just a handful of the world’s more than 4,000 national parks.
The series — which was executive produced and narrated by former United States President Barack Obama — travels from the lush rain forests of Indonesia’s Gunung Leuser National Park to the coves and beaches of the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary, with stops in Kenya’s Tsavo National Park and Chilean Patagonia.
Its cameras catch the nighttime moves of black rhinos gathering at a Kenyan waterhole, Chilean stag beetles locking jaws in a battle for a mate, and the first footage of a 2-monthold orca taking part in the hunt of a gray whale calf.
PETE SOUZA/NETFLIX Like any responsible nature series, “Our Great National Parks” cannot talk about the wonders of the natural world without acknowledging the many ways in which that world is under siege.
No one here is pretending that climate change, habitat loss and pollution do not exist.
But in the world’s national parks, endangered animal and plant populations are coming back, farmlands are being returned to the wild, and there are amazing views of the stars where light pollution used to be.
Although the filmmakers worked closely with scientists, conservationists, local guides and other experts, there are no on-camera interviews with any of them.
Even when one animal hunts and kills another, the deaths are not overly bloody.
Climate change and other threats are acknowledged but not dwelled upon.
Instead, the series offers cleverly constructed, anthropomorphized vignettes of animals meeting the extraordinary challenges of eating, mating and child-rearing in places that range from the paradisal to the perilous.
All of these vignettes are narrated in a friendly, but passionate way by Obama, who does not have to push too hard to get viewers invested the stories he wants to tell.
The narration occasionally ambles into Dad-joke territory, and some of the scenes area little over-scripted.
But it is avery small price to pay for such a life-affirming, wonder-reviving look at the world around us.
And throughout, “Our Great National Parks” reminds viewers of the conservation strides that have been made since Yellowstone National Park was established in 1872.
Today, around 15% of the world’s lands and 8% of our oceans have been protected through parks and reserves.
In “Our Great National Parks,” hope also has fur, scales, gills and claws.
My darling partner, “B,” has been a successful author, and has received a lot of satisfaction from it.
During a lull, B took a job to make ends meet, and has been doing the 9-to-5 slog ever since.
I start thinking about how I can help, offering perspectives and praise; and then it fizzles, and we’re both sad.
B grinds away at ajob to pay the bills, pursues hobbies and friendships — and takes wonderful care of our household.
I wish I could figure out a way to help move all that enthusiasm toward action, instead of watching my partner stall out at the idea phase.
The pressure to both create and also succeed critically and commercially can be exhausting.
This is why some successful writers give it all up and become garlic ranchers.
Now that a day has passed, I find myself wondering what she has written about me.
Your impatience could get the better of you, but hold it back until you’re satisfied with your results.
Your current lifestyle could be so constant that you can do your routine in your sleep.
Consider letting your friends make suggestions on new things to have fun trying together.
You may not have much help from others, but this is likely because youre being given an opportunity to prove yourself and show that you can work independently.
No matter how many people are willing to help you, trying to throw your weight around is not beneficial.
Even if you’re ona good path, bragging can turn people off, especially when they’re trying to make things easier for you.
TODAY IN HISTORY Associated Press On April 21,1910, author Samuel Langhorne Clemens, better known as Mark Twain, died in Redding, Connecticut, at age 74.
That will allow you to look deep inside and ask yourself what’s encouraging you to settle for less.
Seriously — you deserve the best, and there is no reason to shortchange yourself.
You received something that you’ve been working for, only to find that you have to let another person take part in what you’ve been waiting for.
Remind yourself that you don’t have to be afraid of help just because someone hurt you in the past.
For current success, remember to be objective when setting expectations, and don’t let your fears blind you to reality.
Taking this time to figure out what sort of structure works for you can help you get organized.
In1975, with Communist forces closing in, South Vietnamese President Nguyen Van Thieu resigned after nearly 10 years in office and fled the country.
In 1976, clinical trials of the swine flu vaccine began. cases, I shared excerpts with family members where they were named, inviting them to weigh in.
I did this because the relationships were more important to me than the excavation of family history.
There were also cases where I named people but did not invite them to weigh in, because I didn’t care about the impact of my writing on the relationship.
You have the right to ask your family member to see sections involving you.
If she refuses, or if you don’t like what you read later — you have the right to tell her so and to keep your distance.
My husband reluctantly visited his absentee dad on his father’s deathbed.
He got some information and history that helped him to understand everything that had happened around the time he was conceived.
Your husband’s experience underscores something I learned long ago: When it comes to complex and painful family histories, total resolution is rarely in the cards, but getting partway there is a goal worth reaching for.
Something that you never could fully get past may be forcing you to look at it and asking you to express how you feel about that point in your life.
Consider expressing yourself through journaling, talking or creating art inspired by it.
You might be more aware of the differences between you and your loved ones.
What’s important is that you are secure in who you are — that will let you represent yourself in the best way possible.
It’s OK to show a bolder side to yourself, one that allows you to feel more seen and heard.
Do your best to share your opinions with others so they know how you're feeling — don’t leave them or yourself in the dark.
Something might be eating up the attention of the person you were closest to, which could make it feel awkward.
A new dynamic may take some getting used to, but let them have a chance to grow on you.
In 2016, Prince, one of the most inventive and influential musicians of modern times, was found dead at his home; he was 57.
Play online at PlayJumble.com Hartford Courant | Section 2 | Thursday, April 21,2022 7 Scan QR Satie im lay online.
BAILIFF DOCK ORDER TRIAL : BEAK EVIDENCE PLAINTIFF VERDICT 7 Insert the missing letter to complete an eight-letter BENCH GAVEL PLEA WITNESS : ——— — word reading clockwise or counterclockwise.
All Rights Reserved NFDOULIN NIDDON NOLL NOILON NOJN NOON eet ecco IWAILOW ii CHARG E GU | LTY RU LI NG 2 BUN er ane Sarge CITE JUDGE SENTENCE ; TV CROSSWORD JUMBLE by Jacqueline E Mathews ‘fle 28 wo PH |_| Created by Jacqueline E Mathews 10/8/17 PJO/RIC{U/P] 1 IN| E ACROSS 37 “The __ Ranger” ARROW WORDS 1 “Dharma & __” 38 “__ Don’t Eat the Daisies” 5 “One Day __ Time” 40 Star of “Dr.
CLIFNH | EK) NAR AR A NOIDWW to form the surprise answer, as Y\V™N YN it Ce) suggested by the above cartoon.
BASIS GOING FLINCH WINDOW Answer: Her hole in one resulted in — SWING DANCING Check out the new, free JUST JUMBLE app jm ~<}r HOLE IN ONE RESULTED IN --Now arrange the circled letters im) Z}m|o) Fill in the grid using the clues provided in the direction of the arrows.
When complete, unscramble the letters in the circles to reveal a mystery word.
ALL WE NEED IS A VOLUNTEER TO PAY FOR THE PIZZA. 3 ° e > @SCOTTADAMSSAYS DILBERT.COM 4-21-22 2022 Scott Adams, Inc.
Distributed by Andrews McMeel Syndication THIS IS AN INTERVENTION, TIMMeA WE THINK 20U NEED TO START SAVING 4OURSELF/ £2022 Grimmy, Inc.
Distributed by King Features Inc, grimmy.com Hartford Courant | Section 2 | Thursday, April 21,2022 9 CROSSWORD EDITED BY RICH NORRIS AND JOYCE NICHOLS LEWIS Across 17-, 23-, and 8 22. deg.
If East wins the first diamond lead, he can do no better than return a club, since he has no 4 more spades.
If he does that, however, you rise with the ace and lead another diamond, ensuring the contract beyond the South dealer.
It’s virtually certain that West has the king when East does not play that card at trick one, so it isn’t necessary to win the first spade to assure two tricks in the suit.
It seems natural to play low from dummy and win East’s jack with the queen, but if you do this, you go down one.
East wins your first diamond lead with the ace and returns a spade, and West’s spades become established whether you take the ace on this trick or the next one.
Your cause is then hopeless, since you cannot make nine tricks without establishing dummy’s diamonds, and West still has the diamond entry that allows him to cash his spades.
When East returns a spade, you still have the suit doubly stopped, and now when you play a diamond, it does not matter which defender wins the trick.
If West takes the diamond and returns a spade, you concede another diamond Unscramble these Jumbles, one letter to each square, to form four ordinary words.
MONTH SPICY PREFIX PLACID Answer: It was the rabbits’ first time sleeping in a tent, and they were — “HOPPY” CAMPERS Now arrange the circled letters to form the surprise answer, as suggested by the above cartoon.
Yesterday’s TODAY'S SUDOKU ANSWER TO PREVIOUS CROSSWORD PUZZLE Complete the grid so each row, column and 3-by-3box T/SMMeE|m[clE/E RM B/olT| in bold borders) contains A}R|DIO|R| IDJAY| 1O| DE. every digit, 1 to 9.
Disfributed by King Features Syndicate ary S Hartford Courant Get recognized for what makes your company special.
That’s the message Nets head coach Steve Nash delivered hours ahead of tipoff for Game 2 against the Celtics on Wednesday, exactly 10 months after Simmons last played in an NBA game.
The new-look Huskies, with spring practices nearing the end, will put themselves on display for fans on Friday.
I’ve been on this team through the spring now and there are a lot of players who are, like, gems, when you get up here and get around these dudes, it’s special.
Jim Mora’s first UConn team finishes its 15-session spring practice on Friday at 7m., on campus at Joe Morrone Stadium, the new soccer facility.
It’s a chance to reconnect the program with students, with home games 35 minutes away at Rentschler Field.
UConn’s recent history, 7-48 the last four seasons, is not an issue to the many newcomers, like Bembry or Sokoya McDuffie, a redshirt junior from Old Dominion playing on the defensive line.
The event was originally scheduled to be a Blue-White scrimmage, but the coaches have decided to organize it as a practice, with perhaps some 11-on-11 drills.
Turn to UConn, Page 2 More UConn news an absence this long,” Nash said at the TD Garden.
The Storm have had multiple Huskies leading the way for some time now, re , > Hartford Athletic goalkeeper Jimmy Slayton makes a save against the Red Bulls during a United States Open Cup soccer “This has been a prolonged absence,” Nash said.
Simmons has continued to make progress after receiving an epidural in mid-March to alleviate the pain associated with a herniated disk in his lower back.
JESSICA HILL/SPECIAL TO THE COURANT including three last season with Bird and Stewart alongside Katie Lou Samuelson.
That number bumps up to four this year with the addition of Westbrook through the draft as well as the acquisition of Gabby ~g Williams through a trade “gS with the Los Angeles Sparks mJ for Samuelson.
AP FILE Turn to Storm, Page 4 / /} The Nets’ Ben Simmons watches play during the first half against the 76ers on March 10 in Philadelphia.
At 7m. on Wednesday night, a sea of supporters donning blue and green apparel entered Trinity Health Stadium with cautious optimism.
A crowd of 5,141 filled the stadium to watch the first official match against an MLS opponent.
Ultimately, the Red Bulls came away with the victory over the Athletic and eliminated them from the tournament.
The match was an opportunity to show how the Athletic have expanded the sport in Connecticut.
Head coach Harry Watling felt the match showcased the growth ‘ the club has had over four years.
Turn to Soccer, Page 4 ICE SKATING Olympic gold medalist Chen headlines Stars on Ice Tour in Hartford By Lori Riley Hartford Courant Both Zach Donohue and Nathan Chen were lucky.
The two skaters got to experience their Olympic medal ceremonies in Beijing back in February, with Chen winning the gold in figure skating and Dononue the bronze in ice dancing with partner Madison Hubbell.
Although both were members of the silver medal-winning team, neither they nor the other skaters received their team medals after Russian skater Kamila Valieva was found to have tested positive for a banned drug.
Valieva and her teammates won the team event before the December drug test was brought to light.
Giants, Thursday, 1p.m.; at Diamondbacks, Friday, 9:30m.; at Diamondbacks, Saturday, 8m.
Still, the team is 9-3, off to the best start of any team in the league.
Surely, there will be pieces of that hot start that deteriorate or cool off as spring turns to summer.
But nine wins in 12 games don’t happen accidentally, and while some of the reasons for the Mets’ rising stock are obvious (Francisco Lindor slugging .619, the pitching staff making up for the lack of Jacob deGrom by all doing their best deGrom impression), there are some subtle adjustments that also seem to be taking hold.
By diving into the extremely limited data available thus far, one major thing that stands out is Jeff McNeil’s plate discipline.
The Flying Squirrel was in hell last year, when he went from a career .319 hitter to batting just .251 with a glaring lack of extra base hits.
According to FanGraphs, the Mets’ scrappy contact hitter swung at 33.5% of the pitches he saw outside the strike zone last season.
While the numbers will stabilize as the year goes on, and McNeil is likely to trend back toward his career Yankees pitcher Luis Severino throws during the first inning against the Tigers on Wednesday at Comerica Park in Detroit.
The right-hander has been through so many setbacks over the last three years it’s only natural that he would sometimes get discouraged, sometimes worry that he wouldn’t make it back.
A tear in his lat muscle kept him out for all but the last month of the 2019 regular season.
Every time that you don’t feel as well the next day after I try to pitch or when I was told I couldn’t be a starter, that my arm couldn’t handle that much work,’ Severino said of the times he doubted he would make it back.
The Yankees have to be thrilled where Severino is as he takes the mound WednesYANKEES NOTES day night against the Tigers at Comerica Park.
The 28-year-old is 1-0 witha 2.25 ERA in his first two starts of the season.
Through two starts, Severino has struck out 11 and walked two in eight innings pitched.
He has a .219 batting average against and is in the 78 percentile in strikeout percentage and 76 percentile in walk percentage.
I know I haven’t been getting great results right now,’ Gallo said before the Yankees took on the Tigers at Comerica Park.
Gallo has struggled since being traded to the Yankees from the Rangers at last year’s deadline.
Aaron Boone said the Yankees expect Gallo to get on base and hit for power.
He spent Wednesday in the cages “working his off,” according to first-year hitting coach Dillon Lawson, who’s actually encouraged by what Gallo so far this year.
Lawson even used Gallo as an example of how the Yankees’ offense is ready to break out.
Without delving into the personal medical history of his players, Boone confirmed again that he expects the Yankees to have a full roster when they head to Toronto on May 1.
Unvaccinated players were given an exemption last year to travel to Canada and play the Blue Jays at the end of the 2021 season.
No foreigners are allowed to travel to Canada without being fully vaccinated. — though he’s still making a ton of weak contact to produce mostly singles — and McNeil has shown a much more discerning eye in the habits, the patience he’s shown thus far also points to a concerted effort to make the pitchers work.
Even when going O-for-4 with a strikeout as he did in the second RED SOX game of Tuesday’s doubleheader, McNeil was a nuisance to Giants’ pitching.
He saw an average of 5.75 pitches during his four plate appearances, including two that lasted seven and nine pitches before ending in outs.
There’s value to that, especially when the likes of Lindor, Starling Marte or Pete Alonso are hitting behind him.
Blue Jays By Jason Mastrodonato Boston Herald BOSTON — For all that’s been said and written about how well Alex Cora has been at getting the most out of his young players, his bullpen management can get overlooked.
The Red Sox once again entered the season without any star relievers and no clear plan in the ’pen, where last year’s All-Star closer Matt Barnes is now a middle reliever and the only sure-fire weapon at Cora’s disposal is sophomore superstar Garrett Whitlock, who was supposed to be used as a swingman.
And yet the bullpen played the hero on Tuesday night, as Boston relievers shut down one of the game’s premier offenses in the Toronto Blue Jays and preserved a 2-1 win at Fenway Park.
The bullpen was supposed to be a weakRED SOX NOTES ness this year, but “everyone is working really hard to change that perception,” said Hansel Robles, who threw 1 % perfect innings to extend his scoreless streak to 19 consecutive regular-season appearances, Cora admitted he had no clear plan of what to do with this group entering the season.
If you would’ve drawn it up during the offseason, Whitlock looks like the ace in the hole with Barnes as the defacto closer and perhaps Ryan Brasier and Darwinzon Hernandez as the set-up guys.
Reliever Robles picking up where he left off during scoreless streak By Steve Hewitt Boston Herald BOSTON — Hansel Robles had an atypical spring as he prepared for this season, but the Red Sox reliever has picked up right where he left off.
Robles — who emerged as one of Alex Cora’s go-to arms down the stretch last season — signed a minor league deal late in spring, but his return wasn’t simple.
Visa issues forced him to stay home in the Dominican Republic before he finally joined the Red Sox in the final week of spring training.
Robles earned the win for the Red Sox on Tuesday as he threw 1% scoreless innings as part of a dominant bullpen effort, which increased his streak of consecutive scoreless appearances to 19 dating back to Aug. of last season, a month after he was acquired via trade from the Twins.
When Robles arrived at camp in Fort Myers, his readiness was apparent to Cora.
The Red Sox didn’t have any further positive tests of COVID-19 on Wednesday, Cora said.
And the three players — Kevin Plawecki, Christian Vazquez and Jonathan Arauz — who tested positive at the beginning of the week are feeling better.
Returning to coaching after a four-year absence, he’s taken on the huge rebuilding task and overhauled the roster, selling incoming players on his vision and has been heavily engaged in the practices.
He wants you to succeed, not only on the football field but in the academic part as well.
The Huskies will be showing their new offense, which will focus on a small number of plays with deception around them.
Ta’Quan Roberson, the transfer from Penn State, has been taking a lot of the snaps at quarterback with Steven Krajewski, a holdover from last season.
Tyler Phommachanh, recovering from a torn ACL, has been doing more in practice lately, throwing some passes Tuesday morning.
UConn’s stable of running backs is still led by Nathan Carter, the most productive last season.
Are we going to walk around here Linebacker Marquez Bembry, shown at Kentucky chasing Mississippi State’s Will Rogers, is bringing veteran leadership to UConn’s defense as a grad transfer.
Castellanos , off Marquez; Bohm , off Marquez; Schwarber , off Marquez; Camargo , off Gilbreath.
Castellanos , Bohm 3, Schwarber 2, Camargo 3, McMahon 3, Grichuk , Cron 2.
Home, Dan Merzel; First, Bruce Dreckman; Second, Pat Hoberg; Third, Paul Emmel.
Home, Mark Ripperger; First, Tom Hallion; Second, Phil Cuzzi; Third, Cory Blaser.
The Indians played their first game at League Park and lost to the Tigers 5-0, in front of 19,867.
The Brooklyn Dodgers beat the Phillies 14-4 at Ebbets Field for their 10th consecutive victory from the start of the season-a major league record that lasted until 1981.
The Atlanta Braves beat the Cincinnati Reds 4-3 for their 13th straight victory.
In his second start since August 1982, Montreal pitcher David Palmer threw five perfect innings against the St.
Keuchel 11-1; Banks 5-2; Foster 0-1; Severino 4-1; Bieber 8-0; Shaw 1-2; De Los Santos 1-0; Hentges 2-0.
Home, Laz Diaz; First, Alex MacKay; Second, Chad Fairchild; Third, Shane Livensparger.
Lambert 18; Lopez 4; Sousa 3; Crick 3; Bummer 2; Ruiz 3; McKenzie 18; Gose 5; Sandlin 4; Stephan 4; Clase 3.
Home, Brian O’Nora; First, Chad Fairchild; Second, Shane Livensparger; Third, Alex MacKay.
Milwaukee shared the major league streak of 13 straight, set by the Atlanta Braves in 1982.
Brady Anderson led off the first inning with a home run for the fourth straight game for Baltimore.
Randy Johnson struck out 17 batters while giving up two hits in Arizona’s 7-1 win over Colorado.
Atlanta’s Rafael Furcal tied a modern major league record and became the first Braves player in 46 years to hit three triples in a game, as Atlanta beat Florida 4-2.
Albert Pujols hit his major league leading 11th homer of the season and drove in four RBIs in St.
BOSTON 2, TORONTO 1 Toronto AB R H BI SO AVG Springer cf 4 0 1 0 O .267 Bichette ss 4 0 0 0 O .204 Guerrero Jr.
Home, Mike Muchlinski; First, John Libka; Second, Jim Reynolds; Third, Todd Tichenor.
Phil Humber threw the first perfect game in the majors in almost two years, leading the White Sox toa 4-0 victory over the Seattle Mariners.
It was baseball’s 21st perfect game and first since Philadelphia’s Roy Halladay threw one against the Florida Marlins on May 29, 2010.
Nick Swisher hit a grand slam to help the Yankees erase a nine-run deficit, then he added a two-run double to give them the lead as they posted back-to-back seven-run innings to beat Boston 15-9 at Fenway Park.
Ike Davis became the first player to hit grand slams for different teams in the same April, and Neil Walker had a game-winning single with two outs in the ninth inning for Pittsburgh.
Gilbert 22; Poppen 5; Mantiply 3; Adon 24; Arano 2; Finnegan 3; Rainey 6.
Home, Ted Barrett; First, Lance Barksdale; Second, Nic Lentz; Third, Stu Scheuwater.
Ellis 8-5; Baumann 3-0; Bautista 0-0; Pérez 1-0; Irvin 8-3; Logue 3-0; Castellani 3-1; Moll 0-0; Jackson 0-0.
Home, Will Little; First, Greg Gibson; Second, Nick Mahrley; Third, Rob Drake.
It was the fourth time in major league history two teams combined for three grand slams.
Jake Arrieta of the Cubs pitched his second no-hitter in a span of 11 regular-season starts, shutting down the Cincinnati Reds in a 16-0 rout.
A’s southpaw Sean Manaea tosses the twelfth no-hitter in franchise history and the first since southpaw Dallas Braden’s perfect game in 2010, when he keeps the opponents hitless in the team’s 3-0 victory over the 17-2 Red Sox at the Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum.
The 26-yearold’s performance ends Boston’s run of 3,987 games without being no-hit, a streak dating back to Mariners’ Chris Bosio’s no-no against the club at the Kingdome on April 22, 1993.
Dodgers 5, Atlanta 1 Philadelphia 9, Colorado 6 San Diego 6, Cincinnati 0 Tampa Bay at Chi.
The Astros placed second baseman Jose Altuve on the 10-day injured list Wednesday with a strained left hamstring.
The 2017 American League MVP was injured legging out an infield single in the eighth inning of Monday night’s win over the Angels, and the roster move is backdated to Tuesday.
The Astros hoped to avoid placing Altuve on the IL but did so Wednesday after deciding that he likely will need more than a week to recover.
Baker said the Astros would split time at second base between Aledmys Diaz and Niko Goodrum while Altuve is out.
Altuve, 31, is hitting just .167 with one home run and three RBIs in nine games this season.
Two-time All-Star reliever Sean Doolittle was placed on 10-day IL with a sprained left elbow.
The left-hander was a member of the Nationals’ 2019 World Series championship team, played for the Reds and Mariners last season and now is back with the Nationals bullpen.
Doolittle, 35, has retired 16 of the 17 batters he has faced this season.
Capitol was briefly evacuated Wednesday evening after police identified an aircraft that they said posed “a probable threat” — but the plane was actually carrying members of the United States Army Golden Knights, who then parachuted into the Nationals’ stadium for a pregame demonstration.
The Nationals were hosting the Diamondbacks at Nationals Park, which is located a little more than a mile away from the United States Capitol.
Manager Scott Servais and 3B coach Manny Acta both tested positive for COVID-19 and were away from the Mariners beginning with Wednesday’s game against the Rangers.
Negron managed Seattle’s Triple-A affiliate last season before joining the major league staff this year.
Negron said before the game that the 54-year-old Servais was in good spirits and participated in morning meetings via video conference, and that decisions during the game will be a collaborative effort.
The Mariners are experiencing a growing number of COVID cases impacting the franchise.
The team placed RHP Paul Sewald on the COVID list on Wednesday, joining OF Mitch Haniger and C/DH Luis Torrens.
Along with the players, Servais said Tuesday that several other staff members had tested positive in recent days.
Tony Gonsolin tossed six shutout innings, Freddie Freeman hit a two-run HR in the first and the Dodgers beat the visiting Braves 5-1 Wednesday to take two of three from the defending World Series champions.
The only hit allowed by Gonsolin was Manny Pifia’s slow bouncer to the right side leading off the sixth.B Max Muncy was shifted, and his throw to the bag was slow.
Mitch White gave up consecutive doubles to Matt Olson and Marcell Ozuna with two outs in the ninth.
Gonsolin went six shutout innings for the third time in his career and first in two years.
Freeman went 3 of 4 against his former team to close out an emotional reunion.
The 32-year-old who spent his entire career with the Braves until this year visited with his old teammates in their clubhouse before the series opener, reminiscing about winning the Braves’ first World Series title since 1995.
The Jets make sense, but team sources don’t believe the 49ers will move him because they can control his rights for up to three more years.
Ue has lia teu a AD as Ay ‘Day n i pote 2 M Hartford Athletic midfielder M and Russell Wilson are prime examples in recent years.
The Jets have been in the market for a receiver to supercharge Zach Wilson’s development in his second year.
The team was interested in the Falcons’ Calvin Ridley until he was suspended for the year for gambling and would have pursued the Chargers’ Mike Williams but he was re-signed.
Now Samuel is asking out of San Francisco, according to multiple reports, and the Jets have the assets to make an attractive offer.
Samuel isn’t only one of the best receivers in the league, he’s one of the best players in the sport.
Last season he finished with 77 catches, 1,405 yards and six touchdowns.
Robert Saleh was the defensive coordinator for the 49ers from 2017-2020.
Jets offensive coordinator Mike LaFleur was the passing game coordinator and receivers coach when Samuel was drafted in 2019.
Second-year wide receiver Kadarius Toney has not reported to the Giants’ facility yet this month, including for this week’s voluntary minicamp.
Toney’s commitment came into question behind the scenes during his rookie year, from lack of playbook study to poor meeting behavior to frequent injuries.
JESSICA HILL/SPECIAL TO THE COURANT Soccer from Page 1 “The place was packed,” he said.
It’s really important we compete in Skating from Page 1 and never rescheduled.
Donohue, who grew up in Madison, and Chen, who goes to Yale, will be in Hartford Saturday night at 7:30 at the XL Center as part of the Stars on Ice Tour, along with other Olympians, including team silver medalists Madison Chock and Evan Bates, Karen Chen, Alexa Knierem and Brandon Frazier and Vincent Zhou.
We get updates, letting us know it’s being looked into and they haven’t forgotten about us but as of right now, we still have not heard about them reaching a decision.
What I care about is that the effect of this decision, of making such a public statement, and taking this into account and not giving anyone a medal, my hope is that it has a bigger effect on the sport long-term.
Donohue and Hubbell had planned to retire after the Olympics and came back one more time after finishing fourth in the 2018 Games.
The pair won the silver at the world championships in France in late March to end their professional careers.
I think now that we’re all back together for the first time since the Games we were all on different timing at the worlds, so didn’t see each other too much.
Chen did not compete in the world championships due to an undisclosed injury.
From the opening minute the Red Bulls applied pressure on the Athletic defense with their forwards.
He has two more years of “From there, I’ll decide what I want to do,” he said.
Right now, I’m doing Stars on Ice, then when I get back to school, I'll be preoccupied, but I skated before when I was at school, so it’snotsomething that’s off Donohue said he had time to visit with his family, including his mother who still lives in Madison, After the Stars tour is over, he and his girlfriend Nathan Chen, of the United States, competes Feb. in the men’s free skate program during the figure skating event at the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing.
JAE C.HONG/AP are going on vacation, then coming back to the United States to start a business encompassing athletics and skating.
I really want to affect the health, both physically and mentally of the athletes, as well as helping other disciplines outside stuff I would doincompeafter the Olympics and his _ of ice dance to evolve and tition but shows don’t mother wasplanningtogo become more efficient.” require the same level of | tosome ofthe shows.
Celtics from Page 1 said, the 25-year-old All-Star forward practiced in a fouron-four setting with contact for the first time since injuring his back.
As Nash spoke, Simmons walked past the small pool of reporters gathered for the Nets’ shootaround on the TD Garden court.
Simmons participated in the four-on-four on Monday, then a five-on-zero walkthrough Tuesday that Nash defined as “scripting” He said the scripting is important so that Simmons knows what actions the team is trying to run if he does make his debut, but Nash hedged that thought process with the adjustments that come in playoffbasketball.
Bird and Stewart both said they were excited when the Storm selected Westbrook with the 21st pick.
As is the case for many rookies, the 6-foot guard has felt a bit out of syne at times as she gets the hang of each drill and how the team operates.
But having familiar veterans like Bird and Stewart (Williams is still finishing her season overseas) has helped the process.
So I definitely felt ready to come in, I just knew it was gonna be a big change.
Bird believes that Westbrook’s versatility will help him become as familiar as possible with what we’re doing because things change from day to day,’ Nash said.
Itremains unclear whether Simmons has progressed enough to play in Game 3 at Barclays Center on Saturday.
Nash did not rule Simmons out for the Nets’ first home playoff game but said the Nets may be cautious given how long the star forward has gone since playing an NBA game.
I think it’s a pretty unique scenario and it’s not as linear as the other in-season injuries.” the Storm this season, adding that there is a lot in the rookie’s game that she hasn’t even tapped into yet.
Meanwhile, the 41-yearold Bird, who has often talked publicly about how much she’s grappled with the decision of when to retire, is about to enter her 19th season in the league.
The WNBA’s all-time assist leader said she didn’t change too much in terms of her conditioning over the offseason, but she has had to be more aware of how her body is changing to fine-tune certain areas.
Stewart has been easing back into training camp after undergoing a minor preventative Achilles procedure last October, according to an ESPN report.
Lila Bromberg can be reached at Ibromberg @courant.com and @LilaBBromberg on Twitter.
The former UConn women’s basketball guard suffered a season-ending knee injury in training camp, the Washington Mystics announced on Wednesday.
She earned the Ann Meyers Drysdale award asthe nation’s top shooting guard and was named an All-Big East first-team selection in each of the last two years.
WOMEN’S SINGLES, ROUND OF 32 #5 Anett Kontaveit Angelique Kerber, 3-6, 6-4, 6-4.
ATP BARCELONA OPEN BANC SABADELL At Real Club de Tenis Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Red clay-outdoors MEN’S SINGLES, ROUND OF 32 #3 Felix Auger-Aliassime Carlos Taberner, 6-1, 3-6, 6-4.
ATP BELGRADE OPEN At Novak Tennis Center, Belgrade, Serbia; Red clay-outdoors MEN’S SINGLES, ROUND OF 16 #1 Novak Djokovic Laslo Djere, 2-6, 7-6, 7-6.
WTA TEB BNP PARIBAS CHAMPIONSHIP ISTANBUL CUP At Garanti Koza Arena, Istanbul, Red clay-outdoors WOMEN’S SINGLES, ROUND OF 16 #2 Sorana Cirstea Arantxa Rus, 3-6, 6-1, 7-5.
WOMEN’S SINGLES, ROUND OF 32 Rebecca Peterson #1 Elise Mertens, 7-5, 4-1, ret.
Top three teams in each division and two wild cards per conference advance to playoffs. x-clinched playoff spot y-clinched division z-clinched conference WEDNESDAY’S RESULTS Dallas at Edmonton, late Chicago at Arizona, late Colorado at Seattle, late Washington at Vegas, late THURSDAY’S GAMES Boston at Pittsburgh, 7p.m.
NWSL CHALLENGE CUP SATURDAY’S MATCHES Washington at North Carolina, 1p.m.
UEFA CHAMPIONS LEAGUE SEMIFINAL PHASE Tuesday’s first leg Real Madrid vs.
NORTH W L T PCT PF PA NewJersey 0 1 O .000 24 28 Michigan 0 1 0 .000 12 17 Philadelphia 0O 1 O .000 17 23 Pittsburgh 0 1 0 .000 3 17 SOUTH W L T PCT PF PA New Orleans 1 0O 0 1.000 23 17 Houston 1 0O 01.000 17 12 Birmingham 1 0 0 1.000 28 24 Tampa Bay 1 0 01.000 17 3 FRIDAY’S GAME Michigan at New Jersey, 8p.m.
SATURDAY’S GAMES Pittsburgh at Philadelphia, Noon Birmingham at Houston, 7p.m.
MLB THURSDAY NATIONAL LEAGUE FAVORITE LINE UNDERDOG __ LINE at NY Mets -121 San Francisco +102 at Washington -126 Arizona +107 at Miami -130 St.
Louis +110 atChi.Cubs — off Pittsburgh off AMERICAN LEAGUE atCleveland -120 Chi.
White Sox +102 N.Y Yankees -155 at Detroit +135 Toronto -115 at Boston -105 Minnesota -130 at Kansas City +110 at Oakland -118 Baltimore -102 at Seattle -150 Texas +128 NBA PLAYOFFS THURSDAY FAVORITE LINE O/U UNDERDOG Memphis 1% at Minnesota at Utah 6 Dallas Golden State 1% atDenver FRIDAY Miami 1% atAtlanta Phoenix 1 at New Orl.
Daniil Medvedev is among several players who won't be allowed to play at Wimbledon after the All England Club banned players from Russia and Belarus from competing at the Grand Slam because of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
AP FILE WAR IN UKRAINE TENNIS Wimbledon enacts ban over invasion Russians, Belarusians can’t compete at season’s 3rd Slam By Chris Lehourites Associated Press LONDON — Tennis players from Russia and Belarus will not be allowed to play at Wimbledon this year because of the war in Ukraine, the All England Club announced Wednesday.
Medvedev, Rublev and Pavlyuchenkova are from Russia; Sabalenka and Azarenka are from Belarus.
The All England Club confirmed in March that it was having discussions with the British government about whether Russians should be able to play in the grass-court Grand Slam tournament.
Russian athletes have been prevented from competing in many sports following their country’s invasion of Ukraine.
Soccer, figure skating and track and field all banned Russian and Belarusian athletes and teams because of the war.
The Russian men’s national soccer team was excluded from last month’s World Cup qualifying playoffs, forcing them to miss a chance to reach this year’s tournament.
The seven groups that run the sport around the world decided March 1 that players from those countries would be allowed to compete in WTA, ATP and Grand Slam tournaments but not under the name or flag of Russia or Belarus.
Those two nations also were kicked out of the Billie Jean King Cup and Davis Cup team competitions; Russia had been the reigning champion in both.
The French Open, which starts May 22, will be the first Grand Slam tournament held since Russia invaded Ukraine in February and is expected to permit Russian and Belarussian players to compete — just as so-called “neutral” athletes who may not represent their countries.
Villanova coach Wright to retire News services Hall of Fame coach Jay Wright is expected to retire after 21 seasons as men’s basketball coach at Villanova, according to reports Wednesday night.
Kyle Neptune, who was Wright’s assistant coach for eight years before taking the top job at Fordham last season, will be named his successor.
Wright, 60, is retiring from coaching for good and won’t pursue NBA or other college jobs.
Fox Sports reported that Wright “had been thinking about retirement for several weeks” because of his family.
Since taking over Villanova in 2001, Wright has been lauded as one of the greatest coaches in the sport.
He led Villanova to the national championship in 2016 — beating North Carolina in the final — and 2018, when the Wildcats took down Michigan.
Wright was inducted into the Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame in 2021 and wona gold medal at the 2020 Olympics as an assistant coach.
UCLA junior G Johnny Juzang, one of the stars of the Bruins’ run to the 2021 Final Four, will enter the draft.
In 2021, he averaged 22. points in six NCAA Tournament games and was named to the all-tournament team.
The USGA announced that the oceanside course in California will host four more United States Opens over the next two-plus decades.
Kalabrya Haskins, who was calling from Pittsburgh and unaware of the accident, told a Florida Highway Patrol dispatcher on April 9 that her 24-year-old husband had called from near Fort Lauderdale to say he was walking to get gas and would call her back.
When the former Ohio State star didn’t, she told the dispatcher she tried to call him but he wasn’t answering.
The accident report said witnesses told investigators Haskins was trying to cross the highway when he went into the path of the dump truck.
Low. — — sprinkle late, pce and 45 40 46 45 48 courant.com/weather seasonable.
High ( temperatures will be a few degrees cooler than normal with readings in the en ae 060ClU De oe mid-50s to near 60 degrees.
MASSACHUSETTS week, especially during the afternoon when peak gusts up to 30 mph are | 57/448 wacrecorp a 59/47 & possible.
High pressure will bring sunshine, breezy and mild conditions on | 60/45 & . bab nts ' RHODE xy . of Friday with high temperatures climbing through the 60s.
EH—2-3; WL—1-4. el} 5 B-9 W.\ed fo)-}-) 5 CCC-North SIMSBURY 13, SOUTH WINDSOR 6 Goals: S—Elena Bontatibus , Reece Willison , Sofia Smith, Liv Francis, Taylor Trutin, McKenna Pennington, Sarah Perlitz; SW— Maliya Haddock , Emma Lamica, Hailey Deptui.
STAFFORD 101, COVENTRY 34 GIRLS TRACK & FIELD NCCC BOLTON 98, EAST WINDSOR 47 BOLTON 95, GRANBY 50 GRANBY 98, EAST WINDSOR 44 CANTON 104.67, COVENTRY 42.33 CANTON 81.5, STAFFORD 68.
Jacob Wojtkowiak and Matt LaFountaine both had 3hits, 2RBI, 2runs scored for Coventry.
Matt Sinofsky was 2-for-4with a double, RBI and Noah Schermerhorn had a double, 2runs scored for Suffield.
Ambrose tossed 3scoreless innings of relief to get the win with 5strikeouts, including striking out the side in the 6th.
Lyver was 5-for-5with 4RBI and Olivia Stebbins was 3-for-5with 4RBI for Enfield.
Caylin Blazys had a triple, 3RBI, 3runs scored and Lauren Czerwinski had a triple, 2runs scored.
Laura Catellier hada double, 2RBI and Bianca Green was 2-for-3with a double, RBI for Somers.
Sydney Matz had 3hits, 2RBI, 4runs scored and Brynlee Eckles had 3hits, 3 runs scored.
Macyn Rosay hada double, 2RBI and Nataly Rodriguez was 1-for-3 with 2RBI for Innovation.
EW—2-2; B—0-4. el} > B-9 W.\ed fo )-5-) 5 CCC-North CONARD 15, AVON 9 Je) 6-A""(o] BE 4-718 E CCC-Inter ENFIELD 3, NEW BRITAIN 0 E: Drew Rancourt, 13kills, 5aces, 4digs, John Bellafronte, 7kills, 3aces, 3blocks; NB: Anthony Olmeda, 12kills, 9assists, Davin Siharadh, 13 assists, 5kills.
Onil Carrion, 20assists, 4aces, 2kills, Adnel Torres, 12kills, 10aces, Dev Patel, 9aces, 8kills.
M—2-3; BS—1-5 GLASTONBURY 3, NEWINGTON 1 SOUTH WINDSOR 3, CONARD 2 SCC CHESHIRE 3, XAVIER 1 C: Tim Nugent, 27assists, 4aces, 3kills, Will Allen, 13kills, 4aces; X: Vinny Rappoccio, 8kills, 5digs, Peter O’Brien, 13digs, 8kills.
East Hartford at East Catholic NCCC: Somers at Suffield CRAL: Weaver at MLC, 3:30p.m.
Berlin at Lewis Mills CCC-East: East Catholic at South Windsor CCC-Inter: Farmington at Maloney; Hall at Windsor NCCC: Stafford at Coventry; HMTCA at Rockville; Granby at East Windsor/SMSA, 4p.m.
Cromwell at Old Lyme; Morgan at Old Saybrook; North Branford at Valley Regional, 4p.m.
Lyman Hall, Hillhouse at Sheehan BOYS TENNIS CCC-Inter: East Hartford at Rocky Hill; Bristol Eastern at Conard, 4:30p.m.
Canton/East Granby at Rockville SCC: Cheshire at Shelton; West Haven at Lyman Hall Others: Xavier at Hall; Granby at Lewis Mills; Manchester at Ellington GIRLS TENNIS CCC-Inter: Northwest Catholic at Plainville; Maloney at Newington; Simsbury at East Catholic; Platt at Bloomfield; Rocky Hill at Farmington; RHAM at Bristol Central; Enfield at Middletown; Berlin at Southington; Avon at Bristol Eastern NCCC: Rockville at Canton, 4:30p.m.
Cromwell at Valley Regional Others: Lewis Mills at Granby; Bolton at Bulkeley/HMTCA FLAVOR Hartford Courant ab. ‘da 4 i : af 7 ast és ry H Adal merry | | 3 LiVING Hartford Courant | Section 4 | Thursday, April 21,2022 1 Toss chewy noodles in a sesame-peanut sauce for a refreshing dish.
KELLIFOSTER/THEKITCHN.COM These creamy, cold sesame noodles are great anytime By Christine Gallary TheKitchn.com Cold sesame noodles are a refreshing delight — especially on a hot day or if you want a filling but flavorful on-the-go lunch.
There are many versions of sesame noodles, notably ones from Sichuan and Taiwan, but they all contain Chinese sesame paste and other seasonings tossed with chewy noodles.
There’s actually very little cooking to do — just boiling the noodles — so prep is relegated to some chopping and mixing of the sauce.
Good Chinese or Spice up your pork chops By Breana Killeen EatingWell A Cajun-seasoned pork chop rub adds a delicious smoky flavor to this easy skillet dish.
Taiwanese sesame noodles have a balance of sweet, savory, nutty and a little bit of heat, so here’s an easy recipe that balances all those flavors into one tasty, slurp-able bowl.
Thin, dried wheat noodles work best here because they cook up chewy and don’t get too gloppy or gummy when tossed with the sauce.
While sesame noodles used to contain just or mostly sesame paste, modern versions start with peanut butter.
The smooth peanut butter coats the noodles well and adds a great depth of flavor.
Sesame paste is a key ingredient here to round out the sauce, even though you don’t need alot.
Chinese sesame paste is made from darkly roasted sesame seeds and tastes different than tahini, which is made from unroasted or lightly roasted sesame seeds and has a more bitter flavor.
A good spoonSUPER BOWL ful of toasted sesame oil helps thin out the nut butter and adds a delicious toastiness.
The sweet notes in this recipe come from a spoonful of granulated sugar.
Soy sauce and rice vinegar help thin out the sauce, and add savory and acidic notes to balance everything out.
Sesame seeds, scallion greens and roasted peanuts add some crunch and color to the finished CAJUN SKILLET PORK CHOPS WITH ASPARAGUS AND CHEESY POLENTA Makes: 4 servings Total time: 35 minutes 4. cups water 1 cup cornmeal 1% pounds thin-cut bone-in pork chops 1 tablespoon Cajun seasoning ¥2 teaspoon Salt plus a pinch, divided 2 tablespoons grapeseed or canola oil, divided 1 pound asparagus, cut into 2-inch pieces ¥, cup white wine JENNIFER CAUSEY/EATINGWELL __ 1% cups shredded sharp DAILY SUDOKU Y noodles.
You can also toss in matchstick-cut cucumber for some refreshing bites.
To make sesame noodles, boil the noodles and then run them under cold water to stop the cooking and to keep them from getting gummy.
These sesame noodles are eaten at room temperature or cold, making them a great makeahead or on-the-go dish.
What to serve with sesame noodles Sesame noodles are substantial enough that they can be eaten alone, or you can serve them with some protein like poached chicken or even seared fish.
They also go well witha Taiwanese cucumber salad or as part of a hot pot meal. cheddar cheese 4 scallions, sliced 1 tablespoon butter ¥, teaspoon ground pepper 1.
Cook, stirring occasionally, until thickened and the cornmeal is tender, about 20 minutes.
Meanwhile, season pork chops with Cajun seasoning and 4% teaspoon salt.
Add the pork and cook, turning once, until browned, about 1 minute per side.
Thinly slice 2 medium scallions; add scallion white and light green parts to bowl and reserve the dark green parts for garnish.
Cut % medium English cucumber into matchsticks (about 1 cup) and add to the bowl of sauce, if desired.
Add 8 ounces thin, dried Chinese wheat noodles to the boiling water and cook according to package directions until tender.
When the noodles are ready, drain and rinse under cold water until cooled.
Garnish with the reserved scallion greens, peanuts and 1 teaspoon sesame seeds, if desired.
Thin, dried wheatbased Taiwanese noodles labeled kuan miao are best for this recipe, but you can substitute dried udon or spaghetti noodles in its place.
Tahini can be substituted for the sesame paste, but it has a slightly more bitter taste.
Add the remaining 1 tablespoon oil, asparagus, wine and pinch of salt to the pan.
Cook, scraping up any browned bits, until the asparagus is tender, about 3 minutes.
Remove the polenta from the heat and stir in cheese, scallions, butter, pepper and the remaining % teaspoon salt.
That’s because growing up in the South, the first strawberries of the year hit markets in early March.
And while those early season berries weren’t as sweet as those that came at the start of summer, I always loved them more.
Their slightly sulphuric, sour flavor made them ideal for baking, since it helped to cook them down with sugar so as to make them as candy-like as their late-season siblings.
I mostly refuse to eat strawberries throughout the rest of the year, waiting for those first berries of spring to kick off the season that lasts until the last super-sweet berries leave in the summer.
My current baking project is a cold pie that incorporates the cooked-down strawberries into a “Black Forest” flavor profile.
Instead of using cherries, which I often find need alot of help to coax that enticing “red” flavor from within, early season strawberries have the robust, tangy flavor I want — when cooked and condensed, the acidity balances all the sugar and allows for an exponentially greater berry-full flavor.
To complete the inspiration, I spread a layer of chocolate pudding over the jammy berries, followed by a layer of whipped cream to cut all the richness.
In that last layer, I use cornstarch and gelatinto to help set the whipped cream and prevent weeping — when water separates from the dairy fat — which can happen as it sits.
It’s atechnique — to help set the whipped cream on the outside and keep it stable, sliceable and soft — I learned from making a traditional Black Forest cake.
First you make a pudding by cooking a small amount of milk with cornstarch and sugar, then you dissolve gelatin into the pudding and, finally, fold it into the whipped cream to stabilize it.
It may seem unnecessary, but when you work so hard ona pie like this, you want to ensure it sets up and comes out looking beautiful with each slice — now is not the time for those fashionably floppy pie fillings.
With all the intense fillings above it, this crust is refreshingly tame in comparison and a cinch to make since rolling out pastry would be overkill here.
To garnish, I use some simple shaved bits of chocolate and, if I want to really impress (I always do), a sprinkling of ground freeze-dried strawberries.
ANTONIS ACHILLEOS/EATINGWELL Make quick taco dinner on your busiest nights By Sarah Epperson | EatingWell This zippy, creamy slaw is so good, you might find yourself making it for other sandwiches.
Still, it pairs beautifully with the tangy pulled chicken for an incredibly quick dinner you can make even on your busiest nights.
Combine yogurt, sugar, lemon juice, vinegar, salt, pepper and hot sauce in a large bowl.
Combine chicken and barbecue sauce ina medium microwavable bowl; toss until chicken is coated.
Fill each tortilla with 4% cup of the chicken and top with 3 tablespoons of the slaw.
In alarge bowl, add the cracker crumbs, sugar, cocoa powder, salt and butter, and mix with your fingers until evenly combined.
Transfer the mixture to a 9-inch metal pie pan and press evenly into the bottom and sides of the pan.
Transfer the crust to a wire rack and let cool while you make the strawberry layer.
Place over medium heat and cook, stirring every minute or so, until strawberries have mostly collapsed, there are no rigidly solid pieces left and there is plenty of syrup around them, about 10 minutes.
Pour cornstarch slurry into the berries, and continue cooking until liquid thickens (some of the berries will break down into the syrup), about 1 minute.
Scrape the strawberries into the pie crust and spread into an even layer.
In a small saucepan, whisk together the sugar and cornstarch, then mix in the egg yolks.
Place the pan over medium heat and cook, stirring constantly, until the pudding begins bubbling, about 4 minutes, then keep cooking, stirring constantly, until the pudding is thick, about 1 minute more.
Remove the pan from the heat, and stir in the chocolate and butter until both are melted and smooth.
Stir in the vanilla and salt, then scrape the chocolate pudding over the strawberry layer.
Sprinkle gelatin over 2 tablespoons milk ina bowl; let sit until gelatin softens, about 5 minutes.
Whisk together sugar and cornstarchina small saucepan, then add remaining 2 cup milk and place over medium heat.
Cook, stirring constantly, until mixture thickens to the consistency of very thick pudding, 4 to 5 minutes, then remove pan from the heat, and stir in gelatin mixture until it dissolves fully.
Scrape gelatin mixture into a large bowl and let cool, stirring occasionally, to room temperature.
Add one-third of the whipped cream to the gelatin mixture, and stir until smooth.
Add the remaining whipped cream and gently fold with a rubber spatula until evenly combined.
Cover loosely with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 4 hours or overnight.
When ready to serve, sprinkle the top with chocolate shavings and/ or ground freeze-dried strawberries.
Limit one per customer per day HC_4-21-2022 NOT combinable with other offers.
At picnic tables, visitors sampled Donkey & Goat’s newly released natural wines, a group that even the producer’s most ardent fans would not recognize.
Instead of the usual bottles highlighting the hyperspecific terroir characteristics of single vineyards in Northern California, stretching from Mendocino and Sonoma east to El Dorado and the Sierra Foothills, the 2021 Donkey & Goat wines available to taste were either labeled with the generic “California” appellation or came from vineyards that had not been part of its usual lineup.
Wine fans who cherish bottles with asense of place look for specificity in appellations, hoping the wines will reflect the qualities of an area or vineyard.
In the past, any ofits wine labeled “California” was made from inexpensive grapes and carried a modest price tag.
But this year, some of its most expensive grapes are going into those “California” wines.
Crops from multiple appellations were combined in an effort to make up for shortfalls after the 2021 fires in Northern California.
The catastrophic fires of the past few growing seasons on the West Coast have turned what was once the relatively routine, annual ritual of harvest and SERIOUSLY SIMPLE New cuvees, under the generic California appellation, from the winery Donkey & Goat.
CAROLYN FONG/THE NEW YORK TIMES winemaking into a period of fear and anxiety.
Growers and winemakers now must consider whether fires will come again and what to do about it.
Fire damage, along with smoke and ash, is devastating to any vineyard and producer.
Those wineries owned by billionaires or big corporations have the resources to withstand diminished harvests, or even a year or two with no wine at all.
But small businesses like Donkey & Goat now face existential threats each year and wonder if they will be able to make enough wine to cover costs.
As amatter of survival, West Coast wineries have had to innovate, turning grapes that might have been destined for one sort of wine into a completely different one.
Tracey Rogers Brandt, the general manager and winemaker for Donkey & Goat, is hoping that the unusual wines she was compelled to make in 2021 will not be demeaned because they are different or unexpected.
She hopes that what she calls her “climate-driven creative wines” will be recognized as inventive responses to disastrous events and valued accordingly.
Every year Isabel’s Cuvee, a single-vineyard rosé made from grenache gris grown on the Gibson Ranch in the McDowell Valley of Mendocino County, is a core wine for Donkey & Goat.
Rogers Brandt had plenty of grapes in 2021 to produce the usual amount of Isabel’s.
But the Caldor Fire ravaged vineyards in El Dorado, where Donkey & Goat obtains nearly 55% of the grapes for its annual production of red wines.
Donkey & Goat was able to salvage roughly 40% of its red grapes, mostly syrah, grenache and mourvedre.
But when smoke and ash settle on red grapes, the grape skins, which provide color and structure to the wine, must be discarded.
Red wine cannot be produced without subjecting the wine to the sorts of technological manipWhite beans and artichoke hearts, an inspired combo By Diane Rossen Worthington Tribune Content Agency Springtime soups often show off the assortment of greens that have just arrived at the farmers market.
Sweet peas, asparagus, ramps and Chinese peas are just afew ofthe greens I love to cook.
Sometimes I like to combine unlikely but complementary flavors together.
Combining white beans and artichoke hearts turns out to be an inspired combination.
The artichoke hearts add just a hint of the artichokes’ distinguishing taste.
And even though they’re frozen, the artichokes provide the unique flavor in this soup.
Soak the beans overnight in enough cold water to generously cover or doa quick soak by bringing them to a boil in just enough water to cover, boiling for 2 minutes, then covering and letting stand 1 hour.
Ina6-quart soup pot over medium heat, heat the oil, add the onions, and saute for about 5 minutes or until softened, 4 This soup is easy to make into a full meal.
DREAMSTIME want to skip the straining step, since it creates a silky, frothy texture.
Using frozen artichoke hearts cuts down an enormous amount of preparation time without sacrificing any flavor.
Serve warms chunks of your favorite rustic bread with plates of fruity olive oil.
I like to drink a light-oaked Chardonnay or a Beaujolais with this soup. stirring occasionally.
Add the artichokes hearts and saute, about 2 to 3 minutes, until slightly softened.
Increase the heat to high and add the stock, beans, garlic and tomatoes. are tender.
When the soup comes to a boil, reduce the heat to low and simmer for about 1 to 1% hours, partially covered, or until the beans 3.
At this point, you can strain the soup through a finemeshed strainer into a large saucepan.
Heat the soup on medium heat and add the salt, pepper and 2 tablespoons of the parsley and taste for seasoning.
To serve, ladie the soup into bowls and garnish with optional croutons, the remaining parsley, and the Parmesan cheese.
The soup can be prepared up to three days ahead through Step 3, covered and refrigerated.
Be sure to adjust the seasonings and add fresh herbs when you reheat the frozen soup. ulations Donkey & Goat abhors.
In such cases, many wineries would use the grapes to make a simple rose.
Rogers Brandt could have made an innocuous rosé to sell alongside Isabel’s Cuvée.
But she said that would not have been satisfying aesthetically, and she would have lost money on the wine.
She decided instead to combine the rosé made from these grapes with the rosé destined for Isabel’s Cuvee.
Feeling the wine was still missing something, she added some pinot gris from the 2020 vintage, made in the ramato style, in which the juice and skins are macerated together, adding texture and color.
Federal rules permit up to 15% ofa blend froma vintage other than the stated year.
The result, labeled Gris Gris, is delightful — lively, tangy, refreshing and bone dry, with flavors of fruits and herbs.
Rogers Brandt is selling the wine for $32 abottle, roughly equivalent to Isabel’s Cuvée despite the appellation.
Donkey & Goat, like many small wineries without vineyards of their own, must develop partnerships with growers to assure a steady supply of fruit.
This is doubly important for producers like Rogers Brandt, who works primarily with organic and biodynamic vineyards.
Faced with fires in both 2020 and 2021, many winemakers bailed on growers or bought only a portion of their allotment.
It’s a difficult situation for all concerned, but Rogers Brandt said it was crucial to support growers.
Family Owned and Run Since 1932 “You can’t just buy grapes in the good years,” she said.
Rogers Brandt faced a slightly different situation with the 2020 fires.
Only during the winemaking process did she discover they had been affected by smoke.
She made what she could, even if the results, she said, left her heartbroken.
In the early part of 2021, she made a point of tasting many natural wines, looking for inspiration for what she called Plan B Wines if again confronted with fires.
Her other improvised 2021s, all with the California appellation, include Cannonball, an unusual blend of carienan and eriiner veltliner with dollops of chardonnay, grenache blanc and vermentino from Mendocino, Monterey and El Dorado, bright, fruity and savory, all knit together with a thread of tannin, for $36; a light and pleasing pétillant naturel made of Monterey griiner veltliner and Anderson Valley chardonnay for $40; and Skinny Dip, for $36, which requires a bit of explanation.
After she made the Isabel’s Cuvée, which went into her Gris Gris, Rogers Brandt took the pomace — the residue of pulp, skins, stems and seeds left from the winemaking process — and put it into a clay vat.
She then filled it with a rose of grenache noir from El Dorado and let them sit together for 12 days.
One of the LARGEST Italian Specialty RY ln a On De&D Market is just minutes from Hartford, Newington, Rocky Hill, Cromwell, Glastonbury and West Hartford.
Butcher Shop Fresh Ground Sirloin — 5 |b. lots Fresh Ground Chuck — 5 |b. lots D&D Market's Meatball Mix 5 Ib. lots PRIME Sirloin Steaks PRIME Petite Sirloin Steaks Boneless Leg of Lamb Bone-In Pork Chops 1"" & 1%"" cut House Made Lamb Sausage in Lamb Casing Bell & Evans Boneless & Skinless Chicken Breasts -10 lb. bag Our Seasoned Chicken on a Stick Cento Italian Style Breadcrumbs (15 oz.
Monday-Friday Saturday , Sunday 4 Hartford Courant | Section 4 | Thursday, April 21,2022 Make a truly great concha Popular Mexican sweet bread, with its seashell-shaped topping, is a delight when prepared right.
Anyone who has tasted a wellmade concha will go weak at the sight of a fresh one in a panaderia — or really anywhere food is sold throughout Mexico and Mexican American neighborhoods.
A pillar of Mexico’s culinary identity, the concha is an integral part of everyday meals and family celebrations, appearing in movies, paintings and books, and inspiring conchashaped household items.
They can be eaten for breakfast with hot chocolate, coffee or milk; snacked on as an anytime pick-me-up; or split in half to make sandwiches.
Yet there is a good chance that a concha bought at a bakery or store will have a stale bread base witha tasteless topping.
Demand for the beloved quick bite is so high that bakeries sell out anyway.
There is so much competition that bakers strive to offer affordable prices and make sacrifices in the process.
Butter is reduced or left out in favor of vegetable shortening; water is used instead of milk; and, sometimes, the eggs are skipped entirely.
The good news is you don’t have to test out a dozen panaderias to find a great one.
Consider fat content Be it butter or shortening, the less fat, the drier the bun.
But too much fat coats the gluten chains and can weaken them, impeding rise.
Traditionally, conchas were made with fresh lard, Quiroz said, and you can still find some prepared that way, rich and layered in flavor, in small towns in the Mexican countryside.
Butter, a less heavy fat than lard, doesn’t weigh down the rise, giving conchas a pillowy puff and delicate taste.
JOEL GOLDBERG/THE NEW YORK TIMES Knead, knead, then knead some more Concha dough requires more kneading than might seem rational.
Migoya recommends a stretchand-fold method before letting the dough rise, as it gently develops gluten and achieves the desired smooth surface.
You want a dough that is shiny and extremely soft; it should feel a bit like toy putty.
With a bit of patience to work the dough, it will be not only a vehicle for the topping, but also it will shine in its own right.
Focus on the topping The best part of a conchais, arguably, the topping.
In addition to lending flavor, the topping must maintain its signature seashell shape (concha means “seashell” in Spanish) throughout the baking process.
Those ridges encourage the topping to break off gradually as you take bites, rather than crumbling all at once.
While a generous amount of topping is welcome, a tender bun could collapse under its weight.
Whisk the flour, sugar, salt and yeast in the bowl of a stand mixer fitted with the dough hook.
Mix on the lowest speed to combine without the flour splattering out of the bowl, about 20 seconds.
Raise soeed to medium-high and mix until the dough slaps and pulls away from the sides of the bowl and starts to form a smooth, elastic ball around the hook, 10 to 15 minutes.
Stay close to your mixer because it will start jumping all over your counter.
Continue mixing until the dough is again pulling away from the sides of the bowl, loudly slapping it and gathering into avery soft, elastic, silky and shiny mass that hugs the dough hook, 8 to 12 minutes.
The moment you stop beating the dough, it will relax into the bowl again.
To activate the gluten further, stretch and fold the Pastry chef Irving Quiroz in Monterrey, Mexico, on March 16.
A transcendent concha features a tender base, a flavorful topping and a balanced ratio of the two.
Using one or both of your hands, reach down between the greased side of the bowl and the dough, and lift the dough up out of the bowl and fold the dough over itself.
Cover the bowl with plastic wrap, place it in the refrigerator for the first rise and let it chill anywhere from 4 hours to 24 hours.
Bring dough out of the refrigerator and, using your hands or abench scraper, cut it into 15 pieces, each about 76 grams, which is about a ¥3-cup scoop.
One by one, pat each piece of dough into a flat shape on the floured surface, then draw edges into the center, working your way around, pinching dough together into the center of what should now be a ball.
Turn the ball over, cup it with your hand and move it in circles, rolling it over the counter for a few seconds to make a neater round.
Repeat with remaining conchas and place 5 equally spaced balls on each of the 3 prepared baking sheets.
Make sure there is a bit of flour on the counter before pressing each piece of dough, as dough is very sticky.
Combine all the ingredients for the selected topping flavor in the bowl of a stand mixer fitted with the paddle attachment and mix on the lowest speed until the ingredients begin to combine, about 20 to 30 seconds.
Raise the speed to medium and mix to forma glossy and smooth mixture, about 2 minutes.
Fill asmall bowl halfway with warm water to wet your hands while you work to divide and shape the topping.
Portion topping with a soup spoon to create 15 portions that are about 30 grams each.
Wet your hands thoroughly and roll one portion of the topping into a ball.
Set the ball in one palm and, using the other hand, pat it out into a3 ¥2-inch round, as if you were patting a thick tortilla.
Place round disk over a concha and slide your fingers around the edges of the topping, pressing it lightly around the rim to gently adhere to the bun.
The topping should not go all the way down to the parchment paper, but be at least about % inch from it.
Repeat to top the remaining conchas, keeping your hands wet throughout.
TO make a shell pattern, dip aconcha mold into flour to coat and very gently press the mold on the topping from one side to the other in a rolling motion, doing so swiftly and with determination as you move from side to side.
The mold should make a shell-shaped mark on the concha topping, merely Quiroz makes conchas using special concha molds, which can be purchased online.
They make engraving the traditional seashell shape a breeze, but an ordinary dinner knife can also get the job done. indenting it without breaking through to the dough.
If you don’t have aconcha mold, you can make the shape with a dinner knife by dipping it in flour and marking each concha with curves, lines or squares, but avoiding piercing through to the dough.
Cover the conchas with clean kitchen towels and set ina warm, draft-free area of your kitchen until they puff considerably, anywhere from 1% to 2 hours.
At this point, the shaped toppings may have spread slightly, opening a bit more into the indented shapes.
Bake conchas until golden brown and even more puffed, about 20 to 22 minutes.
Conchas are best the day they are baked, but can be stored in an airtight container for up to 4 days.
Bread flour will yield buns with a more defined and slightly taller round shape, a more doughy and chewy texture, and a slightly less sweet taste.
Each of the three toppings yields enough to cover full recipe of 15 conchas, but if you would like to try multiple flavor profiles, simply divide each topping by two or three.
Due to the smaller amount, you’ll need to blend the ingredients using a hand mixer, or simply in a bowl with a spatula.
