Here are some pivotal moments in the years leading up to Moscow’s decision to invade the country on Feb., as well as a brief look at relations between Russia and Ukraine in the 20th century.14 — Protesters in Ukraine overthrow President Viktor Yanukovych in February.
Two secessionist regions, the Donetsk People’s Republic and the neighboring Luhansk People’s Republic, later break off from Ukraine.The war continues in the eastern Ukrainian region known as Donbas.
Roughly 13,000 Ukrainian soldiers and civilians eventually die in the conflict.
The front lines have barely shifted for years.14 and 2015 — Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany sign a series of cease-fire agreements known as the Minsk Accords.
Many view these accords as ambiguous.April 2019 — A former comedian, Volodymyr Zelensky, is elected by a large majority as president of Ukraine on a promise to restore Donbas to the country.21-2022 — President Vladimir V Putin of Russia seeks to prevent Ukraine’s drift toward the United States and its allies.
Mr Putin demands “security guarantees,” including an assurance by NATO that Ukraine will never join the group and that the alliance pulls back troops stationed in countries that joined after 1997.
Many Russians view the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, as the birthplace of their nation and cite the numerous cultural ties between the two countries.Here is a brief recap of their relations in the 20th century:1918-1922 — Ukraine declares independence in 1918 during a conflict fought by multiple countries and armies over several years.
Its independence and sovereignty receive international recognition that year at the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic is founded in 1921 and Ukraine is subsumed into the Soviet Union the following year.32 and 1933 — A famine caused by Stalin’s policy of collectivization kills millions of people, mainly ethnic Ukrainians in a country that is known as the bread basket of the Soviet Union.
The disaster is known as the Holodomor.39-1944 — The Soviet Union annexes Western Ukraine.
Throughout the period Ukraine suffers devastation.91 — The Soviet Union is terminated via a treaty.
Ukraine becomes independent and begins a transition to a market economy.
