US intelligence has told how the Kremlin is preparing for new sanctions.
Russia is ready for the introduction and gradual expansion of the UN mission in the Donbas.
Private intelligence in the United States named the names of officials and oligarchs.
IMF considers unacceptable the President's bill on anticorruption trial.
In the West, they spoke about the consequences of future United States sanctions against Putin's environment. protesters were arrested for actions under the ""Strike of Voters"" in Russia.
WADA told about the involvement of the Russian president in the doping system.
Servicemen of Ukraine, the USA, Great Britain, Canada, as well as more than 10 countries of NATO and partners began preparations for the ""Rapid Trident-2018"" exercises.
Ambassador Volker says United States makes preparations to supply Javelin systems to Ukraine.
As a result of the actions of Russian troops in Syria more than 5. thousand civilians were killed.
As the United States Treasury Department reports, the Government of the Russian Federation held a series of meetings to develop strategies to protect elites and oligarchs from new United States sanctions.
Thus, the Kremlin has dismissed large state-owned firms from the need to disclose their counterparties, so that less people are included in the list of United States sanctions.
In addition, Russian President Vladimir Putin called on the elite and the oligarchs to return their assets from abroad.
The Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank of the Russian Federation offered methods of anonymous money transfers.
The government also allowed the purchase of eurobonds worth € 3 billion to Russian business elites, offering them anonymity.
In recent months, many large Russian companies have involved international capital markets and issued bonds worth hundreds of millions of dollars, but many oligarchs , fearing state control and the propensity of the authorities to nationalize assets, do not want to keep their money in Russia"", says the material.
It is noted that Moscow called the list of prepared oligarchs an attempt to destabilize the country financially and politically in the year of elections.
At the same time, the Kremlin has already laid the foundation for sanctions against the United States in response, but is waiting to see how far Washington will go.
Russia is ready to ensure that the UN peacekeeping mission in the Donbas is located not only on the clash line in the Donbass, but also in its broader territories.
This was announced by the United States Special Representative for Ukraine Kurt Volker during a telephone conference with journalists on the results of the meeting with Putin's assistant Vladislav Surkov.
In his view, when a peacekeeping mission begins to work, it may eventually expand.
In the end, we will have a peacekeeping mission throughout the entire territory "", said Volker.
The previous meeting between Surkov and Volcker took place in mid-November 2017 in Belgrade.
Then Surkov said that Russia had agreed on three of the 29 paragraphs of the United States proposal to deploy peacekeepers in the Donbas.
Special Representative United States Volker: I do not believe that Russia has decided to withdraw troops from Donbas.
Russia has not taken any steps to end the armed conflict in the Donbas and stop the aggression in Ukraine.
This was reported by the United States Special Representative for Ukraine Kurt Volker during a telephone conference with journalists, speaking about Russia and, in particular, his meeting with Putin's assistant Vladislav Surkov.
At a meeting with Surkov, they discussed the return of Russia to the Joint Center for the Control and Coordination of Fire, the restoration of mobile communications in the Donbas, the increase of border crossing points, as well as the status of Russian military in Ukraine.
At the same time, Surkov in conversation with Volker stressed Russia's concern about problems with mobile communications in the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
There was a successful exchange before Christmas that was welcomed both by Russians and Ukrainians, ""Volker said.
In addition, he added that in the Donbass today there is very limited access to the Red Cross mission.
Earlier Interfax, referring to sources, reported that Volker and Surkov had not reached a common position on the law on the de-occupation of the Donbas.
The previous, third meeting on the settlement of the situation in the Donbas took place in mid-November last year in Belgrade.
Russian elites, against which the United States is expected to introduce new sanctions, can be divided into four categories.
It is noted that a great interest in the alleged contributors to the list of oligarchs is supported by the assumptions that his publication could mean for the administration of the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin and Russia as a whole.
So, the first category of elites that may be subject to sanctions are higher Kremlin officials who are directly involved with Putin's administration and mechanisms for implementing foreign policy.
According to intelligence officers, the fourth category the Russian oligarchs, who basically rose in the 90's, possess huge treasures and assets.
New United States sanctions against Russia will not be as powerful as to change Russia's policy in the Donbass and Crimea, but over time they can make the Russian side more compliant.
This was stated in an interview with ""Apostrophe"" by former Polish ambassador to Ukraine , and now the coordinator for Ukraine at the Institute for Eastern European Studies in Warsaw, Jacek Kluczkowski.
New sanctions will hardly be able to significantly affect the change of attitude towards Ukraine and the occupied territories, although they may in some way make the Russian side more inclined to partner conversation,"" the diplomat said.
Therefore, the main thing is not the difference between the approaches of the United States and the EU, but the settlement of the conflict, ""said Jacek Kluczkowski.
Most of the detainees were released from police stations without protocols.
Thus, in Moscow, 16 people were detained, including the organizer of the shares of Alexei Navvalny and member of his federal headquarters Nikolai Lyaskin, but subsequently released them.
On Lyskina they made a report on violation of Article 20. of the Code of Administrative Offenses , Navalny was released without a protocol under the obligation to appear.
Petersburg, 19 people were detained, all of them were also released. 4 people were arrested in Arkhangelsk, 4 people were in Astrakhan, 6 were in Veliky Novgorod, 23 were in Murmansk, 13 were in Petrozavodsk, 16 were in Tula, and 5 were in Saransk.
The largest number of detainees was in Ufa , Volgograd and Cheboksary . 31 people were detained in Kemer.
On the eve of January 28, ""Strike of Voters"" took place in dozens of Russian cities.
Earlier Navalny called on Russian citizens to boycott the presidential elections.
Moravetsky stressed that the previous interpretation of the law did not satisfy Poland.
This is a very important moment for us in our negotiations with the United States, and it's not just about our energy security, but also about the security of the entire region,"" added the head of the Polish the government.
As you know, the project ""North Stream 2"" involves the construction and operation of two strands of the gas pipeline with a total capacity of 55 billion cubic meters of gas per year from the coast of Russia through the Baltic Sea to Germany.
Opponents of the project including Poland, the Baltic States and Denmark argue that North Stream 2 will increase EU dependence on Gazprom, which already supplies about one third of the EU's gas volume.
Germany, the lead beneficiary of the project, supports the North Stream 2 for economic reasons, stating that it will add resources to the market and reduce prices.
It should be noted that the construction of the new North Stream 2 gas pipeline through Gazprom through the Baltic Sea will cause Ukraine significant losses, which may amount to 3% of gross domestic product, which is about $ 3 billion in 2017. -Recall, United States Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, while on the weekend in Warsaw, said that the North Stream 2 project undermines Europe's energy security.
Gazprom completed the construction of a part of the ""Turkish Stream"" in Russia.
State Department spokesman Heather Naurer said that the North Stream 2 project will increase Europe's vulnerability to supply shortages in Russia and cause economic damage to Ukraine.
Former head of the Moscow anti-doping laboratory, Grigori Rodchenkov, told about the involvement of Russian President Vladimir Putin in the state doping system.
I report in front of the Nagorny, Nagornyh before Mutk, and Mutko in front of Putin.
Putin can not deny that he knew about the doping system, ""Rodchenkov said.
Recall earlier Rodchenkov also told that the RF government asked him to substitute the Ukrainian champion.
The Kremlin is convinced that the preparation of the so-called Kremlin report, which is due to come to the United States Congress in the near future, is an ""obvious attempt"" to influence the presidential election in Russia.
The press secretary of the Russian President Dmitry Peskov answered the journalists' questions firmly, whether the ""Kremlin report"" is not an attempt to destabilize the situation before the presidential elections in Russia.
We really believe that this is a direct and obvious attempt to confine some actions to the elections so as to influence them,"" Peskov said.
The Kremlin intends to analyze the consequences of the preparation of the ""Kremlin report"" in order to protect the interests of Russian companies that may appear on this list, said Peskov.
Recall that as of February 1, 2018, the United States Department of the Treasury, with the support of intelligence, is preparing a report on ""individual sanctions"" against Russian oligarchs and officials ""financial services"" of the Russian authorities.
These include Russia's intervention in the 2016 United States presidential election; ""military aggression"" against Georgia and Ukraine, in particular the annexation of the Crimea; bombing civilians in Chechnya and Syria; the murder of Yuriy Shchekochikhin, Anna Politkovskaya, Alexander Litvinenko, Sergei Magnitsky, Boris Nemtsov and other opposition politicians, public activists, journalists, and lawyers.
He also expressed hope that cooperation with Russia on key global issues will continue, and sanctions imposed against the country will no longer be needed.
The document also reduces the maximum term of lending to Russian banks subject to sanctions, up to 14 days, and for oil and gas sector companies up to 30 days.
The United States president can impose sanctions on individuals who intend to invest more than $ 5 million per year or $ 1 million in construction of Russian export pipelines once.
The law obliges the United States president to agree in advance with the Congress any mitigation or abolition of sanctions.
The head of the White House will not be able to remove the restrictive measures by a personal decree, as it was before.
According to a new document, the United States President's ability to lift sanctions is limited, and previous restrictions are fixed at the law.
NET with reference to the press service of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
Prior to the initial planning conference involved representatives of the command of Army Forces of Ukraine and military training in E siyi United States Armed Forces Also, during the planning process, British and Canadian military personnel, as well as army officers from more than 10 NATO member countries and North Atlantic Alliance partners, are actively involved.
During the week, participants will work on developing and practicing common documents that regulate each stage of training future""said in a statement.
Recall that the Ukrainian-American military exercises ""Rapid Trident"" take place on the territory of the International Center for Peacekeeping and Security in Lviv region since 2006.
The purpose of their conduct is to prepare the military of different countries for joint actions within the multinational forces during the coalition operations.
In different years, from 1 to 3 thousand troops from different countries participated in the exercises.
Ukrainians and Ukraine supporters around the globe join the campaign to boycott FIFA World Cup 2018 in Russia.
As reported by Censor.NET citing Patriots of Ukraine Worldwide Movement via Ukrinform, the rally was held outside the Russian embassy in London.
FIFA's decision to hold the World Cup was bought by the corrupt regime with blood money,"" the rally participants said.
The activists also urged Putin to stop the war in Ukraine’s Donbas region and take his troops away from the Ukrainian soil.
Ukraine and United States authorities make joint efforts to deliver the Javelin anti-tank missile systems to the Ukrainian Armed Forces but it takes time to make necessary preparations.
The United States has started preparations for the transfer of the Javelin anti-tank missile systems to the Ukrainian Armed Forces, United States Special Envoy for Ukraine Kurt Volker said in an interview with Radio Liberty, Censor.NET reports citing Ukrinform.
It takes time to prepare everything the facilities where everything will be stored, the ways of transfer.
We are working together on how to transport them and involve them in the work of the Armed Forces, he said.
We only hope to fill some ""white spots"" in Ukraine's defensive capabilities so as to prevent the further escalation of the conflict, Volker said.
So this is precisely a defensive weapon, not for attack and not for use on the contact line.
I think that Ukraine largely shares this position, the United States top negotiator on Ukraine said.
On January 28, a human rights defender Dinara Idrisova was brutally beaten up in Russia's St.
During the opposition rally, a human rights activist decided to remove him from the altitude and for this he rose to the house at the intersection of the Tver and Odessa streets.
When he decided to leave the house, he was shot down by three men standing on the staircase.
Fortunately, I managed to react, and the blow came from the tangent, I did not lose my consciousness, they fell on me and began to loop out.
They took phones I had them two, with the help of one of them I was driving fast and began to demonstratively break them down with my legs, the same thing I did with the camera, which was fixed on the chest on a microscope, everything went on without words, then I began to methodically beat my head, mostly legs.
I tried to defend myself, has substituted a hand it has been broken"", has told Idrisov.
He has fracture of the left shin with fragments, hematoma of the temporal region, closed craniocerebral trauma, concussion of the brain.
Idrisov notes that he will try to find the guilty, but does not believe in the success of this venture.
Paul Manafort, chief political strategist to Ukraine's ex-President Viktor Yanukovych, had an inside man in every country's ministry.
As reported by Censor.NET citing The Atlantic, Manafort's work, the source of the status he cherished, had taken a devastating turn.
For nearly a decade, he had counted primarily on a single client, albeit an exceedingly lucrative one.
He’d been the chief political strategist to the man who became the president of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, with whom he’d developed a highly personal relationship.
Manafort would swim naked with his boss outside his banya, play tennis with him at his palace , and generally serve as an arbiter of power in a vast country.
Only a small handful of Americans—oil executives, Cold War spymasters—could claim to have ever amassed such influence in a foreign regime.
The power had helped fill Manafort’s bank accounts; according to his recent indictment, he had tens of millions of dollars stashed in havens like Cyprus and the Grenadines.
Manafort had profited from the sort of excesses that make a country ripe for revolution.
And in the early months of 2014, protesters gathered on the Maidan, Kyiv’s Independence Square, and swept his patron from power.
Manafort avoided any harm by keeping a careful distance from the enflamed city.
But in his Kyiv office, he’d left behind a safe filled with papers that he would not have wanted to fall into public view or the wrong hands.
Over the decades, Manafort had cut a trail of foreign money and influence into Washington, then built that trail into a superhighway.
When it comes to serving the interests of the world’s autocrats, he’s been a great innovator.
His indictment in October after investigation by Special Counsel Robert Mueller alleges money laundering, false statements, and other acts of personal corruption.
But Manafort’s role in Mueller’s broader narrative remains carefully guarded, and unknown to the public.
And his personal corruption is less significant, ultimately, than his lifetime role as a corrupter of the American system.
That he would be accused of helping a foreign power subvert American democracy is a fitting coda to his life’s story.
Sytnyk announced the start of identification of all persons indicated in the documents, adding the NABU would take measures to prevent their possible escape from the country.
He noted the involvants will be charged under the ""offering of undue profit"" article of the Criminal Code of Ukraine. 5783 civilians died in Syria as a result of Russian military actions from September 30, 2015 to December 31, 2017.
According to Tsensor.NET , referring to Radio Liberty, the ""Syrian Observatory on Human Rights"", based in the United Kingdom, reports.
Recall that the Russian military campaign in Syria began on September 30, 201.
The coalition repeatedly accused Moscow of supporting the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, whose Western countries are accused of massive human rights violations.
The occupation administration on the territory of the occupied part of the Donetsk region, due to the disconnection of mobile communication Vodafone in a few days turned into a site of mass denial and hatred.
According to Tsentzor.net , referring to Ostro , such an opinion was expressed by Russian propagandist Andriy Babitsky, who actively supported the separatists and settled in occupied Donetsk.
In a few days, due to the history of the shutdown of MTS, or Vodafon, they became the object of mass denial and hatred, and they are cursed by thousands of people, ""he wrote in social networks.
No one, of course, believes in the statement of the Ministry of Communications That the connection is not due to Ukraine.
The whole republic, all the elderly are convinced that Phoenix took advantage of the situation in order to establish monopoly on the market"", the Russian propagandist writes.
It's not all that is reasonable in the election year, and this is really a social collapse, a tragedy for hundreds of thousands of our elderly people. something"", he appeals to the occupation"" authorities ""of the occupied part of the Donetsk region.
The United States Special Representative for Ukraine, Kurt Volker, has handed over to Russia lists of those who are still hostage to militants in the Donbas.
He announced this during a telephone conference with journalists, telling about a meeting with Putin's assistant Vladislav Surkov, reports Tsensor.
In addition, he added that during the meeting with the Suriname Russian side recorded these names.
Last Friday, January 26, aide to the Russian president, Vladislav Surkov and K Wolker, met in Dubai.
However, according to Interfax source, familiar with the course of negotiations, V Surkov and K Walker did not reach a meeting in Dubai for a single position on the law on the reintegration of the Donbas.
Concrete decisions based on the results of the meeting are not accepted.
