It is contended that aggression in international affairs has different causes and consequences.
The paper examines the crisis posed in Ukraine following the flight of President Yanukovich and the institution of a pro-NATO and pro-European Union government.
Russia’s economic and military strengths and weaknesses are outlined against the background of the development of the Eurasian Economic Union.
It is contended that Russian policy under President Putin has been defensive and reactive.
Following the flight of President Yanukovich from Ukraine in February 2014, Russia has been widely condemned and regarded as a threat to political security in the West.
One might distinguish between two ways of analysing a threat posed by a state in its conduct of foreign affairs.
First, there are aggressive actions resulting from a state’s active policies.
These stem from the actions of state leaders who are motivated to attack other states for purposes of their own or their countries’ economic or political advantage.
Such policies may be driven by national or universalistic ideologies or the ambitions of leaders.
Second, there are actions that are reactive to the policies of other states.
These actions are driven by anxiety derived from a belief that other states are behaving, or likely to behave, maliciously.
States with such perceptions may react aggressively to defend their interests.
Though Cuba claimed that they were purely defensive missiles, the United States perceived this as a threat and retaliatory aggressive action to defend its interests followed.
The debate about “Russia as a threat” to the international order hinges on which of these two approaches one believes determines Russia’s behaviour.
The Russian leadership as well as some Western commentators adopt the second approach.
The case for a “threat” The case for an active “threat” has been put by academics, political leaders as well as journalists writing in the quality news journals.
Behind a smokescreen of lies he has renewed his drive to carve out a puppet para-state in eastern Ukraine.
The Putin regime is stoking mentality with its nationalist, anti-Western propaganda.
In his war against the West he has deployed heavy military equipment, energy-supply blackmail, cyber-attack, propaganda by sophisticated, well-funded broadcasters, covert operations and agents of influence in EU capitals—oh yes, and Russian bombers nosing up the English Channel with their transponders off, potentially endangering civilian flights.
In the academic sphere, Michael McFaul provides a more coherent analysis.
Putin blamed the United States for demonstrations in Ukraine, the flight of its President Yanukovich and the institution of a new pro-Western government.
By “tilt the balance of power in his favor” he annexed Crimea and supported mercenaries in eastern Ukraine.
In addition to maximising his own power, another theme driving Russian action in foreign affairs is Putin’s geo-political goals.
The objective here is to halt the spread of Soviet norms into the post-Soviet period, which contaminate the preferred Western views of liberal democracy and the market.
The manifestation of Russia’s geo-political aims is to be found in its geographical expansion.
Russia has “contributed to” or “directly supported” the emergence of four breakaway regions and left them as unrecognised states situated in frozen conflicts.
Jeffrey Mankoff concedes that these “frozen conflicts” are a legacy of the Soviet Union’s federalism, which left many concentrated ethnic minorities within the titular defined Soviet republics.
Moscow, in its annexation of Crimea, is seen to be making, a deliberate strike against the West, as well as Ukraine.
Putin apparently believes that he and Russia have more to gain from open confrontation with the United States and Europe—consolidating his political position at home and boosting Moscow’s international stature—than from cooperation.
The fault, as perceived by Markoff, is rooted in President Putin’s ambition.
Of Western print media, the British weekly, The Economist, can be relied on as a major source of Russian phobia.
Opposition to Western globalisation and his insistence on state sovereignty is only a means to enable Putin’s personal power.
Putin in this discourse is motivated by a thirst for power and imperial glory.
The ideology of Eurasianism and the formation of the Eurasian Union are indications of the desire to reinvent the Soviet Union.
The antidote prescribed by Putin’s critics is to escalate economic, political and military sanctions.
Through the journalistic rhetoric one might identify five major themes that would define the Russian Federation as an “active” threat to the international order.
Russia is a destabilising force in Europe, which is illustrated by its initiation of aggression in Ukraine.
Russia is expansionist and seeks to extend its power through the Eurasian Union.
Eurasianism has been devised as a counter ideology to the West and rejects its values.
Russia is hypocritical in its dealings with foreign countries when its interests are threatened.
President Putin’s concern for personal power drives his internal and foreign policy.
I address these assertions by considering four major issues underlying Russian policies.
In doing so, I consider the political context and history in which Russia’s action is embedded.
I will make a case that the Russian Federation has reacted in a defensive mode to Western policies, which are perceived as threatening, and Russia’s policies are to defend its own priorities.
First, in its actions, we should consider if Russia has promoted a military build-up and whether it has recently engaged in unprovoked external aggression.
Second, whether its ideology entails any threat to other states, nations or groups.
Third, whether its leaders are motivated to promote their own interests by de-stabilising the international order.
Russia’s transformation and decline Russia’s foreign policy has to be understood in the context of the dismantling of the Soviet bloc and its economic political and foreign networks.
President Putin took over an economically and militarily weak state, which was politically divided, and lacking an integrative ideology.
Russia’s move to open global markets, a private-property market economy and competitive electoral politics did not lead to the economic and political advances anticipated.
Privatisation involved the theft of public property on a vast scale accompanied by rampant corruption.
The anticipated “creative destruction” of state socialism resulted in demolition of the former Soviet Union’s manufacturing industry and research capacity, but not to the promised renewal and innovation.
Failures in electoral democracy led to widespread disenchantment among elites and people.
While the population had expected pluralistic capitalism to lead to significant improvement in well-being, the result was economic decline, gross inequality and moral decay.
Russia was widely regarded, domestically as well as abroad, as a failed state.
The Commonwealth of Independent State was an association of states having little economic or political cohesion.
The policy of the leadership of the Russian Federation is to reverse these tendencies.
This is the background for the widespread popular support in Russia for the assertive policy of President Putin.
The rise of NATO and European Union enlargement Russia in foreign affairs was faced by two major challenges.
Whereas Russia was in decline and its regional bloc was moribund, the former adversaries of the Soviet Union had been considerably strengthened.
Ironically perhaps, none of the reasons put forward for the expansion of NATO to the areas of the former USSR were framed in the context of a possible Russian move to seize former territories.
On the contrary, NATO expansion was presented in terms of maintaining the security of Europe—at that time NATO did not publicly consider Russia to be a “threat” and its expansion was justified in terms of the creation of a zone of peace.
The expansion of NATO, however, poses a serious threat to Russia’s security.
The enhanced security of the New Member States is at the cost of less security to Russia.
Putin objected to NATO enlargement and its plans for missile defence deployment in the post-Soviet states of Eastern Europe.
However, in 1999, the Visegrad countries, Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary joined; in 2004, followed Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia.
Economically, politically and military, “the West” had arrived at Russia’s borders.
NATO membership, which often precedes full membership of the European Union, is an indication of a future members’ political orientation.
At the urging of the United States, in April 2008, in Bucharest, NATO considered the addition of Ukraine and Georgia.
Following opposition from Germany and France who disagreed with offering NATO membership to countries experiencing internal strife, they were not admitted.
Ironically perhaps, the enlargement was not justified publicly in terms of the need for defence from an aggressive Russia, but to provide security in Europe.
The policy of the Russian Federation under President Putin and President Medvedev entailed a major change towards the West, which infringed some established Western interests.
In its Foreign Policy Concept , Russia’s objectives were to preserve the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.
It identified attempts to create an international relations structure based on domination by developed Western countries in the international community, under United States leadership and designed for unilateral solutions (including the use of military force) to key issues in world politics in circumvention of the fundamental rules of international law.
Economically, Russia has joined the WTO and has welcomed foreign direct investment.
The current political leadership offers a critique and an alternative, phrased in terms of a corporate state and economy predicated on national sovereignty.
Russia has sought cooperation with Western powers, particularly the United States.
Russia sought an alliance with the United States in its war “on terror”—no doubt with his own concerns about Chechnia in mind—and allowed United States planes to use Russian airspace to fly to Afghanistan.
Russia voted to support the UN Security council’s sanctions against Iran.
Russia also abstained from voting on the UN Security Council resolution authorising the use of force against the Qaddafi regime in Libya in 2011.
In the light of its recent history, Russia has been reactive and defensive—despite the incorporation of Crimea into the Russian Federation, which we discuss below.
However, for collaboration with the West to be acceptable, Putin emphasised the need to respect the interests of Russia.
Russia is only respected and has its interests considered when the country is strong and stands firmly on its own feet.
Russia has generally enjoyed the privilege of conducting an independent foreign policy and this is what it will continue to do.
In addition, I am convinced that global security can only be achieved through cooperation with Russia rather than by attempts to push it into the background, weaken its geopolitical position or compromise its defences.
The second major challenge facing the states of the former USSR was the enlargement of the European Union to include the post-Soviet countries of central Europe.
The European Union regarded enlargement as bringing not only economic wealth but also democratic European values.
After the Second World War, the European Economic Community was founded as a union of democratic states; its initial objective (bearing in mind the history of two world wars) was to preserve peace in Europe by containing possible aggression by enveloping nation states within a common economic unit.
Enlargement to the east, which was then under the Soviet sphere of influence was not anticipated.
Later, however, the European Union helped in the dismantling of the Soviet bloc and pursued a policy of cumulative addition to its membership.
The development of a supra national state, the European Union, has outgrown the original conception.
It is now effectively a federal state composed of 28 member states, including eleven post-communist states.
Membership requires the subordination of sovereignty of member states to a common economic, political and social policy framed in terms of neo-liberalism and competitive electoral polyarchy.
In keeping with the institutional arrangements of the European Union, new states have to conform to 31 chapters of the Acquis, which range over the whole area of economic and political life.
Foreign and defence policy must also be in keeping with EU norms and policy.
The enlargement of the European Union limits Russia’s economic markets by changing the pattern of trade and narrows Russia’s political and economic space.
Russian companies are losing their decades-long positions in local commercial markets and are being deprived of large commercial contracts.
The niches thus vacated are being filled by the economic operatives of the states that had a hand in the change of the ruling regime . . . encouraged to a certain extent by someone’s interest in a re-division of the commercial market rather than a concern for human rights.
Driving EU enlargement has been a quest for widening the market for EU commodities as well as a source of labour, which has been freed by the dismantling of the former industrial and research base of the New Member States.
It is the effects of EU policies of enlargement and the free movement of labour and capital that explain the rise in Europe of populist parties.
Though for the Western media, the hand of President Putin is again at work.
It requires a conspiratorial imagination to link the success of such fringe parties to the strategy of President Putin.
What is missing here is any discussion of the austerity programmes which have been introduced as a consequence of the banking crisis of 2007 and the serious decline in confidence of voters in the main parties in Europe that have adopted this policy.
Joining the European Union brings with it not only internal competitive electoral politics, but also a common foreign economic and political policy.
Policies are limited by treaties, regulations, laws and forms of ownership as well as the financial and fiscal requirements of the European Union.
The sovereignty of nation states has been undermined as political decision-making has passed to the federal union.
As a customs union, the European Union fixes common tariffs with outsiders.
The inclusion of the central European and Baltic post-socialist states in NATO was regarded as a threatening move by the Russian Federation.
The policy of colour revolutions involving regime change was also a threat to incumbent leaders.
The process of “coloured revolutions” was designed to topple incumbent authoritarian leaders and replace them with others disposed to EU membership.
As Carl Gershman, the president of the National Endowment for Democracy, a US government financed agency, put it, the association’s “biggest prize” was Ukraine after it had funded more than 60 projects there.
The United States not only invested heavily in funding opposition groups, but also coordinated efforts from their embassies to bring about regime change.
System change was promoted and supported financially by such organisations as the German Marshall Fund, the Project on Transitional Democracies, the Westminster Foundation and the International Center on Nonviolent Conflict.
The protagonists of coloured revolutions not only delegitimated the existing regimes— usually through accusations of electoral irregularities—but provided an alternative set of values—an ideological rationalisation of radical change.
This involves influencing elections and backing those parties approved by the West’s leaders.
What is ignored in much of the “diffusion of democracy” literature is the power of Western governments and international organisations to influence political outcomes in host states.
In the ideology of the Eurasian Union, there is no propensity to expand aggressively either militarily or economically.
Economically, the Eurasian Union seeks the advantages of economies of scale provided by a larger market, something that the European Union and North American Free Trade Area have done for several decades.
What underpins the Eurasian Union idea is the autonomy of a Eurasian civilisation.
Eurasianism does not claim universalism for its values but respect as a form of civilisation.
There is a deep suspicion of the universality of Western values manifested in Western demands for the institution of electoral democracy, a liberal economy and autonomous civil society.
However, there is a tension with the West in the ideological framework which opposes the Western ruling elites and their moral universalism, particularly the freedom of privately owned media, social “diversity” and electoral democracy.
Its religious Orthodoxy ideology does not legitimate a Christian crusade.
It is essentially cultural and geographical and is capable of coexistence with other civilisations such as Islam.
It has no concept of class conflict or any racial and national ideas of its own supremacy or any missionary zeal.
It can be expressed in different modes of production, such as capitalism and socialism.
Hence the idea that Eurasianism is an ideology precipitating a war with the West is unfounded.
The Russian leadership has continually advocated cooperation between the European Union and Russia and this has continued in the context of the Eurasian Union.
Many misinterpret the objectives of the Eurasian Economic Union which was formed between Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan in January 2015.
Some, like Hillary Clinton, see this union as a first step in the reconstitution of the Soviet Union.
This assertion has no foundation in the philosophy of Eurasianism or in the political actions of the leadership of the Union.
The Eurasian Economic Union is to be built on the laws of the market, and most important of all he originally saw the project as part of a Greater Europe.
Such a regional bloc would potentially be a serious competitor to NAFTA and might drive a wedge between the countries of the Atlantic Alliance.
The case of Ukraine After the dismantling of the USSR, of which Ukraine was a constituent republic, Ukraine found itself positioned between two blocs—the strongly entrenched European Union and the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Ukrainian governments have sought agreements with the European Union, which would not prejudice relationships with its major trading partner, Russia.
Things began to change following the Orange Revolution when Yushchenko came to power with a pro-EU policy.
The leaders of the proposed Eurasian Economic Union sought to maintain and enhance links with Ukraine, which would have precluded Ukraine from joining the European Union.
Tariffs with the European Union would have been dismantled to form a free market.
The EU’s proposed “free trade area,” however, would have important economic and political ramifications.
Like other EU states, there would be free movement of labour, goods, capital and services.
Acceptance of the economic conditions would be inconsistent with Ukraine’s existing free-trade agreement with Russia.
Moreover, even without becoming a member, agreements between the European Union and other states were increasingly embedded in conditions which sought to make their institutions and processes compatible with EU norms.
These conditions were defined in terms of Washington Consensus ideology—free markets, private property, the rule of law , multi-party politics and electoral competition.
While economic changes in Ukraine would not occur immediately, a free trade area would come into effect over a 10-year period.
Domestic regulations affecting production and service provision would also be brought in line with EU standards and Ukraine would have to incorporate the relevant content of the EU Acquis into its legislation.
Such agreements would certainly have repercussions on the relationship with the Eurasian Customs Union, which would nullify Ukraine’s favourable links with Russia, its major single trade partner.
Not only does it affect trade and commerce but also defence and foreign affairs, which would have to conform to policies of the European Union.
While the long-term prospects were portrayed by the European Union as favourable, in the short-term there would be considerable dislocation as adjustment to EU standards and free competition would certainly lead to the death of many Ukrainian firms.
EU strategy is to weaken gradually the sovereignty of states and to promote the power of the Union over member states.
These developments clearly compromised Russia’s interests and led to confrontation between the European Union and Russia over relations with Ukraine.
The upshot of negotiations between Yanukovich and the European Union was that the conditions it offered to Ukraine were considered by the Ukrainian side to be inadequate to meet the costs of restructuring and to compensate for the anticipated closure of uncompetitive Ukrainian firms.
While Yanukovich did not rule out signing the agreement at some future date, on 29 November 2013, he expressed a wish to achieve an agreement which would maintain Ukraine’s relationship with Russia.
Ukrainian business people concerned about future economic challenges as well as promised Russian financial support underlay Yanukovich’s decision to withdraw from the EU proposal.
This became the fuse for the Maidan demonstrations in favour of EU membership supported on the streets in person by some prominent United States and European statesmen.
When Yanukovich did not take the right decision, the European Union supported the opposition of the Maidan to make the decision.
The demonstrations turned to violence and the President’s and Parliamentary buildings were occupied by armed insurgents.
Deaths occurred following shooting in the streets, which is discussed below.
The context of armed uprising, of intimidation of pro-Yanukovich deputies in the Rada and the illegal seizure of power, leads one to define the change of political power as a coup d’état legitimated by mass demonstrations.
The “removal” of Yanukovich The Maidan uprising is widely projected in the media as a spontaneous peaceful demonstration in favour of the democratic European Union and its values, in contrast to an autocratic Russian-leaning Ukrainian President.
However, the dark side to the Maidan were nationalist and neo-fascist interests seeking to utilise the occasion to depose Yanukovich.
The culmination of their activity was the sniper fire, which led to deaths of at least 49 people, which were attributed to, but denied by, Yanukovich’s forces.
Not only the 2014 audiotape of the Estonian foreign minister who opined that this was the work of groups within the Maidan, but also the detailed research of Ivan Katchanovski shows quite convincingly that the deaths were the work of right wing agitators.
The various evidence analyzed . . . indicates that armed groups and parts of leadership of the far right organizations, such as the Right Sector and Svoboda, and oligarchic parties, such as Fatherland, were directly or indirectly involved in various capacities or likely knew about actual perpetrators of this massacre of the protesters and the police.
The evidence indicates that the far right and oligarchic parties played a key role in the violent overthrow of the corrupt and oligarchic but democratically elected government in Ukraine.
On the one side, it signed agreements with the European Union, on the other it was confronted by the secession of Crimea and civil war in the eastern territories.
Procedure also called for review by the Constitutional Court, the membership of which was illegally changed by the government.
On 24 February 2014, the Verkhovna Rada, the Parliament of Ukraine, adopted a resolution according to which twelve of the eighteen judges of the Constitutional Court were to be dismissed by the institutions which appointed them.
The Rada recommended that the Acting President and the Congress of Judges consider dismissing the other seven judges.
These measures are inconsistent with respect for the independence of the judiciary and the rule of law.
The order to start criminal proceedings against the judges, issued by the Verkhovna Rada on 24 February appears to have been a violation of Article 126.
Thus the rulings of the Constitutional Court on both the legality of the appointment of an “Acting President” as well as the constitutional position regarding the declaration of independence by Crimea Autonomous Republic must be considered as void.
Following the ousting of the president, the acting prime minister should have taken the president’s place, not Yulia Tymnoshenko, then the parliamentary speaker.
The drift to civil war Following the Maidan events and installation of a pro-EU government, the political provisions of the Ukraine-European Union Association Agreement treaty were signed on 21 March 2014, and the economic ones on 27 June 2014.
Meanwhile, the new regime had to face internal consequences of civil war and the secession of Crimea.
The Maidan activities were hailed positively by the United States and the European Union with personal participation in the demonstrations by Victoria Nuland (US assistant secretary of state for European and Eurasian affairs), and Republican Senator John McCain.
The action of the American and European political leaders appears to be part of a policy to bring Ukraine into the European alliance and thereby weaken Russia’s economic and strategic position.
It took guts for the Ukrainian people to stand up to a regime awash in unchecked cronyism, corruption and violence against its people.
Today, the United States stands with Ukraine in its efforts to forge its own path forward to a freer, peaceful, and unified future.
She condemned Russia’s “aggressive actions” and gave her “unwavering commitment” to NATO—should the alliance decide to intervene.
Later in a leaked telephone conversation, Nuland expressed support for regime change and Arseniy Yatsenyuk for prime minister.
The European Union’s “Fact sheet on EU-Ukraine Relations”7 recognises the popular support in Ukraine for the European Union, and endorses the emergence of the leadership of President Poroshenko.
Nowhere, however, does it mention the violent and illegal overthrow of the Yanukovich regime, the uncompromising position taken by the opposition to the Yanukovich government and the attempts in the Rada by members of the opposition to prevent voting taking place.
While Western commentators echo the Kiev government’s euphoria, a poll conducted between 4 and 18 March by the GfK Ukraine company found that less than half of the Ukrainian population supported the course taken by the government.
According to the poll, 31% said that they “wholeheartedly supported the change of power in Kiev in February 2014; 18% were strongly critical and 16% “unlikely” to support it.
Perhaps most important of all is the lack of any policy of negotiation or compromise with the rebel leaders in Lugansk and Donbass.
Confrontation and problem solving by military means became major courses of action of post-Yanukovich governments.
Western media explain the underlying causes of Ukraine’s break-up as a consequence of Putin’s policies and define Putin as the villain, whereas Russian media emphasise the role of Ukrainian nationalist interests stoked by the West.
From a subjectivist point of view, both sides in the dispute regard each other as aggressive threats.
The task of scholars in international relations is to distinguish the objective basis of such perceptions.
The demonisation of Russia, often derived from statements originating in the Kiev pro European Union lobbies and government, can be dismissed or disqualified in many respects.
Before the putsch replacing the Yanukovich government in Ukraine, there is no evidence that the Russian Federation sought to destabilise the country.
During this time, the Russian minority suffered language discrimination by the authorities.
In the period following the Orange Revolution of 2004, in which the administration of Yushchenko moved closer to the European Union, as well as the period in which the Yanukovich administration intended to sign an association agreement with the European Union, there were no actions from Russia destabilising Ukraine.
Indeed, there was no designation by the media of the “corrupt” president when he was predisposed to sign the association agreement.
The Ukrainian civil war was precipitated by the illegal removal of Yanukovich and his government following the putsch of February which installed a government hostile to Yanukovich’s supporters, many of whom were based in the east of the country.
The uprising was defined as an act of “terrorism” by the Kiev government and the attempt to crush it by armed force led to civil war—the use of Ukrainian army troops against Ukrainian citizens.
Terrorism, however, it was not, as terrorism is directed randomly against the civilian population to incite fear.
In this case, the separatists had a clear purpose—to dissociate from the Kiev government rather than to deploy aggression against Ukrainian people.
These “anti-Kiev” movements were no doubt supported by the Russian Federation but they were not part of a planned policy to “destabilise” Ukraine.
Ukraine was already destabilised by the actions of the insurgents who had illegally replaced the elected president with acting president, Alex Turchinov.
However, the Kiev leadership has consistently refused to consider negotiating with the rebel “terrorist” leaders and sought a military solution.
Consequently, the demands escalated, especially when the Ukrainian army containing volunteer battalions shelled civilian areas.
Though a clear majority were in support of the separatists, there is a sizable minority in favour of the status quo.
Russia’s intervention in the Crimea, as well as earlier in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, had majority support in the breakaway areas.
Even if one concedes that the vote could not be entirely representative, all accounts concur that there is a substantial majority support in Crimea for union with Russia.
The official line of newly elected President Poroshenko was to pursue war by all means.
Our children will go to school, to kindergartens – their children will sit in cellars.
Liberal international interventionalism and political realism There are two competing ways of interpreting the civil war that has arisen.
Liberal internationalists are driven by moral sentiments or a legal code, which they consider to be applicable to all peoples at all times.
Such moralising demonises enemies and puts halos over friendly powers in foreign affairs.
From this point of view, moral principles are superior to state interests.
However, other factors have to be taken into account and these may justify Russia’s actions, just as NATO justified its bombing in Kosovo.
Action is considered in the context of the political chaos in Ukraine following the illegal seizure of power as well as the sentiments of the Crimean population.
The history of Crimea’s membership to Ukraine is also relevant as Crimea had been part of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic until 1954 and its citizens never had any opportunity to vote for or against joining Ukraine as a constituent republic.
Following the putsch in Kiev, the local population declared independence and Russian troops were already there under Russia’s Treaty with Ukraine.
Russia’s intervention in Crimea from a realist perspective is interpreted as securing its geo-political interests in the face of possible future NATO enlargement.
Geo-political considerations and the defence of the interests of Russia were undoubtedly of great importance and led Russia to accept the outcome of the referendum.
McFaul’s argument that Putin was motivated to act in response to “internal political dynamics” is not very convincing.
If this was the case, he could have taken Crimea sooner and the logic of this position is that he would have incorporated Georgia into the Russian Federation following the earlier invasion there.
Though the discriminatory policies of these states were criticised by the leadership of the Russian Federation, there were no retaliatory threats to any of them.
Had the Russian Federation sought to incorporate these territories, there would surely have been some indication of this policy in official pronouncements.
President Putin adopted a realist political policy to preserve state interests.
Realists look first to the effects of policy to secure political objectives.
One could make an argument that Russia was restrained in its policy in the face of attacks on the Russian speaking population in Ukraine.
A trade union building in Odessa was set on fire and its occupants burned alive.
The assault on the trade union offices in Odessa with the subsequent burning and death of some 39 people was a blood bath.
Unlike the anticipated “bloodbath” in Benghazi, which led to “preventative intervention” by the Western powers in Libya, this did not happen in Ukraine.
Putin’s political course Putin has pursued a realist political position within the framework set by the dominant Western powers.
However, he recognises that these principles are derived from and enforced by the dominant powers of the West led by the United States.
In this context, he reserves the right to defend the sovereignty of the Russian Federation when it is undermined.
He accepts the tenets of WTO in free trade and those of the European Union (freedom of mobility of labour, services and capital), which concurrently undermine the role of the state as a collective actor.
Western dominant states secure their own interests by deploying values in declarations of human rights, electoral procedures and the rule of international law to justify liberal internationalism.
They also are instrumental in forming international institutions such as the World Bank and the IMF, of which they are a part, to enforce the rules.
Of course, the dominant Western states which make the laws are less likely to break them and hence can more often take the high moral ground as well as call on other states to accept their rules of the game.
It is possible to incorporate “Putin’s Russia” in a system of international rules, but not if the rules are applied in the interests of the hegemonic United States and European Union.
Putin’s policy is to shift to a multipolar world with respect for national sovereignty.
The wider Russian political and economic elites are also committed to it.
The Russian leadership supports international law, but will break it if political sovereignty is threatened.
Russia would not be unique in breaching the conventions of international law.
In practice, all the major players in international politics break laws if they believe that their interests are threatened.
The question which should be addressed is not whether states act hypocritically but whether their hypocritical actions can be justified or not.
A pacifist’s sentiments might legitimately be broken if he or she is confronted by an unprovoked physical life-threatening attack.
One might support international law and concurrently also claim that, in certain cases, moral values are higher than international laws.
The argument was that the protection of the Albanian minority was a higher value than the law as interpreted by the United Nations.
The problem with many of these cases is whether the values are higher or not and whether the real goals of action are hidden by the appeal to moral values.
NATO’s enlargement to the east was legitimated in the first instance as a means to secure an area of peace in Europe, not as a necessary defence mechanism against an aggressive Russia.
Anders Rasmussen, NATO’s previous secretary-general, said in January 2015 that there was a “high probability” that Mr Putin would test NATO’s Article 5, which regards an attack on any member as an attack on all.
As Ukraine is not a member of NATO, an attack would not have triggered a NATO response.
The “threat” to NATO from Russia is regarded to apply to the Baltic States, where it is assumed that destabilisation would be achieved through the Russian minority in those countries.
NATO’s response, announced in February 2015, was the formation of a “rapid reaction force” formed by the UK, France, Spain, Italy and Poland.
Such a force of some 5000 troops would be ready for deployment in areas where NATO countries were threatened or seized.
The geo-political goals of strengthening the hegemony of NATO underpin this policy.
Russia’s defence expenditure indeed has increased in recent years, but the increase was from a low base.
Given the size and population of the country, comparatively its defence expenditure per capita is not excessively large.
In 2014, according to statistics provided in The Military Balance , the defence budget for Russia was just over 10% more than that of the United Kingdom.
Of course, Russia is a nuclear power and certainly more than a match in conventional forces for its immediate neighbours—but not for NATO countries.
It is pure speculation to suggest that Putin is planning to test NATO’s resolve.
Despite the denial of citizenship rights to a significant part of Russian speaking people born in Latvia and Estonia, since the Baltic states gained independence, Russia has shown no intention or willingness to support the Russian minorities by the use of force.
Despite Western insistence on Russian military involvement, there is no firm evidence of the involvement of the Russian army (though there certainly are volunteers) in east Ukraine.
On 29 January 2015, the head of the General Staff of the Ukrainian Army, General Viktor Muzhenko, stated that “only individual Russian military personnel and citizens of the Russian Federation” are participating in military activities.
Economic power The economy underpinning Russia’s defence effort is relatively weak and has a lop-sided development.
Russia’s gross domestic product in 2016 was 1132 billion United States dollars putting it the seventeenth position in world ranking; the United States, in first place, had a GDP of 18,558 billion dollars with China following at 11,380 billion.
Foreign affiliates in the post-socialist countries are principally investments by companies from the advanced capitalist countries.
A characteristic of the semi-periphery is the presence of companies originating in the core.
With some notable exceptions, the development of large indigenously owned companies in the European post-socialist societies lacked domestic and foreign political and financial support.
Few post-socialist companies are comparable to the very large Western transnational firms.
An element of caution is necessary as wholly state-owned corporations and others with no publicly available accounts are excluded.
The CIS countries possess considerable assets in the material extraction sector; their manufacturing and particularly high tech manufacturing are in decline.
Russia is the only serious player of any of the European post-socialist societies in the world economy, but it only had 28 companies in 2012.
The sector breakdown shows that for Russia the largest group was composed of oil and gas companies, followed by those in raw materials ; there was a tail of banks, telecom companies, and utility, consumer durables and chemical firms.
One might confidently conclude that Russia has neither the military nor economic power to be a significant political threat to the hegemonic world powers.
Conclusion Russia under President Putin has challenged the universalistic moralising of the West and condemned its policy of democracy promotion.
Russia has intervened to promote its own interests in Georgia and Ukraine.
It is contended in this paper that Russian policy has been reactive rather than aggressive.
The evolving ideology of Eurasianism is considered to lack any theoretical base to generate political conflict.
The formation of the Eurasian Economic Union is a means to strengthen Russia as a regional power.
As a potential “threat,” Russia is shown to have insufficient economic and military power to pose a serious danger to the Western powers.
While President Putin has shifted Russian foreign policy to a more active and assertive role, the political objective is to seek respect and acknowledgment as a regional power.
The way to reduce international tension is for the dominant bloc of the United States and European Union to acknowledge greater levels of plurality and to accept the divergent interests of states and regional blocs.
To do so, they would have to revert to a more realist, and less liberal interventionalist, political position.
Such a policy would be facilitated by a multi-polar Europe with different areas of autonomy.
Such a multi-stage and multi-pace European Union would be more conducive to internal cohesion and to the maintenance of good relations with those excluded.
The leadership of the BRICS countries respects the existing world order including the hegemony of the United States.
Economically and politically, a Eurasian or a BRICS bloc can be contained within the world system led by the United States.
They form a “counterpoint” rather than an opposing bloc, coexisting rather than competing with the dominant Western countries.
Currently, Eurasianism is a contradictory mixture; its leaders advocate collective solidarity and concurrently subscribe to the virtues of the free market.
The Russian Federation is on the path to a national form of capitalism, which could be absorbed into the world system just as social-democratic capitalism is an alternative to AngloAmerican capitalism.
The dominant Western powers have to make concessions to maintain peace.
He has published in a wide range of journals including Sociology, Political Studies, Europe-Asia Studies and in Russia, Mir Rossii, Alternativy and Polis.
He has written extensively on development, particularly in state socialist societies.
His recent writing has been on Eurasia, employment and unemployment and alternatives to capitalism.
