The Ukraine crisis captures the essence of gray zone conflicts in which parties and strategies are not easily identified and mediation efforts prove difficult, given the complexity and number of competing stakeholders.
We see this most clearly at crisis onset with the spread of protests and demonstrations from Kyiv to L’viv and Odesa, and from there to Crimea, eventually culminating in outright rebellion in Donbas.
In the case of Crimea, we observe first a declaration of independence, and then its integration into Russia, thus moving from separation to irredentist conflict.
Though Putin has declared his intent of protecting the Russian-speaking peoples of the region, he has also stated no interest in reclaiming Eastern Ukraine.
Not surprisingly it is the latter conflict in Eastern Ukraine which exhibits ongoing gray zone techniques since Russia’s ultimate goal is undeclared.
The Ukraine case also fulfills the requirements for a foreign policy crisis for Ukraine, a situation with three individually and collectively sufficient conditions, deriving from changes in a state’s internal or external environment.
All three perceptions – a threat to basic values, an awareness of a finite time for response to the value threat, and a high probability of involvement in military hostilities – are held by the highest-level decision-makers of the actor concerned.
Thus, a key reason mediation has proved ineffective in gray zone crises like this is that actors on both sides anticipate being able to use mediation to control the actions of their opponents within reasonable limits and thus engage in hostile interactions with bearable costs.
The conflict in Eastern Ukraine is more enduring and the mediation process more complex for the simple fact that the two main geopolitical players in this conflict are Russia and the US, who are engaged in war through proxy.
There is an estimated total of 2000 Canadian, American, and British advisors deployed in Ukraine proper.
Furthermore, there is an increasingly active organized criminal network controlling trafficking and smuggling along the line of separation.
Regularized paramilitary forces, such as the notorious right-wing Azov Battalion, fight alongside the Ukrainian army.
Having chosen to take the diplomatic lead in challenging Moscow, the United States has focused most of its efforts towards threatening Russia, or punishing it, specifically targeting its leader, Vladimir Putin.
Concurrently, the United States has implemented a strict sanctions regime against Russia hoping to minimize Russia’s assistance to the separatists.
Similarly, Russia is taking action with an eye towards its foreign policy crisis with the US.6 To illustrate these points our chapter unfolds in four sections.
First, we examine the gray zone literature and its relevance to those factors that hinder the success of mediation in the mitigation of violence and resolution of conflict.
In the second section, we identify historical characteristics and sources of the recent conflict as well as the key actors and the issues which have shaped and influenced the course of events in the context of gray zone conflict in Ukraine.
Third, we look at mediation efforts in light of the relevant literature on mediation strategies.
We consider both state-based and multilateral (United Nations, Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, and the European Union) mediation efforts.
We conclude by highlighting implications for both theory and policy and identify three scenarios for managing and resolving the conflict. involvement); trigger foreign policy crises for the state’s allies, which leads to an international crisis; invite external involvement based on transnational ethnic affinities of one or more state interlocutors that support the separatist group, which in turn triggers an international crisis; or invite external involvement by one or more states based on ethnic affinities that support the state-center, which triggers an international crisis.
This absence of a formalized alliance structure and security guarantees provides a permissive environment for gray zone conflict to take root.
In gray zone conflict, state actors use a combination of strategic and operational-level techniques, making this form of warfare exceptionally resistant to resolution.
Onset and termination are ambiguous because many of the techniques utilized in gray zone conflicts are largely contingent upon a highly globalized and interconnected international economic and political world order and the substantial permeability of international borders.
There are several reasons why gray zone conflict is difficult to resolve.
First, conventional conflicts are generally characterized by overtness at the tactical level, with hybrid techniques as support.
In gray zone conflict, states rely primarily on covert operations which never pass the threshold of war.
Second, there is an overarching ambiguity regarding long-term victory by participants and stakeholders.
Finally, there is a desire by one or more parties to gradually, but fundamentally, revise the regional or global system of alliances and norms of international conduct to a degree not even seen during the Cold War era.
A goal of this magnitude adds complexity by drawing in many parties and stakeholders into the conflict, the individual interests of which must be considered during resolution attempts.
Rather, hybrid warfare techniques are utilized within the broader gray zone conflict category.
These tools and tactics, however, are utilized gradually in the achievement of a victory point that is entirely ambiguous to the opponent – an element unique to gray zone conflicts.
Political warfare by states can be defined as the dissemination of misleading information in the form of propaganda and a strong appeal to diaspora and ethnic ties across international borders to erode the societal unity and peace within an opponent’s domestic political environment.
Adversaries may invest in media campaigns through television, online social media, non-governmental organizations, and activist groups to discredit the political narratives of the opponent.
However, it is impossible to quantify the success or failure of these tools as no deaths or infrastructural damage directly result from their utilization.
Information warfare, however, is only one segment of the “soft power” arsenal available to states in gray zone conflicts.
Even though its effectiveness remains uncertain, economic pressure is frequently utilized by states against their opponents in gray zone conflicts.
The inducement of economic pressure, through methods such as sanctions, is intended to erode the opponents’ economies, especially in situations of asymmetric economic interdependence, to facilitate a change in policy direction.
It is a method of leverage which cannot be categorized as an overt declaration of war, but also escapes the absolute state of peace.
Often, however, states may utilize tools more proximate to other elements of “hard power” which nonetheless maintain the conflict in a state short of war.
For example, cyber warfare has become especially elaborate as software and hardware has become increasingly sophisticated.
Cyber-attacks remain below the threshold of overt warfare because they can rarely inflict immediate damage or cause casualties.
Moreover, most cyber operations can only be probabilistically attributed to specific state actors and sponsors do not acknowledge their involvement.
Within gray zone conflicts, however, states themselves might not utilize all the aforementioned techniques, leaving the execution of the tactics and operations to sub-state actors and proxies.
States may provide direct material support to organized crime, militant elements, separatist factions, and local elites within the territories of the opponent to fight on behalf of one or more of the conflicting parties.
This is important as states backing these actors desire to insulate themselves from responsibility and potential political backlash domestically and internationally.
This method not only increases the overall number of actors and stakeholders in the conflict but creates problems with attribution of actions to specific entities when attempting to reach conflict resolution.
All of the aforementioned tools utilized by states, and sub-state actors, will not achieve any rapid results but a prolongation of the conflict.
As the global financial, alliance, and military order is highly rigid, states understand that structural revisions may not be expedient.
From NATO’s side, in the early stages of the conflict, representatives claimed that Russia wants to invade the entirety of Ukraine.
Leaders from Russia claimed they wanted to counter NATO’s expansion closer to Russia’s borders.
Concurrently, “hardliners” from the US, such as John McCain, claimed that Russia would invade the Baltics and continue into central Europe.
Considering that commitments to gray zone conflicts inherently mean that a country would be signing on to a costly prolonged conflict, the incentives to engage in such a form of confrontation must be clear.
Based on the experience of the US, conventional military operations have become increasingly expensive to the point of being cost-prohibitive.
Furthermore, conventional tools of warfare have become increasingly sophisticated and deadly over the past thirty years, making their utilization less likely due to the potential human costs.
Also, it is unlikely that nuclear-armed parties would be willing to engage in a direct military confrontation because the potential destruction experienced by any of the parties would be unacceptable.
When considering incentives for engagement in gray zone conflict, however, it is also important to note regime type.
Economic State-level economic Erosion of the opponent’s Sanctions regimes pressure sanctions and blackmail; key economic sectors. between Russia and significant in cases of West; breakdown of asymmetric economic Russian–Ukrainian interdependence. energy sector ties.
Material Material and political States’ desire to insulate Russia’s material support to support for rebels and local themselves from support for the rebels sub-state elites through supplies of responsibility domestically of Luhansk and entities war materiel. and internationally; Donetsk; Ukrainian insulation from war support for volunteer casualties. battalions.
Gradualism States utilize hybrid warfare Making the final point of Use of cyber space by techniques in a gradual victory in the conflict by Russia to gradually manner with only shortall parties ambiguous for erode the integrity of term tactical objectives the opponent; revision of military and civilian being relatively overt. the order of alliances and infrastructure in international norms.
Ukraine; “special” bilateral relations between Russia and individual EU states and policymakers (i.e.
Thus for Russia’s government, which possesses fewer internal checks and balances, it is less costly to support criminal organizations, separatists, and local elites than for the EU and the United States to back similar sub-state actors as a counterweight.
BACKGROUND, ISSUES, AND GRAY ZONE EVIDENCE Moving now to evidence of gray zone conflict in the Ukraine crisis, we focus on the rapidity of events coupled with a complexity of actors and the rise of new gray zone techniques to illustrate core gray zone elements during the crisis.
In November 2013, Ukraine, led by the Yanukovych administration, was poised to sign the Ukraine–European Union Association Agreement.
Russia formally requested a delay in signing in order to better assess the impact of the agreement on Russian–Ukrainian–EU relations.
President Yanukovych responded favorably to Russia’s requests in late November 2013, thus stalling the association agreement and effectively diminishing the country’s commitment to the deal.
On November 29, 2013, the largest organized demonstration since the Orange Revolution of 2004 began in central Kyiv, where protestors rallied against the government’s decision.
A foreign policy crisis for Ukraine began on February 22, 2014, when Yanukovych fled to Russia following violent clashes between protesters and government forces.
The overthrow of Yanukovych’s government created substantial uncertainty over the future of Ukraine’s integrity.
The leaders of a number of regions including Donbas, L’viv, Odesa, and Crimea all expressed concerns about their willingness to remain part of Ukraine.
Popular protests and the occupation and seizure of municipal buildings and regional state administrations became major protest techniques, used by both pro-Euromaidan protestors and those who opposed them.
Starting in Western Ukraine, mass activism diffused across the country moving quickly into Eastern Ukraine.
By February 26, protestors controlled the RSA in Kharkiv, Poltava, and Dnipropetrovsk.
Following Yanukovych’s removal from power, the mayors of some of the largest cities resigned.
Both central and local powers simultaneously struggled to restore public safety.
In Crimea, the local leaders of the autonomous republic were caught between opposing interests.
From one side, the Speaker of the regional parliament, Sergey Konstantinov, remained a strong supporter of President Yanukovych.
As an expression of political support, on February 22 Konstantinov initiated a letter of parliamentary loyalty to Yanukovych.
From the other side there were ongoing negotiations between representatives of Crimea’s pro-Russian parties and Crimea’s intelligentsia.
With the situation uncertain, Konstantinov established an alliance with little known pro-Russian Crimean MP Sergey Aksyonov, the leader of a micro-faction in the Crimean parliament, who soon presented himself as the new leader of Crimea.
Massive pro-Russian rallies in Simferopol and Sevastopol soon followed, accompanied by patrols by Cossacks, local militia, and unidentified soldiers.
Street clashes between pro-Russian protestors and pro-Ukrainian activists and Crimean Tatar Mejlis left three people dead.
Soon after, armed militia began surrounding and seizing strategic buildings.
For Russia, the security and integrity of its large Black Sea Fleet in the Crimean Peninsula was paramount.
On February 27, Crimea’s parliament was seized by unidentified soldiers.
Nevertheless, parliament remained functional and by the end of that day issued a statement declaring that a new premier, Minister Sergey Aksyonov, would be appointed.
At that same time, in Kyiv, an emergency meeting of the Council for National Safety and Defense was held.
Minutes from that meeting show that only acting president Oleksandr Turchinov voted to impose martial law on Crimea, with the remainder abstaining or preferring diplomatic negotiations with Russia.
We now know that Ukraine’s leaders were taken by surprise at the speed of events.
The government in Kyiv seemed unable or unwilling to engage in negotiations with Russia, even as a way of thwarting the latter in the pursuit of its strategic goals.
Few, if any, of the politicians in Kyiv or the West were prepared to entertain alternative scenarios for resolving the crisis, refusing even to contemplate the notion of increased autonomy for Crimea, never mind the possibility of its secession.
When proposals for greater autonomy finally made it onto the table, it was too late.
On March 16, 2014, about 96 percent of voters supported the idea of joining the Russian Federation.
Three days later the lower chamber of Russia’s State Duma voted in support of the results of the Crimean referendum.
In parallel to events in Crimea, the East, South, and Center regions of Ukraine witnessed amplified pro-Russian protests and massive rallies as the main stage of the conflict shifted to Eastern Ukraine.
Russia maintained the narrative that the Russian-speaking people living in Eastern Ukraine were de facto oppressed by the Kyiv government, supporting activists initially at least through diplomatic pronouncements followed by humanitarian assistance.
By adopting this position, Russia effectively promoted the local uprisings.
Less than two months after crisis onset, Crimean separatists including Russian Cossack brigades mobilized in the Donbas region starting in April 2014.
Municipal and regional authorities with strong pro-Russian positions declared their own status referendum for early May.
Anticipating that separatist sentiment would grow in advance of the referendum, Ukraine’s acting president Oleksandr Turchinov announced the beginning of an anti-terrorist operation in Donbas to restore order.
Given growing civilian protest movements in the Eastern regions, coupled with the extremely low legitimacy of the interim central government and an army in decay after years of neglect and stagnation, Kyiv’s military response was ineffective and inconsequential.
Between April and June 2014, municipalities, businesses, and state factories and warehouses holding ammunition and military equipment fell under the control of pro-separatist factions.
The organization had been advocating for moderate levels of self-determination for regional Tatars as well as respect for indigenous special status within Ukraine.
Once the annexation of Crimea took place, the organization was outlawed by the Russian authorities thus undermining the status as well as role of Tatars in regional politics.
The first question regarding membership in the Russian Federation was important.
The Russian Federation is recognized in international law as the successor state of the Soviet Union.
The question asked Crimeans to decide if they should return to the status quo ante before the break-up of the Soviet Union.
In January 1991, through a referendum, Crimea regained its status as an Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic, which gave extended rights to the peninsula.
With separatist control over the border, the situation changed dramatically, starting with mass shelling from the Russian side.
By September 19, separatists controlled the entire stretch of territory along the Russian border in Eastern Ukraine to the coast of the Azov Sea.
The bloody battle of Illovaysk, in August 2014, pushed the Ukrainian army back even further, giving the separatists almost complete control over the region.
Over the fall of 2014, and into the winter of 2015, the separatists further improved their positions and re-captured a few major cities in the region previously under Ukrainian control.
In Debaltseve, Ukrainian army and volunteer battalions surrounded by separatists were yet again forced into retreat.
Fearful of a separatist offensive into Central Ukraine, Kyiv sought and obtained immediate peace talks.
On February 12, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe facilitated a meeting of the leaders of Russia, Ukraine, Germany, France, DNR, and LNR where the parties agreed to a ceasefire that would commence on February 15, 2015.
Under the agreement (known as Minsk II), the OSCE would be responsible for the facilitation of the withdrawal of heavy military equipment and fighters on all sides and subsequent continuous monitoring of the situation.
By this time, the separatist leadership had become firmly established in Eastern Ukraine, though other actors were instrumental in influencing the uncertainty of the situation.
But pro-separatist rallies threatened Akhmetov’s business empire in the Donbas.
As a result, Akhmetov adopted a relatively neutral position calling for peaceful resolution through negotiation.
This contrasted the position taken by another oligarch, Ihor Kolomoyskyi, whose PrivatBank conducted business in Central Ukraine while relying on its strong ties with European financial institutions.
In terms of social media and non-traditional techniques of influence, we see that even prior to the conflict, Russian-language television solidified existing social networks 12 Leadership in Donbas region went through a few stages of sporadic leadership in the first months.
Those political leaders who led the uprising in the early stages were eventually moved aside and replaced by military commanders.
In November 2017, Plotnitsky resigned and was replaced by Leonid Pasechnik.
This propaganda war ultimately facilitated the fracturing of the Ukrainian population along ethno-linguistic lines, with a big portion of the Russianspeaking population of Eastern Ukraine becoming markedly sympathetic to Russia’s point of view, while the ethnic Ukrainian population in the rest of the country largely accepted the narrative presented by the opposition to Yanukovych.
These points illustrate that the loyalty of many in Eastern Ukraine remained on the side of Russia.
Information warfare tools, however, are not the only element of “soft power” states utilize in gray zone conflicts.
Economic pressure is a substantial element of gray zone conflicts as it erodes opponents’ economy in hope of changing their policy direction.
Even though NATO utilized economic tools against Russia, such as sanctions, pressure by Russia against Ukraine has been more finely tuned.
Russia utilized its energy sector to choke the Ukrainian economy during the ongoing conflict in Eastern Ukraine.
Prior to the events in 2014, Russia and Ukraine engaged in substantial cooperation in the energy sector.
Ukraine had been purchasing Russian natural gas at discounted prices; pipelines between Russia and the EU had been constructed through Ukraine, which gained revenues from transit fees.
Most importantly, however, Russia had been the single largest supplier of Ukrainian oil and gas for domestic consumption.
In 2015, Russia ceased the export of its gas to Ukraine claiming it would be demanding upfront payments for natural gas.
Even though this scenario between Russia and Ukraine appears as an energy dispute, the timing and magnitude of this energy-related crisis seems convenient for Russia.
Russia held Ukrainian energy debt for decades without entering substantial disputes over it.
The successful exploitation of economic and political pressure points against the opponent, however, is difficult to achieve without the incorporation of cyber space.
In December 2015, Russia was accused of attacking Ukraine’s power grid through cyber space.
This event, even though attributed to Russia by the Kyiv government and some NATO officials, can only be probabilistically attributed to Russia.
Cyber space, 14 In Eastern Ukraine social networks are primarily based on ties with Russia and/or Russian-language events, religious practices, and television programs.
According to that survey, 67 percent of Ukrainians believed that trust is “not necessary” for Ukrainian politics.
As another indicator of low national cohesion, the survey results showed that most citizens did not even consider themselves close to their neighbors within their own country, but they did feel closeness to people in neighboring states.
In Western Ukraine, people felt closer to Hungary and Poland, but not neighboring regions within Ukraine.
The same tendency existed in the East, where people felt closer to Russia and Belarus.
Another important and less ambiguous element of a gray zone conflict is the direct support for sub-state criminal and militant elements that fight on behalf of conflicting parties.
For example, in August 2014, a T-72 main battle tank with particular specifications was identified in the possession of the separatists in Eastern Ukraine.
Despite the indirect evidence, it remains unclear how much control Russia has over actions taken by the LNR and DNR separatists.
There is some evidence to suggest sustainable strong influence by Russia.
MEDIATION STRATEGIES We now turn to an evaluation of mediation strategies in the two regions.
However, in the international domain, a combination of techniques involving coercive manipulation and non-coercive incentives are applied.
Bercovitch and Houston have noted a mediator’s choice of strategy is most strongly influenced by the conditions of the mediation environment and the identities of the parties in conflict.
Their research based on ICB data finds that the use of mixed strategies involving some elements of manipulation are more likely to generate formal outcomes.
In comparing the two cases of Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, we see evidence of a scaling up of mediation efforts as the conflict shifted from the first arena to the second and as the conflict became more intense, complex, and bloody.
Whereas mediators in the former case remained relatively aloof and facilitative, in the latter case we see clear evidence of mixed and far more manipulative strategies.
At the same time, identity-based differences acted as a clear driver in both cases; identity has influenced the intensity and endurance of the Ukraine crisis.
Gleditsch and Beardsley as well as Carment, James, and Taydas show that the presence of transnational ethnic actors, such as diasporas, alter levels of cooperation among domestic adversaries, making resolution more difficult.
On March 14, just a few days before the referendum, United States Secretary of State John Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov spent six hours discussing the situation around Crimea with no results.
Kerry argued that the whole of Ukraine should have been given the opportunity to vote on the issues involved.
Kerry’s response was inadequate, given the lack of mechanisms for enforcing corresponding solutions on all the parties concerned.
For example, Petro Poroshenko, a Ukrainian MP at that time, visited Crimea on February 28, 2014 but was escorted out of Crimea the same day.
A delegation from the OSCE, including envoy Tim Guldimann and OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities Astrid Thors, visited Crimea the following day.
By the time of their arrival, Simferopol airport was already controlled by pro-Russian activists and unidentified military personnel, and no mediation took place.
German chancellor Angela Merkel was actively involved in negotiations with Russia at the end of February and the beginning of March, but all her efforts had very little effect on Russian president Vladimir Putin.
Kyiv declared the 2014 referendum illegal on the grounds that the Ukrainian constitution made no provision for it.
The Russian framing of the conflict consisted of questioning the legitimacy of the Kyiv government’s claim to Crimea, based on precedent, experience, and Crimean sentiment.
The results of surveys, after annexation, showing strong Crimean support for remaining within Russia, suggest this was a strategy that found favor with the majority on the peninsula .17 Another reason for the lack of mediation was an unwillingness to address Russia’s geopolitical security concerns.
A compromise might have been possible, for example, whereby Sevastopol was annexed, but Crimea resumed its 1992 constitution and remained an autonomous part of Ukraine.
Even when part of Ukraine, Sevastopol was a “city with special status,” and the area in which it was included was a distinct municipality, separate from Crimea.
In addition, it is home to Russia’s Black Sea Fleet (and formerly also to the Ukrainian Naval Forces), the naval facilities having previously been leased to Russia by Ukraine.
An independent Sevastopol might have been enough to satisfy Russia’s strategic needs – and the Sevastopol city council in fact held a referendum of its own on accession to Russia.
Most members of these minorities live in four sub-regions in the north of Crimea.
Historically, they have sought the union of Kherson oblast with the adjoining oblasts in Ukraine proper.
Conversely, Western mediators could have spelled out the costs of Crimea’s absorption into Russia.
There were bailouts and aid packages for Kyiv, but the economic and political benefits that would accrue to the Crimeans by staying in a unified Ukraine were never properly explained to them.
None of the solutions mentioned were easy choices, and it may be that none of them was obvious to the parties in conflict, who were acting under immense pressure to avoid a full-blown war.
Even in the absence of meaningful diplomacy, Crimea managed to come away from the crisis without significant violence.
There is little doubt that Crimea would have sought independence from Ukraine anyway – and a good chance that it would have done so through force, meaning Crimea could easily now be a bloody battleground.
Mediation in Eastern Ukraine Turning to the conflict in Eastern Ukraine, we have shown how it captures key elements of gray zone conflict given the fact that Russia and the United States are involved in supporting opposing sides.
This obviously raises the stakes, but it also influences mediator techniques, the likelihood of success, and the level of commitment from the opposing parties, necessary to ensure a lasting peace.
The earliest and most concerted mediation attempt to facilitate a peaceful resolution to the war in Donbas was the meeting of the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine.
This framework was developed by the OSCE as an attempt to facilitate a dialogue between Russia and Ukraine through the mediation of an impartial actor, and eventually this dialogue resumed in Minsk I and then Minsk II agreements.
On June 6, 2014, the leaders of Germany, France, Russia, and Ukraine met for a memorial D-Day service in France, where they also discussed the possibilities for a settlement of the Donbas crisis.
The active role of German and French parties initially produced a few rounds of negotiation, which became formally recognized as the Minsk agreements.
This process, called the Normandy Format, did not directly involve the EU and consisted for the most part of phone conversations among the four counterparts.
In addition, there have been several efforts at negotiation by the United States Special Representatives for Ukraine, first Victoria Nuland and more recently Kurt Volker and their counterpart Russian presidential advisor Vladislav Surkov.
These conversations, based on private talks, have the American side ostensibly negotiating on behalf of Ukraine.
In 2017 itself there were five meetings between Volker and Surkov, showing an increasing pace compared to previous rounds.
The aforementioned agreement on military prisoner exchange was a result of these talks.
Beyond these three state-level processes most of the mediation has been supported through the good offices of the OSCE, which gives an opportunity for separatist leaders and representatives of Kyiv to consider options put forward by the Contact Group.
The SMM is an unarmed, civilian mission, present on the ground 24/7 in all regions of Ukraine.
September 4, 2014 OSCE Trilateral Contact Russia, Ukraine, Minsk protocol signed.
Temporary ceasefire; improvement in Minsk Group and separatists from humanitarian situation and granting separatists Luhansk and Donetsk separatists more autonomy.
Heavy weaponry moved back by all 2014 Group and separatists from belligerents.
Minsk separatists Luhansk and Donetsk January 31, 2015 OSCE Trilateral Contact Russia, Ukraine, Multilateral dialogue collapsed.
August 26, 2016 OSCE Trilateral Contact Russia, Ukraine, Report on a successful agreement Alleviation of water and electricity Minsk Group and separatists from between utilities companies on shortages in separatist territories. separatists Luhansk and Donets supply of water and electricity to separatist territories December 12, OSCE Trilateral Contact Russia and Ukraine OSCE highlighted that casualties in Perceived conflict stabilization.
Vienna January 19, 2017 OSCE Trilateral Contact Russia and Ukraine OSCE confirmation that the water Signaled the stabilization of conflict; Vienna Group supplies agreement remains in perceived decline in severity of force. humanitarian crisis.
February 1, 2017 OSCE Trilateral Contact Russia and Ukraine Reaffirmation of commitment to Decline in fighting.
Minsk Group Minsk II provisions Signaled the stabilization of conflict.
Not all OSCE-mediated meetings and informal dialogue are public knowledge.
For example, Russian president Vladimir Putin interpreted Minsk I as requesting that both sides implement a ceasefire, but that only the Ukrainians would withdraw, thus effectively enabling the separatists to maintain de facto control over Donbas.
After these talks failed it was subsequently agreed all heavy weapons were to be moved back by all belligerents to 15 km from the front lines, which formed the territory claimed and controlled by the separatists.
When the parties failed to uphold that agreement by again violating the terms of the ceasefire, a subsequent meeting on February 11 and 12, 2015 that included the OSCE, the leaders of the Normandy Format, and representatives of LNR and DNR produced a 13-point peace plan.
Known as Minsk II, the agreement also specified support for the restoration of the Ukrainian–Russian border.
While the implementation of the military portions of the Minsk II protocol were finalized within three months of signing, the political and security portions remained unresolved and to a large extent remain unaddressed.
The Trilateral Contact Group meets regularly to obtain commitments from all parties to maintain the ceasefire, withdraw all weapons regulated by Minsk II, allow the SMM unfettered access to disputed territories, and to commit to the restoration of basic utilities and critical infrastructure for the population directly affected by the conflict.
There are a number of reasons why these multiple mediation efforts have not proven successful.
A key element in the conflict is the mixed motives and interests of third parties, a situation which Russia has worked hard to exploit to ensure a diffusion of efforts and focus from the West.
Though some members of the EU, such as Germany, France, and Britain have been involved in the conflict due to their proximity to the epicenter, other European states remain aloof or more supportive of the Russian position.
As a result, even though the conflict is ongoing, and the situation has remained static since the Minsk agreements, solidarity within the West has deteriorated since about 2016, with some EU policymakers calling for an easing of Russian sanctions.
Russia has also shown some success in developing strong bilateral relations with individual EU states, such as Hungary and Italy.
Italy’s then prime minister Matteo Ranzi was eventually persuaded to oppose the majority of EU policymakers, who proposed implementing an even stricter sanctions regime against Russia.
A second problem facing mediators in Donbas is the lack of a hurting stalemate in which the institutionalized process offers a better option than continued fighting.
Third parties can, in theory, induce settlements through the creation of hurting stalemates, as well as speed up the movement towards a settlement through the imposition of deadlines and other crisis-related strategies.
Similarly, Balch-Lindsay and Enterline show that long civil wars typically correspond to the equitable distribution of third-party interventions.
In essence, external involvement has the effect of prolongation, with its power tipping in favor of Ukraine.
Conversely, when third parties raise the stakes by engaging in the use of force and favoring one side, the duration of civil conflicts is significantly reduced.
However, in this conflict, third parties are already actively supporting the belligerents with the West focusing its efforts on buttressing Kyiv and Russia supporting the armed separatist groups.
Simply put, there are risks beyond the higher probability of war and long conflict endurance.
Such support increases both the number of parties who can veto a settlement and the amount of time required to reach a settlement (Cetinyan 2002).21 As we have shown above for example, the conflict includes informally organized paramilitary forces, funded by private interests over which Kyiv does not exercise full control.
In sum, gray zone cases such as the one in Eastern Ukraine pose a challenge to mediation because of the difficulty in assigning culpability to specific acts, discerning belligerent intentions, and enforcing agreements.
This point is consistent with Pruitt’s argument that heavy-handed mediation strategies occur more often when faced with intransigent belligerents.
However, such efforts increase both the number of parties who can veto a settlement and the amount of time required to reach a settlement.
One way to boost the prospects of resolution is to reduce the number of veto actors by excluding them from a final settlement.
We have seen this exemplified by direct talks between Russia and the US, essentially circumventing Ukraine and the separatists.
A shift to bilateral dialogue is consistent with what we know about mediating complex and protracted conflict.
As time progresses, the chains that produce results become shorter as intermediaries are dropped from the negotiation.
With this information in hand, we envision three possible scenarios for Ukraine.
Both tilted towards European integration initiatives and both ended up in similar situations as de facto uncontrolled territories.
For the separation scenario to unfold, both the West and Russia must be supportive of providing credible assurances to the people of Eastern Ukraine and in return obtain assurances that fighting on both sides will stop.
A Return to Ukraine with Peacekeeping and Autonomy A third option would see the deployment of peacekeepers beyond the unarmed OSCE observers scattered throughout the country already.
Such a mission would be large, expensive, and fraught with political roadblocks, notwithstanding the obvious veto that 22 Oliver Richmond’s argument about devious mediation objectives in which a combatant uses a peace process to simply stall is applicable to gray zone crises in general and Donbas in particular.
The major impediment to peacekeepers is the disagreement between Russia and the United States over the deployment location of the peacekeeping force.
The United States wants peacekeepers throughout the separatist territories, thereby having the ability to intercept war materiel which Russia has purportedly been supplying the separatists.
Russia argues that peacekeepers should only be deployed on the border between Ukraine and the Donbas region where the fighting takes place.
The scattering of peacekeepers throughout the Donbas would likely make them more targets rather than intermediaries.
That is why on January 26, 2018 in Dubai, the United States and Russia discussed a possible multi-phased approach to peacekeeping deployment which could reconcile their individual positions.
An armed peacekeeping capability would help ensure a level of third-party credibility and commitment to a peace process currently absent.
However, as Russia and the United States have now discovered, that peace process needs to be sequenced out with a clear and mutually supported political objective foremost in the minds of its implementers.
The crucial next step is to look beyond the cessation of violence towards political compromise by placing the burden of implementation on the conflicting parties themselves.
To that end, a UN supported peace process must consider Eastern Ukraine’s long-term political prospects as an autonomous entity free to choose its own political path through free and fair elections.
