Russia’s strategic interests in the Black Sea region, especially in terms of energy and military presence, collide with those of Ukraine, Turkey, the European Union and the United States, among others, and expose the governance gap left by the existing conventions and institutions in dealing with the region.
It is argued that Russia’s move to annex Crimea was a strategic decision made irrespective of the destructive effect on the post-Cold War order.
Furthermore, until a new normal has been accepted by the main players, there is no hope of revising the existing conventions and institutions pertaining to the basin.
Crimea; Black Sea; international law; governance; Russia; Ukraine; energy; security Introduction The debate over the crisis in Crimea has been dominated by a clash of conceptions and interpretations of the scope and limitations of the notions of sovereignty, self-determination, secession and the use of armed force.
While it is important to discuss these state and human security-centred principles, the debate about them has descended into a dialogue of the deaf.
The inﬁltration, occupation and annexation of Crimea by Russia was an ordinary post-imperial land grab by a ruler who tears a page out of the dictator’s handbook, crushes dissent at home and restores his standing by ﬁghting enemies abroad.
Putin and his revisionist ideologues and propaganda machine have used concepts like ‘Novorossiya’ and the protection of Russians and Russian speakers abroad to convince the Russian population of the just nature of the Kremlin’s actions – quite effectively so, when we observe the President’s Soviet-style popularity ﬁgures.
Other reasons of a more strategic and geoeconomic nature offer an additional explanation for Russia’s wrongful actions, in particular the pursuit of energy interests and military domination of the Black Sea.
Russia’s strategic interests in the Black Sea region collide with those of Ukraine, Turkey, the European Union and the United States , among others, and expose the governance gap left by the existing conventions and institutions in dealing with the region.
This leaves the question whether the gap can be plugged and, if so, when and how.
The peninsula could serve as a military outpost for extending power projection towards Ukraine, Moldova , Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, the South Caucasus and even the eastern Mediterranean.
For Ukraine, the loss of Crimea represents a signiﬁcant decline in its military potential.
It translates into the near-complete elimination of the Ukrainian ﬂeet.
In fact, the Russian navy and air force have been testing the battle readiness of neighbouring states and NATO allies, far beyond the Black Sea region.
The ‘highly disturbing’ violations of national airspace had caused several incidents where military confrontation or loss of life was narrowly avoided.
One of the results of the crisis over Crimea has been an increased United States presence in the region.
Apart from more frequent naval visits to the Black Sea basin, Washington has extended different forms of support to its NATO allies.
The US continues to build a missile defence base in Romania, which is set to become operational by the end of 2015.
The missile defence shield (or ‘Aegis Ashore System’) has been a thorn in Moscow’s side since 2002, when the idea was launched after NATO’s Prague Summit that year.
The role of the United States in Ukraine has been famously exposed in the form of the leaked recording of a telephone conversation between United States Assistant Secretary of State Victoria Nuland and United States ambassador to Kiev Geoffrey Pyatt.
While much has been made of Nuland’s colourful language, the more important message contained in the conversation concerned the role of Washington in liaising with Ukrainian opposition parties, with a view to manipulating the orientation of the Ukrainian Government in accordance with United States interests.
As for the EU, it has bordered the Black Sea ever since Romania and Bulgaria acceded, but it certainly cannot be considered a Black Sea power.
The basin nevertheless represents a pressure point for the EU’s security and has become a direct geopolitical concern with the crisis in Crimea.
The failure of this EU-centric approach was most painfully exposed by the two crises in Ukraine.
The EU is now scrambling to up its game by reviewing the entire European Neighbourhood Policy.
Based on the lessons learnt from its previous experiences in region-building practices in the Baltic and Mediterranean Seas, the EU is in an urgent need of a more comprehensive and proactive regional ‘strategy’ towards the Black Sea region.
This strategic reassessment ought to address the energy dependence of the EU on Russia through the diversiﬁcation of energy resources and transit corridors for Caspian oil.
The EU is notoriously dependent on oil and gas imports, with its 28 member states obtaining over 50% of their aggregate demand from outside the Union and some Eastern European member states being almost entirely dependent on Russian energy supplies.
Conversely, as a supplier of energy resources, Russia is equally dependent on its European buyers.
Russia too has to diversify, hence the mega gas deal with China in 2014.
The scrapping of the South Stream project to the Bulgarian coast and the intention to work on ‘Turkish Stream’ instead, should be seen as a twin-track attempt at punishing the EU while courting the Turks, who are keen to become Europe’s fourth energy supply ‘artery’ by building their own pipelines to get Caspian gas to Europe.
Russia’s assertive foreign policy and expanded military presence in the Black Sea has pushed Turkey in a more defensive position.
By the same token, the new situation has raised Turkey’s proﬁle as the sole local actor capable of challenging Russian aggression in the region.
Moscow’s proposal to Ankara to build Turkish Stream can indeed be seen as an effort by Russia to woo Turkey while solidifying its newly acquired position in the basin.
While the dynamics of the Black Sea region have changed dramatically, its governing conventions and institutions have either been violated with impunity or have proven useless to address the Crimean crisis.
These and other admissions, combined with the misguided justiﬁcations for Russia’s military intervention in Crimea, seem emblematic for the ‘couldn’t care less’ attitude of Putin’s Russia.
Pursuant to the provisions of this convention, Turkey controls the access to the Black Sea through the Dardanelles and the Bosporus Straits and regulates the transit of naval warships.
In April 1982, the Convention was amended to allow Turkey to close the Straits at its discretion in peacetime as well as in wartime.
Amid the crisis in Crimea, Turkey authorized a United States Navy destroyer to pass through the Bosphorus but rightly noted that the Convention did not permit a United States aircraft carrier to make the same passage.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea , which entered into force in November 1994, has prompted calls for the Montreux Convention to be amended so as to make it compatible with the UNCLOS regimegoverning straits used for international navigation.
However, Turkey’s long-standing refusal to sign UNCLOS has meant that the Montreux Convention remains in force without further amendments.
United States concerns about Montreux ring hollow in the face of its refusal to sign up to UNCLOS.11 Yet, the strains between Montreux’ archaic regional security arrangement, which provides Turkey with a monopolistic position, and the demands for a multilateral regime of UNCLOS are becoming increasingly apparent in the light of actual developments in the Black Sea.
The annexation of Crimea has signiﬁcantly altered the balance of power in the region into a more duopolistic geopolitical arrangement between Russia and Turkey.
Many states have challenged Russia’s seizing of Crimea and thus the legality of its Black Sea claims, but it is likely that the other coastal countries will tacitly recognize the new normal in order to avoid open conﬂict.
However, with Romania and Russia now de facto neighbours and the former getting increased military support from the US, the new maritime border could become a potential source of conﬂict.
Indeed, the consequences of Russia’s annexation of Crimea extend beyond concerns of land sovereignty and far into the waters of the Black Sea basin.
Russia has more than halved Ukraine’s coastal line and totally controls the country’s access to the open Black Sea waters.
The UNCLOS provisions are used by Russia to establish its dominion over vast oil and gas reserves just off the Crimean shore while dealing a crippling blow to Ukraine’s hopes for energy independence.
Article 4 of the Treaty of Annexation between the newly declared Republic of Crimea and the Russian Federation contains a single sentence which states that international law will govern the drawing of boundaries through the adjacent Black and Azov Seas.
Contrary to the determination under the UNCLOS, the 2003 Agreement between the Russian Federation and the Ukraine on cooperation in the use of the sea of Azov and the strait of Kerch’ deﬁned the Azov Sea as a closed sea.
The demarcation of the maritime border was left to a special commission, which met only once in 2012.12 Considering the situation on the ground, Putin may be in no hurry to insist that the commission ﬁnish its task, as he may still want to inspire and support the separatists of the so-called Luhansk and Donetsk Peoples Republics to push for the capture of the important industrial port city of Mariupol and the creation of the infamous land bridge to unlock Crimea.
In doing so, the entire coastline of the Azov Sea would come under de facto Russian control and render maritime border demarcation superﬂuous.
With regard to the Black Sea, the coastal countries have long seen its ﬂoor as a potential energy source, mainly because of modest successes of prospection in shallow waters.
With the annexation of the Peninsula, Russia has taken over the Crimean branch of Naftogaz, Ukraine’s national gas company, and instantly obtained the necessary gear to explore the extended EEZ to which it lays claim.
However, mounting economic sanctions could slow Russia’s exploitation of its Black and Azov Sea annexations by reducing access to Western ﬁnancing and technology.
Crucially, in the context of the present analysis, the Council Regulation also prohibits the export of certain goods and technology to Crimean companies or for use in Crimea’s transport, telecommunications and energy sectors.
With regard to energy, the EU ban affects the prospection, exploration and production of oil, gas and mineral resources.
Also, technical assistance, brokering, construction or engineering services related to infrastructure in the energy, transport and telecommunications sectors are forbidden.
The downgrade means that foreign investors, such as pension funds, are legally obliged to divest billions of their Russian holdings.
In sum, while the international conventions remain toothless in and of their own, the blatant disregard for international rules by Putin’s Russia in Crimea has not gone unpunished.
However, it is highly doubtful whether the stated aim of the sanctions adopted by the EU will be achieved,e. to create behavioural change among those targeted Russians to return to the status ex ante.
International organizations For years, interstate cooperation in the Black Sea basin has been the object of various institutionalization attempts.
Suffering from overlapping mandates and divided memberships, these organizations have become vehicles for regional powers like Russia and Turkey to pursue their hegemonic interests under institutional cover, reducing regional cooperation to merely rhetorical level.
BSEC has proved to be the most efﬁcient conﬁdence-building forum to discuss common interests.
Lest to say that none of these organizations have proved suitable platforms for the resolution of disputes at the high political level at which they have and continue to be played out.
However, the organization could not prevent the annexation of Ukraine and its monitors have been kept off the peninsula by Russia.
In the face of a Russian veto in the UN Security Council, only the UN General Assembly deﬁned the opinio juris of the global community.
Afﬁrms its commitment to the sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Calls upon all States to desist and refrain from actions aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine, including any attempts to modify Ukraine’s borders through the threat or use of force or other unlawful means.
Welcomes the efforts of the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other international and regional organizations to assist Ukraine in protecting the rights of all persons in Ukraine, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities.
Underscores that the referendum held in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol on 16 March 2014, having no validity, cannot form the basis for any alteration of the status of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea or of the city of Sevastopol.
Calls upon all States, international organizations and specialized agencies not to recognize any alteration of the status of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol on the basis of the above-mentioned referendum and to refrain from any action or dealing that might be interpreted as recognizing any such altered status.
This renders the institutional governance system not ﬁt for purpose when dealing with a nuclear weapon-wielding permanent member of the UN Security Council that trespasses on about every basic rule structuring the international and regional order.
This begs the question whether the governance gap over the Black Sea can be plugged.
Concluding remarks The annexation of Crimea by Russia in March 2014 has had an immediate impact on the strategic situation across the entire Black Sea region.
Russia has emerged as a clear beneﬁciary mostly at the expense of Ukraine.
As much as Russian militarism was motivated by the idea of restoring Russian pride and standing by appealing to historical rights and wrongs, competition to dominate the Eurasian energy corridors is as much behind Russia’s aggressive foreign policy.
To be sure, EU jockeying and United States interference in the Black Sea region is also driven by the desire to control critical energy pockets and pipeline routes.
But what distinguishes Russia as a player in this great game is that its move to annex Crimea was a strategic decision made irrespective of the destructive effect on the post-Cold War order, and Russia’s own place therein.
It shows that Putin’s regime is more concerned with the short-term consolidation of its own power and popular support at home than with the long-term economic well-being of its citizens and international stability.
The Kremlin has even gone so far as to issue provocative pinpricks to the air and naval defences of individual NATO allies and G7 countries like Australia.
Putin’s Russia seems ﬁrmly on course towards greater international isolation.
The Black Sea region has emerged as a key issue for recasting a new balance of power between Russia and the West.
The geopolitical ‘chessboard’ is being reordered, with Russia, on the one hand, and the Euro-Atlantic community, on the other, seeking to reconﬁgure their positions in the aftermath of the Crimean crisis.
Until a new normal has been accepted by those main players, there is no hope of revising the existing conventions and institutions pertaining to the basin.
The governance gap in the Black Sea region is, therefore, set to continue for the foreseeable future.
As referred to in note 9 below, Russian authorities and the media outlets they control have misconstrued the sequence of events in several other instances.
Russia ranks 148th in the 2014 World Press Freedom Index , below Cambodia, Myanmar and Bangladesh.
Apart from the increase in its offensive capabilities, Crimea and the maritime zone around it offers Russia a strong line of defence far ahead of the southwestern mainland.
The deployment of troops would be further facilitated by the delivery by France of Mistral amphibious assault ships, of which one was to be allocated to the Russian Black Sea Fleet.
Its potential was only exceeded by the Turkish Navy which splits its forces between the Black Sea and the Aegean and Mediterranean theatres.
The potential of the Black Sea Fleet will be further increased after completion of an ambitious modernisation programme which will add six new frigates, six new submarines, and several other smaller vessels.
The ‘Energy Union’ which was unveiled on 25 February 2015 is a ﬁrst attempt of the European Commission to address this issue by way of formulating a ‘framework strategy’ based on the 2014 Energy Security Strategy.
It is frustrating that the EU’s leaders, notably High Representative Federica Mogherini, on her own account or on behalf of the EU, has not jumped on the smoking gun delivered by President Putin.
The EU has called on UN members to consider similar non-recognition measures in line with UN General Assembly Resolution 68/262 Territorial integrity of Ukraine, UN Doc.
For almost 20 years, he has worked for the EU institutions and member states’ governments on numerous research and technical assistance projects in the geographical neighbourhood of the EU and in Asia.
He served as project leader and leading author of the FES-sponsored Task Force on European Security and Defence chaired by Javier Solana and is currently project leader of a SIDA-sponsored study on the implementation of the EU Association Agreements with Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia.
Ukraine’s energy policy and United States strategic interests in Eurasia.
Putin’s ‘couldn’t care less’ attitude towards Russia’s international commitments.
Council Regulation No 692/2014 of 23 June 2014 concerning restrictions on the import into the Union of goods originating in Crimea or Sevastopol, in response to the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol.
Geostrategic and economic priorities in the Black Sea regionreconﬁguring a fuzzy eastern borderline.
List of close military encounters between Russia and the West, March 2014– March 2015.
Belarus, Moldova, and Ukraine between Russia and the European Union, ed.
Crimea’s annexation by Russia – Contradictions of the new Russian doctrine of international law.
Russia ﬂexes military muscle as tensions rise in Ukraine’s Crimea, CNN.com, February 26.
