The Ukrainian diaspora has been a cheerleader for democratisation, reforms and the integration of Ukraine into Europe while, simultaneously, some of its members have been willing recipients of Ukrainian oligarchs’ financial assistance.
These two stances are contradictory because Ukrainian oligarchs are often pro-Russian or at the very least they are only interested in personal enrichment and not Ukraine’s national interest and are never supportive of the establishment of a rule of law based state in Ukraine.
Acceptance of funds from Ukrainian oligarchs shows that financial donations have been paid to a far larger group of people than only United States political consultants.
Firtash, a western Ukrainian, has supported projects inside Ukraine and abroad that the Ukrainian diaspora have applauded.
At the same time, according to an extensive in-depth investigation, he is Vladimir Putin’s man in Ukraine who has received discounted gas through various intermediaries.
He has purportedly used the profits of this to buy chunks of the Ukrainian economy on behalf of Russia.
During Viktor Yanukovych’s presidency, Firtash , increased their wealth through insider sweetheart deals.
Firtash’s business assets remain untouched by the Russian occupation authorities in Crimea.
In contrast, the business assets of oligarch Ihor Kolomoyskyi, who adopted a pro-Ukrainian stance and funded volunteer battalions to fight separatists in Donbas, have been nationalised by the Russian occupation authorities.
Since the spring of 2014, the United States government sought to extradite Firtash from Austria on charges of corruption.
An Austrian court turned down the US’ request and the case is now pending an appeal from the United States government.
Firtash’s donations totaled over $230 million during the last three years of Yanukovych’s presidency when Putin and the kleptocratic Ukrainian president helped make him even wealthier.
Firtash funded Ukrainian theatre and cultural events within Ukraine and in Western Europe, including a new Ukrainian cultural festival in London.
The donation sparked much controversy in Ukrainian diaspora circles which had raised funds for UKU and the prestigious Kyiv Mohyla Academy.
Borys Gudziak, the American-born former Dean of UKU who is now the eparch of the Ukrainian Greek-Catholic Eparchy in Paris, gave his wholehearted support to Firtash’s donation.
Firtash and his wife, Lada Firtash, have been admitted to the prestigious Guild of Cambridge Benefactors.
Knowledge about Firtash’s corruption and intimate ties with Ukrainian and Russian politicians did not suddenly emerge in 2014.
Six years prior to the United States attempt to have him extradited, Firtash told United States Ambassador to Ukraine William Taylor that, “He acknowledged ties to Russian organised crime figure Seymon Mogilevich, stating he needed Mogilevich’s approval to get into business in the first place.
Mogilevich has been on the FBI’s wanted list since the 1990s for multi-million-dollar fraud schemes.
Ukrainian Congress Committee of America senior member and United States Holodomor Committee chairman Michael Sawkiw Jr. commented on Firtash’s donation, “We are truly grateful for Mr Firtash’s generosity and commitment to the building of a memorial in Washington DC that will educate and inform thousands of people about a forgotten chapter in world history.
Having worked on this issue for many years, this project would not have been successful without Mr Firtash’s keen awareness and dedication to seeing this project completed.
The willingness to accept funds from Ukrainian oligarchs was most glaring during Yanukovych’s kleptocracy in Ukraine between 2010-2014, during which Yanukovych was under intense western criticism for selective use of justice in imprisoning Yulia Tymoshenko, creating a mafia state and reverting to Soviet nationality and language policies.
The US-Ukraine Foundation, a well-known Washington-based charity that has promoted democracy in Ukraine, received donations and funding from the Akhmetov and Kluyev foundations for its “Ukraine in Washington” Gala in December 2013, ironically during the Revolution of Dignity.
Rinat Akhmetov and Serhiy and Andriy Kluyev have been close to Yanukovych for decades.
Andriy Kluyev was a regular speaker at the annual “Ukraine in Washington” Gala throughout Yanukoych’s presidency.
In effect, some of the Ukrainian-American diaspora’s leaders provided Yanukovych’s cronies with a platform to lobby the United States government on their attitudes towards his keptocratic and politically repressive regime.
Yanukovych and Andriy Kluyev fled to Russia in February 2014 when the EuroMaidan revolutionaries came to power.
Meanwhile, Serhiy Kluyev was permitted by the General Prosecutor’s office, which is now controlled by President Petro Poroshenko, to escape an attempt at detaining him and fled to Russia in summer of 2015.
There has always been an inherent contradiction between the Ukrainian diaspora’s support for democratisation, fight against corruption and Ukraine’s integration into Europe and the willingness of some Ukrainian American political consultants, lawyers and think tanks to accept oligarchs’ funds.
