The country’s economy declined by an estimated 4. per cent during 2015 and 2016, while increasing numbers of its population are living in poverty.
Internationally, alleged interference in eastern Ukraine, the annexation of Crimea, and most recently, interventions in the Syrian civil war have turned Russia into a pariah state.
Kremlin watchers debate whether these economic shocks or isolation abroad will lead to domestic unrest and further acts of international aggression.
But Dr Tomila Lankina, Associate Professor of International Relations at LSE, finds this approach overlooks Russia’s deft and sophisticated media management, which has been instrumental in managing internal dissent and offers clues to Putin’s next international move.
Dr Lankina’s study focused on several pivotal moments of public dissent in Russia’s recent history.
In December 2011 and early 2012, thousands of citizens protested against allegations of electoral fraud and the announcement that Putin would again stand for the Russian presidency.
Similar media analysis was then applied to explore how Russia’s state-controlled media covered the Euromaidan protests and the Revolution of Dignity, a wave of demonstrations and civil unrest in Ukraine that began in late 2013 around country’s relationship with the European Union and Russia.
The analysis revealed that Russia’s state-controlled media presented the protests as the work of “fascists” and ultra-nationalists who posed a threat to ethnic Russians, in contrast with Ukrainian and Russian media outlets outside of the Kremlin’s control.
This trend reached its apex around February 2014, when the Russia-supported Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych fled the country.
But when, following annexation of Crimea in 2014, domestic sentiment and public opinion among ethnic Russians in Ukraine’s eastern territories did not show high levels of support for the separation of Ukraine’s territories in the Donbas, the Russian media responded quickly.
The media toned down the aggressively negative narratives about the Euromaidan protests, and how a pro-EU orientation Ukraine would threaten ethnic Russians.
These responses represent the Russian regime’s pursuit of subtle techniques of media manipulation, where the protests were presented either using the vocabulary of “disorder”; or the “freedom to protest” frame, depending on the overall public mood.
By deftly using these different frames, Russian media have altered the coverage of public discontent at home and abroad in ways meant to undermine dissent or, when necessary, to cater to public sentiment.
However, Dr Lankina identifies a number of enduring parallels between the current Russian government and the old Soviet regime, such as mixing facts with faction, and planting misinformation into the public domain which is reproduced by more credible media outlets.
Russian media’s flexible coverage of protest as a regime survival strategy by Dr Tomila Lankina was published in PONARS Eurasia, Washington, DC, USA , 2016.
