Ukraine will build a military base on the Azov Sea and has sent more forces to the area to counter a worsening Russian threat, Ukraine’s armed forces head told Reuters, referring to an arm of the Black Sea that is a flashpoint of tensions with Moscow.
Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council Oleksandr Turchynov has announced Ukraine will conduct a naval exercise in the Sea of Azov.
The NSDC on September 6 approved a set of measures aimed at protecting national interests in the country’s southern regions, the waters of the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea.
National Security and Defense Council Secretary Oleksandr Turchynov has said that Ukrainian servicemen plan to conduct large-scale exercises in the Azov Sea.
NATO is concerned that Russia is preventing Ukrainian vessels from accessing the Azov Sea, stated the Secretary-General of NATO Jens Stoltenberg before a meeting with the secretaries of Defense, reports Interfax Ukraine.
NATO is also concerned with the presence of Russia in the Crimea and their activities near the Crimean bridge.
The Ukrainian State Emergency Service and the State Border Service were forced to increase their presence in the Azov Sea because of the detention of ships by Russia.
The European Parliament plans to consider the situation in the Sea of Azov at its plenary meeting on October 23.
Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council Oleksandr Turchynov says Ukraine is boosting its military presence in the Sea of Azov and will respond adequately to any aggression.
At the end of September, the Ukrainian Navy under Ukraine’s Armed Forces General Staff’s command has conducted a risky and successful naval operation.
Two Ukrainian vessels, the Donbas search and rescue ship and the Korets sea tug departed from Odesa at the Black Sea, went around the occupied Crimea, passed the Kerch Strait under the newly-built bridge and entered the Sea of Azov.
Their move has come out of the blue for Russians, who currently illegally occupy Crimea after annexing it in 2014 from Ukraine, and de-facto control waters around it, including the Kerch Strait.
Russian commandment’s unpreparedness has been visible with panic reactions that accompanied the Ukrainian naval vessels move.
The Donbas and the Korets have been followed by at least 13 Russian vessels, Russian aircraft flew dangerously low over them.
We visited the Donbas, already docked in Mariupol, to talk to the commander of the operation – deputy head of the staff of the maritime commandment of the Ukrainian Navy, Captain 1st rank Dmytro Kovalenko.
The plot of “Military Television” about the transfer of the search and rescue vessel A500 “Donbass” and the maritime tug A830 “Korets” to the port of MariupolChief of Staff of the Naval Forces of Ukraine Andriy Tarasov said that the transition to the Kerch Strait and through it was in a difficult situation, since it was accompanied by ships and aviation of the Russian Federation.
The video appeared on the Facebook page of the Ukrainian Navy on Tuesday.
One of the stages included defense of the coastline of the Sea of Azov.
Over the past three months, Russia’s activity in the Azov Sea has increased significantly.
The Russians do not allow commercial vessels going to and leaving Ukrainian ports to pass through the Kerch Strait without hindrance.
In this regard, President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko instructed the Minister of Defense, the Chief of the General Staff and the Ukrainian Navy to take measures to stop Russian provocations with regard to blocking the entry of ships into Ukrainian ports in the Sea of Azov.
The Ministry of Infrastructure of Ukraine has developed a set of measures in response to Russia’s actions.
At the same time, it was reported that the package of measures includes, among other things, restrictions on passenger traffic with Russia.
The main weapon of the boat is 8 PKR “Neptun” of Ukrainian production , ARB “Crossbow-K”, artillery installation AK-176 in the bow and two artillery AK-630 in the stern.
Also included in the arms are 16 MANPADs “Eagle” and two machine guns 12. mm.
The Russian Black Sea Fleet’s most advanced frigate Admiral Makarov has arrived in Sevastopol for the first time after it entered service with the Fleet.
The Admiral Makarov is the third Project 11356 blue-water frigate named after Imperial Russian Navy Commander, Oceanographer and Vice-Admiral Stepan Makarov.
The latest frigate was delivered to the Navy and the naval flag was hoisted on the warship on December 27, 2017.
The Project 11356 frigates have a displacement of 4,000 tons, a length of 124. meters, a speed of 30 knots and a sea endurance of 30 days.
They are armed with Kalibr-NK cruise missiles, Shtil-1 surface-to-air missile complexes, A-190 100mm artillery guns, air defense artillery, rocket launchers and torpedoes and can also carry a deck-based Kamov Ka-27 helicopter.
A section of the railway portion of the Crimean bridge fell into the sea during assembly, the Russian Taman Road Administration reports.
The incident was presumably due to technical issues with the jack system.
The span structure, which ended up in the water, will be pulled out with cranes after the necessary preparation.
At present, the builders are assessing the consequences of the accident.
The motorway part of the Crimean Bridge was opened to trucks on October 1 this year.
The Ukrainian Ministry of Temporarily Occupied Territories notes that all the military and civil aircraft over the waters of the Black and Azov Seas are within the radius of destruction of these systems.
The maximum target speed that the system can intercept is 4. km per second.
The Russian Guards Sevastopol-Feodosia anti-aircraft missile regiment was reinforced with the first division of S-400 anti-aircraft missile systems Triumph in 2016.
The third division of anti-aircraft systems S-400 took up combat duty near Yevpatoria in September 2018.
Special Representative of the United States Department of State for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker in an exclusive interview with UNIAN explained why Ukraine needed to retain the special status of Donbas, told about the progress in negotiations with Russia on the deployment of a UN peacekeeping mission, and revealed why he had met with Ukraine’s opposition leaders during his latest September visit.
United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker has said it would be too costly for Russia to try to move forward in Donbas.
Volker stressed the Ukrainian military due to Ukraine’s own efforts is much better today than it was in 2014.
And so that already would introduce additional costs to Russia, and inability of Russia to deny its responsibility if it were to launch new aggression this time,” he said.
United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker has called on the Russian Federation to cancel sham, illegal elections in Donbas in connection with the extension by the Verkhovna Rada of the law on the special order of local self-government in certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
Ukraine has repeatedly done its part to implement Minsk, now Russia must fulfill its commitments, Volker said.
The UN peacekeeping mission should create environment of overall security for holding elections for the legitimate local entities in occupied Donbas.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko stated that “Russia will have to pay according to the decision of the Stockholm Arbitration court.
Ukraine had recently won a gas transit contract dispute against Russia in the Stockholm Arbitration Court.
They should not expect that this amount will never be paid to Ukraine in full.
Our country will receive even more, as every day that Russia doesn’t pay, the amount owing grows by half a million dollars.
And I have no doubt that the amount will be received soon,” Interfax-Ukraine Poroshenko him as saying.
According to the Ukrainian President, Kyiv won’t return Russia the funds transferred to former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych in December 2013.
Ukrainian President Petro says the United Nations General Assembly will adopt a resolution calling Russia an occupying state.
Ukraine’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs is preparing a new draft resolution on Crimea for consideration at the UN General Assembly late this year.
Ukraine, the United States, Germany and France are practically ready to submit a joint resolution to the UN Security Council for consideration of the peacekeeping mission in Donbas.
And if Russia takes advantage of the right of veto, it will be its challenge not only to Ukraine, but to the entire world community.
There has been a 30% increase in the number of restrictions OSCE monitors have faced in Ukraine, the vast majority in areas controlled by Russia’s proxies.
Response to the OSCE’s Chief Monitor in Ukraine, Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan, and the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office’s Special Representative in Ukraine and in the Trilateral Contact Group, Ambassador Martin Sajdik As delivered by Chargé d’Affaires,i.
Harry Kamian to the Permanent Council, Vienna September 27, 2018 Thank you, Mr Chair.
Ambassador Apakan, we are pleased to welcome you back to the Permanent Council and regret that Ambassador Sajdik is not able to be with us here today.
Please pass on our appreciation for his work and his report, and that we wish him a speedy recovery.
Ambassador Apakan, we remain supportive of your collective efforts to seek a lasting peace in eastern Ukraine.
The people of Ukraine deserve peace, a peace that is achieved through the respect for international law and commitments, including those relating to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states, and you and your monitors can continue to count on our full support.
Most members of the United Nations Security Council support the Ukrainian initiative for deployment of a peacekeeping mission in Donbas.
We have an intensive dialogue with China, which will not oppose certainly.
Most of the UN Security Council members also support us as evidenced by the talks I held yesterday and the day before.
The Russian Federation is the only one country which is against ,” President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko said, speaking at the celebrations on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of establishment of the National Academy of Legal Sciences in Kharkiv, an Ukrinform correspondent reports.
Solution to the issue of deployment of UN peacekeeping mission has reached “Moscow’s deadlock”, Poroshenko stressed.
At the same time, the President reminded that Ukraine, the United States, Germany and France had a common vision for such a mission and were ready to “almost immediately” submit a joint resolution to the UN Security Council for consideration.
At the same time, Poroshenko noted that if Russia used its veto power, it would defy the international community and further strengthen its isolation.
According to the Head of State, the UN peacekeeping mission in Donbas, as Ukraine insists, will significantly reduce the risk of military conflict escalation in eastern Ukraine and prevent Russia and mercenaries from delivering weapons.
Ukraine spends 6% of its GDP on the defense sector, which is more than NATO’s member countries spend to maintain their minimum obligations to the Alliance, stated by Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko, speaking at the ceremony of handing over two American Island-class patrol boats that took place at the United States Coast Guard shipyard in Baltimore, Maryland, Ukrinform reports.
This figure is now higher than minimal obligations for NATO members,” he said.
President of the United States of America Donald Trump has signed the bill on the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2019, which provides for $250 million in security assistance to Ukraine.
The sum is 50 million higher than the allocations of the 2018 budget for relevant financial aid programs for Ukraine.
Ukrainian Interior Minister Arsen Avakov and British Minister of State for Security and Economic Crime Ben Wallace have discussed joint response to the threats of a hybrid war being waged by Russia.
Ukraine&rsquo;s Internal Minister Arsen Avakov and Great Britain's Minister&nbsp;of State for&nbsp;Security Ben Wallace discussed plans for comprehensive cooperation and exchange of experience.
Ukraine’s Internal Minister Arsen Avakov and Great Britain’s Minister of State for Security Ben Wallace discussed plans for comprehensive cooperation and exchange of experience.
Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council Oleksandr Turchynov says Russia is deploying new military units on the border with Ukraine, which can be used for active hostilities.
According to the official, this constitutes a serious threat for Ukraine.
Russia is deploying additional troops near the Ukrainian border, stated Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov.
Several days ago, Turchynov stated that Russia would never dominate in the Azov Sea.
National Security and Defense Council Secretary Oleksandr Turchynov has predicted that Ukraine and the United States will continue military-technical cooperation, including on the supply of lethal weapons.
But the first step has already been taken, and I think this relevant issue will also be discussed at the end of this year.
When planning the budget for next year, we will talk about more serious interaction systems and projects, in particular air defense,” Turchynov told journalists in Kharkiv on Wednesday.
When we talk about weapons, these are weapons that can be used to systematically defeat an enemy.
Turchynov also stressed that he would like Ukraine to maintain military-technical cooperation with its strategic partners without any restrictions.
This is the logic of the reforms we are conducting in the Armed Forces, in other bodies.
Spokesman for the Ukrainian Defense Ministry Dmytro Hutsuliak says a large batch of small arms and ammunition has been delivered to the occupied city of Luhansk, eastern Ukraine, from the Russian Federation.
The arsenal is stored on the military base, which is arranged on the site of the former knitting factory in Luhansk.
According to intelligence reports, three enemy troops were killed and another three were wounded.
Volunteers of the Povernys Zhyvym project have posted on social networks the video showing the strike hitting the militants’ truck with ammo.
According to the Ukrainian intelligence, a militant company commander was among those killed in the hit.
The command of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation is secretly boosting the training of the occupation forces in Donbas to conduct offensive operations, speaker of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine Dmitry Hutsuliak told a Kyiv briefing Wednesday.
The Russian Federation plans to conduct military exercises in the occupied territories of Ukraine.
Officers of the State Border Guard Service of Ukraine, operating as part of the Joint Forces, have reported yet another case of Russian occupation forces using banned special-purpose laser weapons.
It is reported that the serviceman hit by a laser beam lost 80% of sight in a right eye.
At least four people, including a candidate for the head of the Russia-backed formation called the Donetsk People’s Republic have been injured in an explosion in Donetsk.
Three boys have been reported killed and another injured by a land mine in a separatist-controlled town in eastern Ukraine.
Head of the Joint Forces Operation’s press center Viacheslav Petrovskiy says the Ukrainian military have expanded the security zone in Donbas by more than 10 square kilometers since the beginning of August.
Police in Moscow have detained Ukraine’s former minister of transport, ex-Member of Parliament Mykola Rudkovsky, who had been wanted for allegedly taking part in the “attack” on the Russian embassy in Kyiv in 2014.
According to the investigation, Rudkovsky allegedly hurled a stone at the building of the Russian embassy in Kyiv in June 2014.
Ukrainian Deputy Minister for temporarily occupied territories and internally displaced persons George Tuka says residents of the occupied territories in Donbas have no illusions about the possible accession of the war-struck areas in Donbas – the self-proclaimed “Luhansk People’s Republic” and “Donetsk People’s Republic” – to Russia.
Russia doesn’t need the devastated and destroyed Donbas, the deputy minister believes.
According to the official, there is still no popular slogan “We want to Ukraine” in the temporarily occupied areas in eastern Ukraine.
According to the official, 85 railcars were bought by Ukraine under the EBRD loan.
It is just another lie of Russia’s propaganda machine,” Bohdan Senyk, who heads the public office of the General Staff of Ukraine’s Armed Forces, told the Kyiv-based Interfax-Ukraine news agency on Wednesday, October 3.
Interfax , citing sources, earlier reported that on August 30, about 3,500 small arms, more than 3,100 mines, about two million ammunition rounds, 34,000 detonation devices, 52,000 missiles and 5.38 million blank cartridges were imported into Ukraine via the Krakivets border crossing.
PHOTOS Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine , Oleksandr Turchynov and Head of the National Security Bureau of the Republic of Poland Pawel Soloch, who is on a two-day visit in Ukraine, discussed the trending areas of… View news.
The new facility is supposed to broadcast the Ukrainian TV programs to the temporarily occupied territories of Donetsk region.
This tower is recognized the highest ever in the history of modern Ukraine.
Earlier, the National Council of Television and Radio Broadcasting of Ukraine issued new permissions for temporary broadcasting under a simplified procedure in temporarily uncontrolled territories in Donetsk region and in Crimea.
In connection with this, the deputies propose to put into law the concept of “Russian World” and determine what statements can be considered propaganda.
Deputies of the Rada propose to punish such actions by imprisonment for up to five years with or without confiscation of property.
Representatives of the authorities will receive stricter punishment, five to ten years in prison.
The same punishment is planned to be established for persons who promote the idea of “Russian World” in social media and internet publications.
In addition, the bill proposes not to allow registration of presidential or deputy candidates, if they promote the pro-Russian ideology or have ties to the political forces promoting such ideology.
The former Defense Minister of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic, Igor “Strelkov” Girkin stated on his VKontakte post that the audio recording published by the Ukrainian Security Service was authentic.
The recording captured an assistant to Denis Pushilin discussing the assasination of then DPR head Alexander Zakharchenko with unknown people.
Pushilin was chosen to succeed Zakharchenko a week after the latter was assassinated on August 31.
The character has been recognized and the people who know him have no doubt regarding the identification of his voice and manner of speaking.
It was also confirmed that this person surely worked in Pushilin’s team and was one of his close associates at least in late June this year,” Girkin said.
The SBU stated that the recorded conversation took place in June between the assistant of Pushilin, who was the head of Parliament at the time and represented the Republic during the negotiations on Minsk, and two unknown people.
In this recording, the people were discussing the preparations for a coup d’état by Pushilin and the assasination of Zakharchenko.
We cut off all communications with Ukraine and they take information from our communication channels anyway.
We are looking for spies and they surround us with secret services… Mr Lavrentiev even went to Turkey in June to discuss plans and took no precautions against leaks, putting everyone in a very awkward position.
Four people, including a candidate for the head of the so-called “Donetsk People’s Republic” , Igor Khakimzyanov, have been injured in an explosion in the Russian-occupied city of Donetsk, eastern Ukraine.
The Ukrainian Air Force has a thing for crazy, dangerous low-altitude passes, but you probably can’t fly much lower than this.
This is about the possibility of quick fire strikes on the enemy’s intended goals and leaving their own position even before the enemy strikes a response.
It is precisely the kramatorskoj enterprises that all the key components of Bogdan’s art pieces, including the barrel of the newest gun, have been developed and manufactured.By the way, it is precisely at the kramatorskoy enterprise, in addition to the trunks to the artsists, already manufactured and new trunks for tank guns.
The SAU was created on the basis of the all-wheel drive military truck “KrAZ-6322” with the wheel formula 6х6.
The chassis has a twin armored four-door cabin with two rows of seats and designed for a crew of 5 people.
The Ukrainian Army has received the new batch of upgraded T-80 and T-64BV tanks and new BTR-4 armoured vehicle personnel carriers.
Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov visited the flagships of the armored industry of Ukraine – the State enterprise “Malyshev Plant” where as instructed by President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko, a ceremonial handover of armament and military equipment to the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
Ukrainian servicemen have received 16 tanks and five armored personnel carriers manufactured by the Ukroboronprom State Concern, President Petro Poroshenko has said.
VIDEO&PHOTOS Ukrainian Armed Forces have received 16 tanks and five armored personnel carriers manufactured by the state-run Ukroboronprom Concern.
The military of Ukraine’s Joint Forces Operation have received a brand-new armored personnel carrier Butsefal , developed by the Kharkiv-based Morozov Machine Building Design Bureau, a state-owned enterprise.
The BTR is equipped with a powerful 30mm gun and a combat module that includes Stugna anti-tank guided missiles.
Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov says Ukraine plans to strengthen the Armed Forces’ armored potential.
The military have received 16 T-64 and T-80 tanks, as well as five BTR-4 armored personnel carriers.
The day of the machine-builder at AvtoKrAZ was marked with awards, awards, a concert and an autoshow with the arrivals of KrAZs on the obstacles at the test-demonstration ground.
The President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko signed a law on the ratification of the General Agreement between the Cabinet of Ministers and the Polish Government on the cooperation in the defence field, as the President’s Administration reports.
According to the message, the implementation of the document creates the prerequisites for the development of the Ukrainian-Polish cooperation in the defence sector.
The Agreement provides for the cooperation of both of the states concerning information sharing, demonstration of the armaments and military equipment, joint drills, bilateral and multilateral military exercises, military cultural events and competitions, and etc.
President Petro Poroshenko signed the law on ratification of the agreement between the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the Government of Romania on cooperation in the field of military transportation.
Ukraine in the second half of October is switching to the unified national list of dual-use goods that are subject to export control, meeting EU standards, the State Service of Export Control of Ukraine has reported. 15 helicopter bases and service centre for the French Airbus Helicopters in the amount of 55 items will start working in Ukraine soon.
Arsen Avakov, the Interior Minister of Ukraine, claimed this during the working visit to France as the press service of the ministry reported.
Preliminary, we plan that 15 bases for our helicopter units will start working all over the country,” Avakov said.
Russia is ready to exchange the Ukrainian director and political prisoner Oleg Sentsov for the Russians convicted in the United States Viktor Bout and Konstantin Yaroshenko, as well as Maria Butina, who is under arrest.
This is reported by Novaya Gazeta referring to a source close to the negotiations on the exchange of prisoners between Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
According to the source, the Kremlin is ready to discuss the exchange of Oleg Sentsov directly with Washington.
It is also reported that the official representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation Maria Zakharova informed the publication that she “does not know” on such an initiative.
Viktor Bout is a Russian entrepreneur, convicted in 2012 in the United States for 25 years in prison for intending to illegally trade in arms and support terrorism.
Konstantin Yaroshenko was arrested on May 28, 2010 in Liberia by officers of the republic’s special services on charges of preparing for transportation of a large batch of cocaine.
On July 15, 2018 a Russian citizen Maria Butina was detained in Washington on suspicion of trying to influence United States policy on the orders of a high-ranking official from the Kremlin.
She was officially charged on two counts – in collusion with the purpose of working as a foreign agent and in acting as a foreign agent without proper registration.
The United States does not consider the option of exchange of the Ukrainian movie director Oleg Sentsov for three Russians kept in custody in America, as the Russian BBC service reported referring to the source in the United States State Department.
Ukraine’s Verkhovna Rada urges the country’s National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine to introduce sanctions against several Ukrainian TV channels.
Ivan Vynnyk, the Secretary of the Defence Committee of the Verkhovna Rada, presented a draft law.
The committee offers this very wording and proposes to forward it to the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine regarding the introduction of the personal restrictive sanctions,” Vynnyk said.
The event’s lineup also features humanoid robot Sophia that uses artificial intelligence.
In conditions of the growing influence of China in world trade, precisely Poland and Ukraine are able to supply raw materials to Western markets.
The Representative of Polish MFA also noted that internal reforms in Ukraine should not be delayed by armed conflict with Moscow or “the conflict of identity” with Poland.
Officers of the Security Service of Ukraine jointly with the Prosecutor’s office blocked the export of smuggled amber with the weight of more than one ton to the European countries in Zakarpattia region.
The stuff was placed in trunk compartment and was packed into travel bags.
Operational services established that one of the customs officers facilitated the smuggling of the amber across the state border of Ukraine,’ SBU reports.
Ukrainian anticorruption investigators have launched a probe into alleged illegal enrichment by a top intelligence official whose family reportedly owns three villas worth millions of dollars.
The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry, together with the StratCom Ukraine Center for Strategic Communications, has launched an online campaign #CorrectUA, during which it will ask foreign media outlets to spell the Ukrainian capital correctly , the ministry's press service has said.
The Foreign Ministry invited all Ukrainian citizens and their friends to join the campaign.
The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry has demanded access to Ukrainian film director Oleh Sentsov, who has been on hunger strike in a Russian prison for more than four months.
A monument to Anne of Kyiv, the daughter of Grand Prince of Kyiv Yaroslav the Wise, the wife of King Henry I of France and the regent&nbsp;of France in 1060-1065, has been unveiled in the French city of Toulouse.
Five members of one family in Ukraine’s southern region of Odesa have been hospitalized with symptoms of anthrax after slaughtering cattle, the Health Ministry says.
The United States Senate has unanimously passed a bipartisan resolution that has become the first ever legal act of the United States Congress, where the Holodomor of 1932-1933 was designated as genocide against the Ukrainian people.
The resolution was the result of fruitful interaction between the Embassy of Ukraine in the United States, the Ukrainian community of America and friends of Ukraine in the United States Senate.
Ukraine has declared a Hungarian consul persona non grata and demanded he leave the country within 72 hours.
Head of the National Security Bureau of the Republic of Poland, Pawel Soloch, states that the tension in relations between Ukraine and Hungary should not affect the development of cooperation between Ukraine and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization as well as the European Union.
The official commented on Budapest blocking Kyiv’s participation in NATO events.
The Consul of Hungary in the town of Berehove, Ukraine’s Zakarpattia region, has been declared persona non grata.
The consul must leave the territory of Ukraine within the next 72 hours.
The Security Service of Ukraine assures that the legislative branch of Ukraine needs to decide on the possibility of the implementation of the criminal liability for the dual citizenship.
Viktor Kononenko, the Deputy Head of the SBU claimed this as Interfax-Ukraine reported.
Hungary will immediately retaliate if Ukraine expels the Hungarian consul from the town of Berehove, Ukraine’s Zakarpattia region, over the issue of Hungarian passports to Ukrainian citizens.
Ukraine’s Foreign Ministry on October 4 plans to send Hungary a note informing that the Hungarian consul in Berehove must leave Ukraine.
United States Permanent Representative to NATO Kay Bailey Hutchison says that the United States continues to call on Hungary not to oppose a NATO-Ukraine Commission.
Hungary started to block any Ukraine-NATO Commission activity over a new education law adopted by Ukraine to introduce Ukrainian as the language of tuition.
Hungary to recall its consul from Ukraine’s Berehovo this week otherwise he’ll be expelled Ukraine’s Minister of Foreign Affairs Pavlo Klimkin says that following a reported case of issuing Hungarian passports to Ukrainian citizens, Ukraine is going to expel the Hungarian consul from Berehove this week if Budapest does not recall its… View news.
Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin has said Russia will use the situation with the issuance of Hungarian passports to Ukrainians in Zakarpattia to destabilize the region in particular and Ukraine as a whole.
The Kremlin’s actions are neither in the interests of Hungarians in Zakarpattia nor in the interests of Hungary.
Foreign Minister of Ukraine Pavlo Klimkin gave a week to the Foreign Ministry of Hungary to withdraw its consul from Ukraine as he reported on Facebook.
If it is not done this week, we will send a note to the Hungarian side on his expulsion,” Klimkin emphasized.
Also, the minister reminded that Hungary violated the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.
Of course, by definition, nobody should hide the fact of acquisition of rights and commitments,” he said.
Criminal proceeding for the issuance of Hungarian passports to the residents of Zakarpattia region investigated under the article of the Criminal Code on high treason.
The press office of the regional Prosecutor’s office claimed, Interfax-Ukraine reports.
This is a preliminary legal qualification,’ the press office of the regional Prosecutor’s office claimed.
The prosecutor’s office in Ukraine’s Zakarpattia region jointly with the SBU Security Service of Ukraine is investigating the issue of Hungarian passports to Ukrainian citizens in the town of Berehove as high treason.
In keeping with Ukraine’s Criminal Code, high treason is punishable by imprisonment for a term of 12 to 15 years.
It is not an offense for Ukrainian nationals not to report the fact that they are also in possession of a passport issued by another country, according to Tamás Menczer, the Hungarian foreign ministry’s Minister of State for Information and Hungary’s International Image.
Hungary will not be recalling its Consul General or Consul from Berehove in view of these affairs, “no matter how much the Ukrainians recommend this,” according to Menczer.
The event was organized by the Embassy of Ukraine in cooperation with the diplomatic missions of Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States, Ambassador of Ukraine to Hungary Liubov Nepop wrote on Facebook.
We organized this event together with the Embassies of Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States in Hungary,” the ambassador wrote.
We, for our part, will help this community and worry about it,” Klimkin noted. 68% of the conscripts did not show up at military enlistment offices in Uzhgorod, western Ukraine.
The local city council reported this on Thursday. ‘1,377 conscripts are due to show up at the military enlistment office, and about a hundred of them should be enlisted for compulsory military service.
Currently, one of the major issues is the failure to show up at the enlistment office; 68 % of young men did not show up,’ the message says.
The evasion from military duty envisages administrative and criminal responsibility; the first act of evasion results in a fine in the amount from five to seven personal exemptions, the second one – in the amount from 10 to 15 personal exemptions.
The toughest legal measure of punishment in this case is three years-long imprisonment.
The autumn military draft began on October 1 and will be running through December 31.
It was supposed to end in November, but the General Staff of the Armed Forces admitted the term was extended until December because the National Guard and the State Border Guard need to man the active duty units.
