On the basis of a review by the Council, the information concerning certain persons and entities in Annex I to Regulation No 269/2014 should be amended and entries for four deceased persons should be deleted.
Following changes in the ownership structure of three entities, Annex I to Regulation No 269/2014 should be amended in order to keep the measures against them in place.
Annex I to Regulation Regulation No 269/2014 shall be amended as set out in the Annex to this Regulation.
Those enterprises were thus effectively confiscated by the Crimean ‘authorities’ and the ‘Crimean Sea Ports’ has benefited from the illegal transfer of their ownership.
His ‘election’ was decreed unconstitutional by the acting Ukrainian President Oleksandr Turchynov on 1 March 2014.
He actively lobbied for the ‘referendum’ of 16 March 2014 and was one of the co-signatories of the ‘treaty on Crimea's accession to the Russian Federation’ of 18 March 2014.
On 9 April 2014, he was appointed acting ‘Head’ of the so-called ‘Republic of Crimea’ by President Putin.
Aksyonov subsequently decreed that the offices of ‘Head’ and ‘Prime Minister’ be combined.
For his involvement in the annexation process he has been awarded with Russian State order ‘For Merit to the Fatherland’ — first degree.
As former Deputy Prime Minister of Crimea, Temirgaliev played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the ‘Supreme Council’ concerning the ‘referendum’ of 16 March 2014 against the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
He was acting ‘governor’ of Sevastopol from 1 to 14 April 2014 and is a former ‘elected’ Chairman of the ‘Legislative Assembly’ of the City of Sevastopol.
He is responsible for part of the Russian military presence in Crimea which is undermining the sovereignty of Ukraine and assisted the Crimean authorities in preventing public demonstrations against moves towards a referendum and incorporation into Russia.
Currently employed by the Central apparatus of the Russian Ministry of Defence.
Active participant and organiser of separatist actions, coordinator of actions of the ‘Russian tourists’ in Donetsk.
Former head of the ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ Central Electoral Commission.
Former permanent member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation; Former Director of the Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russian Federation.
As of 4 January 2017, Director of the Russian Institute for Strategic Studies.
Former vice-prime minister of the ‘Donetsk People's Republic’, responsible for security and law enforcement.
Mr Malofeev is closely linked to Ukrainian separatists in Eastern Ukraine and Crimea.
He is a former employer of Mr Borodai, former so-called ‘Prime Minister’ of the ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ and met with Mr Aksyonov, so-called ‘Prime Minister’ of the so-called ‘Republic of Crimea’, during the period of the Crimean annexation process.
Former Deputy Minister of Defence and, in that capacity, involved in supporting the deployment of Russian troops in Ukraine.
According to the present Russian Ministry of Defence structure, in that capacity he participated in shaping and implementing the policy of the Russian Government.
This is in breach of Ukrainian constitutional law, and, as a consequence, of international law, thus threatening the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law.
In terms of volume of trade, it is the biggest commercial seaport in Crimea.
It has become the dominant player in the market, while it had no presence in Crimea before the annexation.
By buying or taking over from branches of retreating banks operating in Crimea, RNCB supported materially and financially the actions of the Russian government to integrate Crimea into the Russian Federation, thus undermining Ukraine's territorial integrity.
In participating formally in the illegal ‘elections’ it has therefore actively supported actions and policies which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and to further destabilise Ukraine.
Public ‘organisation’ that presented candidates in the so-called ‘elections’ of the so-called ‘Donetsk People's Republic’2 November 2014.
According to its stated objectives, it aims at providing all-round, effective assistance to ‘Novorossiya’, including by helping militia fighting in Eastern Ukraine, thereby supporting policies undermining the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine.
Associated with a person listed for undermining the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
