THOMAS GRAHAM, RAJAN MENON, AND JACK SNYDER T he conflict in Ukraine that began in early 2014 produced the worst crisis between Russia and the West since the end of the Cold War.
In its wake, foreign policy mavens have engaged in contentious debates over Ukraine’s future and the West’s choices.
During the Obama administration, the West imposed sanctions on Russia, viewing its annexation of Crimea and material support for ERIC POWELL rebel forces in Ukraine’s eastern Donbass region as violations of the basic norms of post-Cold War international relations.
This approach to Russia was based on a consensus within Europe and between Europe and the United States.
Donald Trump It is not far-fetched to think about Ukraine— was elected United States president, bringing to the office a country whose name derives from the Slavic a disdain for the American establishment’s libword for “borderland”—as a possible buffer eral internationalist foreign policy.
Brexbeen contested by or divided between Russia it, disarray in the European Union, and the rise and rival powers.
Throughout, aspiring Ukrainiof nationalist and populist parties, which held an leaders struggled to forge a unifying national in common with Trump a more positive view identity and join disparate Ukrainian-populatof Vladimir Putin’s Russia.
Because of these ed lands into a single polity with independence changes, the West may shift gears and seek and sovereignty.
On at least two occasions—in an accommodation with Russia over Ukraine’s the mid-17th century and during World War I status.
As such, intermittent discussions in the and the immediate aftermath—a fledgling West about the feasibility and desirability of Ukrainian state, which arose more from unforeUkraine becoming a buffer state have acquired seen geopolitical circumstances than by design, added significance, notwithstanding that such existed briefly as a buffer between Russian and talk has always made Ukrainians uneasy due to its adversaries.
Today, Ukraine finds itself in their aspirations to be part of the West—politisimilar circumstances. cally, economically, and militarily.
To many observers—and even more so Buffer zones separate more powerful states to many Ukrainians themselves—referring to without being aligned with or controlled by Ukraine as a possible buffer zone reeks of retthem.
German Chancellor Angela 1955 Austrian State Treaty, offers one example Merkel has derided Putin’s proclivity for power of a successful buffer state, Switzerland since the politics and spheres of influence as “old think19th century another.
Her put-down reflected the common beas buffers generally have internal cohesion and lief in the West that the end of the Cold War have reached a national consensus that avoidhad cast balance-of-power-based statecraft ing formal alliances serves the national interest, onto history’s ash heap, along with great powdefined minimally as territorial integrity and ers’ claims to special spheres of influence, bufself-determination.
The new international ample—have had military prowess and a terrain order featured, in theory if not always in reality, sufficient to deter would-be conquerors.
Yet a respect for legal principles, people’s freedom buffer lasts only so long as the powerful states to decide their own fate, and universal human party to the deal have stakes in maintaining it rights.
This forward-looking, optimistic vision or lack the capacity to wreck it. shaped how the West responded to Russian THOMAS GRAHAM is a managing director at Kissinger Associates and a senior fellow at Yale’s Jackson Institute for Global Affairs.
The underlying conducted by Rating Group Ukraine for the Inthinking smacks of imperial intrusion.
But this ternational Republican Institute, 54 percent of arrangement can preserve the independence Ukrainians said they aspired to join the EU, while and self-determination of weak states wedged just 15 percent chose the Customs Union between rival great powers.
The history of 19thcomprising Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan. century Afghanistan and Siam, and Switzerland Yet the strength of support varied by region.
In after the Napoleonic Wars, reveals that buffer western Ukraine, 82 percent of the respondents states can in fact protect themselves and foil opted for the EU and only 2 percent for the CU. great powers’ ambitions to conquer them.
The But in the east, which historically has been most security of a buffer increases further when the closely connected to Russia, support for the EU flanking great powers fear that engaging in conwas weakest, at 24 percent, and enthusiasm for flict over the territory will drain resources and the CU was highest, at 35 percent. distract from more pressing concerns.
Even in areas that most strongly favored the EU, support for joining the Atlantic alliance RESEMBLES SWITZERLAND. was markedly lower.
Moreover, NATO membership failed to gain majority support in Ukraine as a whole.
Overall, 39 percent responded that be successful, buffer states must forge national they would vote for Ukraine’s membership in unity, mobilize their citizenry, exploit the adNATO; 32 percent said they would vote against vantages conferred by geography, and conduct that choice.
The rest responded it was too difforeign policies that turn great power competificult to answer or that they would decline to tion to their advantage.
In short, buffer states need not be pasFor an independent buffer state to emerge, sive objects. flanking powers must conclude that the anticiYet it is not always wise to establish a bufpated costs of occupying the territory exceed fer.
Historically, powerful bility, but buffers wracked by domestic turmoil states have created buffer zones without taking can create instability and ratchet up competimuch account of the inhabitants’ sentiments. tion among rival great powers (consider Poland But there is no reason why this must be the case in the 18th century), perishing in the process. today.
With the ideals of democracy and self-deOut of opportunism or fear, neighboring states termination holding unprecedented sway across may react to power vacuums by aligning with the world, a buffer zone-based settlement that internal factions in order to gain influence.
The common Soviet experience, nominally dependent clients may act recklessly interrupted by the Nazi occupation of parts of in pursuit of their own agendas, triggering criUkraine during World War II, did not last long ses that draw in their great-power patrons and enough to blur these distinctions and create a increase the likelihood of war.
Worse, upheaval shared political culture. within the buffer may tempt a powerful neighbor Religion has not provided a unifying glue to step in, prompting its rivals to react.
Thailand was the only in Ukraine reflected the differing historical exSoutheast Asian state to escape outright colonizaperiences of its regions.
Similarly, the oligarchs that For Ukraine, success as a buffer would take the dominate Ukraine’s politics and economy have form of securing its territorial integrity, develbeen regionally based but with varying interoping a capacity for self-determination, and national ties, many of them to Russia.
But a significant ethnic Russian majority, equating it starts in an unfavorable position.
Ukraine’s east rule out national unity; still less do they validate had been an integral part of the Russian Empire the trope of Russian nationalists that Ukraine for centuries, starting in 1654, with an elite cannot be considered a country.
Its south had been part are crosscutting—splits along class lines, for exof the Ottoman Empire until the late 18th cenample—they can blur regional distinctions and tury, and Odessa, the great Black Sea port, had ease the task of forging a national identity.
The Ukraine, however, the various divisions have ofwest had been part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuten been mutually reinforcing, creating distinct ania and then the Polish-Lithuanian Commonand disparate regions—the east, south, west, wealth before being absorbed by the Austrian and center.
Regional divides have been apparent in votAnd that’s a truncated account of the many ruling patterns—for parliament and president— ers of western Ukraine.
Each of these Ukrainiansince the end of the Soviet Union and have populated regions had different political orders contributed to the country’s political crises.
Yushchenko’s tions Index,” noted that “both petty and grand supporters rejected Yanukovych’s apparent nucorruption are still flourishing”; that Ukrainimerical win as the product of election rigging, ans regard the parliament, political parties, law while political leaders in the east threatened a enforcement agencies, and judiciary as “highly referendum on secession if Yushchenko, whose corrupt”; and that the two main anti-corruption power base lay in the center and west, were to agencies lack adequate funding and freedom become president.
Ultimately, a second election from governmental influence. was held after the Supreme Court ruled that When pollsters ask Ukrainians about the there had been voter fraud, and Yushchenko progress their country has made since the flight won.
Still, Yanukovych received 44 percent of of Yanukovych, corruption accounts for much the vote, dominating his eastern strongholds. of their dismay and disappointment, but so When a popular uprising overthrew President does the state of the economy.
The World Bank Yanukovych in February 2014, its deepest supreported that Ukraine’s economy contracted by port was concentrated in central and western 6. percent in 2014 and 9. percent in 2015 Ukraine.
The ensuing crisis involving Russia’s annexation of Crimea and a Russian-supported insurgency in the Donbass RUSSIA DELIBERATELY strengthened Ukrainian national identity.
But at the same time, it sparked a war that has taken EXACERBATES THE FISSURES much of the Donbass out of Kiev’s control, raising the prospect of secession.
The conflict, in WITHIN UKRAINE. which thousands have been killed, has only led to more animosity. in 2018.
The hopes kindled by the fall of YanuUnemployment rose from 7. percent in 2013 kovych for far-reaching reform and integration to 9. percent in 2015.
The World Bank classified a isfy quickly under the best of circumstances. quarter of all Ukrainians as severely or moderBut progress has lagged far behind the public’s ately poor.
Elements of the old politiress in cutting the fiscal and current account cal system persist.
Most of the key leaders now deficits, stabilizing public debt, and increasing at the helm, including President Petro Poroshinternational reserves. enko, previously held positions of authority in The continuing conflict in Ukraine’s east government or were powerbrokers.
And oligaradds to the uncertainty about the economy. chic clans continue to work their will, capturThe two Minsk Agreements—signed in Septeming parts of the government, the economy, and ber 2014 and in February 2015 after the first even civil society while frustrating the most deal fell apart—were aimed at ending the fightcommitted reformers in the administration, ing, creating a durable cease-fire, and enabling some of whom have resigned in disgust. a long-term political settlement between RusCorruption remains rampant.
Moscow remain at odds over the meaning and Ukraine’s less-than-ideal conditions do not implementation of its key provisions.
Efing to the U.N., some 9,600 people had died by fective buffer states have also been helped by late 2016, and many more (nearly 1. million terrain that creates barriers between them and as of August 2015) have been forced from parts potential invaders.
Geography, alas, does not proof Luhansk and Donetsk provinces as well as vide such assistance to Ukraine.
The hardships are especially evident in defensible borders, and its location on the East the east, where factories have closed, joblessEuropean plain throws up few obstacles to miliness has increased, property (both private and tary operations, especially compared to the forpublic) has been destroyed or heavily damaged, bidding mountain ranges protecting Switzerland and the environment has been despoiled. and 19th-century Afghanistan.
Ukraine’s mounContinued violence has boosted the power tains are in southern Crimea and in the far west, of private militias, generally funded by various adjacent to the borders of Hungary, Slovakia, and oligarchs, though progress has been made in Romania.
Its major rivers—the Donets, Dnieper, bringing them under governmental control.
BeSouthern Bug, and Dniester—can be crossed or cause of the upheaval, Russia retains abundant circumvented easily by a modern army. opportunities for intervening in the Donbass, If Putin has refrained from making good on indirectly and directly, using military and nonhis boast that Russian troops could reach Kiev in military means.
These conditions also make the a matter of days, it is because of Ukraine’s deinherently difficult tasks of building a rule-of-law mography and conurbations, not its terrain.
If society, eliminating corruption, and achieving Russian forces were to advance westward, they sustained economic growth even more daunting. would soon enter more hostile areas with smaller Russia deliberately exacerbates the fissures ethnic Russian populations.
Moscow seeks to draw Ukraine large Ukrainians cities—Kharkiv, Dnipropetrointo its orbit, in part by thwarting the consolivsk, even Mariupol—would likely involve bloody dation of its independence.
These instruments have been and geographical realities, Ukraine’s chances of used to divide and weaken pro-Western forces becoming a successful buffer state depend not and to stymie the reforms that meet Western just on its internal situation but also on the balconditions for support or bring Ukraine closer ance of power and resolve between Russia and to Western norms and practices. the West.
Unfortunately for Ukraine, both are The West, by contrast, has unwittingly reindramatically asymmetrical and favor Russia. forced political divisions in Ukraine.
The West Ukraine matters more to Russia than it does to wants to shape Ukraine into an EU-leaning freethe West, so Moscow is willing to pay a higher market democracy.
Most importantly, in political instability and fostering economic difthe minds of Russia’s leaders, Ukraine remains ficulties, thereby raising the cost to the West of inextricably part of the Russian national idensupporting Kiev.
As the former Soviet state with the to project power into Ukraine, but it also has second-greatest economic potential after Russia, no desire to do so, for the obvious reason that it Ukraine remains pivotal to the success of Puwould be waging war on Russia’s doorstep.
And it provides Euro-Atlantic community hardly needs Ukraine the strategic depth that Putin and his national for its identity, prosperity, or security.
Indeed, security apparatus consider critical for Rusthe current interest in Ukraine from Washingsia’s defense.
Moreover, Putin needs to demonton and Brussels has less to do with Ukraine strate—to the West and would-be opponents at itself than with Russia’s violation of European home—that revolutions backed by NATO and the norms of statecraft and the West’s relationship with Russia.
Even if the West has strength in numbers—the EU has 28 members and overlaps considerably with NATO, which has 28 as well— IN THE MINDS OF RUSSIA’S coordination and consensus-building are challenging in two organizations composed of willful LEADERS, UKRAINE REMAINS democracies.
This gives Russia opportunities to INEXTRICABLY PART OF THE RUSSIAN NATIONAL IDENTITY. manipulate existing divisions within the EU and NATO or to wait patiently for them to emerge.
Even the Western liberal diplomatic establishment, which has sought closer ties with Ukraine, realizes that that is a long-term enEU never have and never will prevail in Russia or terprise at best.
Following the 2014 crisis in the other states of the former Soviet Union.
For Ukraine, the EU sought to prevent Ukraine from these reasons, though Russia has undoubtedly falling back into the Russian orbit and, to this been hurt by Western sanctions, its leaders have end, sought to foster effective democracy and not changed course in Ukraine.
That was the main goal of the culate that the unity the West needs to maintain Association Agreement between Ukraine and sanctions will eventually erode. the European Union.
With the EU having fallen Russia’s advantage in proximity, particularly into disarray, the ascendance of nationalist parwhen it comes to using force, cannot be overties with little enthusiasm for reaching out to stated.
Ukraine borders both Russia and NATO Ukraine, and Trump in the White House, this apcountries.
But Russian forces based close to the proach by Western governments toward Ukraine Ukrainian border can rapidly move into Ukraine may run aground. and can quickly be supplemented with reguIn the abstract, the West has more resources lar military units and “volunteers,” as has been than Russia.
NATO forces jor international financial institutions, and has enjoy none of those advantages.
It worked both rious observer believes that the West will risk because the USSR and the United States agreed war with Russia over Ukraine. on a mutually satisfactory formula and because Despite these Russian advantages, the West, the policies of successive Austrian governments especially the United States, has given no indipromoted the country’s unity, stability, prospercation that it will abandon Ukraine, even as its ity, and democracy. strategy, in Ukraine and toward Russia, has had When the conditions that favor the cremixed success at best.
The West continues to ation of buffer zones are absent, however, great provide financial assistance to Kiev, even as it powers vying for influence in an intermediate makes conditions stricter and presses the governterritory might need to consider alternative soment to launch a serious anti-corruption camlutions to a buffer state—ones involving much paign.
Although dissenting voices are growing greater interference by one or both sides.
Five louder, influential leaders in the West, especially such outcomes exist, some resembling a buffer in the United States and Germany, continue to solution, others not. support anti-Russian sanctions and insist on the fulfillment of the Minsk Agreements as a condi1.
NATO has taken steps to The first involves the decentralization of beef up its military presence in Eastern Europe. political authority in a buffer state in ways that The size of the NATO Response Force has been address outsiders’ concerns.
The United States allocated $3.4 key watch over Iraqi Kurdistan while the Sunnibillion to the European Reassurance Initiative in dominated center and west remain zones of con2016—four times the amount they earmarked in flict in which American forces and advisers aid 2015.
Moreover, United States compete for influence while avoidthey stoke Moscow’s suspicions.
Or consider the Ottoman Emplans to fight Russia in Ukraine, but as Russia’s pire.
Russia, France, Britain, Italy, and later Gerleaders see it, NATO is building its presence on many carved it into protectorates and angled for Russia’s border.
The argument that these steps direct or indirect control of the Turkish Straits constitute a response to the insecurity in NATO’s through treaties, subversion, or conquest.
Nominally, there would continue to be its foreign policy in order to create a buffer zone. a Ukrainian state, though substantively its terriAustria during the Cold War remained a liberal tory and autonomy would be compromised.
In any event, trying to enact this third would violate Ukraine’s territorial integrity as alternative would amount to taking stopgap meawell as its freedom to determine many of its own sures rather than carefully considered steps with policies.
It would amount to a deal done to end a plan for Ukraine’s political future. the West’s confrontation—at Ukraine’s expense.
RIGHTS OVER VITAL INTERESTS Great powers have also divided a would-be Great powers can also fashion arrangements buffer zone into exclusive spheres of influence— that give them special rights to secure what they the fourth possibility.
Thus the Cold War prosee as vital interests in intermediate countries. duced a political, military, and economic “iron Historical examples include long-term military curtain” stretching from Stettin, Poland, to Tribasing rights; control over land transit corridors este, Italy.
In this scenario, each power has strong or straits; limitations on arms or fortifications; incentives to strengthen administrative arrangereceivership of the army, navy, or customs to an ments that consolidate its hold over its zone and outside power; recognition of droit de regard—or to deploy the military forces needed to defend right to consultation—by an outside power over it.
Power vacuums are all but eliminated by this co-religionists or co-ethnic populations; prohisolution.
Temptations to engage in pre-emptive bitions on political groups objectionable to an outside power; imposition of international laws THE KREMLIN SEEKS regarding minority treatment or criminal accountability for atrocities; and a foreign role administering sacred spaces.
Many of these approaches were attempted by Great Britain, RusPREPONDERANT INFLUENCE sia, and Germany in the Ottoman Empire’s waning years.
This structure imposes far more severe IN ALL OF THE COUNTRY, restrictions on the intermediate state’s behavior NOT PREDOMINANCE JUST IN A POOR, UNSTABLE than does a buffer zone solution, and it is hard to envision Russia and the West, to say nothing of Ukraine, agreeing to such a deal.
A variation on this theme involves forms of joint administration or internationalization.
Exaggression recede by reducing uncertainty about amples include the system of Four-Power control a rival’s commitment to protecting its sphere. over Berlin; international peacekeeping operaStability emerges through deterrence, though tions, such as the United Nations Interim Force in the peace can certainly be punctuated by crises Lebanon ; and international trusteeships, that, as in Berlin, produce anxious moments such as those in places like Bosnia and Kosovo. and require careful management.
This form of This model seems best suited to managing constability is most likely when the major powers flicts that are localized or involve territories of believe that they have assets worth defending, symbolic, rather than strategic, value.
Moreover, can do so by mobilizing local resources, and it requires a high degree of trust among the excan muster the will to act.
Furthermore, the Ukraine, this approach could consign all of the deep distrust that now exists between Russia and country to the Russian sphere.
For that very reathe West would preclude agreement on virtuson, no Ukrainian government would accept it. ally any form of shared administration.
Besides, And no American government, even one led by neither the West nor Russia wants this type of Trump, would gain congressional support for it. responsibility in Ukraine.
Instead, they seek reMost states within the EU, if not all, would reject liable control over its policies, which can be it, and America’s NATO allies would be shaken. achieved by indirect, less burdensome means.
SEIZING CONTROL sian and Western spheres of influence is not Finally, the prospects for a buffer state ara near-term possibility.
A partition along the rangement can evaporate when one of the neighline of control between the separatist terboring powers makes a unilateral move to seize ritories in the Donbass and the rest of the the advantage at its adversaries’ expense, whethUkraine, coupled with recognition of Ruser through a military fait accompli, intimidation, sian sovereignty in Crimea, appears unworkpiecemeal attacks, or economic pressure.
The Ukrainian government opposes any power might decide not to parry the challenge, such scheme, though it does have kernels of either because it deems the territory strategically support, particularly in western Ukraine and unimportant or because the opponent has insuramong some Western experts. mountable local advantages.
Even assuming that a buffer posing, let alone embracing, such an outcome. zone solution proved possible in Ukraine—and The West, for its part, could not accept a plan acceptable to Ukrainians—Russia could undo it establishing spheres of influence without abanlater through unilateral moves.
Whether it would doning its principled position on sovereignty and in fact take these steps would depend on the casting doubt on the future of European secustrategic concerns, the nature of Russia’s political rity and the norms prohibiting the use of force order, and the reigning national security perspecto change borders.
And Russia has made clear tive among Russian leaders. that it will not bear responsibility for rebuilding the war-battered Donbass; nor has it shown CHOICES FOR THE WEST any interest in a partition plan for Ukraine.
There the country, not predominance just in a poor, can be no universally correct answer.
Continunstable rump state. gent circumstances will determine which of the Decoupling Ukraine’s domestic and foreign above pathways proves most viable.
Any form of joint administration by RusSome prominent experts have proposed presia and the West would be a non-starter.
Given cisely such a solution, but it has gotten little its commitment to democratic norms, the West traction in Europe, the United States, Russia, or could not impose this solution on Ukraine, and Ukraine.
Already, Western governPolitical authority in Ukraine has already been ments are stressing that NATO has no plans to devolved de facto, as the government has moved expand eastward in the near to medium term. to transfer some powers to the regions as part of Kiev could probably live with this arrangement, the constitutional reform process.
The question, providing it still allowed Ukraine to forge closer though, is what the fine print cementing this arpolitical and economic ties with the EU. rangement would be and whether Moscow and The pot could be sweetened further for Kiev can agree on the details.
Ukraine if the plan were to implement a moraThe outlook for any further decentralizatorium on joining military alliances, with the tion remains dim.
Moscow has called for the option to hold a referendum on the question federalization of Ukraine, which in its reading after a set period of 10 years or so.
But this apwould also entail giving the eastern provinces of proach would not necessarily appeal to Russia, Donetsk and Luhansk substantial control over which would likely view the prospect of Ukraine the country’s foreign policy.
Kiev rejects this eventually joining the EU, let alone NATO, as a threat to Russia’s security.
And that assessment will not change unless Russia’s internal order and foreign policy principles converge with A MISSTEP COULD BEGET A Europe’s—an unlikely outcome.
The Kremlin remains apprehensive about the prospect of CRISIS THAT COULD SEGUE Ukraine drifting westward—economically, politically, and geopolitically.
Still, any chance for INTO A CONFRONTATION. a buffer state solution to the crisis will involve some version of neutrality—worked out with proposal, and Western leaders worry that grantUkrainians’ participation in the negotiation and ing more power to the eastern provinces would consent to abide by the outcome. allow Moscow to determine Ukraine’s soverIdeally, the United States and Europe—and eign choices.
Moreover, the competition for most Ukrainians—want a Ukraine in which influence in Ukraine may persist even if Kiev, Western influence predominates.
As for RusMoscow, and the Donbass leadership reach sia, it wants Ukraine to be part of what in 2010 agreement on the particularities of federalizaRussia’s then-president Dmitry Medvedev called tion.
But barfederalism acceptable to all three parties with a ring a radical shift in the balance of power, neiprovision for Ukraine’s neutrality may offer the ther the West nor Russia has the wherewithal best chance for ending the war and enabling a to incorporate Ukraine fully into its sphere.
Yet political settlement that makes Ukraine whole neither appears inclined to abandon the compeonce again. tition for Ukraine, either.
A Ukraine be strong support in Kiev for joining the EU, and settlement based on devolution and abstention significant enthusiasm for entering NATO, neifrom regional alliances makes sense if the mother organization will offer membership in the tives behind Russia’s assertive Ukraine policy foreseeable future.
Interest in adding members are fears of color revolutions and a NATO that has peaked and will diminish given the political includes Ukraine.
Crimea’s status would neutrality would amount to throwing Ukraine have to be put aside until a later time, though to the wolves.
Ukraine would not recognize the territory’s inAt the same time, there are risks in letting corporation into Russia.
Confronted by a weak motivated and truly seeks rapprochement with Ukraine, Russia and the West will each continue the West, concluding and implementing this to suspect that the other will exploit opportunikind of agreement could meet his needs.
As part of the competiwould also help make an independent Ukraine a tion they will cultivate Ukrainian clients.
The more effective, stabilizing buffer between Russia clients, believing that they have their patrons’ and the West. unqualified support, might act independently to Putin’s rejection of such an agreement, defurther their own particular interests, thereby spite encouragement from the United States and the EU, aggravating the external rivalry.
That way lies a would clarify that Russia sees the continued future of intermittent crises.
As a rule, an atmodestabilization of Ukraine and of Europe as essphere of mistrust increases the odds of mispersential to its objectives.
Amid uncertainty and suspicion, states theless decide against a pledge of protection on tend to regard even their rivals’ defensive moves the grounds that Ukraine’s proximity to Russia as offensive gambits, especially during periods of makes a defense commitment too risky, even if tension.
Applied to the Ukraine crisis, this means it does not involve inducting Ukraine into NATO. that a misstep could beget a crisis that could segThat would still not rule out helping Ukraine ecoue into a confrontation—not because Russia or nomically through aid, trade, advice, and investthe West seek one but because the volatile mix ment.
As for Europe and the U.S., Russia’s rejecwould be to try and ascertain whether Putin is tion of a reasonable settlement on Ukraine, or sincere in his claim to want improved U.S.-Ruscheating on the terms, would leave them with no sian relations.
While it would be risky and inapdoubt about the problem they face and the need propriate for the United States or the EU to take the lead for more robust efforts to deal with it. in negotiations with Russia over Ukraine’s status, Ukraine has many features that make it far the West can certainly discuss with Kiev the opfrom ideal as a buffer.
These might ment initiated by Kiev can be feasible if the involve a package of decentralization, neutrality, apparent economic stabilization of Ukraine and demilitarization provisions that would both continues, political and economic reforms are address Russian concerns and stabilize the predeepened, and Russia settles for a deal that carious political and military situation.
