Main 0 Google+ Facebook Twitter Vkontakte Odnoklassniki .push; A woman kicks a cut-out figure depicting Russian President Vladimir Putin in Kiev, Ukraine March 28, 2019Vasily Fedosenko/ReutersIt’s election season on Kremlin TV, but the presidential campaign receiving wall-to-wall coverage from Russia’s federal channels is taking place across the border in Ukraine.
With no chance of achieving a favorable result, Russia is simply getting its excuses in early.The Kremlin certainly has a lot of explaining to do.
Meanwhile, Russia must watch from the sidelines as Ukraine’s three leading presidential candidates denounce Putin’s war while burnishing their credentials as opponents of Kremlin aggression.Moscow still has its own preferences in Ukraine’s race.
Veteran campaigner and former two-time Ukrainian Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko is also seen as a potential improvement due to her past readiness to cut murky gas deals with the Kremlin, but she has spent much of the campaign promising the return of occupied eastern Ukraine and Crimea, while lambasting Poroshenko over alleged defense sector corruption.Both Zelenskiy and Tymoshenko have faced campaign trail attempts to portray them as Kremlin stooges, but in reality they are a million miles away from the openly pro-Russian politicians who once dominated the Ukrainian electoral landscape.
Even if either of Poroshenko’s chief rivals was personally inclined to seek a negotiated compromise with Russia, they would find their room for maneuver severely restricted by prevailing Ukrainian public opinion, which strongly opposes anything even hinting at capitulation to the Kremlin.It is not difficult to understand why Russia has become so toxic to Ukrainian voters.
The Kremlin’s fateful decision to attack Ukraine has proven a geopolitical blunder of historic proportions that has fractured what was previously one of the most closely entwined bilateral relationships on the planet.Moscow’s miscalculation has its roots in the lingering imperial hubris that prevents many in Russia from thinking of Ukraine as a separate country.
This means that a quarter of Yanukovych’s voters cannot vote on Sunday.Nor is there any reason to believe Moscow can eventually regain the ground it has lost since 2014.
None of this would have been possible without the catalyst of Russian aggression.Ukraine’s nation-building odyssey is still a work in progress and it may take decades before the divorce from Russia is complete.
Three hundred years of Russian dominance over Ukraine are drawing to a close, and the Kremlin has nobody to blame but itself.Read the original text at Atlantic Council.
When copying materials for Internet publications, a direct open hyperlink for search engines must be given.
The link should be placed regardless of full or partial use of our siteпїЅs materials.
Hyperlink must be placed in the subtitle or in the first paragraph of the material.
