The EU’s Strategy; security; NATO; and Russia’s polar-opposite integration strategies with Ukraine, Kerch Strait dividing the country between its political and economic aﬃliation with either Brussels or Moscow, were considered as factors causing tensions in Ukraine.
At the same time an intensifying opposition towards President Yanukovich’s leadership was another factor contributing to the deterioration of this crisis.
A series of scholarly accounts examined the afore mentioned causes for intensifying violence of this conﬂict.
The ﬁrst Ukrainian-Russian confrontation in the Sea of Azov in November 2018 necessitates an assessment of the security implications of this re-intensiﬁcation of a conﬂict which seemed to be frozen for several years.
The imminent threat is reﬂected in the Ukrainian President’s request for support by NATO and the implementation of martial law.
By examining the EU’s response to the Ukraine crisis between the annexation of Crimea in March 2014 and the renewed Russian-Ukrainian confrontation in the Sea of Azov in November 2018, this article examines the EU’s capacities in providing security in Ukraine.
Introduction The Ukrainian President Yanukovich gave in to the coercion by his Russian counterpart not to initial an Association Agreement with the EU at the Vilnius summit on November 28 and 29 2013.
The result were protests of pro-European Ukrainians on Kiev’s Maidan , the gradual increase of violence, Russia’s annexation of Crimea in March 2014 and a protracting military conﬂict with Russia.
The Ukrainian-Russian confrontation in the Sea of Azov on 25 November 2018 is the latest evidence of the severity of security concerns stemming from the Ukraine crisis.
CONTACT Anna-Sophie Maass s.maass@rug.nl This article has been republished with minor changes.
MAASS There are dissonnant scholarly interpretations about who is responsible for the worsening of this crisis.
Unlike Snyder, Mearsheimer accuses the United States and the EU of having ‘peeled Ukraine away from Russia’ by seeking to promote democracy whilst spreading ‘Western values’ , in allusion to the EU’s diplomatic mission to Kiev at the height of the Orange Revolution in November 2004.
The aim of this article is to extend the scope of this debate on the origins of the Ukraine crisis.
A mere focus on the extent to which the EU, Russia and Ukraine are responsible for this crisis is obsolete as it fails to examine its implications for European security since the Vilnius summit in November 2013 and the open confrontation between Russia and Ukraine in the Sea of Azov in November 2018.
The increasing security concern stemming from these developments does not merely have an impact on Ukraine, but touches upon wide-ranging questions about the EU’s capacities in security and defence policy, NATO’s role as a guarantor for security as well as Ukrainian-NATO relations.
This article does not provide an in-depth analysis of the evolution of Ukraine’s relations with the alliance, but instead assesses some long-term repercussions of the conclusion at the NATO summit in Bucharest in 2008 that neither Ukraine, Georgia nor Moldova would become NATO members.
Ukraine’s exclusion from NATO merits attention in light of the confrontation with Russia in the Sea of Azov.
This article argues that the EU’s response to security threats between November 2013 and 2018 was hampered by the absence of a security and defence policy which was adequate to contain both the worsening of the crisis and Russia’s uncompromising policy towards Ukraine as epitomised by its ad hoc annexation of Crimea.
Both the policy tools the EU applied in the case of Ukraine, such as the imposition of sanctions, the deployment of a Common Security and Defense Policy mission in November 2014 and subsequent peace plans were insuﬃcient to counterbalance Russia’s categorical foreign policy towards Ukraine.
The articles’ combination of policy analysis and process-tracing enables an examination of potential shifts in the EU’s response to increasing security concerns resulting from the intensiﬁcation of the conﬂict.
After the explanation of the conceptual framework, the article begins with a concise explanation of the origins of the EU-Russian contestation over Ukraine in the aftermath of the Orange Revolution.
It then continues with an analysis of the latest Russian-Ukrainian confrontation in the Sea of Azov.
The Ukrainian president’s request of military support from NATO seems to be indicative of the limitations of the EU’s security and defence policy in the Russian-Ukrainian confrontation in the Kerch Strait.
An assessment of this hypothesis will be addressed in the last section of this article.
The EU’s response to security threats during the Ukraine crisis In seeking to critically evaluate the EU’s response to rising security threats since the Ukraine crisis’ emergence in November 2013 until the open confrontation between Ukraine and Russia in the Kerch Strait ﬁve years later, this article applies Bretherton and Vogler’s concept of actorness.
Its parameters of opportunities, presence and capabilities oﬀer a way to operationalise the EU’s initiatives as a provider of security in Ukraine.
In this way, both strengths and limitations of the EU as a provider of security are critically examined.
An assessment of the EU’s capacities of its perceived role as a security guarantor necessitates a simultaneous examination of Russia’s foreign policy towards Ukraine between Crimea’s annexation and the confrontation in the Kerch Strait.
This deﬁnition is applicable to the EU’s response to the Ukraine crisis.
MAASS deterioration of this crisis, which was fanned by Russia’s deliberate capacity to act, as this article will demonstrate.
According to Bretherton and Vogler, ‘actorness’ entails opportunity, presence and capability.
Some scholars have questioned the EU’s ability to operate in global politics.
These critics have also dismissed alternative deﬁnitions of actorness by stating that they were founded on a state-centric assumption, which does not reﬂect the EU’s sui generis nature embodied by its member states and resemblances to an international organisation.
David Allen and Michael Smith, for example, used ‘presence’ as an alternative concept to explain the EC’s role in international politics.
According to Bretherton and Vogler, presence ‘denotes latent actorness’ because it may stipulate responses from non-EU member states.
Other scholars, such as Christopher Hill, criticised ‘actorness’ for its limited explanatory value.
This article investigates whether there is an inherent gap between the EUs objectives as a guarantor of security, which are described in its Global Strategy on its Common Foreign and Security Policy and adequate resources needed to fulﬁl these goals in Ukraine.
Bretherton and Vogler’s parameters of opportunity, presence and capability oﬀer benchmarks to examine the EU’s latest objectives regarding the provision of security and its abilities to deliver in that respect.
Between November 2013 and November 2018, the EU was not able to act autonomously by providing security in the Ukraine crisis due to both Russia’s presence and actorness.
The following section concisely describes the origins of the EU-Russian contestation over Ukraine during the Orange Revolution, which paved the way for a renewed and intensiﬁed confrontation that shaped the deterioration of the Ukraine conﬂict.
The legacy of the Orange Revolution for EU-Ukrainian integration When international observers of the Ukrainian presidential election presented evidence of fraud , the EU formed a diplomatic mission, which mediated between the incumbent regime and the opposition in Kiev.
The EU’s interference was to the detriment of the Kremlin’s wish to see its favourite candidate Yanukovich as a winner.
About a fortnight after the repeated election, deliberations about Ukraine’s relations with the EU intensiﬁed.
However, the European Commissioner for Enlargement Guenther Verheugen clariﬁed that the EU did not reciprocate Yushenko’s intention.
EU member states were divided regarding the EU’s development of relations with Ukraine.
Germany, on the other hand, sought to develop a newly established framework for enhanced cooperation with Ukraine In May 2015, the European Commission’s President Juncker made an attempt to end the dissonance regarding Ukraine’s EU membership.
In this way, this section provides the necessary background before evaluating the EaP’s lack of guaranteeing security since the evolving Ukraine conﬂict.
The Polish and the Swedish governments’ proposal for the EaP’s launch was presented to the EU Foreign Ministers in May 2008 before its implementation a month later.
About ﬁve years after its launch, the EaP revealed defects regarding the fulﬁlment of its objective of being a guarantor for security in Ukraine.
Four developments reﬂect that Ukraine became a country shaken by multiple conﬂicts.
First, the Ukrainian president’s decision to abstain from signing the AA with the EU combined with an increasingly intensifying opposition towards his leadership , were the main components contributing to the Ukraine crisis.
As a result, the most violent demonstrations both against Yanukovich’s politics and contestation over Ukraine’s future political orientation towards either Russia or the EU took place in February 2014.
MAASS referendum carried out by Russia in Crimea with Russia’s subsequent annexation of the peninsula on 18 March 2014was evidence of Russia’s grip on Ukraine.
Third, Russian separatists in Ukraine’s East started ﬁghting for secessionist attempts.
One of the tragic repercussions of this eruption of a conﬂict, which can be likened to civil war, was the alleged downing of Malaysian airways ﬂight MH 17 by Russian separatists in July 2014.
A consolidation of Russian power in East Ukraine undermines both the country’s territorial integrity and the gradual establishment of a peace process.
Fifth, the emergence of an open confrontation between Russia and Ukraine in the Sea of Azov beginning on 25 November 2018 is the latest of a series of examples demonstrating the imminent security concerns resulting from the EU’s and Russia’s deadlock about negotiating a resolution to the Ukraine conﬂict.
The unfolding of this confrontation and the resulting security concerns in light of the EaP’s lacking framework for providing security will be assessed in the following section.
As a result of divergent aspirations of the EU and Ukraine about their partnership, a mutually agreed approach about their relations has not been found.
Since 2014, a discussion about the possibility of Ukraine’s prospect to become an EU member in the long-term has become almost pointless.
The continuously deteriorating crisis epitomised by violence, Russian separatists in the East, the annexation of Crimea by Russia and the latest open confrontation between Russia and Ukraine in the Sea of Azov, makes Ukraine’s accession to the EU impossible.
This impossibility strengthened Russia’s opportunity to conduct an aﬃrmative foreign policy in Ukraine.
In this context opportunity is understood as Bretherton and Vogler’s deﬁnition of the circumstances shaping the EU’s action, which was hampered by Russia’s actorness.
Russia’s intention to maintain a crucial role in its relations with the post-Soviet space was stated already more than a decade before the Ukraine crisis and exceeds the scope of intensifying relations with Ukraine.
In light of the Ukraine conﬂict, one can say that this Strategy established the Kremlin’s ground rules for its policy towards the former Soviet space and its pursuance of an uncompromising policy towards Ukraine.
Rogozin criticised the EU’s lack of engagement with the Russian government regarding relations with its eastern neighbours.
Before the Vilnius summit emerged clear signs of pressure exerted by the Russian president on his Ukrainian counterpart.
In a potential attempt to try to change Yanukovich’s objections about the AA, the European Commission’s President Barroso and the president of the European Council Van Rompuy praised the agreement for its beneﬁts for Ukraine’s economy.
Simultaneously, they dismissed the widely held perception among Russian policy makers that the AA jeopardised Ukraine’s relations with Russia.
Trilateral negotiations might have oﬀered the opportunity for the EU and Russia to reﬂect about their previous contestation over Ukraine during and after the Orange Revolution to seek a middle-ground regarding their strategic interests in Ukraine.
However, the initiation of such a trilateral mediation should have been launched in the immediate aftermath of the Orange Revolution when the EU-Russian contestation over Ukraine began.
At the time of the Vilnius summit, it was too late to build the foundation for a negotiated formula between Russia and the EU concerning integration with Ukraine.
MAASS conﬂict which reﬂected itself in mutual accusations about their respective responsibilities for the Ukraine crisis.
A crucial step in seeking to resolve the deteriorating war in East Ukraine was the adoption of the second part of the Minsk agreement on 11 February 2015.
The Presidents of Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany concluded an agreement aiming at de-escalating the war.
The Minsk II agreement sought to address measures of the initial agreement aimed at a cease ﬁre which had been adopted on 5 September 2014.
Despite its extensive members including states in Europe, Central Asia and North America, the OSCE’s leverage in the Ukraine conﬂict reﬂected limitations due to the increasing intensity of the conﬂict.
The deterioration of the Ukraine conﬂict and Russia’s grip on the country was exempliﬁed by Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
This deﬁnition best captures the Ukrainian government’s inability to maintain control over its territory as exempliﬁed by Crimea’s annexation.
This contested statehood as a major impairment in Ukraine’s geopolitical orientation was reﬂected in Sakwa’s assessment of the history of post-independent Ukraine.
He stated that this period in Ukraine was ‘characterised by unresolved and often suppressed questions of national coherence and state integration that in the end undermined both.
Ukraine’s contested statehood, the lacking possibility for EU accession of EaP members combined with the EU’s objection towards further enlargement were major obstacles in developing EU-Ukrainian relations.
The ratiﬁcation of the AA by the Ukrainian, the European Parliament and EU member states took place in July 2014.
About six months later, a set of trilateral negotiations regarding the resolution of the Ukraine crisis discussed among Ukrainian President Poroshenko, President Putin, Chancellor Merkel and French President Hollande in February 2015 brought about an amendment of the Ukrainian constitution.
The latest open confrontation between Russia and Ukraine in the Sea of Azov in November 2018 exempliﬁes that this change of the constitution by referring to a frozen conﬂict in Eastern Ukraine is obsolete.
The following section will assess this confrontation and its aftermath to demonstrate that the conﬂict is neither frozen, nor limited to Eastern Ukraine as there are wide-ranging repercussions for security.
EaP failure 2. in Brussels and Riga The EaP summits in Riga in May 2015 and in Brussels in November 2017 as frameworks for developing the EU’s relations with its Eastern neighbours including Ukraine did not lead to tangible results.
In the joint declaration following the conclusion of the summit, the European Council’s President Tusk acknowledged that ‘frozen and armed conﬂicts continue to prevent development and create hardships in countries.
The death of ﬁve Ukrainian servicemen yesterday is just the latest proof of the tragic consequences of Russia’s aggression in Ukraine.
This frank assessment of the perception of Russia’s actions in Ukraine has two repercussions for EU foreign policy.
On the other hand, Tusk’s statement reﬂects the EU’s acceptance of the status quo of the conﬂict, instead of suggesting the implementation of certain policy mechanisms to deescalate the crisis.
The lacking identiﬁcation of political means implies the EU’s lacking actorness, its absence of opportunities, presence and capabilities in its response to the Ukraine crisis in light of Russia’s actorness.
The EU’s lacking actorness is also reﬂected in the summit’s conclusions demonstrating the EU’s passivity in handling this crisis.
Both the EU’s passivity and its seeming acceptance of the status quo of the conﬂict is reﬂected in the EU’s Global Strategy.
The strengthening of the EU does neither explain if economic, political or diplomatic strength are implied, nor deﬁnes any mechanisms used to fulﬁl this objective.
MAASS unable to prevent the Kremlin’s exertion of pressure on the Ukrainian government to derail deeper integration with Brussels.
This outcome exempliﬁed the EU’s inability to make Ukraine resilient to Russia’s aﬃrmative foreign policy.
The next section demonstrates that the EU’s development of an aﬃrmative stance towards Russia is severely challenged by Russia’s actorness in Ukraine.
In light of this confrontation, the need to assess the EU’s actorness in responding to this growing security risk merits attention.
This article assessed a series of critical junctures in the gradual evolution of the Ukraine conﬂict since November 2013.
Since Yanukovich’s decision to refrain from EU integration, the emergence of a domestic crisis regarding the opposition towards his regime, the annexation of Crimea, the war in the Donbas and the downing of MH 17 increased the EU’s pressure to react.
It started playing the role of an innocent bystander at the time of Crimea’s annexation.
When elections in the Donbas in November 2018 aﬃrmed the stronghold of an aﬃliation with Russia, EU oﬃcials such as Mogherini condemned the elections and Russia’s actions in Ukraine.
No less strong in rhetoric but weak in action was the EU’s response to the Ukrainian-Russian confrontation in the Kerch Strait.
This is the latest example demonstrating that the Ukraine conﬂict, which so far cost the lives of 10.000 people is not a frozen conﬂict.
This approach at conﬂict containment seems to be indicative that the EU is not the primary actor in guaranteeing security due to its lacking actorness.
This section explains the evolution of the conﬂict in the Kerch strait, assesses the EU’s response to it before contrasting it to NATO’s and the OSCE’s role.
The ﬁrst Ukrainian-Russian open confrontation in the Kerch Strait since Russia’s annexation of Crimea alert to the severity of the wide-ranging security implications of the Ukraine conﬂict.
On 25 November 2018 Russian soldiers shot Ukrainian vessels in the Kerch Strait and captured 23 sailors aboard of these vessels.
According to Russia, the transit of these Ukrainian vessels through this Strait was illegal since Russia considers these waterways its own since it annexed Crimea.
Prior to this incident, Ukraine undertook similar crossings of this passage, which respects the UN convention on the Law of the Sea according to which shipping can take place in any strait.
An agreement between Russia and Ukraine in 2003 further legitimised Ukraine’s right to pass via this strait.
The Russian Foreign Ministry’s response to the confrontation issued on November 25 echoed a situation on the brink of war.
The Ministry’s statement was ‘issu a warning to Ukraine that Kiev’s policy, pursued in coordination with the United States and the EU, seeks to provoke a conﬂict with Russia in the waters of the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea is fraught with serious consequences.
In the spectre of this security threat, on 29 November 2018 the Ukrainian President Poroshenko requested the imposition of martial law for 30 days.
Poroshenko requested NATO’s envoy of vessels to the Kerch Strait during the time of the martial law.
This plea for support from NATO is a reminder of the NATO summit in Bucharest from April 2 to 4 2008 which concluded that Ukraine would not become a member state.
This increase within two years demonstrates the perceived security risk stemming from the deterioration of the Ukraine crisis whose implications were perceived since the Ukrainian-Russian confrontation in the Kerch Strait.
According to this statement, the EU ‘expected’ Russia to ‘ensure unhindered and free passage through the Kerch Strait.
The rejection of these requests reﬂects the limited coercive capacity Germany and France as well as Mogherini can exert on Russia.
MAASS independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognised borders’, but did not explain which means are used to safeguard this situation.
Thus, the statement is strong in rhetoric but not followed up by concrete action.
In this way, Samokhavlov refers to the EU’s lacking actorness as a a security guarantor as oppposed to NATO’s capacities.
At a time when Russia shoots at Ukrainian vessels in the Sea of Azov, the question of anatgonising Russia is a moot point.
No less indicative for the EU’s fading away from conﬂict resolution in Ukraine, than Poroshenko’s request for the deployment of NATO vessels to the Sea of Azov is the Ukrainian Foreign Ministers plea for extending the scope of the OSCE’s observation mission.
This proposal was further discussed at a meeting on December 11 2018 for French-German mediation eﬀorts regarding the latest Ukrainian-Russian confrontation.
Conclusion This article examined the EU’s responses to the security threats brought about by the Ukraine crisis between November 2013 and November 2018.
The aftermath of the Vilnius summit in November 2013 resulted in wide-ranging changes to the intended roadmap of EU-Ukrainian integration and one of the factors shaping the evolution of the Ukraine crisis.
After Crimea’s annexation to Russia, the challenges for the EU to adequately respond to the crisis by containing the conﬂict on the one hand and seeking to coerce Russia’s actions in Ukraine on the other hand increased tremendously.
Since the eruption of the Ukraine conﬂict, the EU has engaged in initiating reform processes within the realm of the EaP, engaged in peace-building and conﬂict resolution prior to Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
However, since the annexation, its foreign policy capabilities were incapacitated by Russia’s increasing acquisition of actorness.
Despite the EU’s continuous eﬀorts at peace-building epitomised by the launch of a CSDP mission in November 2014, for instance, the Kremlin had already created opportunities to maintain its inﬂuence in Ukraine since the annexation of Crimea and the building of a bridge connecting Crimea and the Russian mainland in May 2018.
This article demonstrated that in its response to security risks resulting from the Ukraine crisis, the EU does not possess the aforementioned elements of actorness.
The EU has acquired presence in Ukraine, deﬁned by Bretherton and Vogler as its ability to exert infuence by shaping perceptions, expectations and behaviours of other actors.
However, the result of its presence is a capability-expectations gap caused by the disproportion between the rising security concerns in Ukraine since the confrontation in the Sea of Azov and the EU’s lacking capacities to respond.
As a result, the Ukrainian political elite turned towards NATO for support in the wake of the imminent threat perception caused by the Ukrainian-Russian clash in the Kerch Strait.
The EU lacks the capability to exploit aspects of EU policy constraining external action by Russia by taking advantage of opportunities.
The EU cannot take advantage of opportunities due to Russia’s creation of its own opportunities, such as the annexation of Crimea and its military response to the alleged illegal crossings of Ukrainian vessels in the Kerch Strait,which incapacitated the EU and the West alike.
Future research needs to engage in an in-depth discussion about the evolution of the OSCE’s and NATO’s engagement in seeking to maintain security in Ukraine.
At the time of writing this article, no details on NATO’s and eventually the OSCE’s and the UN’s engagement is available due to the fact that the events unfolding in the Kerch Strait are recent.
Interviews with NATO, UN, OSCE and EU oﬃcials regarding their responses to this recently emerged conﬂict will illucidate further strengths and weaknesses of these actors.
Such an extensive analysis will contribute to a broadening of the debate on the actorness of these international organisations in the issue area of security policy.
In turn, this will enhance a critical assessment regarding the analytical value of Bretherton and Vogler’s conceptual framework, which thus far is predominantly applied to merely examine the EU’s capacities as an actor.
It is safe to say that the EU, the UN, NATO and the OSCE are faced with a capabilityexpectations gap in Ukraine, which manifests itself in increasing security challenges rising disproportionately to the capacities in security and defence policies of these international organisations.
Declaration by the high representative on behalf of the EU on the escalating tensions in the Azov Sea.
Evaluating external political impact in the European Union in international politics.
The Capability-Expectations Gap, or conceptualising Europe’s international role.
EU, Russia need frank discussion on European, Eurasian integrationUshakov.
Question of Ukraine’s membership of NATO may split country – Poroshenko.
Donbass elections’ outcome shows popular support for integration with Russia, expert says.
In D Bouris & T Schumacher , The revised European neighbourhood policy.
Contested statehood, external leverage and the European Union’s rule of law mission in Kosovo.
Statement by the president of Ukraine on the approval of the decree on the introduction of martial law in Ukraine.
The EU’s “eastern partnership” with former soviet states holds the key to relations with Russia.
