The Russian information campaign accompanying its military movements was no more than a minor contributor to what proved to xi xii Lessons from Russia’s Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine be a conventional takeover.
Russian troops take Russian Dzhankoy control of Kerch ferry port; Kerch troops Ukrainian military unit Chornomorske take airfield. surrounded.
Masked gunmen Ukrainian warships. seize government buildings. beseiged.
Ukrainian Actions Contributing to Russian Success Ukraine’s political leadership made several important errors following the victory of the Maidan revolution in Kyiv, all of which played decisively to Russia’s favor.
These errors also provide lessons for understanding where Russia will be able to capitalize in its operations.
Surveys conducted by United States experts found that, unlike many Ukrainians, 85 percent of Crimeans did not perceive themselves to be European.
Opinion polls indicate more generally that Crimeans were perhaps a more distinct polity than many other Ukrainians.
We cannot generalize the events in Crimea to other broadly established concepts involving hybrid war, nonlinear warfare, or any concept of operations commonly mentioned in reference to Russia’s military today.
Vyacheslav Ponomarev, the aforementioned mayor of Slovyansk, had supposedly moved from one business venture to another before taking ownership of a small soap company.
Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine 41 combat-capable troops available.
Second, Ukrainian army commanders spoke Russian and were disinclined to fight against fellow Russian speakers or order troops into civilian areas.
Oligarchs in the east had plenty to lose in the aftermath of the Maidan movement, since their patronage party was politically decimated, and much to gain from backing protests as part of a bargaining game with those newly arrived in power.
Pro-Russian opportunists and ideologues hoped that they could ride the wave of public outrage into power, while Russian imperialists expected that Moscow would intervene militarily in Eastern Ukraine as it did in Crimea.
When fighting broke out in Mariupol between separatists and volunteer militias in April 2014, Akhmetov sent thousands of steelworkers from his companies Metinvest and DTEK to take control of the streets and establish order.
This was a self-interested action, but it halted fighting in the city, hindering the separatist ambitions and allowing more time for a Ukrainian response.
In the future, Russia may avoid this approach in favor of covert action, backed by conventional forces, which worked in Crimea.
By employing paramilitaries, mercenaries, and ideologues, Russia invested in a mess instead of a constructive means to achieve political objectives.
Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine 67 to effect change in countries that otherwise would have been stable.
The Ukrainian experience suggests that while Moscow seized the advantage during a time of national vulnerability for Ukraine, it may have also behooved Russian leaders to wait and construct a more thoughtful, less improvised plan for handling their neighbor.
