However, in Donbas; separatism; public contrast to post-communist countries such as Azerbaijan, Georgia, opinion Moldova, and former Yugoslavia, prior to 2014 Ukraine was able to avoid a war and a break-up.
This study examines the role of separatists, the Yanukovych government, the Maidan opposition and the Maidan government, far-right organizations, Russia, the US, and the EU in the conﬂict in Donbas.
It uses a specially commissioned survey by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology in 2014 to analyse public support for separatism in Donbas, compared to other regions of Ukraine, and the major factors which affect such support.
It concludes that all these actors contributed in various ways to the conﬂict in Donbas, which involved both a civil war and a direct Russian military intervention since August 2014.
The study links this conﬂict to the ‘Euromaidan’, speciﬁcally, the government overthrow by means of the Maidan massacre, and the secession and Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
The KIIS survey shows that support for separatism is much stronger in Donbas compared to other regions, with the exception of Crimea, and that the break-up of Ukraine is unlikely to extend to its other parts.
The research question Since its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, Ukraine has experienced signiﬁcant regional divisions concerning major domestic politics and foreign orientation issues.
Many previous academic studies have shown the existence of strong regional divisions concerning such political issues and † An earlier version of this paper was presented at a Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies conference in Edmonton in October 2014.
However, most of the previous studies examined such divisions before the ‘Orange Revolution’ and the ‘Euromaidan’, and did not analyse the war in Donbas and separatism in Ukraine.
The violent conﬂict in Donbas, along with the ‘Euromaidan’ and the secession and the Russian annexation of Crimea in March 2014, have brought new attention to the issue of regional divisions and separatism in Ukraine.
Following the violent overthrow of the Yanukovych government during ‘the Euromaidan’ in February 2014, and the secessions and Russia’s annexations of the Crimean autonomy and Sevastopol city in March 2014 with help of Russian military intervention, a conﬂict emerged in Donbas.
Pro-Russian separatists – with the direct involvement of groups of armed Russians – seized power in most of Donbas and proclaimed the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic in early April 2014.
The Donbas war is not only a major political development that affects the future of Ukraine.
The conﬂict became a major international conﬂict and the biggest conﬂict between the Russia and the West since the end of the Cold War.
The war in Donbas involved a direct and indirect Russian military intervention.
The total number of refugees chieﬂy as a result of the conﬂict in Donbas is estimated on the basis of ofﬁcial statistics of respective countries at about 3 million, including 1.7 million internally displaced people registered in Ukraine and more than one million refugees from Donbas in neighbouring countries, primarily Russia.
The war in Ukraine is very relevant to the EU because Ukraine is one of the largest European countries, borders several EU member states, and is a major transit country for Russian natural gas to many EU members.
The direct participation of German chancellor Angela Merkel, French president Francois Hollande, as well as Russian president Vladimir Putin in the negotiations concerning this conﬂict highlights the international signiﬁcance of this war.
The direct involvement of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe in negotiating the Minsk agreements and in monitoring their implementation, also shows the signiﬁcance of the war to European countries beyond Ukraine.
I will seek to determine why Ukraine has experienced a violent conﬂict in Donbas.
This study analyses the role of different actors and factors in this situation in the emergence of this conﬂict and its escalation into a war.
The analysis relies primarily on Ukrainian, separatist, Russian, and Western governmental, as well as online media, live broadcasts, videos, and other sources concerning the conﬂict in Ukrainian, Russian, and English.
This study also uses a brief survey, commissioned by the author and conducted by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology at the end of April and the beginning of May 2014, which analyses support for separatism in Donbas compared to other regions of Ukraine, and the major factors that affect pro-separatist attitudes.
Disparate narratives regarding the conﬂict in Donbas There are many conﬂicting narratives about the conﬂict in Donbas.
The Ukrainian government, the national media and, to a large extent, their counterparts in the West present the violent conﬂict in Donbas as led, from its beginning in Spring of 2014, by regular armed Russian military units and Russian military intelligence agents who therefore lack popular backing in this region.
The governments of Ukraine and the US, top NATO ofﬁcials, and the mainstream Western media typically claim that Russian military and intelligence units were leading the separatist ﬁght in Donbas from the beginning, similar to Russian military units without insignia in Crimea.
Both NATO and Petro Poroshenko, after he became president of Ukraine, stated that there were some 9000 Russian regular troops ﬁghting in Donbas.
Such references are nearly absent in the major media in Ukraine, which is mostly controlled by the oligarchs or the government, and in one noted incident, Ruslan Kotsaba, a Western Ukrainian journalist, was arrested and charged with treason for opposing the draft and calling the war in Donbas a civil war.
Public opinion concerning the war has thus been affected to a signiﬁcant extent by the government propaganda and media coverage which generally follows the respective government positions on the conﬂict lines on the conﬂict.
For instance, the Ministry of Information Policy was created in Ukraine speciﬁcally to disseminate the government propaganda and shape coverage of the war in Donbas in the media and social media.
This suggests that while a signiﬁcant minority of Ukrainians share the Ukrainian government and media propagated view that the war in Donbas is a war between Ukraine and Russia, the majority of the respondents view the war in Donbas as an intrastate conﬂict, mostly with Russian involvement.
In contrast, polls by the Levada Center show that in Russia minorities of the respondents believed that this is a war between Russia and Ukraine, or that regular Russian troops were in Donbas.
The majority of Russians back pro-Russian separatism in Donbas, mainly in the form of independence from Ukraine or the incorporation of these regions into Russia.
The Ukrainian and Western governments and the mainstream media generally characterize separatism in Donbas as having a minor support and present the results of a referendum held by separatists after they seized power there as not reﬂecting public preferences.
They also emphasize that the Ukrainian government has the legal power to suppress separatism by force.
The central government denies responsibility for civilian casualties during a war there, claiming that the separatists themselves are killing residents of the cities and villages in which they were based.
The United States and other Western governments generally ignore civilian casualty ﬁgures, claim a lack of evidence to determine responsibility for deadly attacks on civilians , and argue that the Ukrainian forces are showing restraint in their use of force.
They argue that separatism has widespread popular support in all Eastern and Southern Ukraine.
Russian President Vladimir Putin referred to this part of Ukraine as ‘Novorossiya’ , the region’s historical name when it belonged to the Russian Empire.
Some separatist leaders and commanders stated that they intended to expand their control to other regions of ‘Novorossiya’ and even to overthrow the central government of Ukraine.
The Russian government has consistently denied that its regular military forces were involved in the Donbas conﬂict.
The Russian government and media and separatist leaders have attributed civilian casualties in Donbas, including a shot-down of a Malaysian passenger plane, to the Ukrainian forces.
A Russian government investigative agency has launched an investigation into the ‘genocide of the Russian-speaking population’ in Donbas.
Academic studies show similar differences in deﬁning the nature of the Donbas conﬂict and its main factors.
Other studies characterize the conﬂict as a civil war along with Russian military intervention which they deﬁne in various ways.
The Uppsala Conﬂict Data Program , for example, classiﬁes the conﬂict in Donbas as intrastate.
Separatism in various forms in independent Ukraine has persistently manifested itself in Crimea, in Donbas, and to a lesser extent in some neighbouring regions.
Pro-Russian separatist leaders and parties were in power in Crimea in the ﬁrst half of the 1990s.
Separatism also emerged in Donbas during the same time period, but it always had weaker support there than in Crimea.
Most either ignored such issues as insigniﬁcant, or argued that even though Ukraine was divided along regional lines, it was unlikely to experience a violent regional conﬂict leading to secession.
For instance, the attempt to proclaim an autonomous republic in the East and the South during the ‘Orange Revolution’ was seen as thoroughly contrived.
Until the beginning of 2014 and in contrast to other post-communist countries, such as Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova, and the former Yugoslavia, Ukraine was able to avoid a violent conﬂict and break-up.
Mass anti-government protests started in Ukraine at the end of November 2013 after the Yanukovych government abruptly changed its decision to sign an association and free trade agreement with the European Union.
The conﬂict escalated and turned violent around 4:00 am on 30 November after special police units violently dispersed a relatively small group of protesters on the Maidan.
The mass protests against the police violence followed on 1 December in Kyiv City.
In addition to peaceful rallies, they included seizures of the Kyiv City Hall and the Trade Union Building by a radical wing of the opposition and a violent attack led by radical nationalist and neo-Nazi organizations and football ultras, which formed the Right Sector, on the presidential administration.
Yanukovych attempted again to disperse protesters on the Maidan by force and adopted laws restricting the freedoms of assembly and protest.
At the end of January, the far-right elements of the opposition, led by the Right Sector and football ultras, led an attack on the parliament.
The attack escalated the conﬂict, and it resulted in a violent confrontation and a stand-off with the special police and interior troops units.
Maidan opposition leaders initially condemned the 1 December and the January attacks as ‘provocations’, while Yanukovych resorted to negotiations with the leaders of the pro-Western opposition under pressure from the protesters and the Western governments, primarily the United States government, which generally sided with the opposition.
However, on 18 February 2014, the Maidan Self-Defence and the Right Sector attempted to storm the parliament during a ‘Euromaidan’ opposition march.
Special police units and ‘titushki’ dispersed and beat both the violent attackers and peaceful protesters.
At least several protesters were killed as a result of this dispersal and a stampede.
In a major escalation of the conﬂict, concealed shooters started to use live ammunition against both protesters and the police during these clashes.
They killed about two dozen protesters on 18 and 19 February and nine Berkut policemen and Interior Troops servicemen.
The opposition-led protesters also seized regional administrations, police, and security services headquarters in Western Ukraine and some other regions, primarily in the Center.
A truce deal was negotiated between Yanukovych and the opposition leaders.
However, shortly after midnight on 20 February, the leader of the Right Sector stated that his organization did not accept this truce, and threatened to use force to oust the government.
If Yanukovych had implemented initial plans to use force, including live ammunition and military units to suppress the ‘Euromaidan’, this would likely have resulted in a large number of casualties among the protesters, and a full-ﬂedged uprising in the opposition stronghold in Western Ukraine, and likely civil war.
But in order to preserve his power after the ‘snipers’ massacre’ had severely undermined his legitimacy among his supporters – even in his party’s strongholds in Eastern and Southern Ukraine – he agreed to a compromise deal with the opposition, negotiated with the participation of the foreign ministers of France, Germany, Poland, and a Russian government representative on 21 February 2014.
Yanukovych, however, ﬂed from Kyiv and then from Ukraine after radical elements of the ‘Euromaidan’ opposition reneged on the compromise agreement and threatened to resume violence if he did not resign.
The United States government and major EU countries de facto backed this violent overthrow of the relatively pro-Russian government by reneging on 21 February deal and immediately recognizing the new government of Ukraine.
The issue of the potential involvement of the US government or governments of the EU states in the Yanukovych government overthrow requires further research.
The violent overthrow of the relatively pro-Russian government, speciﬁcally by means of mass killings of the police and protesters, was a tipping point in the conﬂict between the West and Russia over Ukraine.
President Putin used this overthrow and its backing by the governments of the United States and EU countries to radically change his policy towards Ukraine.
The Russian government started to pursue secession of Crimea with the help of direct military intervention since the end of February 2014 and the annexation of Crimea by Russia in March 2014 in a violation of international law.
Such direct Russian backing of separatism in Crimea and the annexation of this region by Russia also encouraged separatists in other regions with signiﬁcant ethnic Russian populations, such as Donbas, Kharkiv, and Odesa.
The mass killing of the protesters and the police that resulted in the overthrow of the Yanukovych government was also a critical juncture in the separatist rebellion in Donbas in Eastern Ukraine.
Starting in March 2014, unarmed and armed separatists seized and occupied regional administrations, security service , and police headquarters in Donetsk, Luhansk, and other cities and towns in the regions.
Igor Strelkov and other members of his armed group of Russian nationalists arrived from Russia via Crimea and seized police headquarters in the towns of Sloviansk and Kramatorsk in the Donetsk Region on 12 April 2014.
The local police and security services either refused to offer armed resistance to the separatists and the Strelkov Russian unit, or sided with them to various degrees.
A careful review suggests that much of the evidence regarding direct Russian military intervention during this initial period was misrepresented or even fabricated.
For example, Strelkov and members of his armed group in Sloviansk and Kramatorsk were identiﬁed by the Ukrainian and United States governments as a Russian military intelligence unit.
However, the publicly available evidence indicates that Strelkov was a retired ofﬁcer of the Federal Security Service.
In both Donbas and the ‘Euromaidan’, however, foreign governments alone could not have been able to covertly seize power in Donbas and Ukraine, respectively, and to produce large numbers of activists and supporters.
Evidence indicates that, in contrast to its direct military intervention in Crimea, Russia initially supported separatists in Donbas by allowing volunteers and weapons to cross the border from Russia, and in providing weapons, recruitment, training, and safe haven to separatists.
The Russian government also threatened to use military force in Ukraine, and deployed large numbers of its military personnel near the border with the Donetsk and Luhansk Regions and other regions of Ukraine in Spring and Summer 2014.
The Strelkov-led Russian nationalist unit and the local separatists also tried to seize control over local airport and telecommunication infrastructure and nearby towns.
These attacks lead to counterattacks by the government forces, which refused to consider a peaceful resolution of the conﬂict and launched the ‘ATO’ in the East on 13 April 2014.
The new Maidan-led government attempted to neutralize the separatists through the use of military force and special police and security units.
An SBU ofﬁcer was killed on the same day during an attempt by an SBU special Alfa unit to seize the separatist leaders in Sloviansk, which was then controlled by the Strelkov-led armed group of Russians and local separatists.
However, many of the government forces were initially reluctant to follow the orders to use force against the separatists.
As a result, paramilitary units and special police battalions, organized by the radical nationalist and neo-Nazi organizations with help of the government and oligarchs, were much more ideologically motivated and willing to use force.
Various evidence indicates that the Right Sector was involved in a deadly attack of a separatist checkpoint in Sloviansk on 20 April 2014.
The special police battalion Dnipro, organized with the participation of the Right Sector and the oligarch-governor of the Dnipropetrovsk Region, Ihor Kolomoisky, was involved in this attack and in another deadly assault in Krasnoarmiisk in the Donetsk Region in early May 2014.
Special police battalions, the Azov battalion/regiment, and paramilitary formations, such as the Volunteer Ukrainian Corps, organized and led since Spring and Summer 2014 by far-right organizations, such as the Right Sector, the Social-National Assembly, and Svoboda, have constituted a minority of the Ukrainian forces during the war in Donbas, but these far-right formations were disproportionally involved in the violent conﬂict, speciﬁcally violence against civilians and prisoners of war.
Small numbers of volunteers and mercenaries, citizens of Belarus, Canada, France, Italy, Russia, Sweden, and the US, including neo-Nazis, served in Ukrainian far right-led units.
The violence by separatists and the central government also had major roles in escalation of the conﬂict into a full scale war.
A separatist attack on 22 May 2014 resulted in the death of 16 Ukrainian army soldiers near Volnovakha.
On 1 July 2014 after a brief truce, the Poroshenko government launched a large-scale military operation against separatists.
A daily examination of various live broadcasts, videos, and media reports shows that the separatist leaders, commanders, and members of their armed units, were mostly residents of Donbas and, to a lesser extent, other regions of Ukraine.
But a signiﬁcant number of volunteers and mercenaries also came to Donbas directly from or via Russia or Crimea.
The analysis of the same numerous sources indicates that these included mostly Russian nationalists, Russian Cossacks, Chechens, Ingushes, and Ossetians and relatively small numbers of Communists and neo-Nazis and citizens of other post-Soviet states, Serbia, and Western countries.
Various sources show that, in spite of continuing denial by the Russian government, direct Russian military intervention in Donbas began at the end of August 2014.
It took the form of incursions by several battalion-size units in order to prevent a defeat of separatist forces and attacks of Donetsk and Luhansk cities.
These include a report by the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine in 2015, as well as reports by separatists, videos of Russian military convoys, videos of captured Russian soldiers and equipment, ﬁrst-hand reports by Western media and eyewitnesses, and released satellite images of Russian military vehicles on the Ukrainian side of the border.
Similar evidence shows that some regular Russian units also took part in the Debaltseve battle in February 2015.
The Russian forces were usually involved in the combat from a distance, such as shelling the Ukrainian positions from artillery, multiple rockets, and tanks.
There are videos and other evidence that they started shelling of the Ukrainian positions from the Russian territory near the border in July 2014.
There were also reports from different sources about incursions of regular Russian units in Donbas in Fall 2014 and August 2015.
Indirect evidence of Russian military intervention includes a relatively rapid change in the military situation in Donbas in August 2014 and February 2015.
Before the end of August 2014, separatists were under attack by Ukrainian forces and had been retreating from Sloviansk and Kramatorsk to the more densely populated parts of Donbas, particularly the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk.
However, following direct Russian military interventions in Donbas during battles at the end of August 2014 and in February 2015, the Ukrainian regular units and special police and far right-led volunteer battalions suffered encirclements, retreats, and losses in the Illovaisk and Debaltseve areas, respectively.
In both of these cases, President Poroshenko rapidly reversed his reliance on military force against separatists and he negotiated the Minsk ceaseﬁre agreements.
In addition, changes in the top leadership of DNR and LNR in mid-August 2014 preceded the Russian military intervention in Donbas.
These include the replacements of Alexander Borodai, the prime minister of DNR, and Strelkov, the defence minister of DNR, with local separatist leaders.
In contrast, a similar direct military intervention by regular Russian forces before August 2014 and permanent presence and continuing direct involvement in combat of signiﬁcant regular Russian military forces have not been corroborated directly and indirectly by the analysis of the various sources.
Analysis of various sources, in particular Ukrainian media reports, suggest that Ukraine became a United States ‘client state’ after the ‘Euromaidan’ and during the conﬂict in Donbas.
There was nearly perfect alignments of Ukrainian and United States government positions concerning major foreign policy issues, including the war in Donbas.
Speciﬁcally, top United States government ofﬁcials generally expressed unconditional backing of the Ukrainian government policies concerning the conﬂict in Donbas, and the United States provided free of charge military training and military equipment to the Ukrainian forces.
But the United States government and other Western countries have excluded the possibility of direct military intervention in the war in Donbas.
Similarly, there is evidence, including separatist sources, that suggests that the separatist republics in Donbas became de facto client states of Russia at the end of summer 2014.
Soon after the direct Russian military intervention in August 2014, almost all separatist units in Donbas were brought under the de facto overall command of Russian military ‘curators’ or advisers.
Most of the original separatist commanders in charge of such units, including Strelkov, were forced to leave Donbas for Russia.
The violent conﬂict in Donbas can thus be deﬁned as a civil war with both direct and indirect military intervention of a foreign state.
The predominant involvement of local separatists at the start of the conﬂict, along with the prevalence of local residents along with residents of other Ukrainian regions among the leadership and in the armed formations points to this origins of this conﬂict as a civil war.
Currently available evidence indicates that the Russian government’s indirect support for separatists, and subsequent direct military intervention, came after the start of the conﬂict in Donbas.
However, this intervention also proved decisive in enabling the separatists to turn the tide of the war and prevent the Ukrainian forces from recapturing all of Donbas.
The separatist conﬂict in Donbas is thus in many ways similar to violent conﬂicts and secessions in other post-Soviet states, such as Transdniestria in Moldova, Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia, and Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan.
Like in Donbas, separatist movements in these countries emerged in regions populated by ethnic minorities.
The central governments of these countries also refused to offer autonomy to these regions and relied on military or police forces and paramilitary units to suppress separatism.
These attempts failed largely because of military interventions by Russia in the form of the Russian 14th army in Transdniestria, and Russian military intervention in Abkhazia and South Ossetia following an attack by Georgia in 2008.
Similarly, Armenia intervened militarily and directly in the Nagorno-Karabakh conﬂict.
As of the end of January 2016, the minimum estimate of direct casualties of the war in Donbas is around 13,000 people killed.
This estimate is based on the UN report of at least 9098 conﬁrmed casualties in Donbas as of 15 November 2015 (Ofﬁce of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 2015a), adjusted by an estimate of presumed casualties among the reported 1200–2000 missing, presumed undercounting of casualties among separatists, Russian volunteers and mercenaries, and Russian regular troops, and media reports concerning casualties since 15 November.
The minimal estimated number of killed members of the Ukrainian military, National Guard, police, Security Service, border guards, and paramilitary units is around 4000.
This estimate is based on ofﬁcial reports of their casualties, updated with media reports and adjusted for missing in action who are presumed to be killed.
In addition, there have been estimated a few hundred casualties among members of the far-right formations.
The casualties among armed separatists units, including Russian volunteers, are estimated to be at least 2500, since they had an advantage of mainly defensive operations during most of the war and no large-scale casualties from encirclements and shot-down military planes and helicopters.
A rough estimate of killed Russian regular troops, primarily involved in ﬁghting in August 2014 and February 2015, is close to 100.
In addition, thousands or tens of thousands of people in this region, and in the government controlled part of Ukraine, are likely to be indirect casualties of the war as a result of higher mortality ratesg. due to inadequate medical care, heating, and food linked to the war, but their numbers are difﬁcult to estimate more precisely because of lack of data.
Attacks on Luhansk, Stanytsia Luhanska, Horlivka, and Donetsk involved multiple civilian casualties stemming from both collateral casualties from shelling by the Ukrainian regular forces and volunteer far-right battalions of both rebels and civilians.
However, the separatists or Russian forces were responsible for the most of major deadly attacks during their advance in January and February 2015, such as shelling of Volnovakha and Mariupol that resulted in multiple civilian casualties.
There is also evidence to suggest that a separatist or Russian crew shot down Malaysian passenger plane MH17 in July 2014, likely by mistaking it for a Ukrainian military transport plane.
This analysis and common political science deﬁnitions show that genocide, fascist junta, and terrorism are not appropriate terms to deﬁne the conﬂict in Donbas.
Determinants of support for separatism A national survey, excepting Crimea, conducted for the author by the KIIS in April/May 2014, indicates much higher levels of popular support for separatism in Donbas, compared to other regions of Ukraine.
It shows that the majority of Donbas residents backed various forms of separatism in April/May 2014.
Support for separatism in different regions of Ukraine, the 2014 KIIS Survey, per cent.
Prior to April 2014 many separatist leaders, speciﬁcally in Donbas, called for federalism and regional autonomy in Ukraine.
The Russian government also pressed for federalism and de facto confederation which would have given Donbas the power to block decisions of the central government, including those regarding matters of foreign policy.
In the 2014 KIIS survey, 23% of the respondents in Donbas favoured autonomy as a part of federal Ukraine, compared to 8% supporting independence of their region, while 23% favoured the region joining Russia.
A 2015 KIIS survey produced similar results in separatist-controlled Donbas.
The 2014 KIIS Survey also shows that ethnic Russians in Ukraine, with the exception of Crimea, were split on the issue of separatism.
Similar percentages of ethnic Russians supported preservation of the existing unitary system , mostly with expanded powers, and different separatist options , including 16% who preferred their region to join Russia.
No major national political party in Ukraine openly supports the separatists in Donbas.
Support for separatism by major ethnic groups in Ukraine, the 2014 KIIS Survey, per cent.
Support for separatism by major languages in Ukraine, the 2014 KIIS Survey, per cent.
Determinants of support for separatism in Ukraine, 2014 KIIS survey, OLS regression.
But 22% of the respondents, who did not intend to vote, also expressed secessionist views, while 12% supported regional autonomy as a part of a federal state in Ukraine.
Multiple regression analysis of the 2014 KIIS Survey data shows that, when other factors are held constant, the residents of Donbas expressed much stronger support for separatism than other regions.
Pro-separatist views there were also stronger than in the neighbouring regions of Dnipropetrovsk, Kharkiv, and Zaporizhzhia.
Residence in other major historic and geographic regions, other political party afﬁliation, other religious confession, being a Russian speaker, education level, and settlement type did not have any signiﬁcant positive impact on support for separatism.
Conclusion Separatists, the Yanukovych government, the Maidan opposition, the Maidan government, far-right organizations, Russia, the US, and the EU contributed to the start and escalation of violent separatist conﬂict in Donbas, and the de-facto break-up of Ukraine, in different ways.
They all misrepresented the conﬂict in Donbas to various extent, but their actions did not all have an equal impact.
The presumed covert involvement of the United States and Russia, the former in the violent regime change during the ‘Euromaidan’, the latter in the start of the conﬂict in Donbas requires further research because of lack of publicly available data concerning these events.
Regional political culture in Donbas and Russian ethnicity were strongest determinants of support for separatism in Ukraine after the annexation of Crimea.
This study suggests that it is almost impossible in the foreseeable future to permanently resolve the conﬂict in Donbas and thereby to unite Ukraine once again even without Crimea.
It is far more likely that this war can either turn into a frozen conﬂict, similar to Transdniestria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Nagorno-Karabakh, or the violence can once again escalate.
The civil war in Donbas, with Russian military intervention, has already led to the de facto independence of the DNR and the LNR, which control the most populated parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk Regions.
Alongside the annexation of Crimea, we are witnessing the de-facto break-up of Ukraine.
But while the KIIS survey shows that separatism has signiﬁcantly higher support in Donbas compared to other regions of Ukraine, it also suggests that other regions are not likely to follow Donbas and separate from Ukraine.
Pochti tret ukraintsev schitayut chto na vostoke strany proiskhodit voina mezhdu Ukrainoi i Rossiei – opros.
Analiz vedennia antyterorystychnoi operatsii ta naslidkiv vtorhnennia Rosiiskoi Federatsii v Ukrainu u serpni-veresni 2014 roku.
Report on the human rights situation in Ukraine 16 May to 15 August 2015.
Poroshenko napoliahaie na zaboroni nepryiniatnykh dlia Ukrainy idei federalismu.
