Fast ThinkingFast ThinkingWhen major global news breaks, the Atlantic Council’s experts have you covered—delivering their sharpest rapid insight and forward-looking analysis direct to your inbox.
New AtlanticistNew AtlanticistNew Atlanticist is where top experts and policymakers at the Atlantic Council and beyond offer exclusive insight on the most pressing global challenges—and the United States’ role in addressing them alongside its allies and partners.
Inflection PointsInflection PointsA weekly column by Atlantic Council President and CEO Frederick Kempe, Inflection Points focuses on the global challenges facing the United States and how to best address them.
UkraineAlertUkraineAlertUkraineAlert is a comprehensive online publication that provides regular news and analysis on developments in Ukraine’s politics, economy, civil society, and culture.
UkraineAlert sources analysis and commentary from a wide-array of thought-leaders, politicians, experts, and activists from Ukraine and the global community.
MENASourceMENASourceMENASource offers the latest news from across the Middle East, combined with commentary by contributors, interviews with emerging players, multi-media content, and independent analysis from fellows and staff.
IranSourceIranSourceIranSource provides a holistic look at Iran’s internal dynamics, global and regional policies, and posture through unique analysis of current events and long-term, strategic issues related to Iran.
During this period, the Kremlin has succeeded in occupying Crimea and a large swathe of territory in eastern Ukraine’s borderland Donbas region.
At the same time, Russian influence over the remaining 92.8% of Ukraine has plummeted to lows not witnessed for more than three hundred years.
Although there remains no end in sight to the ongoing war, it is already becoming increasingly obvious that the events of the past seven years have led to Ukraine’s decisive departure from Russia’s sphere of influence.
Evidence of this historic shift can be seen throughout Ukrainian society.
Politically, support for Ukraine’s pro-Russian forces has collapsed to significantly less than half pre-war levels.
Moscow-leaning Ukrainian political parties that were capable of forming parliamentary majorities and winning presidential elections less than a decade ago now struggle to pass the 20% barrier in national elections and are heavily reliant on an ageing electoral base driven by nostalgia for Soviet stability.
This leaves very little scope for any future revival in political fortunes.
Russia’s ability to dominate Ukraine economically has also greatly diminished.
Prior to the war, Russia accounted for around 30% of Ukraine’s annual trade balance.
During the same period, Ukrainian trade with China and the European Union has flourished.
Meanwhile, Ukraine’s sizeable migrant workforce has voted with its feet, turning away from traditional Russian destinations since 2014 in favor of EU alternatives.
Prior to the outbreak of hostilities, post-Soviet Ukraine had been Russia’s greatest soft power success story.
The formerly indivisible Russian and Ukrainian showbiz scenes have undergone a sharp separation due to the war.
Many Russian celebrities are officially banned from Ukraine, while others are no longer welcome.
Most Russian TV channels have been forced off the Ukrainian airwaves, and Ukrainian TV channels have drastically reduced their Russian-made content.
Thanks to a quota system, radio station playlists now increasingly favor Ukrainian-language artists.
With Russian social media sites blocked, millions of Ukrainians have switched to Facebook and other international platforms.
The 2019 establishment of an internationally recognized Orthodox Church of Ukraine independent of the Moscow Patriarchate has accelerated the already declining influence of the Russian Orthodox Church in Ukraine.
Many in Moscow had hoped the spring 2019 election of Russian-speaking Jewish candidate Volodymyr Zelenskyy as President of Ukraine would reverse Russia’s catastrophic loss of influence in the country.
On the contrary, Zelenskyy himself has launched a crackdown on remaining avenues of Kremlin influence in Ukraine.
He recently shut down Kremlin-linked Ukrainian TV channels and has imposed a range of sanctions on Russia’s leading Ukrainian allies, while also adopting a strategy for the de-occupation of Crimea.
Subscribe to UkraineAlert DAILY As the Russia crisis in Eastern Europe heats up, UkraineAlert DAILY delivers the best Atlantic Council expert insight, from the UkraineAlert online publication and beyond, to your inbox Monday through Friday.
Indeed, with Ukrainian opinion polls consistently indicating majority support for future membership of both the European Union and NATO, it is difficult to imagine any way back for Russia.
Instead, Vladimir Putin looks destined to enter the Russian history books as the man who lost Ukraine.
The loss of Ukraine is a crushing blow to Putin’s dreams of imperial revival and his obsession with reversing the humiliations of the Soviet collapse.
It also represents a resounding defeat for the “Russian World” doctrine that has served as the unofficial ideology of the Putin regime for more than a decade.
Putin’s commitment to a so-called “Russian World” that extends beyond the borders of modern Russia first began to take shape in the mid-2000s and gained considerable momentum following Russia’s 2008 invasion of Georgia.
According to Putin and other prominent advocates, the “Russian World” encompasses populations throughout the former Czarist and Soviet empires who are bound together with Russia by the Russian language along with a common religion, culture, history, and world view.
Ukraine lies at the very heart of Putin’s “Russian World” and is central to his imperial ambitions.
Indeed, widespread assumptions regarding Ukraine’s natural place within the “Russian World” played a crucial role in Moscow’s decision to invade the country in 2014.
This deep-rooted belief has since helped to maintain high levels of Russian public support for the separatist republics created and maintained by the Kremlin in eastern Ukraine.
In reality, the “Russian World” ideology promoted by the Putin regime has been out of touch with Ukrainian public opinion for many years.
This gap has widened significantly as attitudes have hardened in response to the undeclared and ongoing Russo-Ukrainian War.
In early 2014, Putin appears to have fallen victim of his own propaganda to such an extent that he genuinely believed he could orchestrate pro-Russian uprisings across Ukraine.
Instead, the Kremlin’s hybrid assault on Ukrainian sovereignty sparked a wave of popular opposition that has had disastrous consequences for Russian interests in the country.
For the time being, the uncertainties of the unresolved conflict in eastern Ukraine have delayed the inevitable fallout from this historic setback.
However, when the reckoning finally arrives, it promises to be painful for the Kremlin.
While modern Russian national identity is inextricably tied to notions of imperial destiny, the same is simply not true for Ukrainians.
For this reason, the “Russian World” doctrine did not strike a chord among a majority of Ukrainians even before the 2014 crisis.
Predictably, these trends have continued to strengthen since the onset of hostilities seven years ago.
After gaining independence in 1991, Ukraine has slowly but steadily embraced democracy, leading to the emergence of a highly competitive if imperfect multi-party political system.
Today’s Ukrainians take free and fair elections for granted and have also grown used to robust criticism of the authorities and a pluralistic media environment.
Meanwhile, following constitutional changes adopted in 2020, Putin now looks set to remain president of Russia until 2036.
Many Ukrainians remain deeply dissatisfied with the country’s often dysfunctional democracy, but few have any desire for a return to a one-party system dominated by a dictator in the Kremlin.
According to a Pew Research Center survey, Ukrainian approval of Putin in international affairs fell from 56% in 2007 to just 11% in 2019.
No wonder today’s authoritarian Russia has proven such a hard sell to Ukrainian audiences.
Prior to 2014, negative views of Russia were not particularly common among Ukrainians outside of western Ukraine.
However, since the outbreak of hostilities, such attitudes have become increasingly mainstream in all regions of the country.
As a direct result of the ongoing conflict, the number of Ukrainians holding positive views of Russia has collapsed from around 80% to current levels of approximately 40%, according to February 2021 data from the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology and Russia’s Levada Center.
An entire generation of young Ukrainians with no personal memories of the shared Soviet past now knows Russia primarily as an aggressor and an adversary.
Regardless of any future developments towards peace and reconciliation, the seven-year war between the two countries represents a watershed event that has permanently transformed Russian-Ukrainian relations.
One of the central pillars of the “Russian World” doctrine is the Russian Orthodox Church.
On paper at least, the Russian Orthodox Church continues to exert formidable influence over Ukraine.
However, in reality, this influence was already in decline prior to the outbreak of hostilities in 2014 and long before the establishment of an independent Orthodox Church of Ukraine in 2019.
Throughout the early post-Soviet decades of Ukrainian independence, the internationally unrecognized Kyiv Patriarchate had continued to gain ground on the Russian Orthodox Church’s Moscow Patriarchate in the competition for Orthodox Ukrainian loyalties.
This shift gained further momentum following the start of hostilities in 2014, thanks in part to widespread perceptions that the Moscow Patriarchate supported military aggression against Ukraine.
Moscow Patriarchate priests have provoked numerous scandals over the past seven years by refusing to officiate at funerals for fallen soldiers and rejecting public calls to honor the country’s defenders.
In May 2015, Moscow Patriarchate leaders sparked fury when they refused to stand in the Ukrainian parliament to honor Ukrainian soldiers killed in the war.
Ukrainians also increasingly question Moscow’s attempts to link the modern Russian Orthodox Church with the ancient Orthodox traditions of the Kyiv Rus era.
In a survey conducted on the eve of Ukraine’s January 2019 breakthrough towards Orthodox independence, majorities of Ukrainians identified modern Ukraine as the successor to the Kyiv Rus legacy and recognized the Kyiv Patriarchate as the successor to the Orthodox Church established in the Ukrainian capital just over one thousand years earlier.
The Russian Orthodox Church remains a powerful force in Ukrainian everyday life with millions of believers and thousands of parishes.
Looking ahead, it cannot hope play the kind of unifying role in pluralistic Ukraine that it performs inside Russia itself.
Ukraine and Russia have diverged on a number of key historical questions ever since the Gorbachev era.
Many Ukrainians do not agree that Crimea “was always Russian,” for example, and also reject Russian attempts to claim the historical legacy of the Kyiv Rus.
These competing approaches towards the common past are hardly surprising.
For centuries, Russia was able to dictate a highly russo-centric version of Ukrainian history.
Beginning in the nineteenth century with the Czarist regime and continuing throughout the twentieth century Soviet era, Ukrainians faced wave after wave of russification policies designed to stifle Ukraine’s own statehood aspirations.
This history of repression makes it significantly harder for modern Ukrainians to identify with the imperial past, but Russians do not share such qualms.
While a clear majority of Ukrainians now regard Stalin as a tyrant, equally high numbers of Russians see the Soviet dictator as a hero.
In recent years, the space separating rival Ukrainian and Russian historical narratives has grown ever wider.
Inevitably, conflicting accounts of the shared past remain central to the information war raging between today’s Russia and Ukraine.
This proved a grave miscalculation that has accelerated a number of existing trends pulling the two post-Soviet nations in different directions.
The entire “Russian World” concept is rooted in outdated nineteenth century imperial myths that have no place in the twenty-first century.
Such thinking has had an incredibly damaging impact on Russian-Ukrainian ties, playing a direct role in the drive towards war seven years ago and fueling the subsequent escalation of the conflict.
This imperialistic approach now serves as a barrier to peace and possible future reconciliation.
Until modern Russia is able to reject the toxic “Russian World” doctrine, it will continue to poison relations with Ukraine and widen the divide between the two countries.
Russia must annex east Ukraine By Alvydas Medalinskas Kremlin TV chief Margarita Simonyan called on Russia to annex eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region during a recent high-profile forum that signaled an escalation in Moscow’s seven-year hybrid war against Ukraine.
Conflict Disinformation UkraineAlert Nov 22, 2020 How Ukraine’s Orange Revolution shaped twenty-first century geopolitics By Peter Dickinson Ukraine’s 2004 Orange Revolution is often overlooked but it is worthy of more attention as one of the great geopolitical turning points of the early twenty-first century that set the stage for today’s Cold War climate.
Ukraine bans Kremlin-linked TV channels By Peter Dickinson President Zelenskyy shut down three Kremlin-linked TV channels on February 2 in a move portrayed as a major blow to Russia’s hybrid war against Ukraine.
The step has sparked debate over the balance between national security and free speech.
Conflict Disinformation The views expressed in UkraineAlert are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Atlantic Council, its staff, or its supporters.
Read more from UkraineAlert UkraineAlert is a comprehensive online publication that provides regular news and analysis on developments in Ukraine’s politics, economy, civil society, and culture.
The Eurasia Center’s mission is to enhance transatlantic cooperation in promoting stability, democratic values and prosperity in Eurasia, from Eastern Europe and Turkey in the West to the Caucasus, Russia and Central Asia in the East.
Russian President Vladimir Putin addresses the crowd during a March 2018 event in Moscow to mark the fourth anniversary of the annexation of Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula.
Now in its eighth year, Russian military aggression against Ukraine has played a major role in driving the two formerly close post-Soviet nations apart.
Join our network Sign up to receive expert analyses from our community on the most important global issues, rapid insights on events as they unfold, and highlights of the Council's best work.
