THE IMPORTANCE of 2016 RUSSIAN ELECTIONS is posted and can be watched free on YouTube.
Latest events in Syria, including the United States coalition bombing of Syrian army positions and killing over 60 people, as well as Kerry/Lavrov Syria talks and UN clashes.
Lada will give her prediction on whether there will ever be a direct military confrontation between United States and Russia.
Lada Ray’s original take on what is going on among United States elites , why there is so much flip-flopping and inconsistency and how all this is connected with the developing Earth Shift and the crash of the United States Empire.
How Russian voters were prevented from voting in Ukraine and the ‘funny way’ in which it backfired.
What is happening with gas and coal and how Ukraine will survive this winter.
Can the Crimea precedent help and how PMR is different from Crimea or Donbass.
Why pro-West parties had a crushing loss, why United Russia won, and more.
PART 2 is all about Russian Elections 2016, including the overview of main 4 parties, plus 10 other small parties , their platforms and how United Russia won back the constitutional majority.
We’ll talk in detail how more and more women are elected, why pro-West ‘neo-liberal’ parties received almost zero votes.
How these Duma Elections will influence 2018 Russian Presidential Elections.
Why there is presently a fight between patriotic parties and organizations.
How United Russia learned its lesson and what it did differently this time.
The explosive ADDENDUM will talk about the recent arrest of the police colonel Zakharchenko on charges of corruption.
In his possession was found a stash of 8bln rubles and 1. tons of United States dollars.
What is not being said and what this colossal cash stash was planned to be used for.
What was being planned after September 18, Ukraine junta and USA’s role in that failed plan.
THE IMPORTANCE of 2006 RUSSIAN ELECTIONS, FREE ESR11 P1, geopolitics, Lada Ray predictions, Lada Ray Youtube channel, LadaRay.com, LadaRay.info, Pridnestrovie, Russia, Russian Duma Elections, Ukraine, United Russia, USA, Vladimir Putin.
As to United States elections and Russia’s influence, there will be a piece on that in October where I’ll tell all.
