Extremists and neo-Nazis occupy high positions in the police, army and government.
What's more, the regime is a source of instability as well as embarrassment for its pro-Western neighbours, notably Poland.
Poles are none too happy that Ukrainian ultranationalists who allied with Nazi Germany during the Second World War and conducted massacres of their Polish forebears are being rehabilitated as national heroes in Ukraine.
All of this creates a public relations problem for Western governments and their NATO alliance that can explode at any time.
A case in point is the arrests in early August of several bands of Ukrainian ultranationalist saboteurs who infiltrated across the Ukraine-Crimea border with explosives in hand.
The operation was foiled on August 6 when the infiltrators were discovered and quickly rounded up, though not before the Ukrainian army provided cross-border covering fire.
When the smoke cleared, one Russian soldier and one Russian policeman were dead.
A statement by Russia's Foreign Ministry on August 11 says the mission was planned by the Ukrainian Defence Ministry's Chief Intelligence Directorate.
Russia's national security police, the FSB, has released photos and videos of the material carried by the saboteurs.
It has also released information gathered from initial interviews with the arrested.
This is a big public relations problem for the regime in Kyiv and its backers in the West because according to the narratives they have been peddling for more than two years now, Ukraine is a tragic victim of Russian aggression following the Maidan coup, er, ""Revolution of Dignity,"" that saw Ukraine's elected president overthrown in February 2014.
Needless to say, news of a terrorist infiltration plot is hardly conducive to selling the Ukraine-as-victim story.
President Vladimir Putin has promised that new measures will be taken to protect Crimea, but has also said that Ukraine's government and army will pay a price for their folly.
As Turkey has learned since it shot down a Russian fighter plane last year, the Russian government doesn't take kindly to rogue military operations which kill its servicemen.
In the event, the most surprising fact about the Crimean incident is that there have not even been the ritual statements from Western governments of support for Ukraine that I expected.
On the contrary, Western governments have publicly said virtually nothing about the incident.
A meeting of the UN Security Council did take place on August 11 to discuss the incident, but the meeting took place in closed session so scarcely anything is known about it.
By contrast, the calls for restraint I said would be made by the West to Ukraine in private are being made in public as well.
But the reaction of Western media has been quite aggressive, going on the propaganda offensive.
It has waged a two-front offensive in the week following the August 6 arrests.
He gave lots of space to the denials of any involvement by the Ukrainian government.
Germany's state broadcaster Deutsche Welle also featured the denials of the Ukrainian government.
Many reports used a clever twist in describing one of Russia's reactions to events, which was Russia cancelling participation in a planned briefing with Germany and France over the situation in eastern Ukraine which was to take place during the G20 summit meeting next month in China.
The BBC's Sarah Rainsford wrote on August 14, ""No video footage or independent confirmation of that incident has yet emerged.
It starts with extensive reporting of Ukrainian government denials complete with Ukrainian claims of a Russian conspiracy against them.
Russia is attacked by saboteurs, who received cover fire from the Ukrainian army.
The Ukrainian side killed a Russian soldier and a policeman, and the infiltration has stoked fear of a flat-out, new front of global terrorism opening up along the Ukraine-Crimea border.
In response, Russia is upset and angry and is promising stronger measures to defend its citizens in Crimea.
The claims of innocence by Kyiv, repeated widely in the Western press, are disproven by the evidence provided by Russia since the August 6 attack, with much more to come as trials are prepared.
And there is an additional reason to discount Ukraine's claim of innocence and discount Ukrainian and Western media conspiratorial distractions.
It is the simple reason that this is not the first time that the citizens of Crimea have suffered terrorist attacks by Ukrainian ultranationalists.
As events quickly showed in Donbass, eastern Ukraine and in Odessa , the violent threats being widely voiced by Ukrainian right-wing paramilitaries against Crimeans were real and imminent.
In September of 2015, right-wing, ultranationalist paramilitaries mounted a road transport blockade against Crimea.
On the contrary, three months later, it made the transport blockade official government policy.
Then in November 2015, the extremists mounted their boldest attack on Crimea since the Korsun massacre.
They blew up electricity pylons on all four electrical service lines serving Crimea from Ukraine, cutting most of the peninsula's electrical supply.
The rightists blocked crews from conducting repairs and once again the government in Kyiv condoned their actions.
Ukraine has cut bus, train and air passenger travel to Crimea, and unbelievably, it cut water supply with nary a peep of concern from the heroes of Western media.
Crimea became heavily dependent on water from Ukraine's Dnieper River during post-World War Two reconstruction, notably with the construction of the North Crimea Canal during the 1960s.
These events should discredit the efforts of Western media to dismiss or downplay the latest sabotage against Crimea.
The road and electricity blockades of 2015 were reported perfunctorily and then quickly erased from the news.
The blockades were certainly never reported as being the violations of human rights and international diplomacy that they were.
The acceptance by many on the political and antiwar left in Western countries of the ""Russia annexed Crimea"" meme makes matters worse.
There are few cases more glaring than Crimea in recent decades of Western corporate media going flat out to ""manufacture consent"" for its claim that Russia illegally seized and annexed Crimea.
The vote was prompted by unresolved, longstanding grievances over Crimea's second-class status in Ukraine, including how Crimea became to be a part of Ukraine in the first place.
It was also prompted by imminent threats against the rights and personal security of Crimeans by a right-wing coup regime in Kyiv to which they rightly accorded no legitimacy.
Given how the 'Russia annexed Crimea' story is a centrepiece of NATO war threats against Russia, including the underlying threat of nuclear war expressed in the United States government posture, an international campaign of solidarity with the Crimean people is urgently needed.
Pressure is needed on the government in Kyiv to end its military attacks in eastern Ukraine and adhere to the political resolution of the conflict spelled out in the Minsk-2 ceasefire agreement of February 12, 2015.
