Russian photographer Oksana Yushko discusses her work highlighting mixed marriages during the Russian-Ukrainian conflict.
Though she is now based in Moscow, Yushko actually grew up in Ukraine, born and raised in Kharkiv, the country’s second-largest city.
Her mother, Engelina, is Russian, and her father, Viktor, Ukrainian; when they married more than fifty years ago, they formed a union that was, to everyone at the time, utterly normal.
The ‘mixed’ nature of the marriage, Yushko says, hardly merited mentioning.
Kharkiv, located in what is today the northeastern quadrant of Ukraine, is only a forty minute drive from the Russian-Ukrainian border.
But besides the city’s proximity to the Russian Federation, the mixing of families was simply a fact of life in the Soviet Union—especially between Russians and Ukrainians, the two largest ethnic groups.
But following the fall of the USSR and Ukraine’s subsequent national independence, Russia and the European Union began a tug-of-war for influence in Ukraine.
Tensions came to a head when President Viktor Yanukovych strayed from Ukraine’s association agreement with the European Union in favor of closer ties to Moscow.
Shortly after Yanukovych’s announcement, the widely-covered Euromaidan protests began.
When the peaceful protests turned violent following government suppression in early 2014, Parliament voted to remove Yanukovych from his position, and pro-EU president Petro Poroshenko was elected in his place.
Around that same time, the push-and-pull of Russia and the European Union reached a new height.
In March of 2014, Putin announced his country’s annexation of Crimea, a peninsula that joined Ukraine to Russia.
Following the annexation, and the subsequent militia-led uprisings in Ukraine’s Russian-speaking eastern regions, social media was aflame.
Russians and Ukrainians no longer saw themselves as neighbors, Yushko says; all of a sudden, they were enemies.
Yushko thought of her own parents, Engelina and Viktor, and of their 50-year marriage, which had never been political.
Since Yushko’s project is about showcasing the coexistence and love, the first photograph of the series was of Yushko’s parents in their home in Ukraine.
Despite the fiery rhetoric on social media, the reception of her work was immediately positive.
Here, she sits down with TYG to discuss her experiences during the conflict, her own family, and the future of Familia.
I always say the most difficult thing for me was when my friends became enemies of one another—they had nothing to do with politics, they just saw things on social media, reading the news, watching TV, and they became very aggressive.
I remember very clearly, it was in the spring of 2014, after Crimea, and the level of aggression was very high.
I visited my parents in May of 2014, and it was just… an instant idea that I had.
But I put the photograph online and I made my statement and put it next to it.
If I were a journalist, I would have written something much longer to go with it, but I’m a photographer.
So of course, they also care and they want to live under peaceful skies , but I think they could be a model for other people.
And suddenly, unexpectedly—like I said, there was lots of aggression from people on social media, so I never thought it would be like this—there were so many likes, reposts, and shares, and they wrote, “Yeah, it’s true.
And they started to invite other people to participate in this kind of project.
So I asked my friends to share , and if they knew other similar families, to ask them to participate.
And so it became… my duty… and so I would take photos for it as often as I could at that time, because I understood that it was important.
It was published worldwide, and during that half a year there was a lot of interest.
I try not to remember, but I know that it was just very ordinary things—people stopped being friends.
Because it’s not like that—it’s a mix of situations, of cultures, of opinions, of people’s thoughts, of bits of propaganda.
There are so many to what was going on that it’s very difficult to say things are black and white, love and hate, this or that.
I heard for example that there was a couple that had almost divorced—not because of the conflict, but because they had different opinions about the conflict—and when you have different opinions but can’t get to the truth, the fighting just goes on forever.
So they are both living in this apartment that they rent, it was a difficult economic situation as well , and they were about to divorce, but they couldn’t just move out of this apartment.
I was told that after they saw the project, they began to think about things differently, and they vowed to stay together.
I’ve received many very positive opinions from people from abroad, because I think it’s very easy to have an opinion when you read the news, or watch TV, especially when you live very far from the conflict and that’s all you see.
So when these people, too, see the project, they start to think differently about the whole situation.
Mostly through friends, but sometimes when I’m out on assignment I’ll ask around on my own.
Sometimes the discussions come to political things, and I’m very open about these things and am happy to talk about the project.
And while I was waiting for her, I was talking to the doctors in the hospital.
They told me that they had a woman who had come from Kiev, Ukraine, and was married to a Russian guy who was native to the town.
Her name was Tatiana, his was Sergei, and they had also met during university at a nightclub.
Most of the time, you’re meeting them for the first time and you’re in their homes with them.
That’s why I don’t spend that much time with each family—three, four hours at most.
Most of the time I photograph them while we’re talking; it’s not staged photography.
But I say that if they live together, and if they agree to be photographed, I think they don’t have very different opinions.
And I think that’s why it’s easy to ask them about the situation, actually.
You know, I’m not very professional about politics—I couldn’t an expert—so I’m just telling you what I feel.
But I had a huge exhibition in March or April in Kiev—so almost a year ago—and even , it was much better than two years ago.
And I expected that when we came, because it was a collaborative project comparing the situation in Chechnya to the situation in the Donbas region, that people would be aggressive still, but they weren’t.
And now, at the beginning of 2016, I think it’s an even better situation.
And as I told you, it’s not a black and white conflict; there are many, many different things happening at once.
Now, people don’t just blame the other side, they blame their own government.
I don’t think there was as much aggression from Russians towards Ukrainians, of course, because the conflict was happening in Ukraine, not in Russia.
I do, but also from Ukrainians who lived abroad but had friends, relatives, colleagues, who were close to the conflict.
The people who suffer, who live in the Donetsk region, they don’t want the conflict to be in their area.
It’s not that they want to be in Russia or in Ukraine, they just want things to calm down.
The first photograph in this series is one of your parents, at home in Ukraine.
My mom was born in Russia, and then because of my grandfather—he was a military man—their family travelled a lot.
It was just easier for the family, and because was in the USSR, her father was moved there for work. were born in 1936 and 1937… So of course they were very young during the war.
I would imagine that in the USSR, it was fairly normal to come from a mixed Russian-Ukrainian marriage.
You would hear stories all the time—somebody went to go live here, went to study there—it was such a big area.
Kazakh people living somewhere in Central Russia, or for example, after deportations, many Chechens used to live in Kazakhstan…It’s all because of our history that we have this mixing.
There were several situations when I thought that I would need to go to Ukraine and take them out immediately.
I remember that there was some news in the press —on BBC, I think—that some Russian vehicles had crossed over the border with Ukraine.
I remember because later it was written that they were going in the direction of Ukraine, but they didn’t cross.
From the Ukrainian side, it was immediately stated that this caravan was destroyed by artillery.
And I read this late at night and immediately I said to myself that I needed to go tomorrow to Ukraine and take my parents out.
I called them the next day and checked with them to see what they had heard on the news.
In Kharkiv, there was one major explosion at a rally , but that was it.
It’s not that way anymore—I mostly do assignments and personal projects—but I think I’ll keep working on this project until… it’s over for me.
Nobody is interested anymore, the people who live there—they still have these blasts, these guns… It’s not like the conflict is over.
Familia can be found online in full at www.youok.ru/, alongside the artist’s other work.
