After the elimination of the leader of the Donetsk terrorists Oleksandr Zakharchenko and the escape of his immediate region neighbors from Donbas, a new stage of property redistribution has begun.
Russian special services compete for sphere of influence in the occupied territories, and each conflict situation is solved in the high offices of the Kremlin.
How do they make money? By this time, Russia supports the temporarily occupied part of Donbas with the federal budget.
This proves once again that these are artificially created surrogates, which are held not only due to military but also to socio-economic assistance, so that the civilian population receives something at least a bit, but of course this is not enough.
At the same time, Russia does not allocate generous funds from its own budget, vice versa, it constantly demands from the local occupation administrations to secure the transfer of so-called own incomes to the budgets of these territories.
The Russian Federation demands that all expenditures aimed at supporting so-called stability are based on the principle of fifty percent from local sources and fifty percent from the federal budget of the Russian Federation.
So-called revenues to local budgets can be divided into several sources.
The first is the proceeds from the management of the captured Ukrainian property.
But most of the captured Ukrainian enterprises are not working, so it does not heal the economy.
The second source is direct assistance, which comes from the material and technical reserves of the Russian Federation.
The third source through the ""Humanitarian Aid Commission"" headed by Deputy Minister of Economy Serhei Nazarov.
In fact, the Russian government is responsible for the temporarily occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
The fourth – they collect funds from local businesses in the form of so-called taxes.
In fact, this is just a fee that has been set for local businessmen for entrepreneurial activity.
And even after its realization or using in production cycles, in particular in Russia, revenues go in the pocket of ""dealers"" who organize shadow schemes.
For example, over the past year about 4 million tons of coal have actually been stolen from Ukrainian mineral resources.
And the lion's share of profits from this coal went not to provide the population of the temporarily occupied territories, but simply to the pockets of transnational organized criminal groups.
These groupings are controlled by special services of the Russian Federation.
And because of the fact that various special services of the Russian Federation have different representatives in the occupation administrations, conflicts between them are also constantly arising, for the influence on the president of Russia and the redistribution of resources in the ""black"" economic field.
Such schemes are used in order not to allocate funds from the budget of the Russian Federation.
In addition, high-quality anthracite coal mined in temporarily occupied territories very often goes overseas.
A number of people are enriched due to this process, ranging from the bottom to the top in Moscow.
The occupant is obliged to ensure the vital activity of the population at the proper level, which does not take place in reality.
The part of civilian population in the occupied territories needs humanitarian assistance.
This is just humanitarian aid, and these funds are not directed towards the development of the occupied territories.
Also, if you take for example the budget of the International Committee of the Red Cross for the previous years, it is at the level of $ 60 million annually.
Their statements sounded that, for example, they do not need Ukrainian help. They do not refuse.
However, the Ukrainian authorities can not work in the temporarily occupied part of Donbas, so we work through the international mechanism providing humanitarian assistance exclusively through UN agencies and the ICRC and other international humanitarian organizations.
Such organizations, through a simplified procedure, cross the contact line.
Ukraine maximally simplified the access of humanitarian cargos to the occupied territories in order to help Ukrainians, which meets the provisions of the Minsk Agreements.
Instead of that, the occupation administrations imposed a number of additional barriers and even expelled some international organizations, for them not to work in these territories.
For more than two years we have insisted on the opening of additional EECP at the line of contact in the Luhansk oblast, in Zolote.
The Ukrainian side spent more than UAH 1 million there to build the infrastructure for organizing the contact line crossing.
The issue was originally agreed in Minsk, but then the Russian side and the occupation administrations refused to open the check point. The point is that they do not give any reason to be discussed.
After all, the greater the tension, the more negatively people begin to treat Ukraine. This is one of the reasons.
For example, in the temporarily occupied part of Donbas, social discontent takes place among the employees of enterprises in settlements, which dependent on these enterprises.
In response, according to the Soviet model, there is formed a group, which includes the representative of the occupation administration, of the public organization, which member is the Head of the occupation administration, and a representative of so-called Ministry of State Security.
Well, is it not the Soviet way? Does Russia need coal from Donbas, if its energy sources seem to be enough? Russia itself no.
This is exclusively a scheme how not to allocate funds from the budget of the Russian Federation.
Or it can be ""set up"" under the corruption scheme in the Russian Federation, exactly ""set up"", but on this purpose the price should be significantly reduced. Besides Russia, where does the stolen coal from Donbas go? The coal is supplied to different countries, not only to the Russian Federation.
In this case, the falsification of documents takes place, to show that it is Russian coal. Yes.
To Turkey, for example, to other countries of Europe, even to EU member states.
This does not mean that these countries deliberately encourage such schemes, just the falsification of documents takes place.
Ukrainian coal crosses the line of the Ukrainian-Russian border, which is not currently controlled by the Ukrainian authorities, further undergoes various manipulations, and, according to falsificated documents, Ukrainian coal has a different origin.
It is very difficult to establish, for example, in Italy that coal, which according to Russian documents comes from Russia, in fact is Ukrainian.
For example, the company is located in South Ossetia, where there is the South Ossetian Bank, which has correspondent accounts in the Russian Federation.
A system is created when the company that is created or physically exists in the occupied territories of Ukraine opens an account in the bank created by quasi-state entities.
But in reality, it is simply the accounting electronic system that is connected with the electronic system of "" layer"" in South Ossetia, and this platform has access to the Russian bank.
This all is provided with access to the financial system of the Russian Federation.
Thus, the financial system of the Russian Federation and the occupied territories are connected.
Russia, in general, tries to make a coalition of unrecognized ""republics"", as if they form a circle of ""friends”, not friends in reality, and simply create a picture for the propaganda machine of the Russian Federation. What are the groups of influence in the occupied Donbas, and to which of special services of Russia each of them is subordinated? First, there are almost 40,000 representatives of illegal armed formings that need to be managed.
Organizationally they are included in the Southern Federal Military District of the Russian Federation.
It means that these divisions, in matters of subordination and organization of their activities, communications, warnings of military threat , command and security, are included in the military system of the Southern Federal Military District.
So, its items, which can be seen not in animation, but as if on real photos, are the so-called ""Kyndzhal"" system.
It was announced that the first ""Kyndzhals"" are already in service in the Southern Federal Military District, which structurally and geographically covers the Crimea and occupied Donbas.
The civilian branch, which is responsible for socio-economic support, is represented by the so-called commission of the RF Government on humanitarian assistance, headed by Serhii Nazarov.
All these structures in the occupied territories have their own people.
So imagine if one is a proxy of one center of influence, and the other is a proxy of another center of influence, and the conflict arises between them, then strangely enough, this conflict is solved in Moscow.
A number of conflicts taking place at the level of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts have actually been transferred to the Moscow offices.
That is, officials in Moscow are in the tense relationship because of the situation in Donbas. They say in media that after elimination of Zakharchenko, Olexandr Yanukovych and Serhii Kurchenko actively distribute the spheres of influence and financial flows from occupied Donbas among themselves.
By the way, by 2014, the firm with this name was registered in Ukraine and controlled by Mr Kurchenko.
This is one scheme, which uses the citizens of Ukraine, who have joined the Russian Federation and provide support to the occupation regime.
Russia builds schemes allowing to deny plausibly the intervenes in the affairs of Ukraine and the support the regime of occupation.
They say that they are not afraid of anything and anyone, but the schemes are built so that it is difficult to reach Russia.
As for Yanukovych, I do not think that he has a significant influence there. Ukraine is now on the edge of a great election process.
If the IDPs can vote in the presidential elections, they will not be able to elect deputies in majoritarian elections in parliamentary races.
At the same time, soon it will be two years since the bill № 6240 has been obtained by the Verkhovna Rada, according to which the IDPs receive the right to vote in majoritarian and local elections.
Why is it so delayed? Internally displaced persons should be given the right to vote in all elections without exception.
It seems to me that now the political situation in the Verkhovna Rada is such that it does not allow to adopt this law. Perhaps the deputies are simply disadvantaged to give the right to vote to IDPs, after all, the less voters we have, the more convenient it is? I do not think so.
If there are any doubts about respecting human rights in Ukraine, it is unprofitable for anyone who supports democratic values.
However, this question of voting involves a whole range of decisions, not one bill.
It is easy to say that we will now adopt one bill, and it will change everything, but in fact, we need system solutions.
They say that all internally displaced persons should be guaranteed the right to vote in Donetsk and Luhansk, from where they were expelled.
If we are talking about the peacekeeping mission, that elections will be organized, as it is presupposed by the Minsk Agreements, these people should have the opportunity to choose local authorities in Donetsk and Luhansk.
But I fully support that all Ukrainian citizens should be involved in the election process, regardless of other factors. In the separatist mass media of eastern Ukraine, for more than half a year, the issue of possible use of the chemical weapons by the Armed Forces of Ukraine arises.
Are the hitmen insuring themselves from possible man-made disasters as a result of their economic activity? We regarded several versions, but the most likely one, and we found a lot of evidences to support it, is that in the temporarily occupied territories they do not adhere to the rules of dealing with hazardous wastes, and there are significant problems with ensuring the safety of those industries located on the line of contact.
In our opinion, it is just a smokescreen to hide the possible failures of the occupation administrations.
For example, at the “Styrol” plant there is a branch of the ammonia pipeline, which goes to the Odessa Port Plant.
In order to protect the population, it is necessary to take serious measures that have not been carried out there for the last 4-5 years.
To say that the Ukrainian army is trying to do something, and if something happens, Ukraine will be guilty.
By the way, in many industries there are the threats of harmful substances entering the groundwater, in particular, in the water supplied through the channel “Siverskii DonetsDonbas” and in the whole system of water supply.
The quality of surface water in Donetsk has considerably deteriorated during the last 4 years, due to the fact that they stopped pumping out water from some mines.
According to our order, there were taken the water samples in Donetsk's surface reservoirs for analysis, of course, this is not the official analysis, but simply monitoring the situation.
What will it lead to? This can lead to a complete stoppage of water supply in the region.
It seems to me that many people just do not fully understand what is happening.
For me, this is about the same as the threat of committing a terrorist act.
Two years ago, $ 70 million were allocated from the state budget to support the water utility company ""Water of Donbas"", only to ensure that water supply for the residents of the region would not stop.
For humanitarian reasons, Ukraine is struggling to support the water supply system, although it is economically ineffective. Are they trying somehow to make money with it? Yes, this is also a question of money for them.
Everything that is collected from people for water, the occupation administrations take to their pockets, and let Ukraine pay salaries to the ""Water of Donbas"" Moreover, for political reasons, the occupation administrations have set such low tariffs to show that they are ""successful"" managers.
The fact that the company, in principle, has no means to exist does not confuse them.
Therefore, in Minsk, the question will be raised about the need for serious international discussions to find a mechanism to support the functioning of the water supply system at the appropriate economic level. Since the beginning of the year, 9 people have died at the EECPs when crossing the line of contact.
Secondly, the Ukrainian side has more throughput, than the occupied territories.
