The Commonwealth of Independent States is a regional intergovernmental organization of 10 post-Soviet republics in Eurasia formed following the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
It has an area of 20,368,759 km² and has an estimated population of 239,796,010.
The CIS encourages cooperation in economical, political and military affairs and has certain powers to coordinate trade, finance, lawmaking and security.
When the USSR began to fall in 1991, the founding republics signed the Belavezha Accords on 8 December 1991, declaring the Soviet Union would cease to exist and proclaimed the CIS in its place.
A few days later the Alma-Ata Protocol was signed, which declared that Soviet Union was dissolved and that the Russian Federation was to be its successor state.
The Baltic states , which regard their membership in the Soviet Union as an illegal occupation, chose not to participate.
Ukraine, which participated as an associate member, ended its participation in CIS statutory bodies on 19 May 2018.
Eight of the nine CIS member states participate in the CIS Free Trade Area.
Three organizations are under the overview of the CIS, namely the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Eurasian Economic Union ; and the Union State.
While the first and the second are military and economic alliances, the third aims to reach a supranational union of Russia and Belarus with a common government, flag, currency and so on.
In March 1991, Mikhail Gorbachev, the president of the Soviet Union, proposed a federation by holding a referendum to preserve the Union as the Union of Sovereign States.
The Council of Foreign Ministers met in Dushanbe, Tajikistan on 11 April 2003 to discuss the War in Iraq and consider a draft program for the fight against terrorism and extremism, with the particularly the need for an international role in post-war Iraq, was further addressed at the May summit in St.
There are nine full member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Although Ukraine was one of the founding countries and ratified the Creation Agreement in December 1991, Ukraine chose not to ratify the CIS Charter as it disagrees with Russia being the only legal successor state to the Soviet Union.
Thus it does not regard itself as a member of the CIS, and according to the aforementioned Charter of the CIS was indeed not a member, as it never ratified the aforementioned charter.
Nevertheless, Ukraine kept being allowed to participate in the CIS, although not being formally a member.
On 14 March 2014, a bill was introduced to Ukraine's parliament to denounce their ratification of the 1991 Agreement Establishing the CIS, following the Russian military intervention in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea, but was never approved.
As Ukraine was not formally a member, it did not need to withdraw formally, in any other way apart from ceasing to participate.
This series of treaties and declarations also define that the Soviet Union ceases to exist and the former Soviet Union states participating in these treaties take over the Soviet Union's legal obligations.
Georgia 3 December 1993 19 April 1994 18 August 2008 18 August 2009 Withdrew as a result of the Russo-Georgian War of 2008.
Withdrew from CIS as a result of the Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation and Russia's involvement in the War in Donbass As Ukraine was not a member, it did not need to withdraw formally, in any other way apart from ceasing to participate.
Ukraine had mostly ceased to participate in CIS since 2014, after the pro-Russian unrest in the eastern part of the country, but on 19 May 2018, it passed a decree to officially stop participating at all.
On 26 May 1995 CIS leaders signed the Convention on the Interparliamentary Assembly of Member Nations of the Commonwealth of Independent States eventually ratified by nine parliaments.
An important manifestation of integration processes in the area of military and defense collaboration of the CIS member states is the creation, in 1995, of the joint CIS Air Defense System.
Over the years, the military personnel of the joint CIS Air Defense System grew twofold along the western, European border of the CIS, and by 1. times on its southern borders.
When Boris Yeltsin became Russian Defence Minister on 7 May 1992, Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, was appointed as Commander-in-Chief of the CIS Armed Forces, and his staff were ejected from the MOD and General Staff buildings and given offices in the former Warsaw Pact Headquarters at 41 Leningradsky Prospekt on the northern outskirts of Moscow.
In 1994, negotiations were initiated between the CIS countries on free trade area , but no agreement was signed.
A proposed free trade agreement would have covered all twelve then CIS members except Turkmenistan.
After discussion about the creation of a common economic space between the Commonwealth of Independent States countries of Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan, agreement in principle about the creation of this space was announced after a meeting in the Moscow suburb of Novo-Ogarevo on 23 February 2003.
The Common Economic Space would involve a supranational commission on trade and tariffs that would be based in Kiev, would initially be headed by a representative of Kazakhstan, and would not be subordinate to the governments of the four nations.
The ultimate goal would be a regional organisation that would be open for other countries to join as well, and could eventually lead even to a single currency.
A Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia was thus created in 2010, with a single market envisioned for 2012.
The data is taken from the United Nations statistics division and the United States Central Intelligence Agency.
The organisation continued in 1994 as the Central Asian Economic Union , in which Tajikistan and Turkmenistan did not participate.
In 1998 it became the Central Asian Economic Cooperation , which marked the return of Tajikistan.
On 7 October 2005 it was decided between the member states that Uzbekistan will join the Eurasian Economic Community and that the organisations will merge.
The post-Soviet disputed states of Abkhazia, Artsakh, South Ossetia, and Transnistria are all members of the Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations which aims to forge closer integration among the members.
The CIS-Election Monitoring Organisation is an election monitoring body that was formed in October 2002, following a Commonwealth of Independent States heads of states meeting which adopted the Convention on the Standards of Democratic Elections, Electoral Rights, and Freedoms in the Member States of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
The CIS-EMO has been sending election observers to member countries of the CIS since this time; they approved many elections which have been heavily criticised by independent observers.
The democratic nature of the final round of the Ukrainian presidential election, 2004 which followed the Orange Revolution and brought into power the former opposition, was questioned by the CIS while the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe found no significant problems.
This was the first time ever that the CIS observation teams challenged the validity of an election, saying that it should be considered illegitimate.
On 15 March 2005, the Ukrainian Independent Information Agency quoted Dmytro Svystkov that Ukraine has suspended its participation in the CIS election monitoring organisation.
Moldovan authorities refused to invite CIS observers in the Moldovan parliamentary elections, 2005, an action Russia criticised.
Many dozens such observers from Belarus and Russia were stopped from reaching Moldova.
In 2017 a festival for national sports and games, Фестиваль национальных видов спорта и игр государств — участников Содружества Независимых Государств, was held in Ulyanovsk.
The main sports were sambo, tug of war, mas-wrestling, gorodki, belt wrestling, lapta, bandy , kettlebell lifting, chess and archery.
Ukraine is a country-participant, but not a member country"" ^ Economic Interdependence in Ukrainian-Russian Relations.
Retrieved 2018-04-23. ^ a b c d e f ""Ukraine's withdrawal from CIS to take one year Vestnik Kavkaza"". vestnikkavkaza.net.
Protokoll über Beitritt zur GUS-Freihandelszone in Kraft getreten, de.ria.ru 28 December 2013.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Commonwealth of Independent States.
Legal Aspects of the Regional Integration Processes in the Post-Soviet Area.
