This creates a precedent that might also have direct implications for Moldova and Georgia.
Of course, there are differences in how the political elites of EU member states perceive and understand the current Russian–Ukrainian crisis.
As always when the EU is confronted with external challenges, it takes time for it to form a critical mass of member states that share a common understanding of what is at stake and how the problem can be dealt with.
They are inevitable outcomes reflecting long-term developmental trends in or concerning Europe following the end of bipolar conflict.
If one looks back at what has happened over the last two decades in Europe, one can see that the integration dynamics are completely different in western and eastern halves.
The collapse of the Communist bloc helped to deepen the integration process in western Europe and it also pushed the EU into becoming more engaged in its neighborhood.
The former Yugoslav republics look up to the EU as a source of stability and know-how, and of course as a trade partner, and although they experienced several setbacks on their reform processes and paths to the EU, they are clearly not trying to become part of the Russian Federation.
The Lisbon Treaty and the institutional design of the present EU could not have become 6 P Shakarian, “Sanctions against Russia are dividing Europe more than you think,” Russia Direct, September 22, 2014.
The EU is guarantor of peace and stability in the Western Balkans and is preparing the former Yugoslav republics for their accession.
The EU was not involved in the Yugoslav crisis of the 1990s, because it did not yet exist in its current shape.
We can rightly criticize the EU for many things; however, the EU remains a unique project in the history of international relations.
The fact that Malta with its 400,000 citizens has equal voting rights in EU decisions on legislation and policies to Germany with its population of 80 million is a unique situation that is not found anywhere else in the world today nor in history.
The EU in 2014 is a qualitatively different project, internally and externally, to the European Communities before 1993.
Prague, 7 May 2009,” 8435/09 , Council of the European Union, May 7, 2009.
None of the integration initiatives aimed at creating order in the former Soviet Union, or rather, among some former Soviet countries over the last two decades can be labeled successful.
The disintegrated former Soviet Union was supposed to be replaced by the Community of Independent States set up by the presidents of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus in December 1991.
Today few recognize We need to consider what the abbreviation CIS refers to. seriously the integration Russia and Belarus have been trying to dynamics of the EU over renew the common federal state since the last two decades 1994.
Today only Russian and Belorussian and more in order to experts recall that project.
Yeltsin’s Russia understand what the was unable to implement a successful EU response might be integration project in the post-Soviet area. to the current Russian– Putin’s Russia in 2004 came into conflict Ukrainian crisis. with its largest ally – Lukashenka’s Belarus – the same country with which Yeltsin wanted to create a federation.
When we discuss the gas crisis today, let us not forget that it was Belarus who was first to be confronted with the shutdown of its natural gas supply from Russia in 2004 and then again in 2007 and 2010.11 The first gas war between Russia and Ukraine occurred in 2007 and the second in 2009.
Russia used military force on the territory of former Soviet republics during the civil wars in Georgia in 1991 and in Moldova in 1992.12 Russia employed force again in August 2008 in Georgia and in 2014 and is now using it against Ukraine; however, this time it has also annexed part of Ukrainian territory.
Despite the presidents of Belarus and Kazakhstan signing an agreement to establish the Eurasian Union in May 201414 – which both had their own reasons for – nothing changes the fact that in the last 20 or so years Russia has not been able to offer its post-Soviet neighbors a constructive agenda involving standard long-term cooperation based on the principle of equal relations.
Hunting for an example of Maltese–German style equal status cooperation in the post-Soviet region in the last 20 years would be pointless.
This is the substantial difference between western Europe today, and the post-Soviet region.
The contrast between the increasing integration in western Europe versus the continuing fragmentation in the eastern part are It is erroneous to trends that are shaping the pan-European refer to the crisis as agenda, including EU–Russia relations. a “Ukrainian crisis,” Comparisons of the dynamics of European integration based on the EU since it is no chance project and integration attempts by the occurrence.
The crisis “Russian sphere” in the post-Soviet area in is systemic and wholly the last 20 years speak for themselves.
These two different European worlds came to clashes in Ukraine in 2013 and 2014.
It is erroneous to refer to the crisis as a “Ukrainian crisis,” since it is no chance occurrence.
The crisis is systemic and wholly European; it represents a confrontation between the two European worlds that have developed and formed over the last 20 years.
As efforts at co-habitation have not been successful and there is only one Europe, confrontation had to occur sooner or later.
This was called “Common Spaces” and was in operation between 2003 and 2006.15 The idea behind the Common Economic Space was that the EU and Russia would create a free-trade zone within 15 years.
Russia did not like the “color” revolutions in eastern Europe, while most EU member states were sympathetic.
The EU did not accept the Russian request for Gazprom to have privileged status on the EU’s gas markets.
And of course the then European friends of President Putin, French President Chirac and German Chancellor Schröder, lost their political positions in their home countries.
Again, it has to be stressed that the EU included the AA/DCFTA in their 2008 offer to post-Soviet countries partly because Russia decided to walk away from the free-trade deal with the EU at the end of 2006.
Let us emphasize that the EU had offered a free-trade deal to Russia back in 2003, long before it proposed its deal for other postSoviet states.
In other words, the EU response to Russian tanks 15 See A Duleba, ed., Searching for new momentum in EU–Russia relations.
Conflict began in Georgia in 2008, and continued in Ukraine in 2013 and 2014.
This conflict could have been avoided as it mirrors development trends over the last 20 year in the two parts of post-cold war Europe.
Ultimately, despite all the difficulties, including the lack of flexibility over decision-making in external relations, which requires the consensus of 28 member states, the EU became the agenda-setter in Europe, including the East.
The EU’s achievement in the Western Balkans within the last two decades made it the key international actor in/for Europe.
The Western Balkans case illustrates the nature of the EU as an international player.
It is not the number of tanks and military aircraft that measures the strength of the EU in European affairs, it is the modernizing access to the EU market it 19 R Olearchyk, “Russia accused of triggering trade war with Ukraine,” Financial Times, August 15, 2013.
Before the Russian–Georgian crisis in 2008, the string of countries between the EU and Russia could hardly have hoped for anything distantly similar to what the Western Balkans had achieved.
Russia’s military intervention in Georgia in 2008 came as a shock to EU leaders.
The military operation lasted only a few days and the outcome was Russia recognizing South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
In September 2008 EU member states authorized the European Commission to draft a new offer for Georgia and also Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine.
Their aim was to counterbalance the then French president’s Nicolas Sarkozy launch of the Union for the Mediterranean during the French Presidency of the EU Council in 2008.
It is questionable whether the Eastern partnership and proposal for deeper integration with the EU would have ever seen the light of day had it not been for Russia’s intervention in Georgia in August 2008.
The association agreements offered to Eastern Europe meant that the partner countries will adopt around 95 per cent of the EU economic and 21 For an overview of the existing theoretical conceptualizations of the EU as international actor, including the EU capacity to project its power in external relations (as a civilian power, normative power, and/or market power) see Ch.
Successful legal harmonization would in fact make them a part of the EU single market.
Moscow responded by imposing trade sanctions against Ukraine in July 2013 to persuade the then president Yanukovych that signing the agreement with the EU was not a good idea.
In November 2013 Putin agreed to provide a 15 billion USD loan and to lower gas prices to Ukraine if Yanukovych decided not to sign the agreement.
Russia started the military invasion of Crimea on 25 Author’s interview with representatives of the DG Trade of the European Commission who were part of the EU negotiating team for the talks on the AA/DCFTA with Ukraine.
It might be the case that the prime minister of Portugal disagrees with the prime minister of Poland when it comes to assessing the various political aspects of EU relations with Russia.
However, the prime ministers of Portugal and Poland agree that if there is any opportunity in the EU’s external relations with other countries for a contractual deal that would facilitate the expansion of the EU’s single market, that is, that would bring more trade and jobs, then that would be a good deal.
In other words, the offer was made to Eastern Europe with the view that the deal was a win-win one and that it would benefit everyone.
There are always groups of member states who securitize an issue in international relations trying to get it onto the EU agenda.
However, the practice of EU decisionmaking in external relations shows that members who manage to connect securitized issue with economic benefits for all member states are more successful.
Therefore it is often the case that the expansion of the single market becomes the key common ground among member states for finding consensus on EU external relations.
The EU responded to Russian tanks in Georgia in 2008 with a consensual decision to expand the single market into the post-Soviet area.
That is why the EU is directly involved in the Russian–Ukrainian crisis and will have to adjust its institutions and policies in order to deal with the problem.
The EU cannot give up on what it is and on how it has dealt with European crises in the past and delivered the European integration process for over the last two decades.
The EU cannot stop its enlargement policy for the east European nations which are willing to join the project.
The only force which could stop EU enlargement in eastern Europe would be if the people of the partner countries were incapable of accepting the necessary and painful reforms or in other words if their political elites were to fail.
The EU cannot afford a deal with Russia that would be at the expense of the state sovereignty of partner countries.
The political part of AA should not become subject to trilateral talks.
What might be discussed is extending the transitional periods if selected trade items were to be included in the DCFTA providing Russia had reasonable trade, social and/or economy based arguments.
Sanctions against Russia should continue unless solutions can be found for Donbass and Crimea that are acceptable to Ukraine.
The EU can only recognize Crimea as part of Russia on the proviso that Ukraine does so first.
Second, the challenging task for EU diplomacy will be to use trilateral talks to bring about the more realistic prospect of the launch of FTA talks with Russia/Eurasian Union.
The task should be two-tiered; that is, the EU has to be able not only to sustain the association agreement with Ukraine, but also to encourage Russia into engaging with the EU on the FTA deal.
The EU can do anything except act against its nature; in other words, it should come up with a positive agenda to offer Russia, but, exclusively within the prospects of moving Russia closer to a contract with the EU that might facilitate expansion of the EU single market.
In addition, the EU should also consider a combination of an AA/DCFTA for partner countries with the option of concluding sectorial agreements should Ukraine or any other willing partner country be ready to proceed more quickly in harmonizing with the EU acquis on a particular sectorial policy.
First, it should expand the Energy Union it started developing so as to strengthen energy security by involving Ukraine and Moldova, who are European Energy Community members.
The EU’s capacity to sustain its identity as a European integration project is being tested in eastern Europe.
The current crisis certainly poses questions as to what Europe will look like in 20 years to come but also as to what the EU has achieved within the last two decades.
