However, the EU’s failure to predict Russia’s actions does not make it responsible for them.
Since the fighting began, the EU has done a lot to help Ukraine and constrain Russia’s behaviour.
Many of those demanding ‘Brexit’ are adamant that the EU blundered into Ukraine, a country it little understood, and that it set off a chain reaction leading to a bloody civil war.
This encroachment on Russia’s sphere of influence was bound to provoke the bear to lash out, they say.
They criticise the EU for allowing Sweden and Poland – two countries they regard as ‘anti-Russian’ – to shape the ‘eastern partnership’ that the EU unveiled in 2008.
For the most democratic partners, the EU promised association agreements, including ‘deep and comprehensive free trade agreements’ to promote trade.
The Russians see the eastern partnership as an EU scheme to undermine their sway in eastern Europe.
But they also complain that the EU negotiated the association agreement with Ukraine, the neighbour that matters most to Moscow, behind their back; and that the agreement will have dire consequences for the Russian economy.
Since the agreement was the proximate cause of the popular uprising that overthrew the regime of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014, it is worth looking at its origins.
There was a national consensus in Ukraine – extending to those like Yanukovych who were relatively sympathetic to Russia – to pursue the EU deal.
By 2012 the negotiations were complete, and the text was initialled by EU and Ukrainian leaders.
Even though Ukrainian presidents of different political stripes had asked Brussels for the promise of membership since the mid-1990s, the agreement said nothing about that possibility.
The prospect of such a backward country joining their club horrified most EU leaders.
Despite Russian claims to the contrary, the EU tried to consult the Russians on the negotiation of the agreements.
At the twice-yearly EU-Russia summits, the Commission always put the agreements on the agenda.
Igor Yurgens, a senior adviser to then Russian President Dmitri Medvedev, recalls that at these summits the Commission’s president, José Manuel Barroso, urged the Russians to discuss the agreements.
All this changed when Putin returned to the Russian presidency in 2012, for a third term.
In the spring of 2013 Putin learned that if Ukraine implemented the DCFTA – which would mean lowering tariffs – it could not join the EEU, which would have high common external tariffs.
Putin took exception not only to the EU-Ukraine deal, but also to similar agreements that Brussels was negotiating with Armenia, Georgia and Moldova.
In Kyiv, Yanukovych insisted that he was still committed to the agreements with Brussels.
These were due to be signed in Vilnius, at a summit between the EU and its eastern partners, in November 2013.
Sergei Glaziev, a close aide of Putin, said that if Ukraine went ahead with the DCFTA, the economic consequences would lead to the break-up of the country.
At the same time Russia warned Moldova that proceeding with its EU deal would lead to its exports being stopped and its guest workers being expelled.
In September Putin persuaded Armenia to scrap its association agreement with the EU and join the EEU instead.
At that point, neither analysts such as myself, nor the key EU officials, realised how steamed up Moscow was becoming over the association agreements.
We cannot be sure of what Putin said to Yanukovych in the next few weeks.
Senior officials in EU institutions, European governments and the Obama administration were shocked; virtually none of them had expected such an outcome.
But Putin and Yanukovych were equally surprised by what followed in Kyiv, where the rejection of the EU agreements led to a popular uprising.
In February 2014, with the clashes between demonstrators and security forces becoming increasingly violent – more than 50 protestors were shot by snipers in a single day – the security forces started to drift away from Yanukovych, who fled.
Putin may have expected the new government, led by those who had been in opposition, to be a puppet regime of the West.
Whatever his reasoning, he launched an operation to take over the Ukrainian peninsula of Crimea, leading to its annexation in March.
Western governments were once again wrong-footed, having failed to imagine that Putin could carry out such a brazen and illegal act.
By April, anti-Kyiv rebels, backed by Russian special forces, were taking over parts of the Donbass region in Eastern Ukraine.
It tried to talk to the Russians about its agreements with Ukraine, but they were not interested until after the texts were initialled.
And even after the agreements were signed , the EU bent over backwards to keep the Russians informed and involved.
The EU accepted this and agreed to a Russian request that officials from the Commission, Ukraine and Russia should meet regularly to discuss the deal’s impact on Russia, and what steps could be taken to mitigate any harmful effects.
After these meetings EU officials concluded that the DCFTA would have zero impact on the Russian economy, since none of its provisions would prevent or disrupt trade between Ukraine and Russia.
The longer answer is that the EU can be criticised for not thinking through the strategic consequences of its policies on Ukraine.
In Paris and Berlin, some officials complain that the Commission and the European External Action Service are too technocratic and process-driven.
They should have thought more about Russia’s political response to the association agreement, the argument goes.
And if the Russians refused to talk about it, the EU side should have insisted.
But it should be remembered that EU policy on Russia is driven mainly by the key national capitals, notably Berlin, Paris and London, and that the job of the Brussels institutions is largely to implement the line set by governments.
And it was the governments which supported the EU’s eastern partnership and its association agreements, and which mis-read how Russia would respond.
To realists who take a Kissingerian world-view, such words might have been appropriate.
Realists strongly believe – as do Russia and China – in the right of big countries to establish spheres of influence.
But that world-view is incompatible with the Western principle of self-determination.
If you subscribe to the latter, you have to allow Ukraine, as a sovereign state, to choose its own foreign policy orientation.
Evidently, principles such as realism and self-determination cannot be followed absolutely.
Most Western governments – in my view, rightly – would not want to see Ukraine join NATO, for fear of the consequences.
But unless one takes an extreme realist line, the EU was right to stand by its principles in supporting Ukraine’s bid for closer economic ties.
Finally, once Putin had invaded Ukraine, the EU led the international effort to stabilise the situation.
It has helped to keep Ukraine afloat financially, with €4 billion in macro-financial assistance committed or disbursed since the start of the crisis in 2014; it has provided humanitarian aid for victims of the conflict, including displaced persons; and it has given technical assistance to help with reform, including the fight against corruption.
Furthermore – despite grumbling from some member-states – it has maintained pressure on Russia, with sanctions that have been surprisingly effective in depriving major state-backed Russian companies of access to capital.
Without these sanctions, and the possibility that they could be strengthened, Russia might have been tempted to take more Ukrainian territory.
The EU can be chided for not doing a better job of explaining to the Ukrainian people how they would benefit from closer ties.
But the EU cannot be blamed for Russia’s annexation of Crimea or its military incursions into the Donbass.
And it deserves at least some praise for how it has since responded to the conflict.
