Paul Goble Staunton, March 16 – When Stalin deported the Crimean Tatars in 1944, he loaded all of them on trains in the course of a few days and sent them to Central Asia, an action that is almost universally recognized and denounced as an act of genocide.
But today, Vladimir Putin is doing much the same thing but in slow motion and getting away with it.
In the five years since invading and annexing Crimea, the current Kremlin leader has expelled some 40,000 Crimean Tatars and destroyed almost all of their cultural institutions in their immemorial homeland, effectively presenting them with a Hobson’s choice of assimilation or expulsion.
Few people are prepared to put the issue so starkly and so truly, but one who does so is Rafis Kashapov, the former leader of the All-Tatar Social Center and current émigré head of Free Idel Ural.
Such a horrific tragedy many peoples experienced this was the continuing practice of the communist regime,” the activist says.
Tragically, that old would has not yet healed; and it is being made worse by new ones.
And the occupiers have closed schools, mosques, newspapers and governing institutions.
The world is thus fully justified to speak about a new “deportation” albeit one that has not been total or all at once.
Fortunately, the Crimean Tatars are continuing to struggle against the occupation.
Fortunately, too, far more of them who have been expelled from their homeland are in countries like Ukraine and Turkey where they can continue the fight and are doing so.
Unfortunately, too many in the West are unwilling to see Putin’s crime for what it is – a recrudescence of Stalin’s.
Russia’s hybrid military forces mounted two attacks on Ukrainian army positions in Donbas on March 16, with one Ukrainian soldier reported as killed in action and another one as wounded in action.
The situation in the area of the Joint Forces Operation remains under control of Ukrainian troops.
Russian occupation forces violated ceasefire six times in the Joint Forces Operation area in eastern Ukraine over the past day.
The weapons banned under the Minsk agreements were used thrice. — Ukrinform.
The video was uploaded on Facebook by Anatoly “Shtefan” Shtirlitz, an officer in the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
They are contractors, they are willing to shoot at even their own people for money.
At the meeting of the Regional Development Council in Poltava region, President Petro Poroshenko stressed that the Ukrainian Armed Forces had radically changed and received new modern equipment and weapons thanks to the support of the entire Ukrainian people.
He especially noted the complete re-equipment of the army, including the provision of troops with new secure communications, which became strategic in the context of the war.
Revived the army and the entire security sector, which were literally saturated by corruption and FSS officials,” Petro Poroshenko said.
I personally visit the ceremonies of transferring weapons and equipment to the troops.
It is already not repaired, but modernized equipment, and sometimes a completely new and modern weaponry.
And from April 1, snipers, paratroopers and military mountain assault brigades will receive 24 thousand UAH if they are on the frontline,” he said.
President, Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko instructed the Minister of Defense to resolve the issue of raising the amount of financial support for the servicemen of the mountain assault units of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
This is reported by the press service of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine A group of Ukrainian aviators, headed by Colonel Sergei Artemenko, commander of the Ukrainian Air Forces Command Air Force, flew from the airfield of the Boryspil airport to the airbase “Aalborg” of the Royal Air Force of Denmark on the Il-76MD aircraft.
As Colonel Sergiy Artemenko told, this year, five ground service representatives and four flight crew members will be involved in the task for the first time in Greenland.
So the Air Force will be replenished with personnel who will gain experience in the extreme conditions of the Far North “This operation is a serious test for the crew, both for ground service and for aviation engineering,” said the officer. – All the time it is necessary to work in conditions of low temperatures, now it can be lowered to the mark minus 50 degrees Celsius.
Difficulty adds a strong gusty wind, a limited runway at the station “Nord” length of 1800 m and the absence of any visible landmarks.
It should be noted that the Ukrainian military transport aircraft IL-76MD, in terms of its flight characteristics, allows the loading and unloading of large cargoes with the help of crane equipment of the aircraft and take-off and landing on truncated bands, minimally equipped with navigational aids.
Ministry of Defense of Ukraine For comparison: transport aircraft C-130 “Hercules” and C-17 “Globmaster”, which can fly to the station “Nord”, have certain limitations.
Thus, the “Hercules” has considerably less possibilities for transportation of dimensional goods, and “Globmaster” does not have crane equipment, which makes it impossible to transport large-sized tanks specified by the objectives of the technical agreement.
How law enforcement authorities turn a blind eye on corruption in defense sector.
Several hundred people have gathered in Kyiv at a protest organized by a far-right group to call for arrests of figures linked to an alleged military corruption scandal.
The rally in the center of the Ukrainian capital on March 16 was called by the National Corps, the political wing of the Azov battalion.
The state enterprise “Ukroboronservis” has put to the buyer in the United States of America another party of almost three thousand 7.62-mm Mosin rifles of the 1891/30 model.
Earlier, in December 2018, “Ukroboronservis” put the same company in the party with 3200 Mosin rifles.
It should be noted that according to reports from the State Export Control Service of Ukraine, the USA is the largest buyer of small arms in the Ukrainian market.
In particular, during 2007-2017, American companies bought in Ukraine over 400,000 rifles and carbines.
In March 2016, the first batch of rifles was handed over to the National Guard.
VASYLKIV and VINNYTSIA, Ukraine — On a chilly morning in early spring, humid mist and low clouds hang over the air base of Vasylkiv, a city of 36,000 people located 30 kilometers southwest of Kyiv.
It is home to the Ukrainian Air Force’s 40th Tactical Aviation Brigade.
By midday, the sky has cleared, and to the great joy of the brigade’s pilots, the base’s flight control center gives the go-ahead for a flight session — for the first time in this week of poor weather.
The session starts with meteorological reconnaissance — a silver Mikoyan MiG‑29 fighter with blue-and-yellow tridents on its twin tail fins is towed to the runway.
After a half-hour of tinkering, the senior service technician reports that the aircraft is fully fueled and ready to go.
The pilot locks the glass dome of his cockpit, and the jet slips in the gray skies, its turbofan engines roaring and spitting trails of hot smoke.
The Ukrainian Air Force or UAF regularly conducts such practice flights these days, but this was not always the case.
During their careers, many Ukrainian pilots were frequently grounded for want of jet fuel, while their warplanes were being scrapped or sold off by the dozen.
But country’s rising defense budget, which has been skyrocketing since 2014 to a record-breaking $8 billion planned for 2019– almost 6 percent of the nation’s gross domestic product — has offered them hope.
Crippled by years of underfunding, drastic post-Soviet cuts, and a rapid loss of skilled personnel, the UAF is trying to rise again as a combat-potent force.
The mission is now to prevent Russia, the world’s second greatest air power, from encroaching on Ukraine’s integrity and independence.
With swarms of Russian warplanes based closer to Ukraine’s borders every month, the UAF is now feverishly training more pilots and modernizing their aircraft.
But its aging fleet, inherited from Soviet times is drawing close to the end of its operating lifetime.
Within the next decade, the UAF needs a new fleet of modern warplanes capable of conducting a full spectrum of military operations — otherwise, Ukraine’s skies will be largely defenseless.
These include approximately 37 MiG‑29 and 34 Su‑27 fighters, 14 Su‑24M attack aircraft, 31 Su‑25 close air support aircraft, nine Su‑24MR and three Antonov An‑30 reconnaissance aircraft, 32 L‑39 training planes, and five Ilyushin Il‑76 and three An‑26 military transport aircraft.
The force also has a pool of 14 Mi‑9, 30 Mi‑8, and two Mi‑2 helicopters.
While today’s UAF is a shadow of what it was in 1992, Ukraine still remains among the few nations operating all principal branches of air power — bombers, fighters, attack aircraft, reconnaissance, transports, and drones, in addition to missile and electronic warfare forces.
Increased spending on air power, reaching a total of Hr 8. billion in 2019, has allowed the gradual resumption of regular practice flights.
Ukrainian fighter pilots now get between 40 and 60 flying hours a year, and all airbases hold two or three flight sessions every week.
There are no illusions regarding the strong adversary the young pilots will face in the case of all-out war.
So the old hands drill them in close-combat tactics, which, they believe, would somewhat negate Russia’s technological superiority in combat.
They are trained hard to fly as low as possible to avoid Russian radar detection.
Like any active air force, the UAF from time to time suffers tragic accidents that take the lives of even its most experienced flyers.
Limit of strength The overall increase in defense spending due to the war has allowed the UAF to upgrade some of its aircraft.
According to UkrOboronProm, Ukraine’s giant state-run defense production concern, the air force received over 50 modernized and repaired aircraft in 2018, with better navigation systems and radars installed on some of the UAF’s workhorse jets.
But a more serious and strategic problem is the aging of warplanes that have operated since 1970s and 1980s.
Soon the UAF could be left with no planes to fly, he added, and the nation needs to start thinking about purchasing new aircraft abroad.
Plans to launch the licensed production of Swedish-designed Jas‑39 Gripen fighters in Lviv, mulling since 2014, eventually ended in nothing.
The only purchase made so far was of 12 Turkish Bayrakatar strike drones in late 2018.
In terms of target acquisition, we’re lagging behind both Western militaries and the Russians.
He said the UAF still has up to two decades of operational life left — but that’s the most upbeat assessment.
While Ukraine’s modernized warhorse fighters, such as the MiG‑29 and Su‑27, are 4th generation jet fighters, Russia operates the more advanced 4+ generation Su‑30 and Su‑33, and the 4++ generation Su‑35 warplanes, and is preparing to introduce ultramodern 5th generation Su‑57 fighters.
Anatoliy Baronin, appointed to the position of Acting Rector of the Foreign Intelligence Service Institute of Ukraine, is reforming the school in accordance with NATO standards, Ukraine’s Foreign Intelligence Service said on Thursday.
Baronin joined the Service on November 13, 2018 as the lead adviser on the analytical work of the Foreign Intelligence Service head, and from February 12, 2019, he was entrusted with the duties heading the Foreign Intelligence Service Institute.
He is a brilliant analyst who, from the beginning of Russian aggression on volunteer principles, worked to counteract the hybrid aggression of the Kremlin,” the FIS said.
The direction of Ukraine’s movement was determined by millions of Ukrainians, who participated in the Revolution of Dignity. — Ukrinform.
A MEMORIAL COMPLEX featuring photographs of brave protesters fills Kiev’s Independence Square, or Maidan.
Displays reproduce Ukrainians’ Facebook posts from key moments during the movement that overthrew the former president, Viktor Yanukovych, five years ago.
Yulia Tymoshenko has been Ukraine’s prime minister twice, was the global face of a revolution, imprisoned by two different presidents, and the target of an operation to discredit her by President Donald Trump’s former campaign manager.
Facebook introduced new transparency requirements for ads related to politics and elections in Ukraine that become effective on March 18, less than two weeks before Ukrainians are to vote in presidential elections on March 31.
It already functions in the United States, United Kingdom, Brazil, and India.
A similar policy has also been rolled out in Israel ahead of the election to the national legislature on April 9.
They also must confirm their identity and provide a “Paid for by” disclaimer, which has to be approved by Facebook.
Authorized Facebook pages in Ukraine will display all locations of the page administrators in the “Info and Ads” section.
In addition, Facebook has created a public database with all Ukraine-related political ads with disclaimers that will be archived for seven years.
The library will also contain ads that run without a disclaimer if they are reported and determined to contain political content.
Facebook is the most popular social networking site in Ukraine with about 13 million users.
But besides paid-for political ads, a lot of disinformation is distributed in a form of organic content through news sites and individual accounts, as well as on other social media platforms such as YouTube and Twitter.
Deynychenko also points at the fact that the information about sponsors of political ads will be valuable to investigative journalists and scrupulous users who pay attention to sources, but for most users the new feature won’t change anything.
Facebook drastically reconsidered its approach to political ads on its platform after the exposure of a network of fake accounts operated by so-called “troll factories” in Russia across social media platforms to artificially boost support for Donald Trump and discredit his opponent, Hillary Clinton, during the 2016 United States presidential election.
Last February, United States Special Counsel Robert Mueller indicted 13 Russians and three companies for interfering in the election.
Petersburg-based Internet Research Agency, a company linked to the Kremlin.
Ten people were reported arrested after nationalist protesters attempted to disrupt a campaign appearance by Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko in the central city of Poltava.
In the run-up to presidential elections in which national security is a top issue, the country is strengthening the border with Russian-annexed Crimea and with the breakaway Transnistrian region of Moldova.
On March 31, the day Ukrainians are set to vote in the presidential election, a major provocation involving violence is being plotted in the occupied Donetsk, according to Dmytro Tymchuk, who is a Ukrainian MP and coordinator of the Information Resistance OSINT Group.
Tymchuk says a terrorist attack cannot be ruled out, which could become a pretext for a full-fledged Russian invasion of the Ukrainian territory.
The results of said elections could have major repercussions on both Ukraine’s internal developments and the surrounding region as the country struggles to keep its territorial integrity in the view of Russian military and economic moves in eastern Ukraine and the Black and Azov seas.
Surprisingly, the polls conducted in February gave 41-year-old Zelensky 25% of the vote, a 10-point lead over incumbent Petro Poroshenko and political veteran Yulia Timoshenko, who are also running for office in the national election.
The popularity of the current leader of the race reflects the thinking of many Ukrainians nowadays and their deep mistrust towards the ruling political elite.
Zelensky is associated with one of the powerful Ukrainian oligarchs, Ihor Kolomoyskiy, who recently also endorsed him publicly.
Despite numerous allegations that his government has been marred in deep corruption, it was still under Poroshenko that Ukraine saw a veritable divorce with Russia in almost every aspect of geopolitics.
In the last five years since the Ukraine crisis broke out following the annexation of the Crimean Peninsula, Kiev has managed to reinforce the Ukrainian army amid ongoing conflict and contain the conflict with Russia to eastern Ukraine and the Azov Sea.
Ukraine also ratified the Association Agreement with the European Union, the non-signing of which actually deposed the former president Viktor Yanukovych.
Moreover, Ukraine also got visa-free access for its citizens to the EU and four other Schengen-associated countries.
Recently, Ukraine’s Orthodox Church gained autocephaly from the Russian Church.
Beyond this, Ukraine’s trade has been redirected to Europe rather being mostly dependent on Russia, as was the case before 2014.
In addition, there is also a very simple reason why Ukraine is unlikely to become pro-Russian or even try to be neutral.
The very fact that Russia has taken away Crimea and supports the separatist elements in eastern Ukraine will always keep Kiev’s willingness to cooperate deeper with the West.
Moscow is simply pressing too hard on Ukraine, leaving very little, if any, possibility for improvement in the relations or hope that Kiev will abandon its pro-Western path.
Where, before the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, some sections of the Georgian political and cultural elite argued that it would still be possible to work with the Russians and maybe even get back control of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region, in 2008 these legitimate hopes were dashed.
In other words, the Russians dissipated hopes among Georgians for a geopolitical rapprochement with Moscow.
Pavlo Klimkin, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, stood for the idea of dual citizenship legitimization for the representatives of the Ukrainian diaspora, as Ukrainian radio reports.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs outlined that Ukraine should implement new criteria, on which the dual citizenship could be issued.
We lose thousands and thousands of Ukrainians, who could work here and not only in state organizations, in bureaucracy, or in the business field, but also to create the contemporary Ukrainian culture”, – Klimkin said.
Earlier, the status of dual citizenship should be legitimized in Ukraine, as UNIAN reported citing Foreign Minister of Ukraine Pavlo Klimkin.
The Foreign Minister specified that dual citizenship will allow involving foreign specialists for the work.
We should come to it but clearly determine who can apply for it,” Klimkin said.
On March 15, Uzhhorod International Airport resumed its work after a three-year break. — Ukrinform.
The Foreign Intelligence Service of Ukraine has refuted the information regarding its leadership, which was previously provided to the UNIAN news agency.
A plaque honoring slain Russian opposition politician Boris Nemtsov has been unveiled at a park near the Russian Embassy in the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv.
A public garden named after Boris Nemtsov was opened in Kyiv Friday, March 15.
The daughter of the murdered Russian opposition leader attended the opening ceremony, accompanied by Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko.
Fortunately, Korb is now in Ukraine beyond the immediate reach of the Russian siloviki and where one hopes he will receive political asylum until changes in his homeland allow him to return to Omsk.
One can only hope that he will remain safe and active and that those changes will come sooner rather than later.
The United States Embassy in Ukraine on Friday, March 15, released a “Demonstration Alert” regarding the upcoming rally of National Corps activists set to be held at Kyiv’s Maidan Nezalezhnosti March 16.
The group has been linked to violence and public disorder, the Embassy stressed.
Remarks by Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of the Ukraine Crisis Media Center’s founding, March 5.
WASHINGTON – Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty is alarmed at increasing pressure directed against its investigative journalists in Ukraine, following no fewer than three incidents in recent months.
Almost half of Ukrainians communicate with their closest relatives mostly or only in Ukrainian, according to a survey conducted by Kyiv International Institute of Sociology , UNIAN learned.
Russian is the only or major language spoken in the family for 28.1% of Ukrainians, the survey says.
In 2013, the German native’s Ukrainian wife took their first son on a trip to Ukraine.
Jung has spent over six years fighting to have a relationship with his children.
Under the best conditions, he was allowed to see them for six hours per month in his ex-wife’s presence.
In Ukraine, thousands of fathers say that their former partners have prevented them from being part of their children’s lives, according to lawyers who have represented such disputes.
But while Ukraine’s confusing legal system and byzantine bureaucracy are confusing for anyone, they are especially mystifying for foreign fathers who often don’t know the language.
Legal experts say Ukraine has a longstanding problem with failing to enforce court decisions — particularly in custody battles, child abduction cases, and cases that blur the line between the two.
The culprits are the country’s weak judiciary, ineffective police, and biased local government committees.
The Kyiv Post tried to contact mothers who allegedly kept their kids from their dads, but only one responded and consented to an interview.
Jung’s ex-wife refused to answer her door, despite being home when the Kyiv Post came to ask for her comment, and didn’t answer requests for comment sent via Facebook.
Love gone wrong Jung met his future wife, Iryna Jung, while hiking in Crimea in 2010.
The couple then moved to Munich County in Germany, where Jung worked as a safety engineer.
Patriarch of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, Kyiv Patriarchate Filaret explained under what conditions the newly created church could receive the status of the Patriarchy, as Hlavkom news agency reports.
Filaret stated that he was not invited to Istanbul on the ceremony of granting Tomos because he has the Patriarch rank, and the Orthodox Church of Ukraine has the status of the Metropolitanate.
According to the Patriarch, Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew has not ruled out the possibility that the Ukrainian Orthodox Church can receive the status of patriarchy.
We are the patriarchy, but only in Ukraine, in other words, we have not been recognized yet.
That’s why our aim is continuing the uniting process with the parishes and clergy of the Moscow Patriarchate.
When we are united, we will ask the Ecumenical Patriarch to grant us the status of patriarchy”, – Filaret added.
Earlier today, the Patriarch of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church – Kyiv Patriarchate Filaret stated that he is not pleased with the current status of the Ukrainian church granted by Constantinople.
According to Filaret, the current status of the Ukrainian church does not appeal to him enough, so that’s why on the next Pomistnyi Cathedral it is necessary to adopt the Statute of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
Earlier, it was reported that the members of the Synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate signed the Tomos on providing autocephaly for the Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew passed the Tomos of autocephaly and bishops’ crosier to the apostle of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine Epifaniy.
Patriarch of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, Kyiv Patriarchate Filaret stated that he is not pleased with the current status of the Ukrainian church granted by Constantinople.
According to Filaret, the current status of the Ukrainian church does not appeal to him enough, so that’s why on the next local convention it is necessary to adopt the Statute of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
We are the autocephalous church, so we should have our own Ukrainian status, which has to be approved on the Pomistnyi Cathedral.
That is why, we are waiting for the convocation of the council of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, where we should adopt the new status for our church”, – Filaret said.
For others, it will be possible to be temporary members of the Synod in turns.
The constants members of the Synod should be authoritative bishops from different regions, so that all of Ukraine could be represented at the Synod by constant members, in other words, as it used to be in the Kyiv patriarchy”, – Filaret answered to the question, what difference will between the statuses.
Filaret does not think that the conflict with Constantinople could appear due to the change of the status.
Our acts are lawful ones, not against the Ecumenical Patriarchate”, – Filaret added.
Another attempt to seize the temple of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church by representatives of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine was made in the Vinnytsia region.
This is reported by Strana with reference to the press service of the UOC Vinnytsia Diocese.
According to the report, on the evening of March 15, supporters of the UOC poured locks on the doors of the Spaso-Preobrazhenska Church with resin to prevent the Divine Liturgy scheduled for Saturday morning.
However, the parishioners broke locks and spent the whole night in the building.
On Saturday morning, the UOC supporters closed the parishioners of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church inside the temple and blocked the entrance to prevent the holding of the service.
Archbishop Varsonofiy, together with hundreds of believers in the village, performed a liturgy.
Moscow • Authorities in Vladivostok, the largest city in far eastern Russia, plan to erect a gigantic statue of Jesus Christ on a site once designated for a monument of Vladimir Lenin.
The statue will stand on top of a hill looking east over the Pacific Ocean.
Soviet authorities issued orders for the construction of a 98-foot-high bronze statue of Lenin at the site in 1972.
Another statue, of Soviet dictator Josef Stalin, was planned to be built on a neighboring hill.
But construction hitches meant the plans repeatedly were postponed, before eventually being scrapped altogether in 1990.
Supporters of the Jesus statue are enthusiastic, despite the lack of details about the project.
Attempts by Religion News Service to contact the Vyatsky Center for comment were unsuccessful.
