The alleged reason for joining the operation is that ""Russian aggression against Ukraine breaches international law and challenges the European security order”, according to Sweden’s ‘defence’ minister Peter Hultqvist.
The first successful test of that BMD or “Ballistic Missile Defense” system occurred on 19 May 2016 and constituted a breakthrough in the ability of the United States and its allies to conquer Russia; the test had occurred in Hawaii.
Just seven days earlier than that test, the first installation of the system had occurred, which took place in Romania on May 12th.
So, United States rulers have started to install the ultimate mass-killing system, for the ultimate conquest; it’s the system to block an enemy from defending itself from an invasion.
Russia is increasingly surrounded by an expanding NATO, and that expansion up to Russia’s borders is supposed to be accepted by Russia as if it’s not a very aggressive move against Russia.
NATO has already been prominently promoting the lie that Russia invaded Ukraine and stole Crimea from Ukraine — which is the basic lie upon which NATO is preparing to invade Russia.
Swedish officials are already using that baldfaced lie in order to fool the Swedish public to accept their country’s becoming a staging area for NATO’s buildup to invade Russia as a measure supposedly to ‘defend’ Sweden and NATO countries from being invaded by Russia.
Since they can’t find any realistic excuse for preparing to invade Russia, the lie that Russia ‘seized’ Crimea suffices.
Not part of the official line is that the United States Embassy was already starting by no later than 1 March 2013 to organize the overthrow that occurred in February 2014.
Also not part of the official line is that the EU’s membership offer to Ukraine came with a $160 billion price tag, and so was entirely unaffordable.
After all, The West needed an excuse to explain the ‘Maidan democracy demonstrations’ that provided a pretext for the overthrow.
If one is starting on 1 March 2013 to organize a fascist coup that’s to occur a year later, then one won’t want to provide the victim an offer that will be accepted by him.
One will need the offer to be rejected, in order to have a ‘justification’ to overthrow the victim.
Such a ‘justification’ was that he was corrupt, but they didn’t mention that all post-Soviet Ukrainian leaders have been corrupt.
Crimea is especially important here, because, though Russia refused to accept Donbass into the Russian Federation Russia did accept Crimea.
However, the people in Crimea had voted 75% for Yanukovych and had also wanted to become again a part of Russia, ever since the Soviet dictator Nikita Khrushchev in 1954 arbitrarily transferred Crimea from Russia to Ukraine.
And therefore Russia — not finding acceptable Obama’s soon-to-be seizure of their naval base — supplied protection for Crimeans to be able to hold a peaceful plebiscite on 16 March 2014 in order to exercise their right of self-determination on whether to accept rule by the bloody new Ukrainian coup-regime, or instead to accept Russia’s offer to regain membership in the Russian Federation. 97% chose the latter, and Western-sponsored polls in Crimea both before and after the plebiscite showed similarly astronomically high support for rejoining with Russia.
Although he was there describing actually himself , he was pretending that it described instead Russia’s President, Vladimir Putin, who was merely protecting Crimeans, and, in the process, protecting all Russians , from an enemy whose gift for deceiving the public might have no equal in all of human history.
And that ‘seizure of Crimea’ is actually the pretext upon the basis of which Obama’s NATO alliance is now mobilizing to invade Russia.
The upcoming NATO Summit will take place in a security environment that continues to be challenging.
First of all, the security order that was established in Europe after the Cold War is challenged by Russia.
The illegal annexation of Crimea is the first example in more than 70 years where one European state has occupied territory belonging to another state using military force.
If we allow the annexation to become a status quo we make ourselves guilty of destroying one of the very pillars of the European security order as we know it.
We see no signs that Russia has changed its position or have softened that.
Moreover, there are no indications that Russia is planning to leave the Donbass region.
Instead, Russia is building up its proxy army there, with 25,000 soldiers and more tanks than any EU Member State has.
The intensity of the conflict in eastern Ukraine can be Increased or decreased depending on what best serves the interests of the Kremlin at any given moment.
He alleged that all violations of the Minsk agreement were from the Donbass side, and none at all from the Ukrainian side — the side that has actually been attacking Donbass — but the evidence clearly contradicts that lie.
The United States doesn’t actually need additional military bases in countries such as Sweden.
And after the coup in Ukraine, America’s aristocracy has been giving an extra yank at every opportunity.
Back in 1990 the precondition on the basis of which the Soviet and then Russian leader Mikhail Gorbachev dissolved in 1991 both the Soviet Union and its NATO-mirror the Warsaw Pact, was the promise by the representatives of United States President George Herbert Walker Bush, that if that happened, then NATO would not expand “one inch eastward” — which also turned out to have been a lie.
