During the Middle Ages, the area was a key centre of East Slavic culture, with the powerful state of Kievan Rus' forming the basis of Ukrainian identity.
Following its fragmentation in the 13th century, the territory was contested, ruled and divided by a variety of powers, including Lithuania, Poland, Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire and Russia.
A Cossack republic emerged and prospered during the 17th and 18th centuries, but its territory was eventually split between Poland and the Russian Empire, and finally merged fully into the Russian-dominated Soviet Union in the late 1940s as the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
In 1991 Ukraine gained its independence from the Soviet Union in the aftermath of its dissolution at the end of the Cold War.
Before its independence, Ukraine was typically referred to in English as ""The Ukraine"", but most sources have since moved to drop ""the"" from the name of Ukraine in all uses.
Following its independence, Ukraine declared itself a neutral state; it formed a limited military partnership with Russia and other CIS countries while also establishing a partnership with NATO in 1994.
In 2013, after the government of President Viktor Yanukovych had decided to suspend the Ukraine-European Union Association Agreement and seek closer economic ties with Russia, a several-months-long wave of demonstrations and protests known as the Euromaidan began, which later escalated into the 2014 Ukrainian revolution that led to the overthrow of Yanukovych and the establishment of a new government.
These events formed the background for the annexation of Crimea by Russia in March 2014, and the War in Donbass in April 2014.
On 1 January 2016, Ukraine applied the economic component of the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area with the European Union.
Ukraine is a developing country and ranks 88th on the Human Development Index.
However, because of its extensive fertile farmlands, Ukraine is one of the world's largest grain exporters.
Ukraine also maintains the second-largest military in Europe after that of Russia.
The country is home to a multi-ethnic population, 77. percent of whom are Ukrainians, followed by a very large Russian minority, as well as Georgians, Romanians, Belarusians, Crimean Tatars, Jews, Bulgarians and Hungarians.
There are different hypotheses as to the etymology of the name Ukraine.
Neanderthal settlement in Ukraine is seen in the Molodova archaeological sites which include a mammoth bone dwelling.
The territory is also considered to be the likely location for the human domestication of the horse.
Modern human settlement in Ukraine and its vicinity dates back to 32,000 BC, with evidence of the Gravettian culture in the Crimean Mountains.
By 4,500 BC, the Neolithic Cucuteni–Trypillia culture flourished in wide areas of modern Ukraine including Trypillia and the entire Dnieper-Dniester region.
During the Iron Age, the land was inhabited by Cimmerians, Scythians, and Sarmatians.
Beginning in the sixth century BC, colonies of Ancient Greece, Ancient Rome and the Byzantine Empire, such as Tyras, Olbia and Chersonesus, were founded on the northeastern shore of the Black Sea.
In the 7th century AD, the territory of eastern Ukraine was the centre of Old Great Bulgaria.
At the end of the century, the majority of Bulgar tribes migrated in different directions, and the Khazars took over much of the land.
In the 5th and 6th centuries, the Antes were located in the territory of what is now Ukraine.
White Croats, Severians, Polans, Drevlyans, Dulebes, Ulichians, and Tiverians.
Migrations from Ukraine throughout the Balkans established many Southern Slavic nations.
Northern migrations, reaching almost to the Ilmen lakes, led to the emergence of the Ilmen Slavs, Krivichs, and Radimichs, the groups ancestral to the Russians.
Kievan Rus' included the central, western and northern part of modern Ukraine, Belarus, far eastern strip of Poland and the western part of present-day Russia.
According to the Primary Chronicle the Rus' elite initially consisted of Varangians from Scandinavia.
During the 10th and 11th centuries, it became the largest and most powerful state in Europe.
It laid the foundation for the national identity of Ukrainians and Russians.
The Varangians later assimilated into the Slavic population and became part of the first Rus' dynasty, the Rurik Dynasty.
Kievan Rus' was composed of several principalities ruled by the interrelated Rurikid knyazes , who often fought each other for possession of Kiev.
The Golden Age of Kievan Rus' began with the reign of Vladimir the Great , who turned Rus' toward Byzantine Christianity.
During the reign of his son, Yaroslav the Wise , Kievan Rus' reached the zenith of its cultural development and military power.
The state soon fragmented as the relative importance of regional powers rose again.
After a final resurgence under the rule of Vladimir II Monomakh and his son Mstislav , Kievan Rus' finally disintegrated into separate principalities following Mstislav's death.
On today's Ukrainian territory, the principalities of Halych and Volodymyr-Volynskyi arose, and were merged into the state of Galicia-Volhynia.
Following the Mongol invasion of Rus', much of Ukraine was controlled by Lithuania and after the Union of Lublin by Poland within the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, illustrated here in 1619.
In the mid-14th century, upon the death of Bolesław Jerzy II of Mazovia, king Casimir III of Poland initiated campaigns to take Galicia-Volhynia.
Meanwhile, the heartland of Rus', including Kiev, became the territory of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, ruled by Gediminas and his successors, after the Battle on the Irpen' River.
Following the 1386 Union of Krewo, a dynastic union between Poland and Lithuania, much of what became northern Ukraine was ruled by the increasingly Slavicised local Lithuanian nobles as part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.
Polish colonisers of depopulated lands in northern and central Ukraine founded or re-founded many towns.
In 1430 Podolia was incorporated under the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland as Podolian Voivodeship.
In 1441, in the southern Ukraine, especially Crimea and surrounding steppes, Genghisid prince Haci I Giray founded the Crimean Khanate.
In 1569 the Union of Lublin established the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, and much Ukrainian territory was transferred from Lithuania to the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland, becoming Polish territory de jure.
Under the demographic, cultural and political pressure of Polonisation, which began in the late 14th century, many landed gentry of Polish Ruthenia converted to Catholicism and became indistinguishable from the Polish nobility.
Deprived of native protectors among Rus nobility, the commoners began turning for protection to the emerging Zaporozhian Cossacks, who by the 17th century became devoutly Orthodox.
The Cossacks did not shy from taking up arms against those they perceived as enemies, including the Polish state and its local representatives.
Formed from Golden Horde territory conquered after the Mongol invasion the Crimean Khanate was one of the strongest powers in Eastern Europe until the 18th century; in 1571 it even captured and devastated Moscow.
From the beginning of the 16th century until the end of the 17th century, Crimean Tatar slave raiding bands exported about two million slaves from Russia and Ukraine.
The Tatar raids took a heavy toll, discouraging settlement in more southerly regions where the soil was better and the growing season was longer.
The last remnant of the Crimean Khanate was finally conquered by the Russian Empire in 1783.
In 1648, Bohdan Khmelnytsky and Petro Doroshenko led the largest of the Cossack uprisings against the Commonwealth and the Polish king John II Casimir.
Khmelnytsky, deserted by his Tatar allies, suffered a crushing defeat at Berestechko in 1651, and turned to the Russian tsar for help.
In 1654, Khmelnytsky signed the Treaty of Pereyaslav, forming a military and political alliance with Russia that acknowledged loyalty to the Russian tsar.
In 1657–1686 came ""The Ruin"", a devastating 30-year war amongst Russia, Poland, Turks and Cossacks for control of Ukraine, which occurred at about the same time as the Deluge of Poland.
Defeat came in 1686 as the ""Eternal Peace"" between Russia and Poland divided the Ukrainian lands between them.
The Constitution of Pylyp Orlyk or Pacts and Constitutions of Rights and Freedoms of the Zaporizhian Host was a 1710 constitutional document written by Hetman Pylyp Orlyk, a Cossack of Ukraine, then within the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.
It established a standard for the separation of powers in government between the legislative, executive, and judiciary branches, well before the publication of Montesquieu's Spirit of the Laws.
The Constitution limited the executive authority of the hetman, and established a democratically elected Cossack parliament called the General Council.
Pylyp Orlyk's Constitution was unique for its historic period, and was one of the first state constitutions in Europe.
Kirill Razumovski, the last Hetman of leftand right-bank Ukraine 1750–1764 and the first person to declare Ukraine to be a sovereign state.
Cossacks led an uprising, called Koliivshchyna, starting in the Ukrainian borderlands of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1768.
Ethnicity was one root cause of this revolt, which included Ukrainian violence that killed tens of thousands of Poles and Jews.
Increasing conflict between Uniate and Orthodox parishes along the newly reinforced Polish-Russian border on the Dnieper River in the time of Catherine II set the stage for the uprising.
As Uniate religious practices had become more Latinized, Orthodoxy in this region drew even closer into dependence on the Russian Orthodox Church.
Confessional tensions also reflected opposing Polish and Russian political allegiances.
After the Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Empire in 1783, New Russia was settled by Ukrainians and Russians.
Despite promises in the Treaty of Pereyaslav, the Ukrainian elite and the Cossacks never received the freedoms and the autonomy they were expecting.
However, within the Empire, Ukrainians rose to the highest Russian state and church offices.
At a later period, tsarists established a policy of Russification, suppressing the use of the Ukrainian language in print and in public.
A map from 1904 showing administrative units of Little Russia, South Russia and West Russia within the Russian Empire prior to Ukrainian independence 1917–1921.
After the Russo-Turkish War , Catherine the Great and her immediate successors encouraged German immigration into Ukraine and especially into Crimea, to thin the previously dominant Turk population and encourage agriculture.
Beginning in the 19th century, there was migration from Ukraine to distant areas of the Russian Empire.
According to the 1897 census, there were 223,000 ethnic Ukrainians in Siberia and 102,000 in Central Asia.
An additional 1. million emigrated to the east in the ten years after the opening of the Trans-Siberian Railway in 1906.
Far Eastern areas with an ethnic Ukrainian population became known as Green Ukraine.
Austrian Galicia, under the relatively lenient rule of the Habsburgs, became the centre of the nationalist movement.
Ukrainians entered World War I on the side of both the Central Powers, under Austria, and the Triple Entente, under Russia.. million Ukrainians fought with the Imperial Russian Army, while 250,000 fought for the Austro-Hungarian Army.
Austro-Hungarian authorities established the Ukrainian Legion to fight against the Russian Empire.
Those suspected of Russophile sentiments in Austria were treated harshly.
Polish troops enter Kiev in May 1920 during the Polish–Soviet War in which Ukrainians sided with Poland against the Bolsheviks.
Following the Peace of Riga signed on 18 March 1921 Poland took control of modern-day western Ukraine and Soviet forces took control of eastern Ukraine.
The Russian Revolution of 1917 led to the founding of the Soviet Union under the Bolsheviks, and subsequent civil war in Russia.
A Ukrainian national movement for self-determination re-emerged, with heavy Communist and Socialist influence.
Act Zluky was an agreement signed on January 22, 1919 by the Ukrainian People's Republic and the West Ukrainian People's Republic on the St.
This led to civil war, and an anarchist movement called the Black Army or later The Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine developed in Southern Ukraine under the command of the anarchist Nestor Makhno during the Russian Civil War.
They protected the operation of ""free soviets"" and libertarian communes in the Free Territory, an attempt to form a stateless anarchist society from 1918 to 1921 during the Ukrainian Revolution, fighting both the tsarist White Army under Denikin and later the Red Army under Trotsky, before being defeated by the latter in August 1921.
Poland defeated Western Ukraine in the Polish-Ukrainian War, but failed against the Bolsheviks in an offensive against Kiev.
According to the Peace of Riga, western Ukraine was incorporated into Poland, which in turn recognised the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in March 1919.
With establishment of the Soviet power, Ukraine lost half of its territory to Poland, Belarus and Russia, while on the left bank of Dniester River was created Moldavian autonomy.
Ukraine became a founding member of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in December 1922.
The war in Ukraine continued for another two years; by 1921, however, most of Ukraine had been taken over by the Soviet Union, while Galicia and Volhynia were incorporated into independent Poland.
Bukovina was annexed by Romania and Carpathian Ruthenia was admitted to the Czechoslovak Republic as an autonomy.
Hostilities between Polish state authorities and the popular movement led to a substantial number of fatalities, and the autonomy which had been promised was never implemented.
A number of Ukrainian parties, the Ukrainian Catholic Church, an active press, and a business sector existed in Poland.
Economic conditions improved in the 1920s, but the region suffered from the Great Depression in the 1930s.
The Russian Civil War devastated the whole Russian Empire including Ukraine.
It left over 1. million people dead and hundreds of thousands homeless in the former Russian Empire territory.
During the 1920s, under the Ukrainisation policy pursued by the national Communist leadership of Mykola Skrypnyk, Soviet leadership encouraged a national renaissance in the Ukrainian culture and language.
The Bolsheviks were also committed to universal health care, education and social-security benefits, as well as the right to work and housing.
Most of these policies were sharply reversed by the early 1930s after Joseph Stalin became the de facto communist party leader.
Starting from the late 1920s with a centrally planned economy, Ukraine was involved in Soviet industrialisation and the republic's industrial output quadrupled during the 1930s.
The peasantry suffered from the programme of collectivisation of agriculture which began during and was part of the first five-year plan and was enforced by regular troops and secret police.
Those who resisted were arrested and deported and agricultural productivity greatly declined.
The Communist leadership perceived famine as a means of class struggle and used starvation as a punishment tool to force peasants into collective farms.
Largely the same groups were responsible for the mass killing operations during the civil war, collectivisation, and the Great Terror.
These groups were associated with Yefim Yevdokimov and operated in the Secret Operational Division within General State Political Administration in 1929–31.
He appears to have continued advising Joseph Stalin and Nikolai Yezhov on security matters, and the latter relied on Yevdokimov's former colleagues to carry out the mass killing operations that are known as the Great Terror in 1937–38.
Following the Invasion of Poland in September 1939, German and Soviet troops divided the territory of Poland.
Thus, Eastern Galicia and Volhynia with their Ukrainian population became part of Ukraine.
The Ukrainian SSR incorporated the northern and southern districts of Bessarabia, northern Bukovina, and the Hertsa region.
But it ceded the western part of the Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic to the newly created Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic.
These territorial gains of the USSR were internationally recognized by the Paris peace treaties of 1947.
German armies invaded the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, initiating nearly four years of total war.
The Axis initially advanced against desperate but unsuccessful efforts of the Red Army.
In the encirclement battle of Kiev, the city was acclaimed as a ""Hero City"", because of its fierce resistance.
More than 600,000 Soviet soldiers were killed or taken captive there, with many suffering severe mistreatment.
Created as armed forces of the underground which had developed in interwar Poland as a reactionary nationalist organization.
During the interwar period, the Polish government's policies towards the Ukrainian minority were initially very accommodating, however by the late 1930s they became increasingly harsh due to civil unrest.
Both organizations, OUN and UPA supported the goal of an independent Ukrainian state on the territory with a Ukrainian ethnic majority.
Although this brought conflict with Nazi Germany, at times the Melnyk wing of the OUN allied with the Nazi forces.
Also, UPA divisions carried out massacres of ethnic Poles, which brought reprisals.
At the same time, the Ukrainian Liberation Army, another nationalist movement, fought alongside the Nazis.
In total, the number of ethnic Ukrainians who fought in the ranks of the Soviet Army is estimated from 4. million to 7 million.
The pro-Soviet partisan guerrilla resistance in Ukraine is estimated to number at 47,800 from the start of occupation to 500,000 at its peak in 1944, with about 50% being ethnic Ukrainians.
Generally, the Ukrainian Insurgent Army's figures are unreliable, with figures ranging anywhere from 15,000 to as many as 100,000 fighters.
Most of the Ukrainian SSR was organised within the Reichskommissariat Ukraine, with the intention of exploiting its resources and eventual German settlement.
Some western Ukrainians, who had only joined the Soviet Union in 1939, hailed the Germans as liberators.
Brutal German rule eventually turned their supporters against the Nazi administrators, who made little attempt to exploit dissatisfaction with Stalinist policies.
Instead, the Nazis preserved the collective-farm system, carried out genocidal policies against Jews, deported millions of people to work in Germany, and began a depopulation program to prepare for German colonisation.
The vast majority of the fighting in World War II took place on the Eastern Front.
The total losses inflicted upon the Ukrainian population during the war are estimated at between 5 and 8 million, including an estimated one and a half million Jews killed by the Einsatzgruppen, sometimes with the help of local collaborators.
Of the estimated 8. million Soviet troops who fell in battle against the Nazis, 1. million were ethnic Ukrainians.
The republic was heavily damaged by the war, and it required significant efforts to recover.
The situation was worsened by a famine in 1946–47, which was caused by a drought and the wartime destruction of infrastructure.
The death toll of this famine varies, with even the lowest estimate in the tens of thousands.
In 1945, the Ukrainian SSR became one of the founding members of the United Nations organization, part of a special agreement at the Yalta Conference.
In 1954, the 300th anniversary of the Treaty of Pereyaslav was widely celebrated.
By 1950, the republic had fully surpassed pre-war levels of industry and production.
During the 1946–1950 five-year plan, nearly 20% of the Soviet budget was invested in Soviet Ukraine, a 5% increase from pre-war plans.
As a result, the Ukrainian workforce rose 33.2% from 1940 to 1955 while industrial output grew 2. times in that same period.
After the accident, the new city of Slavutych was built outside the exclusion zone to house and support the employees of the plant, which was decommissioned in 2000.
A report prepared by the International Atomic Energy Agency and World Health Organization attributed 56 direct deaths to the accident and estimated that there may have been 4,000 extra cancer deaths.
On 16 July 1990, the new parliament adopted the Declaration of State Sovereignty of Ukraine.
This established the principles of the self-determination, democracy, independence, and the priority of Ukrainian law over Soviet law.
This started a period of confrontation with the central Soviet authorities.
In August 1991, a faction among the Communist leaders of the Soviet Union attempted a coup to remove Mikhail Gorbachev and to restore the Communist party's power.
After it failed, on 24 August 1991 the Ukrainian parliament adopted the Act of Independence.
A referendum and the first presidential elections took place on 1 December 1991.
More than 90% of the electorate expressed their support for the Act of Independence, and they elected the chairman of the parliament, Leonid Kravchuk as the first President of Ukraine.
On 26 December 1991 the Council of Republics of the USSR Supreme Council adapted declaration ""In regards to creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States"" which de-jure dissolved the Soviet Union and the Soviet flag was lowered over the Kremlin.
Ukraine was initially viewed as having favourable economic conditions in comparison to the other regions of the Soviet Union.
However, the country experienced deeper economic slowdown than some of the other former Soviet Republics.
During the recession, Ukraine lost 60% of its GDP from 1991 to 1999, and suffered five-digit inflation rates.
Dissatisfied with the economic conditions, as well as the amounts of crime and corruption in Ukraine, Ukrainians protested and organized strikes.
After 2000, the country enjoyed steady real economic growth averaging about seven percent annually.
A new Constitution of Ukraine was adopted under second President Leonid Kuchma in 1996, which turned Ukraine into a semi-presidential republic and established a stable political system.
Kuchma was, however, criticised by opponents for corruption, electoral fraud, discouraging free speech and concentrating too much power in his office.
In 2004, Viktor Yanukovych, then Prime Minister, was declared the winner of the presidential elections, which had been largely rigged, as the Supreme Court of Ukraine later ruled.
The results caused a public outcry in support of the opposition candidate, Viktor Yushchenko, who challenged the outcome.
During the tumultuous months of the revolution, candidate Yushchenko suddenly became gravely ill, and was soon found by multiple independent physician groups to have been poisoned by TCDD dioxin.
All of this eventually resulted in the peaceful Orange Revolution, bringing Viktor Yushchenko and Yulia Tymoshenko to power, while casting Viktor Yanukovych in opposition.
Activists of the Orange Revolution were funded and trained in tactics of political organisation and nonviolent resistance by Western pollsters and professional consultants who were partly funded by Western government and non-government agencies but received most of their funding from domestic sources.
According to The Guardian, the foreign donors included the United States State Department and USAID along with the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs, the International Republican Institute, the NGO Freedom House and George Soros's Open Society Institute.
The National Endowment for Democracy has supported democracy-building efforts in Ukraine since 1988.
Writings on nonviolent struggle by Gene Sharp contributed in forming the strategic basis of the student campaigns.
Russian authorities provided support through advisers such as Gleb Pavlovsky, consulting on blackening the image of Yushchenko through the state media, pressuring state-dependent voters to vote for Yanukovych and on vote-rigging techniques such as multiple 'carousel voting' and 'dead souls' voting.
Yanukovych returned to power in 2006 as Prime Minister in the Alliance of National Unity, until snap elections in September 2007 made Tymoshenko Prime Minister again.
Disputes with Russia briefly stopped all gas supplies to Ukraine in 2006 and again in 2009, leading to gas shortages in other countries.
The Euromaidan protests started in November 2013 after the president, Viktor Yanukovych, began moving away from an association agreement that had been in the works with the European Union and instead chose to establish closer ties with the Russian Federation.
Some Ukrainians took to the streets to show their support for closer ties with Europe.
Meanwhile, in the predominantly Russian-speaking east, a large portion of the population opposed the Euromaidan protests, instead supporting the Yanukovych government.
Over time, Euromaidan came to describe a wave of demonstrations and civil unrest in Ukraine, the scope of which evolved to include calls for the resignation of President Yanukovych and his government.
Violence escalated after 16 January 2014 when the government accepted new Anti-Protest Laws.
On 21 February, President Yanukovych signed a compromise deal with opposition leaders that promised constitutional changes to restore certain powers to Parliament and called for early elections to be held by December.
However, Members of Parliament voted on 22 February to remove the president and set an election for 25 May to select his replacement.
Petro Poroshenko, running on a pro-European Union platform, won with over fifty percent of the vote, therefore not requiring a run-off election.
Upon his election, Poroshenko announced that his immediate priorities would be to take action in the civil unrest in Eastern Ukraine and mend ties with the Russian Federation.
Poroshenko was inaugurated as president on 7 June 2014, as previously announced by his spokeswoman Irina Friz in a low-key ceremony without a celebration on Kiev's Maidan Nezalezhnosti for the ceremony.
The ousting of Yanukovych prompted Vladimir Putin to begin preparations to annex Crimea on 23 February 2014.
Using the Russian naval base at Sevastopol as cover, Putin directed Russian troops and intelligence agents to disarm Ukrainian forces and take control of Crimea.
After the troops entered Crimea, a controversial referendum was held on 16 March 2014 and the official result was that 97 percent wished to join with Russia.
On 18 March 2014, Russia and the self-proclaimed Republic of Crimea signed a treaty of accession of the Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol in the Russian Federation.
The UN general assembly responded by passing resolution 68/262 that the referendum was invalid and supporting the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Separately, in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, armed men declaring themselves as local militia supported with pro-Russian protesters seized government buildings, police and special police stations in several cities and held unrecognised status referendums.
The insurgency was led by Russian emissaries Igor Girkin and Alexander Borodai as well as militants from Russia, such as Arseny Pavlov.
Talks in Geneva between the EU, Russia, Ukraine and USA yielded a Joint Diplomatic Statement referred to as the 2014 Geneva Pact in which the parties requested that all unlawful militias lay down their arms and vacate seized government buildings, and also establish a political dialogue that could lead to more autonomy for Ukraine's regions.
When Petro Poroshenko won the presidential election held on 25 May 2014, he vowed to continue the military operations by the Ukrainian government forces to end the armed insurgency.
In August 2014, a bilateral commission of leading scholars from the United States and Russia issued the Boisto Agenda indicating a 24-step plan to resolve the crisis in Ukraine.
In late 2014, Ukraine ratified the Ukraine–European Union Association Agreement, which Poroshenko described as Ukraine's ""first but most decisive step"" towards EU membership.
On 1 January 2016, Ukraine joined the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area with European Union, which aims to modernize and develop Ukraine's economy, governance and rule of law to EU standards and gradually increase integration with the EU Internal market.
View of Carpathian National Park and Hoverla at 2,061 m , the highest mountain in Ukraine.
The landscape of Ukraine consists mostly of fertile plains and plateaus, crossed by rivers such as the Dnieper , Seversky Donets, Dniester and the Southern Bug as they flow south into the Black Sea and the smaller Sea of Azov.
To the southwest, the delta of the Danube forms the border with Romania.
Ukraine's various regions have diverse geographic features ranging from the highlands to the lowlands.
The country's only mountains are the Carpathian Mountains in the west, of which the highest is the Hora Hoverla at 2,061 metres , and the Crimean Mountains on Crimea, in the extreme south along the coast.
However Ukraine also has a number of highland regions such as the Volyn-Podillia Upland and the Near-Dnipro Upland ; to the east there are the south-western spurs of the Central Russian Upland over which runs the border with the Russian Federation.
Near the Sea of Azov can be found the Donets Ridge and the Near Azov Upland.
The snow melt from the mountains feeds the rivers, and natural changes in altitude form sudden drops in elevation and give rise to waterfalls.
Significant natural resources in Ukraine include iron ore, coal, manganese, natural gas, oil, salt, sulphur, graphite, titanium, magnesium, kaolin, nickel, mercury, timber and an abundance of arable land.
Despite this, the country faces a number of major environmental issues such as inadequate supplies of potable water; airand water-pollution and deforestation, as well as radiation contamination in the north-east from the 1986 accident at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant.
Interspersed in various uplands and along the northern and western perimeters of the deep chernozems are mixtures of gray forest soils and podzolized black-earth soils, which together occupy much of Ukraine's remaining area.
However, their intensive cultivation, especially on steep slopes, has led to widespread soil erosion and gullying.
The smallest proportion of the soil cover consists of the chestnut soils of the southern and eastern regions.
They become increasingly salinized to the south as they approach the Black Sea.
Ukraine has a mostly temperate climate, with the exception of the southern coast of Crimea which has a subtropical climate.
The climate is influenced by moderately warm, humid air coming from the Atlantic Ocean.
Precipitation is disproportionately distributed; it is highest in the west and north and lowest in the east and southeast.
Ukraine is home to a diverse assemblage of animals, fungi, microorganisms and plants.
One of these areas, in the west of the country, is made up of the borderlands of Europe, where there are species typical of mixed forests, the other is located in eastern Ukraine, where steppe-dwelling species thrive.
In the forested areas of the country it is not uncommon to find lynxes, wolves, wild boar and martens, as well as many other similar species; this is especially true of the Carpathian Mountains, where a large number of predatory mammals make their home, as well as a contingent of brown bears.
Around Ukraine's lakes and rivers beavers, otters and mink make their home, whilst in the waters carp, bream and catfish are the most commonly found species of fish.
In the central and eastern parts of the country, rodents such as hamsters and gophers are found in large numbers.
The criminal judicial system maintains an average conviction rate of over 99%, equal to the conviction rate of the Soviet Union, with suspects often being incarcerated for long periods before trial.
The criminal judicial system and the prison system of Ukraine remain quite punitive.
National Police of Ukraine was formed on 3 July 2015, as part of the post-Euromaidan reforms.
The Ministry of Internal Affairs is also responsible for the maintenance of the State Security Service; Ukraine's domestic intelligence agency, which has on occasion been accused of acting like a secret police force serving to protect the country's political elite from media criticism.
On the other hand, however, it is widely accepted that members of the service provided vital information about government plans to the leaders of the Orange Revolution to prevent the collapse of the movement.
In January 2016, Ukraine joined the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area with the EU , established by the Ukraine–European Union Association Agreement.
Ukraine currently considers Euro-Atlantic integration its primary foreign policy objective, but in practice it has always balanced its relationship with the European Union and the United States with strong ties to Russia.
The European Union has encouraged Ukraine to implement the PCA fully before discussions begin on an association agreement, issued at the EU Summit in December 1999 in Helsinki, recognizes Ukraine's long-term aspirations but does not discuss association.
On 31 January 1992, Ukraine joined the then-Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe ), and on 10 March 1992, it became a member of the North Atlantic Cooperation Council.
Ukraine–NATO relations are close and the country has declared interest in eventual membership.
This was removed from the government's foreign policy agenda upon election of Viktor Yanukovych to the presidency, in 2010.
But after February 2014's Yanukovych ouster and the following Russian military intervention in Ukraine Ukraine renewed its drive for NATO membership.
All major political parties in Ukraine support full eventual integration into the European Union.
The Association Agreement with the EU was expected to be signed and put into effect by the end of 2011, but the process was suspended by 2012 because of the political developments of that time.
The Association Agreement between Ukraine and the European Union was signed in 2014.
Ukraine long had close ties with all its neighbours, but Russia–Ukraine relations became difficult in 2014 by the annexation of Crimea, energy dependence and payment disputes.
The average area of a Ukrainian raion is 1,200 square kilometres ; the average population of a raion is 52,000 people.
Commander of the Ukrainian contingent in Multi-National Force – Iraq, kisses his country's flag.
Ukraine has been playing an increasingly larger role in peacekeeping operations.
On Friday 3 January 2014, the Ukrainian frigate Hetman Sagaidachniy joined the European Union's counter piracy Operation Atalanta and will be part of the EU Naval Force off the coast of Somalia for two months.
Ukrainian troops are deployed in Kosovo as part of the Ukrainian-Polish Battalion.
A Ukrainian unit was deployed in Lebanon, as part of UN Interim Force enforcing the mandated ceasefire agreement.
There was also a maintenance and training battalion deployed in Sierra Leone.
In 2003–05, a Ukrainian unit was deployed as part of the Multinational force in Iraq under Polish command.
The country has had a limited military partnership with Russian Federation, other CIS countries and a partnership with NATO since 1994.
In the 2000s, the government was leaning towards NATO, and a deeper cooperation with the alliance was set by the NATO-Ukraine Action Plan signed in 2002.
It was later agreed that the question of joining NATO should be answered by a national referendum at some point in the future.
During the 2008 Bucharest summit, NATO declared that Ukraine would eventually become a member of NATO when it meets the criteria for the accession.
In Soviet times, the economy of Ukraine was the second largest in the Soviet Union, being an important industrial and agricultural component of the country's planned economy.
With the dissolution of the Soviet system, the country moved from a planned economy to a market economy.
The transition was difficult for the majority of the population which plunged into poverty.
Ukraine's economy contracted severely in the years after the Soviet dissolution.
Day-to-day life for the average person living in Ukraine was a struggle.
A significant number of citizens in rural Ukraine survived by growing their own food, often working two or more jobs and buying the basic necessities through the barter economy.
In 1991, the government liberalised most prices to combat widespread product shortages, and was successful in overcoming the problem.
At the same time, the government continued to subsidise state-run industries and agriculture by uncovered monetary emission.
The loose monetary policies of the early 1990s pushed inflation to hyperinflationary levels.
For the year 1993, Ukraine holds the world record for inflation in one calendar year.
Prices stabilised only after the introduction of new currency, the hryvnia, in 1996.
Following independence, the government formed a legal framework for privatisation.
However, widespread resistance to reforms within the government and from a significant part of the population soon stalled the reform efforts.
A large number of state-owned enterprises were exempt from privatisation.
Growing sectors of the Ukrainian economy include the information technology market, which topped all other Central and Eastern European countries in 2007, growing some 40 percent.
In 2013, Ukraine ranked fourth in the world in number of certified IT professionals after the United States, India and Russia.
Ukraine's 2010 GDP, as calculated by the World Bank, was around $136 billion, 2011 GDP – around $163 billion, 2012 – $176. billion, 2013 – $177. billion.
In 2014 and 2015, the Ukrainian currency was the world's worst performing currency, having dropped 80 percent of its value since April 2014 since the War in Donbass and the annexation of Crimea by Russia.
Significant issues include underdeveloped infrastructure and transportation, corruption and bureaucracy.
The public will to fight against corrupt officials and business elites culminated in a strong wave of public demonstrations against the Victor Yanukovych's regime in November 2013.
According to the CIA, in 2006 the market capitalization of the Ukrainian stock market was $111. billion.
Ukraine has managed to achieve certain progress in reducing absolute poverty, ensuring access to primary and secondary education, improving maternal health and reducing child mortality.
The poverty rate according to the absolute criterion ) was reduced from 11. percent in 2000 to 2. percent in 2012, and the poverty rate according to the relative criterion decreased at the same time from 71. percent to 24. percent.
The economy of Ukraine overcame the heavy crisis caused by armed conflict in southeast part of country.
At the same time, 200% devaluation of Ukrainian hryvnia in 2014–2015 made Ukrainian goods and services cheaper and more сompetitive.
According to World Bank statement growth is projected at 2% in 2017 and 3.5% in 2018.
As of 2017, according to major economic classifications of countries such as gross domestic product or the Human Development Index, Ukraine is the second poorest country in Europe, after Moldova.
Ukraine is regarded as a developing economy with high potential for future success, though such a development is thought likely only with new all-encompassing economic and legal reforms.
Although Foreign Direct Investment in Ukraine remained relatively strong since recession of the early 1990s, the country has had trouble maintaining stable economic growth.
Despite all this, Ukraine's economy was still expected to grow by around 3.5% in 2010.
Major routes, marked with the letter 'M' for 'International' , extend nationwide and connect all major cities of Ukraine, and provide cross-border routes to the country's neighbours.
Rail transport in Ukraine connects all major urban areas, port facilities and industrial centres with neighbouring countries.
The heaviest concentration of railway track is the Donbas region of Ukraine.
Although rail freight transport fell by 7.4% in 1995 in comparison with 1994, Ukraine is still one of the world's highest rail users.
The total amount of railroad track in Ukraine extends for 22,473 kilometres , of which 9,250 kilometres is electrified.
Transport by air is developing quickly, with a visa-free programme for EU nationals and citizens of a number of other Western nations, the nation's aviation sector is handling a significantly increased number of travellers.
The Euro 2012 football tournament, held in Poland and Ukraine as joint hosts, prompted the government to invest heavily in transport infrastructure, and in particular airports.
The Donetsk airport, completed for Euro 2012, was destroyed by the end of 2014 because of the ongoing war between the government and the separatist movement.
Kiev Boryspil is the county's largest international airport; it has three main passenger terminals and is the base for the country's flag carrier, Ukraine International Airlines.
Other large airports in the country include those in Kharkiv, Lviv and Donetsk , whilst those in Dnipro and Odessa have plans for terminal upgrades in the near future.
In addition to its flag carrier, Ukraine has a number of airlines including Windrose Airlines, Dniproavia, Azur Air Ukraine, and AtlasGlobal Ukraine.
Antonov Airlines, a subsidiary of the Antonov Aerospace Design Bureau is the only operator of the world's largest fixed wing aircraft, the An-225.
Natural gas is heavily utilised not only in energy production but also by steel and chemical industries of the country, as well as by the district heating sector.
In 2012, Shell started exploration drilling for shale gas in Ukraine—a project aimed at the nation's total gas supply independence.
Following the armed conflict in the Donbass, Ukraine was cut off from half of coal and all of its anthracite extraction, dropping Ukrainian coal production by 22 percent in 2014.
Russia was Ukraine's largest coal supplier, and in 2014 Russia blocked its coal supplies, forcing 22 Ukrainian power plants to shut down temporarily.
By 2016, Russia's share was down to 55 percent, Westinghouse supplying nuclear fuel for six of Ukraine's VVER-1000 nuclear reactors.
Ukraine has been a net energy exporting country, for example in 2011, 3.3% of electricity produced were exported, but also one of Europe's largest energy consumers.
As of 2011, 47.6% of total electricity generation was from nuclear power The largest nuclear power plant in Europe, the Zaporizhia Nuclear Power Plant, is located in Ukraine.
In 2008 Westinghouse Electric Company won a five-year contract selling nuclear fuel to three Ukrainian reactors starting in 2011.
Following Euromaidan then President Viktor Yanukovych introduced a ban on Rosatom nuclear fuel shipments to Europe via Ukraine, which was in effect from 28 January until 6 March 2014.
After the Russian annexation of Crimea in April 2014, the National Nuclear Energy Generating Company of Ukraine Energoatom and Westinghouse extended the contract for fuel deliveries through 2020.
The share of renewables within the total energy mix is still very small, but is growing fast.
According to Macquarie Research, by 2016 Ukraine will construct and commission new solar power stations with a total capacity of 1.
Ukraine has a large and steadily growing Internet sector, mostly uninfluenced by the financial crisis of 2007–08.
As of June, 2014, there were 18. million desktop Internet users, which is 56% of the adult population.
The core of the audience is the 25 to 34-year-old age bracket, representing 29% of the population.
Ukraine ranks 8th among the world's top ten countries with the fastest Internet access speed.
Kearney Global Services Location Index, Ukraine ranks 24th among the best outsourcing locations, and is among the top 20 offshore services locations in EMEA, according to Gartner.
In the first six months of 2017, the volume of export of computer and information services reached $1.256 billion, which is an 18.3% increase compared to the same period in 2016.
The IT industry ranks third in the export structure of Ukraine after agro-industry and metallurgy.
Ukraine's IT sector employs close to 100,000 workers, including 50,000 software developers.
In 2007 Ukraine occupied 8th place in Europe by the number of tourists visiting, according to the World Tourism Organization rankings.
Kiev, Lviv, Odessa and Kamyanets-Podilskyi are Ukraine's principal tourist centres each offering many historical landmarks as well as formidable hospitality infrastructure.
Tourism used to be the mainstay of Crimea's economy but there has been a major fall in visitor numbers following the Russian annexation in 2014.
According to the Ukrainian Census of 2001, Ukrainians make up 77.8% of the population.
It is also estimated that there are about 50,000 ethnic Koreans in Ukraine that belong to the Koryo-saram group.
Their number may be as high as 100,000, as many ethnic Koreans were assimilated into the majority population.
The industrial regions in the east and southeast are the most heavily populated, and about 67.2% of the population lives in urban areas.
Ukraine has one of the most equal income distribution as measured by Gini index and Palma ratio.
The country's population has been declining since the 1990s because of a high emigration rate, coupled with high death rates and low birth rates.
The birth rate has recovered in recent years from a low level around 2000, and is now comparable to the European average.
It would need to increase by another 50% or so to stabilize the population and offset the high mortality rate.
During the years 2008 to 2010, more than 1. million children were born in Ukraine, compared to fewer than 1. million during 1999–2001.
In 2008 Ukraine posted record-breaking birth rates since its 1991 independence.
Infant mortality rates have also dropped from 10. deaths to 8. per 1,000 children under one year of age.
To help mitigate the declining population, the government continues to increase child support payments.
The demographic trend is showing signs of improvement, as the birth rate has been steadily growing since 2001.
Net population growth over the first nine months of 2007 was registered in five provinces of the country , and population shrinkage was showing signs of stabilising nationwide.
According to the constitution, the state language of Ukraine is Ukrainian.
According to the 2001 census, 67. percent of the population declared Ukrainian as their native language and 29. percent declared Russian.
Russian was the de facto official language of the Soviet Union but both Russian and Ukrainian were official languages in the Soviet Union and in the schools of the Ukrainian SSR learning Ukrainian was mandatory.
Effective in August 2012, a new law on regional languages entitles any local language spoken by at least a 10 percent minority be declared official within that area.
Russian was within weeks declared as a regional language in several southern and eastern oblasts and cities.
Russian can now be used in these cities'/oblasts' administrative office work and documents.
On 23 February 2014, following the 2014 Ukrainian revolution, the Ukrainian Parliament voted to repeal the law on regional languages, making Ukrainian the sole state language at all levels; however, the repeal was not signed by acting President Turchynov and current President Poroshenko.
In February 2019, the law allowing for regional languages was found unconstitutional.
In central Ukraine, Ukrainian and Russian are both equally used in cities, with Russian being more common in Kiev, while Ukrainian is the dominant language in rural communities.
In eastern and southern Ukraine, Russian is primarily used in cities, and Ukrainian is used in rural areas.
These details result in a significant difference across different survey results, as even a small restating of a question switches responses of a significant group of people.
For a large part of the Soviet era, the number of Ukrainian speakers declined from generation to generation, and by the mid-1980s, the usage of the Ukrainian language in public life had decreased significantly.
Following independence, the government of Ukraine began restoring the image and usage of Ukrainian language through a policy of Ukrainisation.
Today, most foreign films and TV programs, including Russian ones, are subtitled or dubbed in Ukrainian.
Ukraine's 2017 education law bars primary education to all students in any language but Ukrainian.
The Unian reported that ""A ban on the use of cultural products, namely movies, books, songs, etc., in the Russian language in the public has been introduced"" in the Lviv Oblast in September 2018.
A 2016 survey conducted by the Razumkov Centre found that 70% of Ukrainians declared themselves believers in any religion, while 10.1% were uncertain whether they believed or not, 7.2% were uninterested in beliefs, 6.3% were unbelievers, 2.7% were atheists, and a further 3.9% found it difficult to answer the question.
Of the Ukrainian population, 81.9% were Christians, comprising a 65.4% who declared to be Orthodox, 7.1% simply Christians, 6.5% Greek Rite Catholics, and 1.9% Protestants.
Judaism and Hinduism were the religions of 0.2% of the population each.
A further 16.3% of the population did not identify in one of those listed hitherto.
According to the surveys conducted by Razumkov in the 2000s and early 2010s, such numbers have remained relatively constant throughout the last decade.
A further 2.7% were members of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church, which, like the Kievan Patriarchate, is not recognized by the Eastern Orthodox Church.
Among the remaining Orthodox Ukrainians, 32.3% declared to be ""simply Orthodox"", without affiliation to any patriarchate, while a further 3.1% declared that they ""did not know"" which patriarchate or Orthodox church they belonged to.
The second largest Christian group in Ukraine, Catholicism, is predominantly represented by the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, an Eastern Catholic Church in communion with the Holy See of the Roman Catholic Church.
It recognizes the primacy of the Pope as head of the Church while still maintaining a similar liturgical and spiritual tradition as Eastern Orthodoxy.
The church consists mainly of ethnic Poles and Hungarians, who live predominantly in the western regions of the country.
The famines of the 1930s, followed by the devastation of World War II, created a demographic disaster.
Life expectancy at birth fell to a level as low as ten years for females and seven for males in 1933 and plateaued around 25 for females and 15 for males in the period 1941–44.
Significant migration took place in the first years of Ukrainian independence.
More than one million people moved into Ukraine in 1991–92, mostly from the other former Soviet republics.
Currently, immigrants constitute an estimated 14.7% of the total population, or 6. million people; this is the fourth largest figure in the world.
In 2006, there were an estimated 1. million Canadians of Ukrainian ancestry, giving Canada the world's third-largest Ukrainian population behind Ukraine itself and Russia.
There are also large Ukrainian immigrant communities in the United States, Poland, Australia, Brazil and Argentina.
The Ukrainian Red Cross Society was established in April 1918 in Kiev as an independent humanitarian society of the Ukrainian People's Republic.
Its immediate tasks were to help refugees and prisoners of war, care for handicapped people and orphaned children, fight famine and epidemics, support and organize sick quarters, hospitals and public canteens.
At present, society involves more than 6. million supporters and activists.
The organization takes part in more than 40 humanitarian programmes all over Ukraine, which are mostly funded by public donation and corporate partnerships.
By its own estimates, the Society annually provides services to more than 105,000 lonely, elderly people, about 23,000 people disabled during the Second World War and handicapped workers, more than 25,000 war veterans, and more than 8,000 adults handicapped since childhood.
A factor contributing to the high death rate is a high mortality rate among working-age males from preventable causes such as alcohol poisoning and smoking.
In 2008, the country's population was one of the fastest declining in the world at −5% growth.
The UN warned that Ukraine's population could fall by as much as 10 million by 2050 if trends did not improve.
In addition, obesity, systemic high blood pressure and the HIV endemic are all major challenges facing the Ukrainian healthcare system.
As of March 2009 the Ukrainian government is reforming the health care system, by the creation of a national network of family doctors and improvements in the medical emergency services.
In November 2009, former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko proposed introducing a public healthcare system based on health insurance in the spring of 2010.
Active reformation of Ukraine's healthcare system was initiated right after the appointment of Ulana Suprun as a head of the Ministry of Healthcare of Ukraine.
Assisted by deputy Pavlo Kovtoniuk, Suprun first changed the distribution of finances in healthcare.
Emergency medical service is considered to be fully funded by the state.
Emergency Medicine Reform is also an important part of the healthcare reform.
In addition, patients who suffer from chronic diseases, which cause a high toll of disability and mortality, are provided with free or low price medicine.
The Ukrainian higher education system comprises higher educational establishments, scientific and methodological facilities under national, municipal and self-governing bodies in charge of education.
Ukraine produces the fourth largest number of post-secondary graduates in Europe, while being ranked seventh in population.
For most students the government subsidy is not sufficient to cover their basic living expenses.
Also, it is common for libraries to supply required books for all registered students.
Historically, Specialist degree is still also granted; it was the only degree awarded by universities in the Soviet times.
The Law of Ukraine On Higher Education came into force on 6 September 2014.
On the Russian language, on Soviet Union and Ukrainian nationalism, opinion in Eastern Ukraine and Southern Ukraine tends to be the exact opposite of those in Western Ukraine; while opinions in Central Ukraine on these topics tend be less extreme.
Similar historical cleavages also remain evident at the level of individual social identification.
However, all were united by an overarching Ukrainian identity based on shared economic difficulties, showing that other attitudes are determined more by culture and politics than by demographic differences.
Ukrainian customs are heavily influenced by Orthodox Christianity, the dominant religion in the country.
Gender roles also tend to be more traditional, and grandparents play a greater role in bringing up children, than in the West.
The culture of Ukraine has also been influenced by its eastern and western neighbours, reflected in its architecture, music and art.
The Communist era had quite a strong effect on the art and writing of Ukraine.
During the 1980s glasnost was introduced and Soviet artists and writers again became free to express themselves as they wanted.
Artisan textile arts play an important role in Ukrainian culture, especially in Ukrainian wedding traditions.
Ukrainian embroidery, weaving and lace-making are used in traditional folk dress and in traditional celebrations.
Ukrainian embroidery varies depending on the region of origin and the designs have a long history of motifs, compositions, choice of colours and types of stitches.
Embroidery motifs found in different parts of Ukraine are preserved in the Rushnyk Museum in Pereiaslav-Khmelnytskyi.
These policies faced a steep decline in the 1930s, when prominent representatives as well as many others were killed by NKVD as part of the Great Purge.
These repressions were part of Stalin's implemented policy of socialist realism.
The doctrine did not necessarily repress the use of the Ukrainian language, but it required that writers follow a certain style in their works.
The most famous figures of Ukrainian post-war Soviet literature were Lina Kostenko, Dmytro Pavlychko, Borys Oliynyk , Ivan Drach, Oles Honchar, Vasyl Stus, Vasyl Symonenko.
Literary freedom grew in the late 1980s and early 1990s alongside the decline and collapse of the USSR and the reestablishment of Ukrainian independence in 1991.
Michael's Golden-Domed Cathedral in Kiev, foremost example of Cossack Baroque and one of Ukraine's most recognizable landmarks.
Ukrainian architecture includes the motifs and styles that are found in structures built in modern Ukraine, and by Ukrainians worldwide.
Since the Christianization of Kievan Rus' for several ages Ukrainian architecture was influenced by the Byzantine architecture.
After the 12th century, the distinct architectural history continued in the principalities of Galicia-Volhynia.
During the epoch of the Zaporozhian Cossacks, a new style unique to Ukraine was developed under the western influences of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.
After the union with the Tsardom of Russia, many structures in the larger eastern, Russian-ruled area were built in the styles of Russian architecture of that period, whilst the western Galicia was developed under Austro-Hungarian architectural influences.
Ukrainian national motifs would finally be used during the period of the Soviet Union and in modern independent Ukraine.
The great churches of the Rus', built after the adoption of Christianity in 988, were the first examples of monumental architecture in the East Slavic lands.
The architectural style of the Kievan state was strongly influenced by the Byzantine.
Early Eastern Orthodox churches were mainly made of wood, with the simplest form of church becoming known as a cell church.
Major cathedrals often featured scores of small domes, which led some art historians to take this as an indication of the appearance of pre-Christian pagan Slavic temples.
Sophia of Kiev – the year 1017 is the earliest record of foundation laid, Church of the Saviour at Berestove – built from 1113 to 1125 and St.
Several buildings were reconstructed during the late-19th century, including the Assumption Cathedral in Volodymyr-Volynskyi, built in 1160 and reconstructed in 1896–1900, the Paraskevi church in Chernihiv, built in 1201 with reconstruction done in the late 1940s, and the Golden gates in Kiev, built in 1037 and reconstructed in 1982.
The latter's reconstruction was criticised by some art and architecture historians as a revivalist fantasy.
Unfortunately little secular or vernacular architecture of Kievan Rus' has survived.
As Ukraine became increasingly integrated into the Russian Empire, Russian architects had the opportunity to realise their projects in the picturesque landscape that many Ukrainian cities and regions offered.
Andrew's Church of Kiev , built by Bartolomeo Rastrelli, is a notable example of Baroque architecture, and its location on top of the Kievan mountain made it a recognisable monument of the city.
An equally notable contribution of Rasetrelli was the Mariyinsky Palace, which was built to be a summer residence to Russian Empress Elizabeth.
During the reign of the last Hetman of Ukraine, Kirill Razumovsky, many of the Cossack Hetmanate's towns such as Hlukhiv, Baturyn and Koselets had grandiose projects built by Andrey Kvasov.
Russia eventually conquered the south of Ukraine and Crimea, and renamed them as New Russia.
New cities such as Nikolayev, Odessa, Kherson and Sevastopol were founded.
Such apartments were built throughout Ukraine during Soviet times and are found in every major city.
Previously, the city was seen as only a regional centre, hence received little attention.
The first examples of Stalinist architecture were already showing, and, in light of the official policy, a new city was to be built on top of the old one.
After the war, a new project for the reconstruction of central Kiev transformed Khreshchatyk avenue into a notable example of Stalinism in Architecture.
However, by 1955, the new politics of architecture once again stopped the project from fully being realised.
The task for modern Ukrainian architecture is diverse application of modern aesthetics, the search for an architect's own artistic style and inclusion of the existing historico-cultural environment.
An example of modern Ukrainian architecture is the reconstruction and renewal of the Maidan Nezalezhnosti in central Kiev.
Despite the limit set by narrow space within the plaza, the engineers were able to blend together the uneven landscape, and use underground space for a new shopping centre.
Ukrainian music sometimes presents a perplexing mix of exotic melismatic singing with chordal harmony.
The most striking general characteristic of authentic ethnic Ukrainian folk music is the wide use of minor modes or keys which incorporate augmented 2nd intervals.
Mykola Lysenko is widely considered to be the father of Ukrainian classical music.
During the Baroque period, music was an important discipline for those that had received a higher education in Ukraine.
It had a place of considerable importance in the curriculum of the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy.
Much of the nobility was well versed in music with many Ukrainian Cossack leaders such as being accomplished players of the kobza, bandura or torban.
The first dedicated musical academy was set up in Hlukhiv, Ukraine in 1738 and students were taught to sing, play violin and bandura from manuscripts.
As a result, many of the earliest composers and performers within the Russian empire were ethnically Ukrainian, having been born or educated in Hlukhiv, or had been closely associated with this music school.
Since the mid-1960s, Western-influenced pop music has been growing in popularity in Ukraine.
Ukrainian pop and folk music arose with the international popularity of groups and performers like Vopli Vidoplyasova, Dakh Daughters, Dakha Brakha, Ivan Dorn and Okean Elzy.
Modern musical culture of Ukraine is presented both with academic and entertainment music.
Ukraine has five conservatories, 6 opera houses, five houses of Chamber Music, Philharmony in all regional centers.
Ukraine hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 2005 and the Eurovision Song Contest 2017.
Other important directors including Kira Muratova, Sergei Loznitsa, Myroslav Slaboshpytskyi, Larisa Shepitko, Sergei Bondarchuk, Leonid Bykov, Yuri Ilyenko, Leonid Osyka, Ihor Podolchak with his Delirium and Maryna Vroda.
Vera Kholodnaya, Bohdan Stupka, Milla Jovovich, Olga Kurylenko, Mila Kunis.
Despite a history of important and successful productions, the industry has often been characterised by a debate about its identity and the level of European and Russian influence.
Ukrainian producers are active in international co-productions and Ukrainian actors, directors and crew feature regularly in Russian films.
Published mainly in Ukrainian with selected articles published in or translated to Russian and English, the newspaper has particular emphasis on the politics of Ukraine.
Freedom of the press in Ukraine is considered to be among the freest of the post-Soviet states other than the Baltic states.
Press freedom has significantly improved since the Orange Revolution of 2004.
National newspapers Den, Mirror Weekly, tabloids, such as The Ukrainian Week or Focus , and television and radio are largely based there, although Lviv is also a significant national media centre.
The National News Agency of Ukraine, Ukrinform was founded here in 1918.
The Ukraine publishing sector, including books, directories and databases, journals, magazines and business media, newspapers and news agencies, has a combined turnover.
Sanoma publishes Ukrainian editions of such magazines as Esquire, Harpers Bazaar and National Geographic Magazine.
Many Ukrainians also played for the Soviet national football team, most notably Ballon d'Or winners Ihor Belanov and Oleh Blokhin.
This award was only presented to one Ukrainian after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Andriy Shevchenko.
The national team made its debut in the 2006 FIFA World Cup, and reached the quarterfinals before losing to eventual champions, Italy.
Two years later the Ukraine national basketball team finished 6th in EuroBasket 2013 and qualified to FIBA World Cup for the first time in its history.
Euroleague participant Budivelnyk Kyiv is the strongest professional basketball club in Ukraine.
The traditional Ukrainian diet includes chicken, pork, beef, fish and mushrooms.
Ukrainians also tend to eat a lot of potatoes, grains, fresh, boiled or pickled vegetables.
Ukrainians drink stewed fruit, juices, milk, buttermilk , mineral water, tea and coffee, beer, wine and horilka.
This page is based on the Wikipedia article Ukraine; it is used under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.
