PERFORMING Naval Postgraduate School ORGANIZATION REPORT Monterey, CA 93943-5000 NUMBER 9.
DISTRIBUTION CODE Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited 13.
NUMBER OF annexation, Anschluss, Austria, Crimea, Hitler, irredentism, Nazi Germany, Putin, revanchism, PAGES Russia 95 16.
Chair, Department of Department of National Security Affairs iii THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK iv ABSTRACT This thesis compares the irredentist and revanchist actions of Nazi Germany and the contemporary Russian Federation with regard to violent and coercive changes of borders as an element of statecraft.
ORIGINS AND IMPLEMENTATIONS OF THE ANSCHLUSS .....................9 A PAN-GERMANISM IN AUSTRIA ........................................................10 1.
Role Models of a Dictator ............................................................12 2.
Interwar Currents of Anschluss .................................................15 B POPULAR SENTIMENT BEFORE THE ANSCHLUSS ....................18 1.
The People.....................................................................................18 2.
UKRAINIAN NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND CRIMEAN ANNEXATION ....................................................................................................29 A UKRAINIAN NATIONALIST DEVELOPMENT...............................30 1.
Common Roots? ...........................................................................30 2.
Ruthenians ....................................................................................33 4.
Struggle for National Statehood .................................................35 B CRIMEAN NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT .........................................39 1.
From Batu Khan to Brest-Litovsk..............................................40 2.
Transition to Soviet Rule and World War II ............................41 3.
Transition to Independence ........................................................44 C BACKGROUND AND SYNOPSIS OF THE ANNEXATION OF CRIMEA ...................................................................................................47 1.
Fraud and Revolution ..................................................................47 2.
CRITICAL ANALYSIS AND IMPLICATIONS OF THE HITLER ANALOGY ...........................................................................................................55 A WEIMAR RUSSIA? ................................................................................55 B REDUCTIO AD HITLERUM ................................................................57 vii C A “CRIMEAN ANSCHLUSS”? .............................................................63 1.
Revanchism, Irredentism, and Pan-Nationalism ......................63 2.
Although many contemporaries viewed the comparison as strikingly apt, some held that the social and political characteristics of post-Soviet Russia would not allow a transition to fascism because of the suffering that Nazi aggression during the World War II brought to the population of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics .2 The main difficulty with the Weimar Russia analogy is that there are only two cases from which to develop the correlation and hypotheses as to trends and causation.
The Moscow Times ran an article calling the annexation “Putin’s Crimean Anschluss” and directly comparing the West’s response to appeasement in 1938 with its reaction in 2014, while Hillary Clinton, Wolfgang Schäuble, Prince Charles, and several other notable figures publicly compared Vladimir Putin to Adolf Hitler.
The nationalistic pan-Slavism rhetoric in modern Russian politics and Putin’s security guarantees to Russian-speaking minorities suggest an aspiration to future conquests that may resemble Hitler’s acquisition of Austria and the Czech Sudetenland prior to his invasion of Poland.
These phenomena were especially fateful in Central Europe and in what eventually went from medieval and classical Germany after 1648 in the early modern period to the modern order of nation states in central Europe with the attempt by the nations of central Europe to become nation states on the western European model.
Popular Sentiment in the Nazi Era, 1938–1945 (Chapel Hill, NC: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 2000), 5; Berend, History Derailed, 34.
National movements developed among the Italian, Czech, and Hungarian minorities of the empire from 1789 until 1848, and the German-speakers grew to feel threatened, especially as the Klein Deutschland concept emerged as an option for German unity with the advent of Bismarck’s chancellery in 1862.29 The Austro-Prussian War of 1866 and subsequent unification of Germany under Kaiser Wilhelm I in 1871 meant that the Deutsch Österreicher, who for a thousand years had been the core of the Reich, was unceremoniously shunted to the periphery.
Pan-Nationalist displays were surreptitiously celebrated with the adornment of cornflowers, the singing of “Deutschland Über Alles” instead of the imperial anthem, and the display of red, black, and gold colors.
Georg Ritter von Schönerer was the most influential personality in the Pan-German movement of the fin de siècle.
Schönerer notably joined anti-Semitic dogma with Pan-German rhetoric in Habsburg Austria after 1890.
Schönerer’s use of ethnic hatred as an explanation for the social and political tribulations of a multi-ethnic empire made anti-Semitic and xenophobic attitudes central to the Pan-German movement.
Although Schönerer lost his parliamentary seat in 1907 and likely never met the future dictator, Hitler was witness to the demagogue’s cult of personality in the Vienna of the turn of the century.
Schönerer’s influence persisted as his young disciples went on to dominate municipal life in multiple provinces as civic figures,36 as well as political figures in Vienna.
Wolf was a journalist-turned-politician whose successes and view of Czechs as “the main enemy”41 would eventually distance him from his original patron in Schönerer.
Stein, a fierce advocate of German workers and founder of the “German National Workers Association,”43 was known for blatant attacks on the Habsburgs in favor of the annexation of peripheral provinces by the German empire.
Austria’s “inability to be self-sufficient” economically was reflected in its loan request from the League of Nations and its pursuit of customs union arrangements until 1931.59 France’s stipulation that Austria surrender domestic control of its financial system, however, was politically infeasible.
In a display of suspicion and its relatively strong financial position, France withdrew all its assets from the Austrian Creditanstalt and precipitated a ruinous economic crisis60 that resulted in the near-collapse of the Austrian banking sector, a dramatic slowdown of the Austrian industrial sector, and greater than 30 percent unemployment.
With the rise of railroads and modern transportation, the migrant flow—particularly of “unskilled Czechs”—increased sharply.
Furthermore, the withdrawal of French assets from the Creditanstalt mentioned earlier plunged the banking sector toward collapse in 1931.70 While the Austrian economic situation was worsening, however, Austrians saw the National Socialist system across the border after 1933 generating jobs and creating what was presented as an increasingly classless society.
In response, massive Socialist demonstrations and protests set fire to the Vienna Palace of Justice, an uprising that was only subdued when police opened fire on the crowds, killing 73 Steven Beller, Concise History of Austria , 200.
Nevertheless, it started to gain electoral victories in Vienna, Lower Austria, Salzburg, Styria, and Carinthia by 1930, even winning 41 percent of the vote in Innsbruck in 1933.78 While Austrian politics were certainly descending into fascism, Nazism was markedly too radical for most right-wing Austrian politicians.
The threat from Nazism and the schism it created among conservatives served to accelerate the transition to authoritarianism after 1932.80 Englebert Dollfuss became Chancellor in 1932 in the wake of the financial crisis following the 1931 failed customs union.
The brief civil war resulted in the disbandment of the Social Democrats, the filling of concentration camps, and the drafting of a constitution that codified a fascist state in the so-called Ständestaat.
On a second front, the consolidation of power by Hitler’s Nazis in Berlin and the meteoric rise of the Austrian Nazi party in Vienna made Dollfuss suspicious of an impending Nazi takeover.
Still, the Führer could not control the actions of his Austrian compatriots nor the plotting of his armed formations and a putsch was attempted by Austrian SA and SS in July.
The Ständestaat under both Dollfuss and Schuschnigg exhibited anti-Semitic undercurrents, albeit not the radical measures prescribed by Schönerer and his disciples.
Like the Monarchists, much of the Austrian right advocated an anti-Republican, authoritarian, and anti-Semitic regime, but were not satisfied with the Ständestaat and demanded more radical measures.
The Italian dictator’s support gave Schuschnigg’s Ständestaat resilience against increased pressure from Nazi Germany.
Chancellor Seyss-Inquart held his office for only two days before signing the “Reunification of Austria with the German Reich” into law on the 13.105 The cheering crowds of people adorned in Swastikas and lining the streets of Innsbruck and Vienna surprised even Hitler.
Although, according to Schuschnigg, more than two thirds of Austrians were in favor of independence after the invasion,107 the following month would turn that tide.
The controversy as to whether there is a unique Ukrainian nation or whether Ukraine belongs in the Russian nation has led to a political and cultural rift in modern Ukraine and Russia.
Furthermore, since various empires ruled the territory of modern Ukraine, distinct policies on nationality rights led to Ukrainian identities developing asymmetrically, tangentially, or not at all, depending on the region.
The area ruled by the Rus covered western and central Ukraine, most of modern Belarus, and western Russia.
It was between 1240 and the 1600s that truly separate Ukrainian and Russian identities developed,122 and diverse narratives within Ukraine took shape.
Ukrainian elites became more integrated into Russian society due to relatively similar cultures; and although certain Ukrainian cultural icons and even music were incorporated into Russian culture, the result was an extremely Russified elite caste among the Ukrainian Cossacks and an impoverished peasantry.5 Consequently, once the nobility of the Hetmanate became assimilated into Russian culture, the concept of any distinct Ukrainian culture did not exist among the Russian elites.
The Decembrist uprising in 1825 and the suppression of the Polish rebellion in 1830 by Tsarist forces split the forces of Pan-Slavism into pro-Russian and anti-Russian camps.0 Leftist Pan-Slavists pursued a Slavic Federation free of the European and Russian dynastic ancien régimes; this policy was clear in the first Pan-Slavic congress in Prague in 1848.
This idea portrayed the Germans and the Austrians as the eternal opponents of the Slavs and strengthened Russian nationalism, state centrism, and imperialism in the course of the 19th century in the face of German unification and the decline of the Habsburg Empire.1 Ukrainians under Russian rule experienced a deliberate and coordinated effort to undermine the development of a Ukrainian national identity because Ukraine was unlike other Russian territories.
However, even though the Habsburg system allowed for schooling in the “Slaveno-Rusyn” language—the predecessor of modern Ukrainian—upward mobility was limited.
In Galicia, Polish rulers offered Polonization—assimilation into Polish culture—as the only options for Ruthenians.8 Higher education was offered only in Polish or German, so the small Ruthenian elite was quickly stratified into Polonophiles or Ruthenian nationalists, with most choosing the former.
This friction between nationalities and nations would endure and result in a resolute local nationalism that distinguished the Ruthenians from the Poles by the turn of the century; however, the imperial borders that created “two nationalities on one ethnographic base” would crumble with their empires after World War I.143 4.
This would eventually backfire as the intelligentsia established a post-war cultural and civilizational symbol in the traditional Ukrainian capital as peasants were migrating to urban areas.3 Moreover, Soviet post-World War II policies concerning Ukraine would further contribute to an already existential rift in the population.
Southern and eastern Ukraine—particularly the industrial Donbas region— became a “multi-ethnic melting pot for all the peoples of the Empire” with a distinctly Russian culture.5 Concurrently, the Western Ukrainians’ deep-seated hostility toward Russia continued to develop well into the 20th century.
This contributed to the eventual disintegration of the Soviet Union and the subsequent independence of Ukraine and other former Soviet republics in 1991.156 As the Soviet Union collapsed and independence referenda were held in the Soviet Socialist Republics, it quickly became evident that Boris Yeltsin’s concept of independence as “each republic sovereignty, but we would all remain together” was not endorsed by Ukraine and other Soviet successor states.
Historians have portrayed Ukraine as the progenitor of Russian civilization, replaced its early modern history with that of the Cossacks, and depicted it as a multi-ethnic realm descended from the Rus.3 In contrast to what Renan considers “getting history wrong,” Ukraine’s history is rather that of a borderland between Eastern Europe and the Asian steppes it has spent its past shifting between.
These Tatars established their own Khanate state as the Mongol empire crumbled around it in the 1420s, maintaining autonomy until the Ottoman conquest in 1475.170 Under Ottoman rule, the Crimean Tatar Khanate developed a trade economy based primarily on the slave trade, sourced by annual forays into the Slavic lands to the north.
The 1937 census recorded 47. percent of the Crimean population as Russian, 20. percent Tatar, and 12. percent Ukrainian,179 but World War II and its aftermath at the hands of Joseph Stalin would change this population distribution.
Although this is as shocking as the Donbas’s August 1991 vote for independence, it should be noted that Crimea was the only province in the Ukrainian SSR that did not achieve an absolute majority of the populace (considering that there was only a 60 percent voter turnout).192 As Ukraine became an independent state, however, there was strife on the peninsula, notably when Ukrainian was deemed the official language.
By the mid-1990s, the Crimean Tatar population in Crimea had increased three-fold to more than 250,000 inhabitants.0 The severe downturn of the Ukrainian economy disenchanted many on the Crimean Peninsula with the Ukrainian government.
Crimea received 80 percent of its water, 75 percent of its industrial goods, and 85 percent of its energy from Ukraine.2 Furthermore, the socioeconomic divide between the population caused little strife between the Russian and Ukrainian inhabitants, but Crimean Tatars constituted 70 percent of the unemployed populace and their financial hardships caused further marginalization.3 Minority populations in Crimea viewed the Ukrainian Government as the “guarantor of their cultural and political rights” and opposed Crimean separatism or reintegration into Russia.
This created a confused situation, with an outgoing incumbent president (Leonid Kuchma), a nominal winner in the contested elections , and the supposedly popular choice .213 Days of protest followed, the protesters swaddled in orange clothing and waving orange banners—the color of Yushchenko’s Our Ukraine party—that gave the movement the moniker of the Orange Revolution.
The next month, under heavy international monitoring, new elections were held and Yushchenko won 52 percent of the vote, with a marked regional division.4 Despite heavy support from Russian President Putin via lengthy press conferences and several hundred million dollars to Yanukovych, Yushchenko was elected president and voiced a strong dedication to a democratic Ukraine and closer ties to the European Union.5 The ensuing years featured strife between Russia and Ukraine.
After appointing Sergei Aksenov—a pro-Russian politician—as the head of the Crimean government, Crimea declared independence from Ukraine and requested incorporation into the Russian Federation on March 11.233 Within the week, irredentist efforts staged a referendum for the secession of Crimea on March 16.
Two days later, the Russian Constitutional Court ratified the treaty.6 In the wake of the Russian annexation of Crimea, reports of human rights violations were abundant.
The daily harassment of dissenters and the high rate of emigration240 are likely to ensure further Russification and waning dissent on the peninsula.
The Russian majority and simmering separatist movements made the coup de main relatively smooth and bloodless.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez compared Israel’s actions in Lebanon with Hitler’s genocide275 and Russian President Vladimir Putin has frequently asserted that there were neo-Nazi, Nazi, and fascist elements in Ukraine’s Orange Revolution and Euromaidan.
How to Help Lose a War You Won,” Political Studies 52, no. : 381, doi: 10.1111/j.67-9248.2004.00485.x.
A study of English-, German-, and Spanish-language media showed that comparisons of Putin to Hitler started immediately after his election into the presidency in 2000, but spiked following his gas disputes with Ukraine in 2005–2009 and the RussoGeorgian War in 2008, and nearly tripled following the annexation of Crimea.1 Ironically, President Putin and the Kremlin have maintained a consistent counternarrative that neo-Nazis and fascists caused the Euromaidan ouster of Yanukovych and are currently in power in Kiev.
An initially large “information gap” between policymakers and the public,286 coupled with a potential rally-round-the-flag appeal, produces a compelling galvanizing effect.
Even negative comparisons—arguing that someone is not like Hitler—offer evidence that the reference is abundant in the media,290 and studies also show that people are more likely to associate negative correlations than if they had not heard the comparison at all.
Toward a Theoretical Synthesis,” Annual Review of Political Science 11 : 41, doi: 10.1146/annurev.polisci..060406.214132.
Professor Andrey Zubov of the Moscow State Institute of International Affairs was dismissed after writing an article comparing the Russian annexation of Crimea with Germany’s Anschluss with Austria in 1938.295 In response, Aleksandr Dugin—the head of a Kremlin-affiliated think-tank—lambasted Professor Zubov.
The short-lived Deutsche-Österreich Republic sought parity between its German and Austrian parts, but was nevertheless forbidden by the victors in World War I.300 The isolation of Austria during the Great Depression plunged it deeper into economic crisis.
The prestige associated with Crimea as one of the former crown jewels in Russia’s empire and the home to its Black Sea Fleet made it an icon of nostalgia for prior Russian power.6 No two cases of ethno-national irredentism are likely to be identical.
Furthermore, Austria had from the outset been a part of Hitler’s design for a greater Germany, and Hitler made this clear on the first page of Mein Kampf.
While Crimean independence from Ukraine was a point of contention for the ethnic Russians on the peninsula and politicians in the Kremlin,311 the official line concerning Crimea was not revanchist.
In 2010, the lease on Russia’s military bases in Crimea was extended for 25 years from 2017.312 As soon as a revolution in Kiev threatened those interests, the gears of war started turning.
While the Black Sea Fleet lease had been extended, full incorporation of Crimea by Russia removed restrictions on the fleet’s expansion.3 Almost overnight Russia surpassed Turkey as the most powerful Navy in the Black Sea, owing in part to Russia’s seizure of Ukrainian ships.
The existing pan-German attitudes, the endorsement by major public figures, and the elimination and intimidation of the political opposition negated the need for any falsification of ballots.1 The Crimean referendum, in contrast, has been shrouded in more controversy.
The vote in Crimea was a façade of being “in full compliance with democratic procedures and international norms,”326 as Putin referred to it, regardless of the United Nations General Assembly denunciation.
Such a genocidal agenda is absent from President Putin’s geopolitical endeavors, despite the extreme expansionist views articulated by Aleksandr Dugin and other Kremlin advisors.1 The mysterious appearance in Crimea of Russian special forces without insignia in February and March 2014 initiated a sequence of events that resulted in a series of human rights violations.
If modern neo-nationalism is analyzed with the model of fascist nationalism utilized by Hitler, then the successful conduct of foreign policy will inevitably be hampered.
