Russia’s President Vladimir Putin has branded the Ukrainian leadership a “party of war” which would continue fueling conflicts while they stay in power, giving the recent Kerch Strait incident as an example.
This is a party of war and as long as they stay in power, all such tragedies, all this war will go on.
That’s reason number one why the Ukrainian government is not interested in a peaceful resolution of the conflict,” Putin stated.
Second, you can always use war to justify your failures in economy, social policy.
This approach to statecraft by the Ukrainian authorities deeply concerns Russia’s President.
Tensions between Russia and Ukraine have been soaring after the incident in the Kerch Strait.
Last weekend three Ukrainian Navy ships tried to break through the strait without seeking the proper permission from Russia.
Following a tense stand-off and altercation with Russia’s border guard, the vessels were seized and their crews detained over their violation of the country’s border.
While Kiev branded the incident an act of “aggression” on Moscow’s part, Russia believes the whole Kerch affair to be a deliberate “provocation” which allowed Kiev to declare a so-called “partial” martial law ahead of Ukraine’s presidential election.
It appears President Putin has the measure of the Ukrainian Government and what they’re up to.
We saw how they care, They invaded ukraine, killed 20.000 Ukrainians since 2014.
President Putin cares about Ukraine as a neighbour but he knows that it is a failed state.
The Russians invaded Donbass and CRIMEA…………………5200 Russian Army soldiers kiled in Donbass, 20.000 Ukrainians.
The guy is a total loser who doesn’t know what he is talking about and will not accept the truth if it hit him in the mouth -which I hope it does.
Crimean economy is down, hardly light, gas….and drinking water..and no tourims, just the truth.
He’s probably not very well paid for this , but our rulers cannot be too choosy in their choice of trolls.
He’s at least persistent and does provide some contrast, even if it is a deeper shade of shite.
Shows the stupidity of the people of Ukraine if they vote in the ‘Gas Princess’, who the United States wish to install.
A bit harsh on the wretched Ukrainians, who are no more stupid I fear than the inhabitants of most western “democracies”, who continue to vote in governments that make them pay for perpetual war, ris Armageddon and steadily replace the native population with those from Arica and Asia.
Alas most people are easily gulled when they are let down by a corrupt and degenerate elite and given no real choice.
Even when they do vote for ‘change’ – as with Brexit and Trump – they are baulked.
He can’t drain the swamp because as a friend of Epstein he absolutely has to be a swamp creature himself.
And wait for a humanitarian crisis and then intervene to stop the killing.
If the United States didn’t start the regime change in Iraq, Libya and Syria, there would not be so many Refugees seeking safety in Europe.
All the evidence shows United States MEDDLING/regime change in other Nation’s affairs, leaves only failed terrorist States in their place, and still doubles down on failed policies.
Iran is the last target for United States regime change, following the 2001 United States WAR PLANS brought out within weeks of 9/11, to change the regimes of Iraq, Libya, Syria, and at THE END, Iran.
Anyone who doesn’t know how to use the Caps Lock key must be deficient in brain function.
And as long as the United States backs Ukraine, the danger of war will continue to exist.
And Europe is guilty by association…continuously imposing restrictions which end up hurting both sides.
Sorry to say but President Petro Poroshenko thinks he is the reincarnation of Germany’s Adolf Hitler during the 1930’s and his rise to power.
He is doing the same thing Hitler did when he invaded other countries at first.
