These include blaming the West for the crisis, downplaying Russian military involvement, justifying Russian annexation of the Crimea, describing the conﬂict as a “civil war” and minimizing Russian nationalism while exaggerating Ukrainian nationalism.
Richard Sakwa’s Russia Against the West: The Post-Cold War Crisis of World Order and Anna Matveeva’s Through Times of Trouble: Conﬂict in Southeastern Ukraine Explained From Within , using them as a springboard to initiate a wider conversation on the status of contemporary Eurasian studies.
The two books under review would be included within the second of nine categories that these publications are divided into.
American-Ukrainian and Ukrainian-Canadian academic institutions do not traditionally cover politics and international relations, and have largely ignored the Donbas conﬂict and Crimea.
The Ukrainian diaspora proved to be a paper tiger compared to the Croatian which collected huge sums of money and sent thousands of volunteers to the Croatian war of independence in the ﬁrst half of the 1990s.
The overwhelming majority of Western authors writing about the crisis and war have never traveled to Ukraine.
A Ukrainian expert noted, “Many people participate in the discussions about the Donbas.
While many scholars may not wish to travel to the Donbas frontline of the war, this does not excuse the absence of ﬁeldwork research in Kyiv, and Eastern and southern Ukraine.
Barely any of these publications, including both books under review, include interviews with Ukrainian oﬃcials, civil society activists, and soldiers at the central and local levels.
Anna Matveeva is an exception to the above as she traveled to Russian-controlled Donbas enclaves and to Moscow where she conducted many interviews in the course of her ﬁeldwork.
Unlike the majority of scholars writing on the crisis who use primarily secondary sources , her book’s great value is in providing a bottom-up view of the Donbas rebels through interviews with local and Russian actors.
Matveeva’s book would have been greatly improved if her research had been balanced with similar ﬁeldwork in Eastern and Southern Ukraine, including Ukrainian-controlled Donbas, and in Kyiv.
Russian-language media remains prevalent in Ukraine and many publications have Russian and Ukrainian versions.
Nevertheless, few scholars use sources from Ukraine and for Western Russianists, the default is always to use sources from Russia.
In Richard Sakwa’s ﬁrst book on the crisis, his only sources from Ukraine are the English-language Kyiv Post, in contrast to 75 sources from Russia.
That this is a far wider problem than merely scholars of Russia, can be seen in contemporary geographer Gerard Toal who cites Mikhail Gorbachev twice and Poroshenko only once.
Scholars writing about the crisis from the perspective of the two books under review can be understood by analyzing their work through ﬁve themes.
First, blaming the West for the crisis and portraying Russia as a victim.
Fifth, downplaying and ignoring Russian nationalism, and exaggerating Ukrainian nationalism.
Matveeva surprisingly devotes only half a page to the shooting down of MH17 by Russian troops in July 2014 while devoting an entire page to Russian disinformation denying its involvement.
Russian “neo-revisionism” was a response, Sakwa believes, to the spread of American exceptionalism and liberalism, and EU hegemony and the lack of respect accorded to Russia as a great power.
Sakwa traces the sources of the current crisis to the end of the Cold War when the West did not build an “inclusive peace” that included Russia.
The West is the source of the problem with Russia pushing back against Western hegemonic practices and values.
Alexander Solznenitsyn complained about a “degenerate West” during his United States exile in the 1970s and 1980s.
Stephen Hutchings and Vera Tolz write how Eurasianism is a substitute for de-colonization claiming Russia has succeeded in managing ethnic diversity more successfully than the West.
Eurasianism claims Russia’s values are superior to European, rejects Western political models and embraces the Mongol-Tatar-Eurasian heritage.
Ukrainian polls show a high majority believe Russia is seeking to destroy Ukrainian sovereignty.
Both Russian Presidents Borys Yeltsyn and Putin supported hybrid warfare towards the dismembering of Moldova, Georgia, and Ukraine.
Russia believes it can be a great power only by controlling, and the West recognizing its sphere of inﬂuence in Eurasia.
Hence, Putin’s desire for a “grand bargain” with United States presidential candidate Donald Trump which would recognize Russia as an equal to the United States and Russia’s “privileged zone of interests” in Eurasia.
The Russkiy Mir is used to justify an exclusive sphere of inﬂuence beyond the Russian Federation based on culture, values, and language.
The “Russian” presence abroad is where Russia’s sphere of inﬂuence extends, and this includes Ukraine and Belarus as these are not separate peoples but branches of the “Russian” people.
Sakwa and Matveeva seek to downplay Viktor Yanukovych as a friend of Russia thus minimizing Russian pressure upon Ukraine.
This line of argument ignores or minimizes an entire array of evidence of Russian interference in Ukrainian aﬀairs in the decade prior to 2014.
From 2005–2006 up to 2014, Russian intelligence provided paramilitary training to pro-Russian groups , including training the extremist pro-Russian Donetsk Republic which came to power in the November 2014 DNR election with 68.3% of the vote.
Senior Russian citizens were appointed as his personal bodyguard and Minister of Defense, Chairperson of the SBU and commander of Ukrainian naval forces.
Russian leaders were never satisﬁed with Ukrainian presidents because they wanted to see a Belarusian-style dominion in Ukraine.
Indeed, the common misnomer that Russia only had poor relations with Ukraine when it was led by “nationalists” Kravchuk and Yushchenko is wrong.
Russian intelligence trained Donbas and Crimean pro-Russian groups since the Orange Revolution and in Summer 2009, Russian diplomats were expelled for supporting extremist pro-Russian and separatist groups which led to Medvedev’s open letter.
Russian spetsnaz led by Igor “Strelkov” Girkin invaded Ukraine in early April 2014, Russian volunteers who were trained in Russian camps joined the conﬂict and Russian weapons were being brought into Ukraine before Russia’s full invasion on 24 August 2014 – a date deliberately chosen to humiliate Ukraine on its Independence Day.
Ukraine could not have lost so many aircraft and helicopters, and been ultimately defeated at Ilovaysk3 without Russian military assistance.
Following the Minsk 1 agreement, Russia transformed its Donbas proxy groups into a large army with an impressive array of weaponry.
Evidence of Russia’s massive build up is available from a huge array of oﬃcial sources, think tanks and academic studies, including within Ukraine.
United States Ambassador Kurt Volker, Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations, said, Russia consistently blocks expansion of OSCE border mission and its forces prevent SMM from reliably monitoring the border as it sends troops, arms, and supplies into Ukraine; all while claiming it’s an ‘internal’ conﬂict and spouting disingenuous arguments about Minsk agreements.
The DNR 1st Corps and LNR 2nd Corps has a combined 35,000-strong army which is bigger than half of NATO’s 29 members and could only have been created with Russia’s active military assistance.
It cannot be true, as Sakwa writes, that Russia sought to extricate itself from the Donbas at the same time as it built up a huge army and military arsenal controlled by GRU oﬃcers and 5,000 Russian occupation troops.
Sakwa adds to this denial of Russia’s military support to Donbas proxies by downplaying Russian hacking in the 2016 United States elections and Russia’s chemical weapons attack in Britain on former GRU oﬃcer Sergei Skripal.
There is no better way to view the collapse of Russian soft power than to analyze polling data of Ukrainian attitudes to Russian leaders to see how a perspective commonly found only in western Ukraine prior to 2014 has since become pan-national.
In 2012, 53% of Ukrainians held a positive view of Putin which by 2016 had collapsed to 10.
Even among the dwindling supporters of Ukraine joining the Eurasian Economic Union, 67% held negative views of Russian leaders; in contrast, among those supporting EU membership, 96% were negative.
Joanna Szostek concluded that Russia needs legitimacy, “that comes from mass popular acquiescence to the Russian leadership.
Widespread opposition to Ukraine adopting the Russian model of development is an outgrowth of Russia associated with “aggression” , “cruelty” , and “dictatorship” .7 Re-identiﬁcation of Ukrainians had been taking place slowly up to 2013 and although this has dramatically increased, current research, and polling data of changes in Ukrainian identity is often ignored by scholars writing on the crisis.
In 1996, 50% of Ukrainians supported elevating Russian to an oﬃcial language which has declined to 16.
The 2012 language law making Russian an oﬃcial language, which by-passed changing the constitution and was criticized by the Council of Europe, has therefore little public support.
Ethnic Russians made up 17% of Ukraine’s population in the 2001 Ukrainian census, itself a decline from 22 in the 1989 Soviet census.
The share of the population identifying itself as Ukrainians has increased to 92% making Ukraine the fourth most nationally homogenous country in Europe.
Although this problem is decreasing, scholars continue to use outdated 1990s stereotypes about a heavily regionally divided Ukraine based on the outcome of the 1994 and 2004 presidential elections.
Volodymyr Kulyk’s research found “sweeping re-identiﬁcation in favor of Ukrainian” identity since 2014.
Although this has not immediately translated into growing numbers of Ukrainian speakers, it has made them less demeaning towards the Ukrainian language and more amenable to learning Ukrainian.
Bilingualism denoted a shift from Ukrainian to Russian-speaking in the USSR and today that process is reversing with growing numbers of Russian-speakers becoming bilingually Russian and Ukrainian – especially at home.
Describing Ukrainian as one’s “native language” in a census and opinion poll may not necessarily reﬂect one’s language use, but it has been shown to reﬂect a sentiment to the language.
Importantly, these changes lead to a growing number of Russian speakers giving Ukrainian as their native language, itself an indicator where their loyalties lie in the conﬂict.
Scholars writing from the perspective of “Russia the Victim” are failing to consider these important changes in identity brought on by Russia’s military aggression that have led to the demise of a “pro-Russian east” (Zhurzhenko 2015) and the growth of Ukrainian identity in Ukrainian government-controlled Donbas.
Predictions by Western scholars writing in the 1990s of the rise of a Russian-speaking group identity in Ukraine have not happened; instead, Russian-speakers have evolved from Soviets into Ukrainians.
Kulyk adds that a “post-imperial Russian ‘superminority’ in Ukraine has ceased to exist” while Zhurzhenko concludes that Ukraine’s “pro-Russian east” has shrunk to the Donbas.
Justifying Russia’s annexation of the Crimea Surprisingly, a large body of Western scholars, particularly historians of Russia, view the Crimea as historically Russian.
The “normality” of the Crimea returning to its “natural home” leads Sakwa , Neil Kent , Kaspar de Ploeg and other scholars to take at face value the March 2014 referendum results.
Kent writes that the “reunion” of Crimea and Russia returned the peninsula to its natural home.
It would seem that Western historians of Russia not only do not interact with Western historians of Ukraine Orest Subtelny , Paul R Magocsi , and Serhii Plokhy , they also do not interact with their counterparts teaching the history of North America and Australia, and are not up to speed in the ﬁeld of post-colonialism.
One could also include the Greeks as a “First Nation” who had lived in the Crimea and the northern Black Sea coast for over a thousand years, of whom 50,000 were deported from the region in three successive waves in 1942, 1944, and 1949.
Importantly, Ukrainian historiography does not claim “First Nation” status for Ukrainians in the Crimea while Russian and surprisingly Western histories of Russia does lay claim to the status of “First Nation” for Russians.
Presenting Crimea’s annexation as a “return to normality” is undertaken by taking sociological data out of context to prove there was always majority support for separatism.
In writing the Crimea “never reconciled itself with its place in an independent Ukraine” Der Pijl aims to prove the Crimea eagerly awaited its “liberation” and return to Russia in 2014 Support for separatism in the Crimea, as well as in the Donbas, has never been higher than a third of the population, although higher than elsewhere in Eastern and Southern Ukraine.
Kharkiv, which had the second highest support after the Crimea and Donbas, had 16% support for separatism.
Nevertheless, two-thirds of the Donbas wished to remain in Ukraine showing that separatism was not backed by a majority of the population anywhere in Ukraine.
In the Donbas there were the same confused nuances about identity as found by the Razumkov Center in the Crimea.
Elise Giuliano concluded that a majority of Russians, Ukrainians, and Russian-Ukrainians in the Donbas did not therefore support separatism.
A similar lack of majority support is found in other areas of Eastern and Southern Ukraine.
The takeover of oﬃcial buildings was supported by only 24, 18, and 10% respectively in Luhansk, Donetsk, and Kharkiv.
Without direct Russian support transforming protests into armed rebellion, pro-Russian separatists could not have taken power and created the DNR and LNR Russian proxy states.
The 2014 Novorossiya project and 2015 threat of Russia creating a land bridge from the Russian border east of Mariupol to Odesa, would have been impossible because of miniscule support in Kherson and Mykolyiv supporting the intervention of Russian troops.
Sakwa and Matveeva do not provide answers as to why the Novorossiya project was an abysmal failure, presumably because to delve into this matter would undermine their “monist” versus “pluralism” framework.
With such low support, Russian forces in the Donbas could be classiﬁed as occupation troops because they do not have popular local consent to be present in this territory.
The conﬂict as a “civil war” Sakwa and Matveeva describe the conﬂict as a “civil war” and a leaderless, bottom-up revolt with local roots.
Describing the Donbas conﬂict as a “civil war” is closely correlated to three factors.
Second, claims that Russian speakers were oppressed or threatened with Ukrainianization.
All three claims are either not backed up by evidence or exaggerated by not placing the subject within a comparative context.
For example, Ukraine is a country where 92% identify themselves as ethnic Ukrainian making it more nationally homogenous than the Russian Federation, Canada, UK, Italy, Spain, Belgium, Bulgaria, Romania, and Slovakia which all have regional and separatist threats.
France, the quintessential centralized nation-state, granted autonomy to Corsica after a violent rebellion.
To emphasize a bottom-up revolt, Matveeva writes the Donbas elite were not interested in rebellion.
Nevertheless, these elites did not support Kyiv either and their neutrality provided a vacuum and window of opportunity for separatists and their Russian backers to step into.
Between January and April, oligarch Rinat Akhmetov was playing both sides and only after the Donbas had slipped out from his control, did he shift to a pro-Ukrainian position.
If Akhmetov had mobilized workers and coalminers against the rebels they would have been probably defeated.
In Mariupol in May 2014, Akhmetov brought his workers on the streets and they, together with the Azov battalion, defeated pro-Russian proxies.
It is wrong to give credence to rebel claims Mariupol was within their hands as there was limited local support; one reason being because the local Greek minority did not harbor fond memories after three waves of deportations by Joseph Stalin's USSR.11 In Kharkiv, Mayor Hennadiy Kernes shifted to a pro-Ukrainian position after discussions with Dnipropetrovsk oligarch Ihor Kolomoysky and following the assassination attempt upon him in late April 2014.
The Crimea and Donbas are diﬀerent in that Ukrainians were willing to ﬁght for the Donbas but not for the Crimea, which undermines the exaggerated view of the inﬂuence of Ukrainian nationalism.
Civilization, rather than language, is a better marker of loyalty in the Russian-Ukrainian war.
Nevertheless, Matveeva’s discussion of civilization is confusing as she wrongly deﬁnes it in civic terms as corresponding to Rossiyskie citizens of the Russian Federation.
The Russkiy Mir is in fact a claim to an alleged common Russkiy ethno-cultural, religious and historical identity of the three eastern Slavs – and therefore ethno-cultural and not civic.
Russia is a “state-civilization” and Russia is re-collecting “Russian” lands that are part of the Russkiy Mir.
In both cases, they are saying Ukraine is a “Russian land” and Ukrainians are a branch of the “Russian” people.
This historical framework of Russian statehood beginning in Kievan Russia and moving to Vladimir-Suzdal, Muscovy, Russian Empire, USSR and Russian Federation is commonly found in Western histories of Russia and mirroring that used in contemporary Russia.
Matveeva does not take her discussion of civilization to its logical conclusion of why Ukrainians were divided in their attitudes to the conﬂict.
The ﬁrst division was over whether their homeland was the USSR, with the Russkiy Mir as its contemporary incarnation, or Ukraine.
The second division is over whether they look with nostalgia to the Soviet past or with hope to a European future.
The majority of Ukraine’s Russian speakers have supported Kyiv in the crisis, 60% of Ukrainian troops are Russian speakers and the highest proportion of casualties of Ukrainian security forces are from Russian-speaking Eastern and Southern Ukraine .13 Scholars writing from the perspective of “Russia the Victim” ﬁnd it diﬃcult to bring in Russianspeaking soldiers playing a prominent role in ﬁghting for Ukraine as this completely undermines the “monist” versus “pluralism” myth.
An important factor undermining claims of a “civil war” is the low level of importance Ukrainians ascribe to language issues.
In fact, grievances over alleged discrimination against Russian speakers has always been low.
Exaggerated concern about threats to Russian speakers do not tally with only two percent of Ukrainians feeling concerned about the protection of the Russian language in Ukraine.
Matveeva follows Sakwa and other scholars in applying a nationalistic “monism” versus Eastern Ukrainian “pluralism” mythical framework to the conﬂict.
Describing pro-Russian proxies in the DNR-LNR and occupation forces in the Crimea as “pluralists” has no basis in facts on the ground and ignores extensive evidence from scholarly work and human rights organizations.
First, nearly two-thirds of Ukrainian troops ﬁghting in the Donbas are Russian speakers17 and the highest number of casualties of security forces are from Eastern and Southern Ukraine.
Second, the largest church in Ukraine until the creation of the autocephalous Orthodox Church of Ukraine in January 2019 was the Russian Orthodox while Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox, Catholic, and Protestant Churches are banned or severely repressed in the DNR-LNR and Crimea.
Ukraine’s Jews, who are primarily Russian-speaking, supported the Euromaidan and support Ukraine’s side in the war with Russia.
Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian minorities in the Crimea and DNR-LNR are repressed, their institutions are closed down and many of their leaders have been forced to ﬂee to Ukraine, imprisoned or exiled.
Seventy Ukrainian political prisoners are imprisoned in Russia on trumpedup charges, including ethnic Russian ﬁlmmaker Oleg Sentsov from the Crimea who is close to death after a hunger strike.
Russiﬁcation has been re-introduced after the closing down of Ukrainian language schools.
Ukrainian history writing (Subtelny 2009; Magocsi 2010; Plokhy 2015) has never denied the existence of a Russian people whereas Russian history routinely deny the existence of Ukrainians.
Matveeva over-focuses on Ukrainian portrayals of the “Other” without any commiserate discussion of the far more extensive Russian and Donbas rebel “Othering” of Ukrainians.
Nationality policies in the DNR-LNR and Crimea drawing on decades of Ukrainophobia and Tatarophobia can be traced back to the 1930s and 1940s.
Sakwa and Matveeva could analyze extensive examples of Russian chauvinism and Tatarophobia in Krymskaya Pravda, Crimea’s most popular newspaper.
Hate language against Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars is propagated by the Crimean and DNR-LNR authorities and the language of enmity is unprecedented and aggressive.
Yevhen Mahda lists 21 books published in Russia from 2007–2014 which disparaged Ukraine and Ukrainians and warned of a pending war.
An April 2018 Levada Center poll found Ukraine to be second only to the United States in being perceived by Russians as a threat to Russia.
The ﬁrst claim is not reﬂected in the weak importance of language issues discussed earlier while the second claim is not reﬂected in oﬃcial policies.
In the Crimea, the number of Tatar schools has been reduced from 16 to 7 while all Ukrainian schools have been closed22; Ukraine’s government has not retaliated by closing down Russian-language schools.
If scholars were to look in any media kiosk in Ukraine, they would ﬁnd many more Russian-language than Ukrainian-language newspapers and magazines.
Freedom House found no “national intolerance” in Ukraine’s media environment and recorded improvement in media freedoms since 2014.
Ukraine’s most popular television channel Inter has always broadcast primarily in Russian, including under Presidents Yushchenko and Poroshenko, and, as discussed earlier, purposefully gave free air time to ethnic nationalists.
Matveeva’s discussion of de-communization does not provide an understanding of what lies behind the processes.
De-Naziﬁcation was central to Germany’s democratization and Europeanization and de-Communization could be viewed in the same way in Ukraine.
One of the four laws honor Ukrainian nationalist partisans in the 1940s but at the same time exclude any military formations under Nazi control.
One of the laws provides the freest access to Soviet secret police archives anywhere in the former USSR outside the three Baltic states.
The above could be contrasted with Russia with its GPW as a state-sanctioned religion, a cult of Stalin, downplaying of Soviet crimes against humanity, and lack of access to archives.
Russian policies of re-Sovietization and a cult of Stalin have been exported to the DNR-LNR and Crimea.
Matveeva takes at face value the symbols that the Donbas rebels and Russian supporters are promoting when she writes that the Russian Orthodox Church stands at the center of their identity.
The majority of ROC (until 2018 registered as the Ukrainian Orthodox Church) parishes are in Western and Central Ukraine with the Donbas having far fewer Orthodox parishes – as seen in the few Churches found in villages.
Four Protestant leaders were murdered by Russian occupation forces in Slovyansk.
Sakwa writes “the genie of Russian nationalism was ﬁrmly back in the bottle” and distances Putin the pragmatist from Russian nationalists.
Pål Kolstø and Laruelle write that the nationalist rhetoric of 2014 was novel and subsequently declined.
Hale believes Putin was only a nationalist in 2014, not prior to the annexation of the Crimea or since 2015.
Putin was not dependent upon Russian nationalism “and it is debatable whether the word is even applicable to him,” Sakwa writes.
Such classiﬁcations are only applied by these scholars to Russian political elites but never to Ukrainians.
Matveeva’s interviews with leaders of the Russian Spring in the Donbas are an original contribution to the scholarly literature.
At the same time, she sidesteps their political aﬃliations because to do so would show that Russian neo-Nazi’s and other similar extremists led the Donbas Russian Spring.
Alexander Borodai and Alexander Prokhanov edited the fascist, Stalinist and imperialist newspaper Zavtra , which began as Den in 1990.
Borodai is quoted by Matveeva as saying Russian leaders provided the “organizational, ideological” support to the Russian Spring.
Gubarev’s and Borodai’s membership of the neo-Nazi RNE is ignored and instead they are described as “patriots” and “conservatives” while Maveeva denies that Borodai is an ethnic nationalist.
Sakwa and Matveeva never describe any Russian political leaders a “nationalists” or “neo-Nazis;” these terms are reserved for Ukrainians.
In the Crimea, Sergei Aksyonov, who was installed by Russian occupation forces as Crimean Prime Minister, was the leader of the extreme right-wing nationalist Russian Unity party.
Similar to other Russian nationalists and Cossack groups in a region which has always had high levels of xenophobia, Aksyonov’s political party espoused an extreme form of Russian chauvinism toward Tatar and Ukrainian minorities.
Sakwa undertakes academic somersaults to downplay Russia’s support for populist-nationalists and neo-Nazi’s in Europe.
Russian support for fascists, neo-Nazis, Trotskyists, Stalinists, and racists in Europe and the United States is ignored as is the hundreds of European populist nationalists and neo-Nazis who have ﬂocked to join pro-Russian rebels.
Downplaying nationalism in Russia is coupled with an exaggeration of nationalism in Ukraine.
This is unlike Putin who enjoys reading works by Ivan Ilyin, a White émigré and fascist who denied the existence of Ukrainians.
Bandera continues to be buried in Munich, Germany while Ilyin’s remains were brought back by the Russian government and re-buried in Russia.
Timothy Snyder writes that Ilyin was integrated into Putin’s ideology during his re-election campaign in 2012 and Ilyin’s chauvinistic views have guided Putin’s policies towards Ukraine.
Such claims depict Ukraine as the negative “Other” by purposefully ignoring many examples of populist nationalists in European countries; for example, Hungarian Prime Minister, Viktor Orban and using a Soviet deﬁnition of ‘nationalism’ to include anybody who does not desire to live in the Russkiy Mir.
If Ukrainian nationalists are understood in the same way as populist-nationalists in Europe, they are unpopular among voters as seen by their failure to be elected in October 2014.
Ukraine’s far-right has only won seats in one of seven elections in 2012.
If “Ukrainian nationalists” are understood in the Soviet and contemporary Russian sense as a broader group opposed to Soviet, Russian and Eurasian values and believing their country to be part of Europe, which is how they are analyzed by Sakwa , Matveeva and many other scholars, they represent a larger group.
This though, is a product of a quarter of a century of evolutionary nation-building and four years of rapid identity change brought on by Russian military aggression.
As discussed earlier, diﬀerent Ukrainian attitudes to Russian citizens and Russian leaders exhibit patriotism – not ethnic nationalism.
To understand how wrong scholars are exaggerating the inﬂuence of Ukrainian nationalism, one should compare Ukrainian attitudes to Russian leaders with those to Russian citizens.
Negative Ukrainian attitudes to Russian citizens is far lower at 22.4%, up slightly from 16.6.
Downplaying Russian and exaggerating Ukrainian nationalism leads to the apportioning of blame on Kyiv for the violent conﬂict.
President Poroshenko is blamed for unleashing a war after he was elected in May 2014 rather than seeking compromise.
In such an analysis, Putin presumably shares no, or little, responsibility.
Sakwa and Matveeva both use derogatory terms for Ukrainian nationalists.
Matveeva wrongly writes Nazi symbols were commonplace on the Euromaidan when in fact only one then small group, the Social National Assembly/Patriot Ukraine who transformed into the National Corps party, used them.
Svoboda party and Pravyy Sektor , two more mainstream nationalist parties, have never used Nazi symbols.
All of these nationalist political parties are electorally unpopular because patriotism – not ethnic nationalism – is dominant in Ukraine.
When Western scholars, such as Sakwa and Matveeva , use the Soviet and contemporary Russian non-political science deﬁnition of “nationalism” they will see it as dominating post-Euromaidan Ukraine where Russia is rejected.
If “nationalism” is deﬁned in the political science understanding of that term it is a weak phenomenon in Ukraine as reﬂected in one of the weakest electoral results of nationalist parties anywhere in Europe.
Conclusion This review article has discussed how Western scholars of the former USSR need to get up to speed with the rapid changes taking place in Ukrainian– Russian relations, within Ukraine and in Ukrainian identity.
It is time for Western historians of Russia to write histories of the nation-state in the manner of histories of France, Britain and Italy – and not as is common until now, of the Russian Empire masquerading as the Russian state.
Historians of Russia should modernize their approach to the Crimea so that it is integrated with historical writing about other postcolonial countries.
Matveeva is unfortunately right not to be optimistic about an end to the Donbas conﬂict.
Federalism has always had minimal popular support, including in the Donbas.
But, the main barrier to peace is Russia’s inability to recognize Ukrainian sovereignty and Ukrainians as a separate people.
And it is this fundamental question that continues to elude most scholars writing on the crisis and war, including in the two books under review.
Matveeva’s ﬁgure of thousands of Ukrainian dead at Ilovaysk is exaggerated.
Interviews conducted in April 2015 in Mariupol with Mariya Podybaylo and Vadym Dzhuvaha of the Novyy Mariupol NGO and Olena Mokrynchuk, Soldatska Pochta NGO in Volnovakha.
A Russian-speaking Ukrainian soldier says that he has served tours in Iraq and Afghanistan and he could not believe that something similar could happen to Ukraine.
He is disinterested in politics and nationalist movements and he just wants to defend his home and his family from foreign aggressors.
Ukraine may have its problems, but it is the responsibility of Ukrainians to resolve them – not Putin.
The soldier believes if Putin and Chechen President Ramzan Kadyrov would take over Ukraine, his children would not have a decent life or any future, which is why he is ﬁghting for his children and their future.
The law “On the legal status and honouring of the memory of ﬁghters for independence of Ukraine in the 20th century” lists the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists and Ukrainian Insurgent Army alongside many other organizations as ﬁghters for Ukrainian independence.
Changes in the Attitudes of Ukrainians during the War in the Donbas, edited by O Haran and M Yakovlyev.
