When in 2014 Russia occupied the Crimean Peninsula, Ukraine informed the UNSD about it being impossible to provide statistical data on the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol as the result of annexation of those Ukrainian territories by the Russian Federation.
However, Ukraine has not sent any similar notice to the UNSD in relation to the territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions occupied by Russia.
This can be accounted for primarily by the fact that Russia did not dare include these territories to its composition, the way it had done with the Crimea, and secondly – by the conclusion of the Minsk agreements that confirmed that the territories should go back to Ukraine's control.
Therefore, the State Statistics Service of Ukraine continues to take into account the population of the occupied territories of the two eastern regions in its assessment of the Ukrainian population.
The SSSU provides the UNSD with those figures and makes them public on its site and in its printed editions.
In particular, in its annual statistics collections 'The Current Size of Ukraine's Population' the SSSU provides information as of January 1 for each region as well as for each city of regional importance and each district with the breakdown into urban and rural population.
Since the border between the occupied territories and the territory under Ukraine's control is known, using those collections of the SSSU, official population on the occupied territories can be counted, and it may be studied how it changed in the period from January 1, 2014 to January 1, 2017.
According to the above data, as of January 1, 2014 the population of Donetsk and Luhansk regions was 6,583 thousand persons, including 3,894 thousand, or 59.15% of the overall number, – in the inhabited settlements which are now under occupation.
Urban population of the two regions as of the above date made up 5,885 thousand persons, of which 3,696 thousand, or 62.8%, were in the territory which is under occupation now.
Thus, the occupationists managed to take the territory in which only 5.1% of residents lived in rural areas.
In this industrial area there are both residential areas, areas of mining and industrial enterprises and large areas of industrial waste polluting air and subsoil waters.
From the economic point of view, this territory is depressive, from the environmental point of view it is a total environmental disaster area, and from the demographic point of view it is a quick population extinction zone.
According to the data of the SSSU, in 2013, that is in the last year before the Russian invasion, the total birth rate in Donetsk and Luhansk regions was respectively 9. and 9. and was significantly lower than the general Ukrainian rate of 11.1.
At the same time, the overall death rate in both regions made up 15. , and was much higher than the average Ukrainian rate of 14.6.
Also, there was a noticeable migration outflow of residents from both regions.
The integral consequences of the demographic crisis in Donetsk and Luhansk regions can be traced in the following comparison.
It means that in Donetsk and Luhansk regions the population was shrinking more than twice as fast as in other Ukrainian regions.
But the data refers to the whole territory of Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
After the Russian invasion, the demographic trends in Donbas have been changing drastically.
Many people had grounds to be afraid for their lives since they had took a clearly pro-Ukrainian standpoint.
For young families the main motif was a wish not to put their children at risk.
Also, many men wanted to avoid compulsory call-up to the occupation army.
Besides that, state institutions were evacuated from the occupied Donetsk and Luhansk, and many of their staff members moved with them to Mariupol, Kramatorsk, Artemivsk , Severodonetsk.
Also, higher educational establishments were evacuated , and many students moved to their new places of studies.
Among those who left the occupied territories there prevailed young people and middle-aged people , while the share of people of pre-pension and elderly age was comparatively low.
A typical phenomenon was that adult children moved to the territory controlled by Ukraine, while their parents-pensioners stayed there not to leave their apartment unattended.
For this category of prospective students the procedure of enrolment was specifically simplified, and passport, certificate of complete general secondary education, certificate of external independent appraisal were not mandatory.
All the above trends have generally resulted in a considerable distortion of the demographic structure of the population in the occupied territories.
Prior the war it had already been characterized by a lower share of young generations than on average in Ukraine, and now the share has reduced even more, and the share of pensioners has increased.
It's clear that reduction of the share of young people results, in its turn, in the fall of the birth rate.
Besides, the curfew makes life more complicated for those in love, and young families normally don't dare have children in the conditions of uncertain nearest future.
That is why until the territories are under occupation, the share of young generations in the structure of the population that remains there will keep on shrinking.
And this, in its turn, will result in further increase of the general death rate factor.
Thus, Russian occupation has pushed local residents into the demographic spiral of extinction and degeneracy.
According to the above data provided by the SSSU, the population in the territories of Donbas that are under occupation reduced by 45 thousand persons over 2014, by 21 thousand persons over 2015, and only by 5 thousand persons in 2016.
In the period between population censuses changes in the population in each inhabited settlement are calculated on the basis of the data provided by state bodies registering people at their place of residence.
Every month the estimated number is adjusted through adding the number of births and those who got registered and deducting the number of deceased and those who were struck off the register.
Over almost the whole 2014 the respective authorities still functioned in the whole territory of Donetsk and Luhansk regions and transmitted collected information to Kyiv.
But gradually those bodies stopped functioning in the towns and districts with the occupation regime.
In particular, territorial bodies of the SSSU – the Main Administrations of Statistics in Donetsk and Luhansk regions – moved, respectively, to Artemivsk and Severodonetsk on December 1, 2014.
Ukrainian authorities were replaced by self-proclaimed 'authorities' in recording births, deaths and residence, without Ukraine's authorization to that.
The SSSU neither gets reports from them nor takes into account the information they make public.
The data of the State Statistics Service, even if it includes some data on the occupied territories, it is only the data coming from Ukrainian authorities in the territory under Ukraine's control.
In particular, this could be the data about the change of permanent residence.
The largest migration flow from the occupied territories could be traced in the last months of 2014 and the first half of 2015.
Due to that, information on migration, starting with April 2016, has been developed by the State Statistics Service on the basis of available administrative data arriving from executive bodies of city, town, urban village, village councils and village heads.
Still, besides the migration outflow of residents from the occupied territories, there also could be traced some migration inflow there.
Even a larger share of migration inflow was represented by the citizens of the RF who came to the occupied territories within the occupation army, either as mercenaries, or to have service in the occupation administration, or for carrying out some other criminal activity.
Army general Viktor Muzhenko, the Head of the General Staff – Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, announced this figure in the Liga.net interview published on August 8, 2017.
The head of the General Staff stressed that 'in Donbas there are no illegal military groups, these are well-structured military organisms.
These are the 1st and 2nd Army Corps, bearing all the signs of regular troops.
Most important is the fact that they are managed from the centre which is located in Russia.
The commanding commissioned staff in both corps were regular Russian service men.
Muzhenko reminded that Ukrainian military had take many Russian service men captive and noted the fact confirmed that there were regular members of the RF's armed forces in Donbas.
Besides that, the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe works in Ukraine.
The problem of migration flow from the RF is topical, but in any case of importance is the question how many Ukrainian citizens still remain in the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
As it has already been stated, official statistics of the SSSU includes only a small portion of the changes the population of the occupied territories has undergone.
The data of the latest collection 'The Current Size of Ukraine's Population' shows that as of January 1, 2017 in the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions there resided 3,823 thousand people.
However, this number is obviously inflated, which fact is recognized by the State Statistics Service itself.
The occupation authorities have established activity of statistical bodies in Donetsk since February 2015 and in Luhansk since August 2015.
They have published the data about the dynamics in the population size starting with January 1, 2015.
The occupation statistics shows that as of January 1, 2017 in the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions there resided 3,803 thousand persons, as of August 1, 2017 – 3,785 thousands.
This is 38 thousands less than according to the Ukrainian statistics, however even this figure is also obviously inflated.
The SSSU takes into account only the events recorded by the Ukrainian bodies , while the occupation statistics includes only the events recorded by the occupation bodies.
Comparison of Ukrainian and occupation statistics is provided in the table.
At that time in the territories of Donbas that are now under occupation there resided 3,894 thousand persons.
Over three years the SSSU estimated reduction of population in those territories as amounting to 71 thousand persons.
And occupation statistics for two years and seven months found population reduction in those territories by 86 thousand persons.
Since both of those figures – 71 thousands and 86 thousands – take into account the data received from absolutely different sources and about absolutely different events, the laws of logic suggest that the indices should just be added up.
That figure may be considered top assessment of the real number of Ukrainian population in the occupied territories of Donbas.
According to the occupation authorities,data during 2015 in the occupied part of Donetsk region 9,162 children were born, during 2016 – 11,771, during January-July 2017 – 6,852.
The general birth rate factor made up respectively 3. in 2015, 5. in 2016 and again 5. in 2017.
It means that if by the end of 2017 the same birth rate is maintained as the one traced over the first seven months, the overall figure for the year will be five of newly born children per one thousand of the current residents.
And after the intervention this factor in the occupied part of Donetsk region makes up on average 4. over the three years, which means that occupation has caused birth rate drop more than twice.
One cannot doubt that the occupation authorities are interested in showing improvement in the demographic situation and, therefore, try to reflect in their statistical reports all the children born.
And nobody normally wants to provide false overestimation of the birth rate, since that is a dangerous thing for all those involved in such a fraud.
If the child is not shown, suspicions may arise of murder or at least some fraud.
Everybody understands that the authorities may change , and therefore does not want to take the risk.
Besides that, in order to considerably raise the birth rate factor – at least by one, let us say, from 5. to 6.0, – one needs to distort information about the birth of a whole hundred of children per each hundred of thousands of residents annually.
Certainly, that does not mean that birth rate figures are absolutely reliable and do not contain any false data.
But judging by the fact that the factor published remains very low, systemic and large-scale falsifications in statistical reporting about the birth rate in the occupied territories seem to be of low probability.
At the same time, great doubts arise as to the fact that the occupation authorities record and take into account all the deceased.
The average over the three years is 14.2, which is even below the pre-war level.
It is clear that the occupation authorities are interested in underestimating the death rate among residents, in particular, concealing the cases of murders of the residents in the occupied territories by occupationists and collaborators.
Also, the occupation authorities strive to conceal the number of occupationists who perished.
The Decree of the President of the RF Putin as of November 30, 2015 includes the data about the losses in the military staff to state secrets.
Site gruz200.zzz.com.ua has published the list of 3,817 perished and missing Russian service men and mercenaries as of September 1, 2017.
Combat actions were most intensive starting with August 2014 up till February 2015.
But even after that the level of losses among occupationists remains rather high.
Still, though the occupation statistics provides an obviously underestimated death rate factor, the natural growth factor for the residents of the occupied part of Donetsk region appears to be lower than anywhere else not only in Ukraine but in the world as well.
The occupation authorities don't provide any data on the birth rate and death rate in the occupied part of Luhansk region.
But the number of those coming and those leaving is not mentioned, there is no data breakdown by the geographical directions of migration flows.
As far as the occupied part of Luhansk region is concerned, the occupation statistics does not provide any information on the migration growth at all, the same as about the natural population growth.
In April 2017 the official spokesman of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Russia Maria Zakharova stated, referring to the data of the Federal Migration Service of the Russian Federation, as of March 16, 2017, that in the territory of the RF there are 2. mln.
The FMS of the RF stated this data about a million of refugees also in summer 2015, but from all over Ukraine, and not only from Donbas.
According to Tuka, the study was conducted by the organizations which analyzed the increase of the load on educational institutions, maternity houses, etc. in the place of registration of displaced persons, as well as changes in the statistics of death rate and other indicators there.
On September 4, 2017 the Ministry of Social Policy informed that, according to the data of structural units of residents social security of regional and Kyiv city state administrations, 1,592 thousand persons displaced from Donbas and Crimea got registered . 20 thousands of them were Crimean residents.
However, those figures run counter to the data provided by the State Statistics Service, according to which the population in the territory of Donetsk and Luhansk regions under Ukraine's control over 2014–16 did not only grow, but vice versa shrank by 73 thousand persons.
If we take 3,894 thousand persons in the now-occupied territories of Donbas as of January 1, 2014, deduct 1,572 thousand persons displaced from Donbas , mentioned by the Ministry of Social Policy of Ukraine, and the million of refugees to the RF Zakharova talks about, only 1,322 thousand persons are left, which is an unrealistically small figure.
Then we get 2,668 thousands, which may be considered the lowest assessment of the real number of Ukrainian residents in the occupied territories of Donbas.
Most probably, among those who have gone to Russia, a considerable part is made up by the residents of the part of Donbas which is now controlled by Ukraine, as well as actors of the Yanukovych regime, participants of separatist riots in Kharkiv, Odesa, etc., who fled in the threat of imprisonment.
For a more reliable assessment the mean of the above upper estimate and the lower estimate should be taken, that is 3,203 thousands, or the rounded figure of 3. mln. persons.
Taking into account the above estimates, one may provide characteristics of the age composition of the residents of the occupied territories of Donbas.
Donetsk, Makiyivka, Horlivka in Donetsk region and Luhansk and Alchevsk in Luhansk region.
Over 2014–17 in the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions as the result of migration outflow of young people and families with children as well as the birth rate fall the share of children and young people under 20 reduced considerably.
Judging by the available data, it may be stated that it dropped to 10% or even less, which means that now it is more than twice smaller than in the peaceful regions of Ukraine.
Discussing the demographic prospects for the occupied territories of the east of Ukraine, one should take into account new threats posed for the health of local residents, resulting from the Russian occupation.
They are gradually being strengthened and may have long-term negative consequences.
One of such threats is rapid deterioration of the public health system.
Most doctors of both state, municipal and private health care institutions have left for the territory under Ukraine's control.
In particular, Donetsk social media users inform that the city is left with few dentists.
Quite often doctors have to hand their businesses over to the representatives of the occupation authorities for a song and to leave their native city.
Now medical institutions provide service primarily or exclusively for the occupation army.
And the supplies of drugs and medicines for farmacies have deteriorated significantly, and drugs have become more expensive.
In their turn, doctors who remain in the occupied territories have increased the cost of their services many times.
And local residents cannot do anything about that since now there is almost no competition in health care.
Due to such a state of affairs one may expect further rise in the death rate among the residents of the occupied territories of Donbas.
This year, after the so-called nationalization of companies by the occupation authorities, two more negative trends have appeared.
The first is the fall in the overall standard of living due to closure of companies.
More people are incapable of providing themselves with good nutrition, the necessary medicines and medical services.
Secondly, the environmental situation is becoming worse, it being absolutely bad even before the war.
A special threat is posed by the expected flooding of mine 'Yunkom' in the town of Bunge of Yenakiyevo town council, where in 1979 an underground explosion was arranged for the sake of reducing tension in the mountainous area.
The risk of the mine flooding became apparent in June 2017, and it may lead to radioactive contamination of underground waters.
The Russian occupation of parts of Donetsk and Lugansk regions has led to a sharp deterioration of the demographic situation throughout the territories, especially in the occupied cities and districts.
Migration outflow of population took place on either side of the front line.
But besides, people left their homes in the occupied cities and regions because of the loss of work or business and even because of the lack of good prospects for themselves.
For more than two years, these problems, and not hostilities, have been the main reasons for migration outside the occupied territories.
In 2017, after the «nationalization» of enterprises owned by Ukrainian companies in the occupied territories, the migratory outflow from these territories increased.
In fact, the Ukrainian economy's inability to absorb a large quantity of new labor force is its only restrain now.
Youth leaves the occupied territories most actively, for young people are normally highly mobile searching the better prospects.
The birth rate drop in the occupied part of Donetsk region is quite indicative of this trend.
According to occupational statistics, the fertility rate in 2016 equated 5. per 1,000 people.
Meanwhile, according to the Ukrainian State Statistics Service, the figure was as twice as high, 10. per 1,000 people.
These population age composition deformations inevitably result in mortality rise, since among the elderly, it is always much higher than among younger generations.
Moreover, death rate in the occupied territories rises due to the terror conducted by the occupation authorities, sharp healthcare deterioration, and lack of medicines.
In 2017, it was accompanied by local population rapid living standards decline because of mass closure of «nationalized» enterprises and, at the same time, worsening environmental conditions caused by mines flooding.
The Yunkom mine flooding that began on June 30, 2017, is especially dangerous.
In 1979, a nuclear device was set off in the mine located near Enakievo to reduce tension within the bedrocks.
The mine flooding can cause groundwater radioactive contamination, and it is fraught with peril for Enakievo and its vicinities.
According to invaders' statistics, the occupied part of Donetsk Oblast mortality rate was 15 per 1.000 people in 2016.
However, even with mortality rate that clearly understated, in 2016, the natural population growth ratio in the occupied parts of Donetsk Oblast reached almost 10 per 1.000 inhabitants.
According to UN statistics, there is no country on the globe with a ratio that bad.
The real mortality rate in the occupied territories may exceed 20 per 1.000.
Consequently, the natural population growth rate may be 15 per 1000 inhabitants or even higher.
Both Ukraine and Russia will have to consider the circumstances while designing Donbass future.
The Kremlin is scarcely going to increase spending to maintain the captured territories and locals, facing growing number of pensioners among them.
But even in Crimea, ethnic Russians migrating from Russia prefer settling along the subtropical Southern coast, neither northern mountains nor the steppe areas.
But the Kremlin has another way of solving demographic problems of the captured part of Donbass.
Russia has a considerable «demographic reserve» of Chechens, Ossetians, and other North Caucasian nations.
Therefore, if the Kremlin dwells on the frozen conflict scenario, one can expect rapid increase in North Caucasian people presence in the occupied Donbass territories.
It's not a secret that the Chechen and Ossetian militants took an active part in occupation of Donbas.
They stood out among other groups of occupants by treating the locals in a more aggressive manner and confronting co-invaders.
Settling a hundred thousand North Caucasian families having three to four children instead of one usual for locals during the last decade – and in a couple generations the newcomers' descendants will be as numerous in the occupied territories as people of Slavonic ancestry.
It would make sense, explaining the locals living under occupation prospects like this.
Therefore, it is necessary to develop its own plan of solving the Donbass's demographic problems before it is completely de-occupied, since these problems may even worsen after most anti-Ukrainian part of the population leaves the region.
Above all, favorable conditions should be created for returning refugees who had moved to the territories controlled by Ukraine.
Stimulating the baby boom is necessary, in the Donbass as well as in the rest regions of Ukraine.
But the war end, an economic growth, and living standards growth might form appropriate mood in society.
Donbass needs projects attracting unemployed population from other regions, especially young people, both men and women.
Ukraine's Western partners have repeatedly promised multibillion-dollar aid to renovate Donbas infrastructure.
But meanwhile it is necessary to seek investors to create new enterprises.
