DISTRIBUTION CODE The Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014 set off the worst crisis between Russia and the West since the 1980s.
In the wake of this event, a reunified Germany has emerged as the key leader to engage Russia on behalf of the West.
The Crimean episode shattered the 1975 Helsinki foundation for the peaceful inviolability of Europe’s existing borders.
The shock of the Russian intervention in Ukraine and the Crimean annexation destroyed the illusion of the German Ostpolitik since 1969 of perpetual entente with Moscow and challenged the European security order.
This study examines historic German-Russian relations and Germany’s foreign policy, with an emphasis on Germany’s Russia Policy and post-1990 Ostpolitik.
The evolution of policy from “change through rapprochement” to “change through trade” forms a special focus.
Caught between an interest-led Realpolitik and a value-based Moralpolitik, Germany has changed its Russian statecraft since the Crimean annexation.
The thesis examines this German policy transformation and presents its implications for Germany’s foreign policy amidst a growing German geopolitical power in Europe.
Chair, Department of National Security Affairs THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK IV ABSTRACT The Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014 set off the worst crisis between Russia and the West since the 1980s.
Caught between an interest-led Realpolitik and a value-based Moralpolitik, Gennany has changed its Russian statecraft since the Crimean annexation.
I am honored and grateful for having had the opportunity to attend the master’s program in regional studies at the Department of National Security Affairs.
In this regard, I thank the Bundeswehr for the extraordinary step in my professional development and chance to live in California, nurturing a network of professionals and colleagues who made our time in the United States an invaluable and rewarding experience.
I was only able to finish this project due to the continual support of various people on and off the campus.
Foremost, I like to extend my deepest gratitude to my thesis advisors, Professor Donald Abenheim and Professor Mikhail Tsypkin, who ensured the success of this thesis with a high degree of flexibility, patience and collegial guidance.
Their profound experience, knowledge, support, and suggestions in all phases of the thesis gave me valuable direction and guidance.
Additionally, I owe Professor Abenheim my gratitude for his editorial support despite his tight calendar.
As a non-native speaker, it is a challenge to write a thesis and fulfill the high standards of academic research and writing within the restrains of a shortened program.
Thus, I explicitly like to thank Professor Helen Anderson for laying the foundations of research and writing in National Security Affairs during the first quarter, which was a prerequisite to realize this task.
In this regard, I particularly like to thank my colleagues and fellow officers, such as LT James Hough, Major Stephanie Baugh and LtCol Michael Hanisch for their insights, assistance and valuable contributions.
However, the most important support in order to succeed came from my beloved wife, Christiane, and my wonderful children, who have had to put up with quite a lot during the course of this project.
INTRODUCTION The community of fate shared by Germany and Russia reemerged in 2014 as a leading question of global security.
Peace and stability in Europe and the world rely on compliance of international law to enable cooperative relations with prosperous economies and the peaceful settling of conflict in whatever form.
During the Cold War, the conclusion of the 1975 Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe was a major step out of that conflict and laid the foundation for Europe’s inviolability of existing borders in the post-1945 order of nation states.
Despite public acknowledgement (save for Central Europeans) of Russia’s constant claim for its sphere of influence—the “near abroad”— the world seemed shocked and surprised in 2014, when Russia violated existing international law and, in a coup de main of irregular war, annexed Crimea, thus violently changing borders in Europe with a bravado that especially shocked a younger generation with no tangible memory of such events.
The reunited Germany of the Berlin Republic especially has embraced its role as the bridge state between East and West in its geographically central position.
Beginning at the end of the 1960s with the advent of Willy Brandt’s detente with the Soviet bloc, and especially in the second decade of the new century, the Federal Republic of Germany has been a strong mediator between the West, the United States, and Russia.
In a 2015 interview with the German weekly magazine Der Spiegel, former chancellor Gerhard Schroeder openly praised Otto von Bismarck as his example of statesmanship and guardian of a European order, a figure whose statecraft had famously swung from east to west, but which generally had anchored the fate of the Second Reich to Petersburg and the Romanov dynasty.
While Schroeder’s successor, Gennan Chancellor Angela Merkel, does not have the same close relation to Russian President Vladimir Putin as her predecessor, in the midst of the Ukrainian crisis and even before, she had still used the avenues of dialogue with Russia and its political elite instead of such alternatives of power politics that recalled the Cold War, or something even worse.
But having lost patience and with factual evidence at hand in the course of the Malaysian passenger jet being shot down over Ukraine in 2014, as well as with Putin’s late personal statement in 2015 that the Crimea annexation was deliberately planned and executed on order in a manner that recalled too well the worst of modern European history, Chancellor Merkel had no choice but to rethink Germany’s foreign policy towards Russia in the hard and brutal realities of crisis in the years 2014-2015.
This study addresses the context and content of this shift in policy, which constitutes a diplomatic revolution for Gennan foreign and security policy, which is not well understood in the United States or which all too often becomes the butt of caricature.
An additional focus seeks to explain the international perception of Gennan Foreign Policy as being too Russian-friendly, despite Germany’s strong ties and cultural foundations in the Euro-Atlantic hemisphere.
RELEVANCE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF THE TOPIC With the fall of the inner German border and the subsequent collapse of the Soviet Union during 1989 to 1991, Germany suddenly went from being the sundered cockpit of the Cold War conflict to its central geographical position in Europe, as it had been before 1945.
This position had lately resembled a bridge towards Central and Eastern European nations and Russia, in which all that transpired between the two was interpreted as friendship, amity, and prosperity.
The episodes of conflict from the eighteenth through the twentieth centuries gave the imperative for cooperation an added boost.
Because of its geography and modern history, Germany has a long tradition of alternately friendly and hostile relations with Russia, respectively the Soviet Union, since 1918, if not since the time of Frederick the Great’s Prussia.
Since Willy Brandt’s Ostpolitik in the late 1960s, West Germany has promoted cooperation over confrontation, aiming at Wandel durch Annaherung —that is, “change through rapprochement”—in its foreign policy towards Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union beginning with the nadir of the Berlin crisis in 1961, which moved Egon Bahr and Willy Brandt to revise Cold War statecraft of the formation of eastern and western blocs.
With German reunification in 1990, Berlin had to take on the role of a bridge or mediator between east and west, a fact that did not manifest itself fully until the geopolitical changes of the new century.
In accordance with this role and in compliance with the 2+4 Treaty connected with unity, which finally freed the nation from the reserved rights of the victors of 1945, Gennany has always attempted to maintain close contact in its negotiations with Russia.
Eine Einfuhrung [Germany’s foreign and security policy: An introduction], 2nd ed.
Barbara Budrich, 2006), 57. 3 successful under Helmut Kohl in the late 1980s and 1990s continued with Gerhard Schroeder in 1998, but it took on a new quality that granted the latter’s biography and the national interests of both nations that became manifest in ideological as well as trade ties in the Schroeder chancellorship.
Since about 2013, in the wake of the Ukrainian crisis, such policy in the minds of critics has led to strong discussions between so-called Russlandversteher, or Russian apologists versus what is also a noteworthy rise of Russian and or Putin critics within Gennan domestic politics.
The role of such figures in the domestic politics of Germany requires interpretation for a non-German-speaking readership, which this study aspires to do, along with the explanation of foreign policy making in Gennany to a non-German readership that should become acquainted with this major issue of global security.
A sudden and recent unexpected change in Germany’s foreign policy toward Russia, which supposedly happened in 2014, can be regarded as a diplomatic revolution for future policy-making decisions in Germany, as well as in Europe.
As of spring 2015, this change has already worked its overall effects on foreign and security policy, and it may in time conceivably alter the balance of power in Europe and Eurasia, which is very much in flux.
Not only is Russia a part of continental Europe, but it is also Germany’s eleventh largest bilateral trade partner.
This earthquake-like event, felt beyond Kiev, Odessa, and the Donbass, compelled German politicians to reevaluate the political tenets that had grown familiar and comfortable for their generalized good feeling and absence of bullets.
With the primacy of foreign policy over other fields in Germany, foreign policy is the major instrument to influence other states, in this context Russia.
Although sufficient literature is available on German and Russian foreign policy, this thesis aims to contribute to the understanding of Germany’s policies on Russia with respect to the foundations of interests and constitutional values based on a case study of the Russian annexation of Crimea.
This thesis also aims to explain the extent of Germany’s “Russia Firsters,” or Russlandversteher, Russian apologists in Germany.
HYPOTHESIS During the quarter century since the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, a reunified Germany has gained ever more strength on an international scale while the United States role in Europe has shrunk to a shadow of its fonner self, and the other powers expect those who rule in Berlin to take over more political responsibility.
Wolf-Dieter Eberwein and Karl Kaiser , 46. 5 junking of imperial fantasies of the old stripe.
Putin used the ongoing and sharpening political crisis in Ukraine as his stage and illegitimately annexed Crimea with a small degree of violence—a rather bloodless Anschluss with concealed conflict on the old Soviet model.
Initial international reactions of shock and calls for a wholly force-free, political solution during the crisis have not led to a satisfactory result as of spring 2015, once Russia had finally integrated the territory into its administration and regarded the Crimea as part of sovereign Russian territory.
Claudia Major and Jana Puglierin have stated that “the Ukraine crisis has substantially and perhaps permanently altered Europe’s security structure.
The hypothesis of this study suggests that German foreign policy, closely connected to the institution and personality of German Minister of Foreign Affairs FrankWalter Steinmeier, and especially to German Chancellor Angela Merkel, changed fundamentally in the course of the Ukraine crisis during 2014-2015.
Of further significance is the shared German Democratic Republic past of the 1970s and 1980s in the respective backgrounds of acting personalities such as Angela Merkel and Vladimir Putin.
Additionally, such elites’ misinterpretations of the Russian insistence of its spheres of influence, the “near abroad,” and the respective forces of domestic pressures in the statecraft and external relations of Russia and in Germany are of significant relevance.
Whether as a legacy of the fonner GDR or out of a reflexive and historical anti-Americanism and neo-Bismarckian orientation, the strong presence of Russian apologists in Gennan politics and society adds to the complexity of the foreign policy change and influences its durability, especially in this moment of crisis.
METHODOLOGY AND RESEARCH DESIGN At the core of the research design is the evaluation of historic literature on German-Russian relations, as well as the analysis of the Ukraine crisis as a single case study to detennine changing German foreign policy.
In regards to the wealth of literature dealing with Germany, its history and foreign policy—qualitatively as well as quantitatively—a selection of German and English sources are used.
Due to the current nature of events in Ukraine, the research primarily draws on secondary sources, including scholarly articles, political commentary, and think-ta nk reports, such as the German Council in Foreign Relations , the German Institute for International and Security Affairs ( Stiftung Wissenschaft and Politik ), or the European Council on Foreign Affairs, as well as monographs and books dealing with German and Russian relations and their respective foreign policies.
In addition, primary sources are used to take into consideration the perspectives of Gennan and Russian top politicians, analyzing, for example, speeches by the German chancellor or by the Russian president.
The events, which peaked in the annexation of Crimea, are briefly recapitulated in chronological order to explain the conflict and the initial efforts undertaken in light of German foreign policy and put in the context of historical German7 Russian relations.
The historical perspective of German-Russian relations is required to show the fundamental changes that have taken place in Germany’s foreign policy towards Russia, which adds to the value of this thesis.
Chapter I discussed the relevance and current significance of the topic, the hypothesis for the research, and its methodology and research design.
The Chapter II provides background on the development of the GermanRussian relations since the seventeenth century, taking into account the principles of German Ostpolitik, the Soviet-Union’s role in the reunification, and the current state of affairs.
Chapter III focuses on the formation of Gennan Foreign Policy, explaining the structure of the federal German government and considering the role of civil society in foreign affairs before ending with a discussion of Germany’s Russia policy.
Chapter IV focuses on the case study, initially discussing the formation of current Russian foreign policy and its parameters, as well as its interdependence with domestic Russian politics and the current dominance of the siloviki in the Kremlin.
In a second part, Chapter IV discusses the evolution of events that peaked with the annexation of Crimea and subsequent Gennan and international reactions.
Chapter IV ends with an evaluation of whether Putin’s decisions pay off.
Chapter V contains the analysis of a German foreign policy change and its root causes, detennining its extent and evaluating whether the wider-spread understanding of “Russia Firsters” has declined.
Chapter V ends with a discussion of the consequences of such a policy change for German security and foreign policy.
Chapter VI summarizes findings, identifies implications for Gennany’s foreign and Russia policies, and provides recommendations for future research.
HISTORY OF GERMAN-RUSSIAN RELATIONS Germany and Russia share a longstanding and ambivalent common history—from the Battle at Lake Peipus in 1242, where Alexander Nevsky defeated the Knights of the German Order, to the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and beyond—and have experienced the full spectrum of conflict and cooperation over the past centuries.
The mutual influence on the development of both nations has had significant relevance.
This story forms the basis of any understanding of contemporary German-Russian relations.
The dualism of these contemporary figures fits into a pattern of personality and statecraft that has mesmerized Europe for centuries and been the pivot of war and peace.
A Century’ of Conflict (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1990), 317.
GERMAN-RUSSIAN RELATIONS BEFORE 1945 The story begins recently, that is, more recently in modem history than most ancient accounts of the Teuton and the Slav suggest, especially when one wishes to underscore the closeness of the German-Russian relationship.
Although German-Russian history dates back as far as 1242, when Alexander Nevsky defeated the Teutonic knights of the Bishop of Tartu, Herman I, in Estonia, it was actually Peter the Great who invited Germans at large to assist in developing Russia—politically and economically—because Romanov elites perceived the West, especially Germany, as scientifically advanced.
Thus, Peter the Great adapted Russia according to the absolutist dynastic regimes in Europe and reacted to the developments in military affairs of the standing army and the post-1648 absolutist order by refonns from above, which built the foundations of Russia’s later status as a member of the five leading powers in the era of the wars of the cabinets.
Kontinuitdt, Konflikt und Wandel [Russia: Continuity, Conflict and Change], eds.
As Napoleon reached the height of his power in 1812, the Prussian General Yorck von Wartenburg, although aligned with France in the war against Russia, signed the Tauroggen convention against his king’s initial will and declared neutrality in order to free Prussia from French occupation.
Hence, Tauroggen signifies the modern tradition of Prussian-Russian cooperation.
Russia was one of the five Great Powers 19 that detennined Europe’s future in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
The holy alliance that grew out of Mettemich’s diplomacy cemented the northern courts, especially in the maelstrom of 1848, only to witness the breakdown of this bond in 1852 with the war in Crimea when Austria and Prussia did not stand with the Tsar against the French and the British.
In 1873, Germany and Russia became part of the Dreikaiserabkommen, and a revival of the northern courts pact.
The Three Emperor’s League consisted of Germany, Russia, and Austria-Hungary, was renewed in 1883, and was succeeded by Bismarck’s Reinsurance Treaty with Russia in 1887.
Despite the alliance with the French and its path to the emergence of opposing alliance 18 Laquer, Russia and Germany, 26.
Present-day trade between Germany and Russia has its roots in the nineteenth century, when from 1858 to 1913 German imports to Russia rose from 28 percent of all Russian imports to 47 percent, while Russian exports to Germany, mainly natural resources, rose from 16 percent of all Russian exports to 29 percent.
In the decade prior to the outbreak of the 1914 war, the devastating Russian defeat in the Russo-Japanese War of 1905 had severe implications for Russia as it finally ignited the revolution in St.
The war drove Russian aspirations back to Europe from expansion in Asia, back to the Balkans, and back into greater conflict with the powers with whom it had been allied in the past.
The revolution called for a constitutional government with legislation and citizens’ equal rights before the law, a revolution against the Old Regime.
While Gennan-Russian trade relations prospered, rising imperialism and the developments in the Balkans of perpetual war and conflict between Ottoman, Habsburg, and Romanov led to enhanced anti-German attitudes in Russia and, by 1910, to the view in both Germany and Russia that war between them was unavoidable.
In Russia, the results of the Balkan crisis of 1913 were regarded as further defeat—after the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905 and the Bosnian annexation crisis in 1908—and the Gennan military mission to Constantinople led by Lieutenant General Liman von Sanders in June 1913 worsened the Gennan-Russian relations even more as Wilhehnine Germany extended its reach possibly to the Persian Gulf and to spheres of influence of the other imperial powers.
Russia became convinced that it was necessary to stand up in order to retain its status as a Great Power in the shifting powers of 1913-1914.
The July crisis of 1914, after the assassination of Austrian-Hungarian Archduke Franz Ferdinand, quickly paved the way for the general war that eventually became known as World War I, when Germany gave AustriaHungary the carte blanche against Serbia, which inevitably meant the involvement of Russia.
The German leader had become fatalistic and pessimistic about the rise of Russian power in the European system and opted for earlier war to preclude being suffocated by the Russians later on.
Although the Germans tried to convince Russia not to mobilize in order to prevent a European war, the Russian order for mobilization could not be reversed, and subsequently, Gennany declared war on Russia on August 1, 1914.
The Gennans were soon faced with an unexpected advance by the Russian Army into East Prussia and Galicia, but the victories of Paul von Hindenburg and Erich Ludendorff at Tannenberg and the Masurian Lakes in August and September 1914 enabled the German Army to occupy large parts of the Baltic and Poland by 1917, as well as the wield destruction on the Serbs and secure strategic goals in the East, despite the damage that the Russians did to Habsburg in what is modern-day Ukraine.
Due to the influence of Gennan experts in supporting the state and administration in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, by the time of the Bolshevik Revolution, most areas of Russian domestic politics or foreign policy were in part shaped by Germans.
It was German assistance that enabled the return of Lenin to Russia, via Finland, following his exile in Switzerland in April 1917.
In 1914-1918, the combatant powers used indirect and concealed means to wage war against each other with gusto.
In coordination with the German Auswartige Amt , the objective was to strengthen the Russian revolution in order to set up a new provisional government after the February revolution, which would negotiate a truce and peace deal, as well as enter into new Gennan-Russian diplomatic relations.
BrestLitovsk has been perceived as the “first milestone in Soviet-German relations after the revolution,” 32 but the treaty came at a disastrous cost for Russia as the Germans claimed a third of Russia’s population, half of its industry, and up to 90 percent of the coal-mining industry.
The Russians were defenseless and saw the treaty with the Germans as one 28 Malia, Soviet Tragedy, 90.
The amendment to the treaty, signed in August 1918, supported the Bolshevik s ’ claim to power among domestic turmoil in Russia, of which the Germans were fully aware when they tried to secure sufficient reparations.
Gennany indirectly set the stage for the rise of the Soviet Union, which would dominate Gennan-Russian relations for decades to come.
With the abdication of William II and the signing of the armistice in November 1918, the Gennan Empire ceased to exist.
Germany signed the Treaty of Versailles on June 28, 1919, as part of the Paris suburban pacts with the Central Powers, that is, the treaties with Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Turkey.
The Treaty of Versailles became a symbol of humiliation, injustice, and loss for those Germans unwilling to accept defeat in their numbers.
The new European order was laden with smoldering conflicts in the East, which made the Gennan-Russian relationship all the more fateful in the years 1919-1939.
Although the renewed independence of Poland separated Russia and Gennany, they were tied together by the fact that the Parisian victors excluded the defeated Central Powers and Red Russia from having a say in the fate of Europe and beyond.
As a result, both nations were eager to revise the terms of the Versailles Treaty and the Paris system of 1919.
At the international conference in Genoa, Italy, in 1922, the Russians and Germans were allowed only a passive role and engaged in bilateral negotiations that ended in the surprise of the Gennan-Russian Treaty of Rapallo, which was directed against the western victors.
The international community in London, Paris, and Washington, DC, was shocked by the prospects of Gennan-Russian rapprochement.
The Berlin Treaty of 1926 supplemented the Rapallo Treaty, was more specific, and declared mutual neutrality in case of a third party’s aggression toward either Russia or Germany.
In Stent’s assessment, the treaties of Rapallo and Berlin, used as symbols of cooperation, did not have such an exaggerated significance, but rather shaped the attitudes of Gennany’s and Russia’s neighbors in the Little Entente in Paris, Warsaw, Prague, and Belgrade, which feared too close a relationship between the two nations.
Equally significant was the secret military cooperation initiated and organized with the Soviets by the leadership of the Reichswehr, especially by its chief of staff, Hans von Seeckt, whose open eastern orientation was no secret and probably at variance with parliamentary control of military policy, as well as foreign policy.
This secret military cooperation support began in 1922 and was beneficial to both nations and armies.
While the Gennan Army set up trainings camp for weapon systems that were forbidden under the Versailles Treaty in Germany, the Russians gained access to modern military equipment from Germany; thus, ironically, the Soviets enabled the creation of the modern armor branch Panzerwaffe, which would attack Russia in a Blitzkrieg only six years after the end of the bilateral military collaboration of 1933.
Werner von Blomberg, in particular, was but one of leading Reichswehr officers blinded by the red star, which made him susceptible to the Nazis when their time came in the 1930s.
Von 1815, 150. 16 normalcy and detente with the western powers, symbolized by Locarno and Gustav Stresemann’s effort to lessen the diplomatic wreckage of the war.
This period of stabilization was preceded by great uproar as the immediate post-war period came to a close.
By 1923, the Weimarer Republic was struggling to avoid economic collapse in the aftermath of the Ruhrkrise, where French and Belgian forces occupied the West German Ruhr area, and to re-stabilize domestic politics.
Baltic Germans also imported the vicious anti-Jewish ideas of Imperial Russia into the NSDAP, which sought an end to assimilation and tolerance for Jews that had been obtained in the second Reich.
With Hitler’s seizure of power on January 30, 1933, it was expected that the Gennan-Russian relations would deteriorate, but there was no initial break on either side because both nations were preoccupied with their domestic situations.
However, in the course of 1934, Hitler’s Gleichschaltung, persecution of Jews and suppression of other minorities, as well as members of the opposition, including the ban on communists in Germany, led to Moscow’s reexamination of Germany and its 40 Laquer, Russia and Germany, 146.
Soviet Russia was hardly able to react because Russia’s population had declined between 19 and 20 million people between the late 1920s and 1939 due to collectivization and the extennination of the Kulaks, especially in 1931 in Ukraine, and with Stalin’s purges within the party and society that began in 1934.
With Nazi Gennany’s rhetoric becoming more and more aggressive with the antiComintern campaign and the Spanish Civil War in 1936 and its racial ideology, including the objective for Lebensraum im Osten —expanding living space in the East—Stalin became nervous and distrustful but tried to avoid further escalation in Gennan-Soviet relations.
Thus, in a diplomatic revolution with echoes of Tauroggen and Rapallo, Berlin and Moscow signed a non-aggression pact, the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact of August 1939, instantly improving trade relations, especially because Germany needed raw materials in order to support its heavy industry for war preparations that had been underway since 1936.
After concluding a truce with Japan on August 15, 1939, the Russians attacked Poland from the east on August 17, 1939.
Germany and the Soviet Union split Poland after its capitulation only weeks after the war had begun and consequently shared a common border.
This refusal to participate fully in Axis world strategy opened the door to a revision of statecraft, and the Gennan side decided on an offensive against the Soviet Union, which, they believed, was hopelessly weakened by ideology and inner contradictions, not the least being the gutting of the brains of the Red Army through the purges.
Finally, Hitler attacked the Soviet Union on June 22, 1941, which came as a shock to Stalin, despite Stalin’s own assessment that a war between Germany and the Soviet Union rather sooner than later was inevitable.
Stalin has assumed that he would have to fight all the capitalist powers in a later war, a task that would be made easier once the capitalist powers had weakened themselves in the present war.
After operational successes during the first months of war against the Soviet Union, the Germans advanced deep into Russia and came to a halt only short of Moscow.
The offensive began again in 1942; however, it reached a tipping point in Stalingrad, which in early 1943 marked the most serious reversal of German fortune at arms with the loss of Field Marshal von Paulus’ 6th anny.
The German and Axis allies waged war without quarter in the USSR in 1941-1942, with the ideal of the Generalplan Ost drafted by the SS, which foresaw the extennination of Slavic and Jewish populations in European Russia to make way for a Eurasian continental German empire on an unprecedented scale.
All of these events influenced German-Russian relations throughout the decades of the Cold War and beyond with a monumental burden.
After the allies had advanced into Germany, Hitler had committed suicide, and the Russians had taken Berlin, the new government under Grofiadmiral Karl Doenitz signed an unconditional surrender on May 8, 1945.
This left the Soviet Union and the other allies as victors, as the Third Reich ceased to exist in the division of Germany among the victors as a prelude to the Cold War.
From the Convention of Tauroggen to the Reinsurance Treaty, to the Treaty of Rapallo, to von Seeckt’s secret German-Soviet military collaboration, to the Hitler-StalinPact of August 1939, and finally to the third Reich’s capitulation on May 8, 1945, there have always been times of cooperation and confrontation in historic German-Russian relations until the end of World War II, which did not affect only Germany and Russia, but Europe as a whole.
THE COLD WAR AND EMERGENCE OF A NEW OSTPOLITIK The Cold War system of German-Russian relations emerged from the failures among the victors to end the war with a durable European order of peace and security, as in 1815 or even 1871.
Rather, the peace of Europe lay in its division, which meant the division of Germany and Austria, as well as parts of Yugoslavia.
This regime began to transform in the early 1960s and ended at the close of the 1980s, after the long sacrifice of the Cold War in which the common fate of Germany and Russia was always a leading theme.
Additionally, the former German 50 Stent, Russia and Germany Reborn, 9.
By that and by Poland’s west border shared with the Soviet occupation zone in East Germany, Germany lost its territories east of the Oder-Neisse-line.
The main objective for Stalin was to prevent any future German aggression, as the Soviets feared neo-Nazi German revanchism for the territories lost and were obsessed with the need to ensure buffer states between Gennany and the Soviet Union.
The delay in Polish free elections, as stated in the Yalta, and the manipulated results in early 1947 elections—enabling a communist government—aroused suspicions among Western allies; and in the context of the progression of communist-modeled governments in Eastern and Central Europe, the EastWest conflict escalated with the Western Allies prioritizing a democratic government in West Gennany.
When Stalin realized that he had failed to reach the objective of a neutral and communist Germany, he insisted on its division.
In the West, it was perceived highly unlikely that the Soviet Union would have agreed to any other status of Gennany, where the Soviets would not have control or economic access to parts of it, like the Soviets did when the decision was made in 1947 to govern the Soviet occupational zone separately from the West.
German Foreign Policy since 1945 (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers), 9.
When George C Marshall proposed the Marshall plan in June 1947 for economic aid to the Soviets and Eastern European nations, Stalin feared a pro-western attitude within the Soviet satellite states and rejected the offer.
For Western Europe, the Marshall Plan’s objective was to stabilize the social and economic situation on the capitalist or social market economy model and thereby support reconstruction in order to avoid vulnerability to communist ideas.
With the Berlin Blockade from June 1948 to May 1949, Stalin’s objective was to destroy the Allies cohesion and to continue negotiating the Gennan question and thus prevent a West Germany.
The plan failed completely and achieved nearly the opposite because Germans in West Gennany and West Berlin united to outlive the crisis, West German’s public opinion of the Soviet Union plunged, and attitudes towards the United States soared with the airlift; the Allies and Germany grew closer because the Germans were grateful for the Rosinenbomber, which positively influenced public opinion for a long time; it became obvious that hopes for a united Germany had no prospects of success; and, therefore, d) it accelerated the creation of and detennination for a West Germany.
With the parliamentary council’s 61 acceptance of the Basic Law—the German Grundgesetz —the Federal Republic of Germany was proclaimed on May 23, 1949, although not as a complete sovereign state.
The Allies retained control of Germany’s jurisprudence as “occupational law took precedence over Gennan law,” 63 56 Haftendorn, Coming of Age, 11.
In August 1949, Konrad Adenauer of the Christian Democratic Union became the first chancellor of West Gennany, who concentrated his ambitions on Westbindung rather than Ostpolitik; he was determined to achieve Germany’s integration into the West because he believed that the Western Allies would grant Germany more freedom to act on domestic and foreign policy only if the Germans could convince the Allies of the wish and will to integrate with the West.
Adenauer’s idea of statecraft arose from his own Rhenish biography within Prussia of the Weimar Era, and from his dislike of the policy of swinging from west to east that had so ill served the first Gennan republic.
The Marshall plan was not enough, however, and the West Gennan state had to assure its security with the aid of what presently became its Atlantic allies.
A security pact was essential, a requirement made all the more urgent by the worsening of the Cold War in the years 1949-1950.
In the words allegedly ascribed to the first NATO Secretary General, Lord “Pug” Ismay, NATO was founded 64 Stent, Russia and Gennany Reborn, 12; Haftendorn, Coming of Age, 17.
Von 1815, 253. 23 “to keep the Americans in, the Russians out, and the Germans down,” 66 in order to deter Soviet expansionism, prevent the revival of nationalist militarism in Europe through a strong North American presence on the continent, and encourage Western European political integration.
The Soviet eventual answer to NATO was the conclusion of the Warsaw Pact on May 14, 1955, uniting the eight Soviet satellite states under the umbrella of mutual cooperation and defense, where the GDR became a full member.
Both nuclear anned organization dominated the East-West conflict until the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the subsequent dissolution of the Soviet Union, and resembled the respective pillar of deterrence and power projection in Europe.
The first Soviet nuclear detonation in August 1949 reassured the Allies in their formation of NATO, while it also underlined the new superpower status of the Soviet Union.
The bloc formation, including the foundation of the Warsaw Pact in 1955, determined the two opposing sides of the Cold War, which for the Gennans meant the inevitable risk of a Gennan brother war, putting Germany in the center of a potential battlefield.
The Soviet hegemony in Eastern Europe used the perceived West German danger as pretext for its legitimization and as raison d’etre for the Warsaw Pact.
The Alliance’s New Roles in International Security , 67 Haftendorn, Coming of Age, 36.
This uneven military threat led Adenauer to worry about Germany’s position, hoping to avoid a fate like Korea, where communist North Korean forces overran South Korea after crossing the 38th parallel in June 1950, thus initiating the Korean War with international involvement under United States leadership.
After strong initial opposition by European neighbors, especially France, to Germany’s rearmament, a solution was reached to create a European anny, the so-called European Defense Community , which was the ideal of western defense along with NATO until 1954, when the French abandoned the idea.
Instead, NATO allowed West Germany to establish its own new force in 1956, called the Bundeswehr (the federal armed forces), to attain full control of its forces.
It was led by a defense minister and fully integrated within NATO and the mechanism of the Western European Union as the heir to the failed European Army.
West Germany’s armament and admission to NATO by the Paris Treaties was paralleled by the revision of the General Treaty with the Allies, which, despite a few limitations, gave the Germans much of their national sovereignty back from the most severe regime of occupation.
Thus, exactly ten years after the end of World War II, the occupation ended and West Germany became a full member of the Western Alliance, founding the new federal armed forces to counter the threat from the East.
In the period from 1952 until 1955, especially with the death of Stalin, the Soviets reacted to discussions of West Gennany’s rearmament with an intensified policy towards the German question and tried to pressure the GDR into campaigning with an all-German election, but failed.
The Soviet Union, shortly after Stalin’s death, decided to use military force to end the demonstrations and support the GDR in political and military means, thereby introducing a shift in Soviet foreign policy that gave priority to the support and preservation of the GDR rather than countering improving relations with West Germany.
His regime put in hand a mini detente, which entertained ideas of pulling back on the Cold War front lines and of precursors of the policy solutions that did finally emerge in 1989.
Adenauer accepted a surprise Soviet invitation to Moscow in September 1955 to discuss the German question and the release of Gennan prisoners of war still held by the Soviet Union.
In that perception, the FRG was Germany, whereas the new GDR was only the Soviet Zone of Occupation, a bastard regime of Soviet vicegerents without legitimacy or any basis in constitutional heritage.
Throughout the later 1950s and the early 1960s, the relationship between the two German states became increasingly competitive in terms of attractiveness for its population.
West Gennany was experiencing an economic miracle with the help of the Allies and the Marshall Plan.
In addition, East Germans experienced arrests and purges in the wake of the 1953 uprising and enjoyed a lesser degree of freedom.
The SED regime introduced a news series of socializing measures in 1958 at the time that Nikita Kruschev called for the wrapping up of four-power rule in divided Berlin.
West Germany enjoyed a freer society and an improved standard of living in the years 1958-1961, which led to about three million East Gennans having fled to West Germany by 1961, posing a serious threat to East Germany.
The construction of the wall in the summer of 1961 also constituted a diplomatic revolution in the Cold War, once the confrontation reached its low point amid the prospect of thennonuclear war and the limits of the Adenauer regime and the Hallstein doctrine.
In the following weeks, the complete border between the ERG and GDR was closed with barbed wire, mine fields, and surveillance measures, thus sealing off East Germany and prompting horror, fear, and helplessness on the West German side.
The Allies and Germans in West Berlin knew that Kh rushchev had threatened several times that a war over Berlin would turn nuclear; thus, it became clear that the Western powers—foremost Washington—would not be willing to risk a nuclear war with the Soviet Union.
West Germany quickly grew weary of the burdens of its status as a frontline state, while Adenauer continued to pursue the West integration.
Thus, it was time to change Germany’s Ostpolitik as the Adenauer regime entered into its eclipse after 1961.
It was the first time that the Social Democrats took over the governmental responsibility in West Germany.
In the meantime, Leonid Brezhnev had succeeded Kh rushchev in Moscow in 1964.
Under Kh rushchev and in the wake of the generalized prospect of the end of the world with the Cuban crisis of the fall of 1962, the first signs for detente with the West had appeared, such as the beginning of negotiations in 1959 regarding nuclear test bans, which were interrupted in the crises of 1961 and 1962 and the first grain import from the United States in 1963.
Brezhnev continued the path of detente towards the West, but he also oversaw the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, which sparked new fear in West Germany.
With the possibility of the defection of the Central European satellite states declining after the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in the summer of 1968, and with the division of Europe now secure, small revisions and a lessening of tension could resume.
But on the grounds of the Brezhnev Doctrine, the Soviets achieved a feeling of flexibility in its Westpolitik without endangering Soviet hegemony in their sphere of influence, thus, opening the door for a more cooperational Westpolitik.
In other words, while the Soviet satellites in Central and Eastern Europe were firmly under control, Moscow could be more flexible on its stance on relations with the West.
It was in this setting that Gennan chancellor Willy Brandt’s new Ostpolitik of being “willing to recognize the European status quo” fully initiated a new impetus for Soviet-West German detente in 1969.
However, during Brandt’s tenure, the relations with the Soviet Union, but also his personal relationship with Leonid Brezhnev, improved significantly, which also fostered enhanced economic relations, as in 1970 when a first deal on Soviet export of natural gas was concluded, igniting energy relations that would gain substantial importance for Germany, Russia, and Europe as a whole.
Despite the strong opposition to detente and Ostpolitik, the federal elections in 1972 showed sufficient support for Chancellor Brandt’s policy and a desire for the administration to continue its policy of detente with the East.
The factual recognition of the European geographical status quo by West Germany gave them new freedom to act and broadened their foreign policy options.
On the issue of Gennan-Soviet trade, German exports to the Soviet Union, mainly machinery and industrial technology, rose between 1973 and 1976 by 61 percent, while the Soviet Union continued to deliver natural resources.
On the issue of diplomatic relations between the East and West—the Warsaw Pact and NATO, respectively—two separate but parallel developments took place in 1973.
On the one side, the Soviet initiative of the CSCE started in Helsinki, 88 Stent, Russia and Germany Reborn, 21.
While the negotiations on MBFR did not achieve any results until 1989, the CSCE Final Act was signed in 1975 by thirty-three European states, the United States, and Canada, agreeing, among other things, on the renunciation of use of force, territorial integrity, inviolability of existing border, and peaceful mediation.
After a Soviet top spy had been uncovered in the direct vicinity of Chancellor Willy Brandt, who seemed to be exhausted by the office in the Bundeskanzleramt, Brandt was forced to step down and Helmut Schmidt succeeded him.
Despite the fact that the Soviets could not achieve all their objectives at Helsinki, the conclusion of the Final Act was a major success for Brezhnev.
It de facto legitimated the Soviet hegemony in Eastern Europe for the time being and with little inkling of what lay ahead in the decade to come.
Brezhnev became too ill after 1974 to advance the Soviet Union’s Germany policy any further.
The United States became increasingly disillusioned with detente and Schmidt over questions of nuclear deterrence, as well as with the impact of stagflation on the western economy.
And despite pressure to back off economically in the Gennan-Soviet relations, Brezhnev retained economic relations but committed himself to containing the Soviet military threat and remaining loyal to Germany’s integration with the West with a dual track decision in 1977.
West German-Soviet trade relations became a boost when, under the Schmidt administration in 1978, another cooperation agreement in the energy and natural resources sector was concluded, which, despite pressure from the United States, was not halted or cancelled as a result of the Soviet Afghanistan invasion in 1979.
The Soviet-American conclusion of the Strategic Arms Limitations Talks I and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty in 1972 had from a continental-European perspective manifested a de facto agreement on the nonuse of strategic nuclear weapons above the intermediate-range level and enforced Schmidt’s fear that the nuclear balance had tipped to the Soviets in Europe because it created an East-West disparity, thereby compromising European security.
In his 1977 speech in London, Schmidt called for a level of parity on all levels, not just on conventional systems but to include nuclear weapons.
While Schmidt’s initial aim was not a demand for new weapons, but for enhanced engagement within the MBFR talks, the main objective was to retain the engagement of the United States in Europe, which was in doubt in Schmidt’s mind with the post-Vietnam malaise and the aborted attempt to deploy neutron tactical nuclear weapons.
While the Soviets favored Schmidt’s Ostpolitik, they were reluctant to discuss any reductions of their missile capabilities with the United States and regarded Schmidt’s engagement for retrofit armament of the existing nuclear weapon systems at the end of the 1970s, as detente 97 Stent, Russia and Germany Reborn , 27.
Schmidt was convinced that, after a failed anns control mechanism on intermediate nuclear missiles, only strong retrofit armament could ensure Western Europe’s, and thus Germany’s, security.
It was West Germany’s consistent pressure that led NATO to the double-track decision in 1979, which foresaw the deployment of modern Pershing-II systems and ground-based cruise missiles to Europe, thus underlining United States commitment to European security and assuring all levels of escalation in deterrence.
Despite Brezhnev’s warning about Nachriistung, Moscow could not prevent the decision.
For Soviet-German relations, the NATO double-track decision posed a major setback, and fears of a renewed Cold War appeared, while domestically the double-track decision led to most controversial debates and manifestations.
On October 1, 1982, Helmut Kohl was elected by the Bundestag and took over office of the chancellery until the federal elections in March 1983.
The situation was marked by the deployment of Soviet SS-12/22 to Central Europe and a propaganda effort aiming at pacifist and anti-American sentiment in the German public.
Von 1945, 205. 33 fears derived from German aggression against the Soviet Union in two world wars and underlined the sacrifices endured by the Soviet population—which continued to affect the Soviet people—warning that Germany should not threaten the Soviet Union again and accusing Germany of revanchist attitudes.
One consequence, which the Soviets failed to understand, is how the Kohl government resisted the urge to go neutral and that increased Soviet pressure—military and political—drove West Germany westwards and enhanced the American-West Gennan cohesion at the height of the Intermediate Nuclear Forces crisis in the years 1983-1985.
The comparably young Secretary General was driven by concerns for Soviet collapse due to the devastating state of the Soviet economy, and less by communist ideology, as his goal was to strengthen the Soviet Union economically and politically to develop its international competiveness.
The “new thinking,” introduced by Gorbachev, led to a revival of detente between East and West in 1986 with the Reykjavik proposal to abolish nuclear weapons on the grounds of Gorbachev’s disarmament proposals and enabled the continuation of negotiations for the INF Treaty, which was concluded in December 1987.
Von 1945, 216; Haftendorn, Coming of Age, 277. 34 the technological backwardness, the superpower status was eroding.
Consequently, the new thinking in foreign and security policy was closely connected to the domestic state of affairs when Gorbachev decided to cut military spending in favor of industrial modernization.
Gorbachev announced such additional signals in 1987-1988 that were interpreted as cooperative, as with the withdrawal of forces from Afghanistan and further reforms in Eastern Europe.
Gradually, Gorbachev announced that the Soviet Union would no longer interfere militarily to impose stability and order in any of its socialist Eastern European states, thus ending the Brezhnev doctrine a la Czechoslovakia in 1968 and opening the way for democratization and liberalization in Eastern Europe.
The first signs of change came from Poland, where the labor union Solidarnosc, founded in 1980, initiated severe general strikes, which led to free elections in June 1989, while at the same time the nationalists in the Baltic States urged the Soviet Union to admit the details of the Hitler-Stalin Pact from 1939.
However, in the face of such generalized reform, the GDR’s anti -Perestroika regime under Erich Honecker was reluctant to refonn and implement measures of Glasnost because it feared the repetitions of 1953 and 1971.
Honecker still believed in true socialism in its original post-1949 model and resented Gorbachev’s new thinking.
The developments in 1989 now eclipsed those of 1953, 1956, and 1968 in a way that astonished all concerned.
Therefore, Gorbachev’s long-planned visit to the FRG in June 1989 came during troubling times for the Soviet Union.
It was, however, a visit with tremendous relevance because it not changed the mutual perception in West Gennany and the Soviet Union, despite the low in personal relations between Kohl and Gorbachev, which was based, among other things, on Kohl’s inadvertent and indirect 1986 comparison of Gorbachev to Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels.
The population received Gorbachev like a hero, and the two men developed a special and close relationship, which would show its historic significance in the critical months that lay ahead, which would be full of surprises.
The latest crisis in NATO over the modernization of short-range nuclear weapons had just been solved with a strong West German effort at nuclear roll back, and West Gennany’s Allies, especially France, again raised concerns about a “Rapallo repeated” on the grounds of the Joint Declaration between the FRG and the Soviet Union.
While the East Germans were fleeing the GDR and continued their manifestations on the East German streets in October 1989, the SED Politbuero under Honecker commemorated the fortieth anniversary of the GDR with great pomp on October 6 and 7.
Heads of state and governments from various socialist countries attended the celebration.
This moment also changed GermanRussian relations in a fundamental manner and began the eradication of the epoch of confrontation that reached back to June 22, 1941, and all the suffering in the decades since.
While the decision-makers in Berlin and Moscow were literally overran by the situation, calls for the deployment of Soviet “intervention and blocking divisions along the border” of the GDR and the use of the NVA were brought up by hardliners in Moscow and within the SED in early November 1989.
Kohl felt he needed to hurry, fearing that the Soviet Union could oppose any further rapprochement between the two parts of Germany.
Kohl did this without consulting any of his allies, which led to widespread skepticism in London and Paris about Gennany’s new role, while the Soviets were outraged and felt betrayed.
The United States under President George Bush and Spain were the only Allies of West Germany that supported a reunified Germany from the very beginning.
None of the other key allies, the 1945 victors (who retained their reserved rights for Germany as a whole in international law), France, Great Britain, or especially the Soviet Union were in favor of reunification.
Although Gorbachev knew it was inevitable, reunification was not foreseen at that early time, and France and Great Britain relied on exactly that Soviet position, firmly opposing Germany’s reunification.
In its support of a united Germany, the Bush administration adhered to the statecraft of the last four decades against neutrality for Gennany and pushed for continuous NATO membership.
The United States outlined these parameters to Kohl before the chancellor met with Gorbachev in Moscow in February 1990.
Kohl’s visit to Moscow was a game changer, as Gorbachev generally accepted German reunification, with three preconditions.
According to Laird, it was also critical to Gorbachev to limit the Bundeswehr to 300,000 troops.
With the Soviets general acceptance of Germany’s self-determination, the way was free for intra-German negotiations on the internal tenns of reunification.
In the first democratic Volkskammer elections in March 1990, 49. percent of the East German population voted for the CDU and its conservative allies, thus legitimizing a fast path to reunification.
The negotiations on reunification between the West and East German cabinets after the Volkskammer elections led to the Treaty of Unification August 31, 1990, as a precondition for a unified Germany, which depended then solely on the approval of the four victorious powers.
During the negotiations, the Soviets asked for multi-billion credits, which the German government generally granted if the Soviets would regard the substantial German economic and financial support in the 2+4 framework as part of the solution to the German question.
The Soviets repeatedly changed their position in regards to alliance membership.
After West Gennan Foreign Minister HansDietrich Genscher assured the Soviets that NATO would not be expanded eastwards into the territory of the GDR, and once issues about the Bundeswehr 's dual-use weapons and allied troop movements in the GDR had been clarified, the 2+4 Treaty was signed in Moscow on September 12, 1990; on October 1, the four powers declared the termination of their rights and responsibilities effected by reunification.
On October 3, 1990, the flag of the Federal Republic of Germany was the only German flag hoisted in front of the Berlin Reichstagsgebaude, the current parliament of reunified Gennany.
But the fonnal reunification did not automatically mean that the nation was really “one people,” as declared during the Montagsdemonstrationen on the East German streets.
Despite the fact that Germans in the GDR never developed a real socialist identity, as propagated by the SED since 1949 and especially since 1961, after the reunification it turned out that East Germans had indeed acquired their own identity, influenced by Soviet occupation, political socialization, and isolation from the West—a fact not wholly appreciated by westerners who newly discovered the society of the exGDR in 1990 for themselves.
In addition, the economic and financial conditions of the reunification process, such as the introduction and exchange of the Deutschmark, was felt by critics and proponents of an alternate path to unity to be imposed by West Gennany.
This different attitude was expressed by the differentiation in Ossis and Wessis in the 1990s.
The perception of Gennany’s reunification differed widely depending on where one stood on October 2, 1990, and was colored by what occurred in the decade that followed.
While the people in unified Germany celebrated, critics in France, Great Britain, and Poland regarded the reunification with deep skepticism and fear for Gennan revanchism and the return of an unhappy past that had seemed forever vanished by the post-1945 order.
The people in the Soviet Union, however, were split in their opinion of Germany’s reunification.
The divided Germany was perceived as a war trophy, and it resembled—in the Soviet perspective—the price that the Gennans had to pay.
The people, too, were divided on whether the Soviet Union had lost its war gains from the Second World War and whether the reunification should be perceived with satisfaction or anxiety.
In Moscow, the old guard of government officials (the conservative Germanisty ), who had ensured that two Germanys did not threaten the Soviet Union, felt betrayed by the events.
The most prominent opposition member was Yegor Legachev, who voiced critique and opposition of conservatives in Moscow, especially the military establishment, calling for dealing with the threats of a united Germany and arguing that it would be a mistake and “unbelievably short-sided ... if we did not see a Germany with huge economic and military potential looming on the international horizon.
Soviet leadership was literally overrun by the events in East Germany, as the fall of the Berlin Wall was a fait accompli, before Moscow even realized it.
Reunification took place under the influence of Soviet internal unrest.
Gorbachev was preoccupied with the situation in the Soviet Union and tried to retain power in the Kremlin.
Although Gorbachev survived the coup, he could not survive politically because the Soviet Union had disintegrated.
Thus, Gorbachev resigned on December 25 and handed the Kremlin over to Russian President Yeltsin, and the Soviet Union ceased to exist.
Russia’s rebirth and the dissolution of the Soviet Union had a major impact on the European balance of power, especially its security.
The United States accelerated its retreat from its fonner primacy in European security to the Middle East, with the onset of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in the months prior to Germany’s unity in the fall of 1990.
West Germany’s tradition of multilateral approaches paid off during the reunification and Germany’s engagement in the multilateral system remained in place after unification, which was already being challenged by the crises in the Middle East and then on the Balkans with the violent breakup of Yugoslavia.
The fact that disunity and chaos would eventuate in Southeastern Europe and the Middle East could, at first, be ignored in Bonn because of this political culture of reticence.
Geographically, the end of the Cold War put Germany in the center of a Europe that more or less came to peace in the 1990s, while politically it became a bridging state between East and West.
Germany’s interests in the Russian transfonnation was immense, as by January 1992 and until 1994 still more than 100,000 Russian troops were stationed in Germany.
Germany, in strong support of Mikhail Gorbachev, was initially unaware of Yeltsin but quickly decided to support him in economic and political tenns because Kohl realized that good relations with Yeltsin were imperative for the transition in Russia.
A united Germany and the new Russian Federation had similar challenges ahead of them.
Though economically and socially very different, the foreign policy challenges shared similarities.
Both countries were new to Europe in 1990 and 1991, in tenns of their borders of; both countries were preoccupied with domestic policy issues; and both countries needed to redefine their foreign policies.
Thus, both countries faced uncertainties in their future roles while the global system advanced with new centers of gravity in the Middle East and Asia.
While Russia had to redefine its relationship to its closest neighbors—the former Soviet republics—Gennany faced expectations from its allies to engage more in the questions of security in Europe, especially in regards to the crisis in the former Yugoslavia, where, due to the dissolution of the Yugoslav state, ethnic tensions had led to civil war in 1991.
Germany had to balance between its efforts to eliminate any doubts on its Westintegration and post-1990 Ostpolitik.
The diplomatic revolution of 1989-1991, however, had returned the fate of Zwischeneuropa to the fore and made Central European nations look westward in hopes of statecraft, a fact that led to the need to adjust the Western European security structure in an unexpected manner.
Central to this in the Kohl cabinet was a desire to reconcile with Warsaw, modeling on reconciliation with Paris from three decades before.
A major objective of Germany’s foreign policy was to diffuse any Russian concerns regarding the NATO and ELI enlargement, thus integrating the fonner Warsaw Pact and Central European states into the western alliance and at the same time rethinking the use of military force in the face of rising conflict in southern Europe and the Middle East.
A policy was advanced by German Minister of Defence Volker Riihe, who called not only for rapprochement but also for integration of former Warsaw Pact states.
Russia had continuously objected to any NATO enlargement process as early as 1994, when President Yeltsin warned about the possibility of a “Cold Peace” in its West relations.
Despite these early objections, once the Alliance accepted the decision for enlargement in late 1995, the triumvirate of Bill Clinton, Helmut Kohl, and Boris Yeltsin adjudicated the enlargement of NATO through the year 1999 in a way that is belied by 2014 propaganda to the contrary.
It was after the second round of enlargement in 2004 that, as argued in the Ukraine case, Russia opposed the NATO enlargement, provoking a crisis in Russia’s West relations.
Although Russia was less concerned with new policies in Central and Eastern Europe, their concern was to avoid any economical or territorial threat to Russia that would evolve from NATO membership, thus excluding Moscow from future security structures and decision-making.
A significant milestone had been the 1994 adjustment to the mission of the Bundeswehr to include collective security under Article 24 of the Basic Law versus the strict Central European focus of Article 87a of the mid 1950s, as ruled by the Federal Constitutional Court.
While the first years were characterized by domestic discussions on Germany’s new role in Europe, a “modified continuity” in foreign policy could be observed.
A change became apparent only after 1998, when a socialist-environmentalist government coalition between the SPD and the party Die Griinen took over the Gennan chancellery.
With the global crisis—Germany was particularly concerned about the situation in the Balkans—Gennany’s constitutional court permitted the deployment of the Bundeswehr in the UN-mandated framework of international organizations in 1994.
Thus, in the perspective of many scholars, Germany’s foreign policy moved from “modified continuity” to a matured self-conscious power.
Although the new Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer promoted continuity, chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, in 1998, stood for change and pledged Gennan troops for combat operations against Serbia to demonstrate to Slobodan Milosevic that Germany would not allow a rift within NATO on that question.
Fischer explained the decision to intervene with the imperative “Me wieder Auschwitz"" , refening to Germany’s historic past and its ambiguous relation with military power in the face of seemingly unending atrocities in Bosnia and then in Kosvo.
However, in 1998 at Ramboulliet, Russia strongly opposed any military operation against Serbia because they regarded the unmandated operations as unlawful acts of aggression.
Instead, such was compromised, and in 1999 it nearly led to a military confrontation at the Pristina International Airport in Kosovo between Russian paratroopers and NATO soldiers in which United States General Wesley Clark nearly precipitated a military confrontation.
With Boris Yeltsin’s decline and the rise of Russian nationalists, such as Victor Zhirinovsky, who dominated the middle to late 1990s and gave the West and the Gennans reason to worry about Russia’s future, western criticism of Russia on the Second Chechnyan War and the political division between Russia and the West over NATO’s Kosovo campaign complicated Russian-West and especially German-Russian relations decisively.
The Russian opposition marked a partial resurgence of Russia after its weak performance in the wake of the Soviet Union’s disintegration, and subsequently its transfonnation from a communist system to a superpresidential system, supposedly leading to a democracy.
Yet, in the midst of NATO’s Kosovo operation, the alliance enlarged to include Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary, and though the Russians may have disliked the event, they did nothing in any concrete way to stop such action, just as they did nothing concretely to oppose the NATO campaign in Kosovo against the dead-end Milosevic regime.
As the course of European unity advanced along with the rigors of globalization, along with the need to moderni z e the social market economy in trains, Germany’s economy became increasingly dependent on exports.
It was no surprise, then, that Chancellor Schroeder turned to Russia, especially regarding energy security and commerce.
Schroeder and Putin developed a pragmatic and friendly relationship, which characterized the foreign policy between the two countries.
In the process of this bilateral relation, old east-west structures in a new personalized form reasserted themselves in the political economy of Gennan-Russian trade.
While the German economy’s Ostausschuss (the committee on Eastern European Economic Relations) lobbied for enhanced Gennan-Russian relations, the two presidents created the Petersberger Dialogue in 2001 in order to promote a strategic partnership for economical and political cooperation beyond regular government relations and to draw Russia closer to Europe.
Gennan-Russian relations developed well, especially in the energy sector, with Gennany becoming a major partner in energy trade.
Germany started going the “German way” in tenns of national interests in the midst of a changing world and European order, whereby the national effort at unity promised great payoffs in globalization and a new continental orientation.
When Chancellor Schroeder declared the “German Way” in the context of the decision not to participate in the Iraqi invasion of 2002-2003, this policy was a continuation of saying no to the old “out of area” dictum from 1955 onward.
Nevertheless, such policy was put in hands with a populist, antiAmerican election campaign especially aimed at the electorate in the five new federal states.
Schroeder made common cause with the French and Russians in an open conflict with the United States, which considered the Iraq invasion a matter of national interest closely connected to the September 11 terror attack on the United States.
However, Merkel did not revert from the export-oriented policy demanded by globalization and the prospect of Eurasian markets.
Based on her origin in East Gennany, she not only spoke Russian, but also reflected on the past experiences with the Soviets in East Germany.
She was not a member of the Jungsozialisten nor a veteran of the politics of the FRG in the 1960s and 1970s, with its anti-American stripe, as had been central to Schroeder’s statecraft in power.
Merkel emerged from the Lutheran Bildungsbuergertum as a professor of physics in the GDR, the social class well positioned for power in 1990.
Thus, she was neither idealistic nor naive regarding Russia, as her predecessors had been.
Nevertheless, Chancellor Merkel addressed such contentious topics as human rights abuses, but as with the case of the 2008 Georgian War, she acted rather in a reserved way to maintain a close dialogue with Russia, while at the same time addressing topics that the public expected her to address regarding Russia; however, the tone from Germany’s Chancellery and Foreign Office remained widely noncommittal.
The 2008 Georgian War came as a surprise to the West and has assumed special importance when seen from the perspective of 2014 and Crimea.
Georgia had been a possible candidate for NATO membership, and although Gennany and France opposed such accession, some progress could be observed in the transition of Georgia’s security structure, especially through participation in NATO-led operations, such as the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, where the Georgians had been as heavily committed as they had been in Iraq.
Bloomsbury Academic, 2015), 28; Schollgen, Deutsche Aufienpolitik: Von 1945, 291. 52 were suspended.
An independent commission came to the conclusion that Russia’s account of the origins of the outbreak of war were true, and relations then recommenced, notably due to German behind-the-scenes political promotion.
Additionally, the Caucasus was somehow far away and loom less central to the theme of European security, and the Georgian war slipped into forgetfulness soon after it happened.
Moreover, in 2007-2008, the West endured a huge setback to its post-1989 forward momentum in its relations with Russia and the world economic crisis.
In addition, the West had the perception of an increasingly aggressive Russia under Putin at the end of his first two terms, promoting exclusive interests at any cost to the West, in regards to blocking Kosovo’s independence, NATO’s plans for a missile defense system in Europe, or the invasion of Georgia, and usage of energy deliveries as instruments of threat; therefore, Dimitri Medvedev was seen as relief for a hopeful West when he became president in May 2008.
The new Russian president aimed at modernizing the economy, countering corruption, and acquiring investments and technology from the West.
In Gennany, the presidential-prime-ministerial castling, as Putin became prime minister in 2008, resulted in a “Medvedev Effect,” with the German public perception of Russia improving, which was supported by the US-Russian relations “reset” initiated by the new United States President Barack Obama in 2009, an event that was seen with much hope in Germany, whose citizens were at that time tired of the Bush administration and the Iraq disaster.
However, Medvedev was only the crown prince for Vladimir Putin, as the West, and especially Merkel, had to leam in 2012.
Merkel assumed power amid an erosion of democratic civil culture in Russia, after Germany had hoped to work furthermore with Dimitry Medvedev rather than return to a Putin-Merkel relationship in German-Russian relations.
After facing a major financial and economic crisis that Medvedev handled, Putin promised a recovery of the Russian economy in 2012, when he retook the Office of the Russian President for his third tenn.
Thus, even more so than during his first two terms, Putin relied on the cadres of siloviki and the poweroriented bureaucracy and security apparatus of government administration, which, to the shock and dismay of observers in the West, began to manifest more of the old bad habits.
With Putin’s return, critics in the West, who were dismayed by the drift to authoritarianism in Russia, increasingly questioned the special relationship that Russia and Germany had enjoyed.
The first signs of opposition in Russia were visible in 2012, when large demonstrations took place in the streets of Moscow against Putin and his allies.
Currently, the Russian president enjoys an approval rating of 86 percent, as shown in recent polls.
In this context and with regards to the stagnation or reversal of democratic development in Russia, German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle argued in 2013, with regards to Gennan-Russian relations and Ostpolitik, that despite commonalities, “there are also differences and many observers currently believe that what divides us is growing at a faster pace than what we have in common.
German-Russian relations are manifold on all levels of society and government.
Germany and Russia’s common history affects the way in which the people are perceived and how politicians make decisions.
In the context of German-Russian relations, certain key events are important to note, beginning with the fact that Soviet sacrifices made in two world wars continued to affect the Soviets until 1990 Russia today, which commemorates the seventieth anniversary of Soviet victory.
The Cold War with Germany’s Ostpolitik and the Gennan reunification are also key events, while parallel developments concerning Gennany’s new beginning and the disintegration of the Soviet Union—and its domestic perception in Russia as defeat—is especially imperative to note.
Thus, Germany was in a more prominent position in regards to Russia, and enjoying a special relationship.
German-Russian relations, however, have always been ambiguous and wavelike, misinterpreted often, but restrained by the fact that Germany and Russia are both part of continental Europe.
It should not be underestimated that “intimacy, however, may breed not only on friendship, but also contempt or open hostility.
GERMAN FOREIGN POLICY Since Germany’s reunification in 1990 and the end of the Cold War, the global security environment has changed dramatically, and with it has transformed the theory and practice of international relations.
With technological advances and the widespread effects of globalization (that is, the process of increased global, transnational and transcultural communication, and commerce in all realms affecting people’s daily life), the execution of foreign policy has become much more complicated.
Since 1989, the international system of states has shifted profoundly and today is prone, once again, to the constant shifting of national power and influence, which has lately been more than evident.
These shifts detennine the position of a nation state within the global system or its ability to assert its interests and sovereignty.
Foreign policy execution is the nation state’s instrument to ensure its vital interests and values—survival, security and prosperity—in the constant competition with other nation states that has been going on since 1648, if not before.
For Germany, this instrument underwent a diplomatic revolution after reunification in 1990.
The reunited Germans had to learn to carry the burden of sovereignty, which comes along with enlarged responsibilities and growing expectations by allies and partners to do more while at the same time remaining within the boundaries of Germany’s painful memory of the epoch of defeat in total war and the aftereffects on political culture.
Germany’s leading role and ability to shape international politics in Europe and beyond has developed during more than two decades after reunification.
Germany has slowly regained power, economically as well as politically, partially by its deploying military force in a multilateral framework amid the turmoil that began in the early 1990s.
Too many today forget Germany’s geopolitical situation of being a nation in between, a fact that has historically contributed to Germany’s special path to nationhood.
This path has and has not diverged from that of Germany’s western neighbors, who became national enemies, with tragic results, including repeated attempts by Germany to dominate Europe by force of arms, attempts which ended in horrible failure.
German foreign policy since unification is deeply conscious of these facts, which are too easily forgotten in the confusion of the twenty-first century, where historical memory is either too short or simply non-existent.
With the US’s pivot to Asia’s and Gennany’s growing role in European politics in the wake of the 2008 world economic crisis, and with the forward march of globalization, one must understand the process of how Germany’s foreign policy became a reality, of the essential stakeholders, and of the domestic influences that shaped Germany’s policy, as directed by the Bundeskanzleramt and the Federal Foreign Office.
Only with these essentials can one understand Germany’s relationship with Russia.
Besides governmental stakeholders, foreign policy is influenced by public opinion with regards to domestic decisions, as well as by such special interest groups as the Ostausschuss der Deutschen Wirtschaft , which strongly promotes Gennan-Russian relations and opposes the sanction regime introduced in 2014 after the Crimean annexation.
German foreign policy must be understood in the historical realms of the nation’s past, as well as in the context of its profound European interdependence, of which Chapter II provides a basic overview with focus on Germany and Russia.
While a purely theoretical explanation based on the body of international relations theory does not sufficiently explain German foreign policy formation—the structures, dominant stakeholders, motives, procedures, and influences—a theoretical approach on terms and ideas of foreign policy is inevitable.
This chapter initially provides a brief theoretical background on foreign policy formation, its stakeholders and powers, interests, and identity in the framework of international relations in order to understand foreign policy.
These theoretical essentials elaborate on governmental decision-making in German foreign policy while explicitly addressing such main actors as the Bundeskanzleramt, the Answaertiges Amt and the Bundestag before outlining the parameters of contemporary German foreign policy and an analysis of Germany’s Russia policy.
The chapter closes with a discussion of the role of civil society in foreign policy and includes non-governmental stakeholders, such as media and think tanks in Gennany, as well as German-Russian interest groups, such as the Ostausschuss of the German economy.
UNDERSTANDING FOREIGN POLICY Foreign policy, as part of international relations or world politics, has been extensively researched and theoretically founded for more than a century, if not longer.
Notwithstanding that other, especially constructivist, approaches have gained explanatory significance since the end of the Cold War with the furthering democracy and multilateral institutions, this section does not go into detail on the differentiation of theories of international relations; rather, it aims to provide a theoretical background on foreign policy formation in general.
Acknowledging the fact that foreign policy formation does not take place in a vacuum leads to the assumption that, if the respective international relations environment changes, then so does the policy formation and, accordingly, its explanatory theory.
Essentials on Foreign Policy Foreign policy is generally understood as the entirety of state activity undertaken to realize the state’s interests concerning its power, economy, culture, and above all security vis-a-vis its international partners and neighbors.
Kissinger’s distinction also implies that domestic goals and international goals are separate, which was true for past centuries, but today, due to increased globalization and its transnational relevance, the distinction between foreign policy goals and domestic policy goals is rapidly disappearing.
There has also been a significant change in the face of war and the nature of weapons, which poses a challenge for German foreign policy in keeping the technological standard of its military capabilities, which have suffered from decades of under-investment in the peace dividend from 1989.
While internal factors are societal preconditions, preferences, or specific decisions made in connection with domestic issues within the country, external factors are the stimuli that foreign nation’s actions generate on the system.
Sicherheit, Wohlfahrt, Institutionen undNormen [German foreign policy: Security, welfare, institutions, and norms] , 16.
While change or adaption is a constant character of governmental foreign policy, it is necessary to understand the extent to which foreign policy change is undertaken, as one nation’s change in foreign policy will always have consequences for other countries, forcing them to adapt or change their foreign policy.
The factors that determine and influence a foreign policy change are multidimensional.
Although the degree of institutionalization and the support of actors affect change, the domestic significance of an issue also influences the likelihood of foreign policy change.
When Governments Choose to Redirect Foreign Policy,” International Studies Quarterly 34, no. , 5-6.
This idea implies that the states also define the order of international politics through their interactions.
Although the international system constitutes the environment in which foreign policy takes place, it is the different actors that execute foreign policy.
In Waltz’s realist approach, nation states are units on the same level because, even though each sovereign state varies widely in size, power, capabilities, wealth, and form, they all face the same tasks, though they may not have identical abilities to execute them.
Gareis concludes that, despite the rise of non-governmental organizations in international politics or intergovernmental organizations such as the European Union, the nation state remains the dominant actor in the international system.
Based on the Westphalian system in the epoch from 1648 until 1815, a European rational-bureaucratic state developed and, confined to its territory, became the authorized actor on the international stage, actions described as Staatskunst to assure and safeguard power and territorial integrity through diplomacy, alliances, or military actions.
In the classical sense of the era from approximately 1740 until the 1880s, the tenn state encompassed, in addition to government, society, which was politically diverse according to the prevailing regime, and the national territory.
In most democratic systems, Staatskunst is performed by what was formerly a small circle of government officials and cabinets by the political leadership, as outlined in the constitution.
Grundlagen, Strukturen und Prozesse [Foreign policy: Basics, structures, and procedures] , 79.
Among the broad spectrum of structures in executive branches, the power to shape and decide foreign policy resides with but a few power centers within the executive branch.
Personalizing the power centers, foreign policy is formed, decided, and executed by the head of state and government—in Gennany, the Bundeskanzlerin ,as well as the minister of foreign affairs and the minister of defense,—supplemented by such additional ministries as economics or development and trade, as well as small advisory circles.
Thus, the governmental top-level executives act on behalf of the nation state and represent the state as an actor in international politics.
With the systemic relevance of governmental top-level executives in foreign policy, the personal attitudes and characteristics of decision-makers are of importance.
However, the actual level of power differs depending on the established political system with restraints in a democracy, such as coalition agreements or separation of powers with checks and balances, compared to an authoritarian, dictatorial system, where a small circle of decision-makers could enjoy nearly unlimited power.
In the contemporary international system, states are not the only actors, although they remain the dominant players.
Contributing to and participating in international relations are also such international governmental organizations as the UN or regionally defined EU, OSCE or NATO and their subunits, as well as such non-governmental organizations as the International Committee of the Red Cross or Doctors without Borders.
In addition, private actors, such as large transnational corporations (e.g., Google, Gazprom), or even private persons like the co-founder of Microsoft, Bill Gates, or terrorist groups and groups of organized crime, are increasingly exerting influence at the international level.
Power, Interests, and Identity In the disorder of the international system, states aspire towards hegemony to be able to pursue their interests and dictate their nonns and values for the international system, which is possible only if the state is powerful enough to prevail.
However, any power projection automatically leads to countervailing power because states are in a constant struggle.
In order to survive in a realist understanding and to safeguard against any external aggression, power—often expressed as military, economic, financial, cultural, or technological power—is the relevant factor.
Max Weber defined power as taking advantage of every chance to get one’s way in a social relation, even against resistance.
According to Weber’s perspective, states are in constant relation to each other; thus, power is expressed in the ability of one state to persuade another state to act in such a way that the state would not have acted otherwise.
Consequently, in the anarchic system of international relations, power is the ability to assert the state’s objectives and interests against competing interests to the benefit of the state.
The father of modern United States realism theory, Hans Morgenthau, argues a realist perspective such that each state seeks maximum power according to his concept of interest defined in terms of power; however, adjacent theories usually define more than one interest.
If foreign policy is generally understood as the entirety of state activity undertaken to realize the state’s interests, then a state needs to define its interests, or at least its guiding principles, such as values and nonns.
National interest can also be influenced by ideology or history, as evidenced by the Federal Gennan case with regards to Westbindung from 1949 onwards, or by Russia’s national interests with regards to retaining an alleged superpower status in the present and recent past despite the collapse of the USSR in 1991.
In this context, foreign policy is the manifestation of the state’s means-ends relation in order to pursue the objectives as defined in interests.
The national identity of a state plays an important role in foreign policy because it defines the self-perception of a nation state and thus influences foreign policy formation and its underlying interests.
National identity can force national interests and foreign policies to change when the national identity and proclaimed foreign policy interests collide.
With the end of the Cold War, not only Germany’s position has changed but also the situation of the European continent and the world order in turn.
During the Cold War, Federal Germany’s foreign policy was determined by the perception of the constant military threat in the East—beyond the “Iron Curtain”—while the objectives of Germany’s foreign policy were the peaceful resolution of national division, the prevention of nuclear war, the perseverance of territorial integrity, and the perpetuation of hard-won political independence while firmly embedded in the EuroAtlantic West.
To ensure these objectives and at the same time reassure its partners, Federal Germany engaged in multilateral institutional approaches, such as within NATO and its integrated military command structures or the European Union.
The defeat in two world wars, the weak Republic of 1919-1933, and national division had long-defined Germany’s semi-sovereignty until reunification in 1990.
The integration into a sovereignty that limited the regimes of multilateral approaches was for West Germany, and then for a united Gennany, the modus operandi for its foreign policy during the Cold War.
The best means of overcoming the legacy of defeat was the path not really taken by German statesmen either before 1914 or aside from Locarno in 1925, that is, a firm grounding of Germany in collective security and collective defense as these institutions emerged through the 1960s within the international system of the Cold War.
Germany’s Uncertain Power , 3. 67 their foreign policy behavior according to common norms and regulations, and to do so even if that meant following regulations and nonns not in-line with their objectives and interests.
With respect to Gennany’s apparently weak power in May 1949 and with the foundation of the FRG, a multilateral approach was the most promising way to regain international acceptance and influence, but also to show the world that West Germany could be trusted again.
This policy assured the survival of the new FRG in the blast of the Cold War; united the French and West Germans via the Saar, Ruhr, and Lorraine industrial regions; laid the foundation for a common market; and secured the role of the United States as a balancer to the UK and France, who otherwise might drift away from Central Europe.
The policy also assured prosperity, which, with the security of NATO, allowed West Gennan democracy to consolidate in a way that had not been possible in the 1920s.
Thus, the critical public thoroughly scrutinizes every foreign policy decision in Gennany, especially in the remits of usage of military force, in politics, population, and media along the lines of Germany’s foreign policy culture.
At the same time, the FRG built up its military forces and discussed the use of nuclear weapons as part of NATO’s Strategic Concept MC 14/3 during the Cold War from 1968 on— hardly the instruments of a civilian power.
However, the political culture the concept of civilian power , and its subsequent foreign policy identity of multilateral engagement is still valid today.
Maull and Risse, among others, argue that after reunification in 1990, Germany’s foreign policy followed a path of continuity, and relevant changes happened slowly and in small steps with the employment of instruments, such as the Bundeswehr, while the overall concept of civilian power remained in place and is the basis of Germany’s strategic culture when seen in contrast to other great powers, especially since 2001.
One looks in vain for an account of the policies and instruments required for the coherent implementation that is rooted in accepted societal and political preferences.
The soon-tobe revised Weifibuch on security policy and the future of the Bundeswehr from the year 2006, is the responsibility of the Ministry of Defense, with the participation of the other governmental resorts.
In contrast with somewhat similar documents in the UK or the United States, this work is especially significant, even if it receives far less attention than it deserves.
Germany’s foreign policy is rooted in these decentralized and federal structures of the political system, including its society.
Thus, knowledge about the role of the main foreign policy actors of the federal German government helps one understand the formation of German foreign policy and its limits.
Such knowledge, however, is often suffocated in partisan political debates, and extreme political positions arise from the unhappy legacy of the age of total war and especially its effects on domestic politics.
Among the different ministries and agencies on the federal level, the traditional institutions of foreign policy in Gennany—the Federal Chancellery, the Federal Foreign Office, and the Federal Ministry of Defense—are the main actors.
Their interactions and the fonnation of policy are guided by several principles.
The dominant role of the Chancellor is supplemented with the principle of ministerial authority, which explains that “each Federal Minister shall conduct the affairs of his department independently and on his own responsibility.
It is worth mentioning that most of the decisions are not being prepared in the collegial body of the cabinet but in consultative political sub-bodies of the cabinet, where only those who have an interest in the topic are involved.
The practice of these principles, based on the Basic Law, gives the executive branch a strong position, which has been confirmed by the Federal Constitutional Court multiple times.
With two exceptions in 1960 and in 1982, Gennany has always had coalition governments of the leading parties from left center, to center, to right center since the first Adenauer cabinet from September 20, 1949, until present.
This fact affects the decision-making process within the federal government significantly.
The coalition principle affects all other principles like an overarching superstructure, as federal governmental policy decisions need to take into account the diverging interests and positions of more than one political party.
The Bundeskanzleramt supports the chancellor in performing constitutional duties while acting as head of the federal government and is thus an import steering and coordinating body interlining the implementation of the principles of chancellor, ministerial, and cabinet authority.
The chancellery needs to have oversight and expertise knowledge of all relevant ministerial and governmental plans and actions in order to educate the chancellor at any given time and ensure a coherent and unified position of the German government.
The directorate-general is manned mainly by experts, diplomats, and officers from the Foreign Office and the Ministry of Defense, while the head of the 2nd directorategeneral—usually a senior diplomat from the Foreign Office— is the chancellor’s foreign policy advisor.
The Bundesssicherheitsrat is located within the 2nd directorate-general, also one of the cabinet’s political sub-bodies.
The Federal Security Council meets secretly and consists of the chancellor, and the ministers of foreign affairs, defense, interior, finance, justice, economic affairs, and development aid, as well as the head of the office of the chancellery; in addition, the chief of defense and the government spokesperson have advisory seats.
However, the Federal Security Council has lost significance in that, presently, it deals mainly with arms exports, while important foreign-policy decisions are made in smaller, more infonnal circles, which consist of at least the chancellor, the head of the office of the chancellery, and the ministers of foreign affairs, defense, and interior.
The Federal Foreign Office and Primacy of Foreign Affairs While the traditional institutions of foreign policy are still the dominant actors in Germany’s foreign policy fonnation, the number of other specialized ministries engaged in international, bilateral, or multilateral relations in favor of German interests has grown significantly in light of globalization, trans-nationalization, and the end of the Cold War.
Moreover, because of the federal structure at the heart of government, foreign relations are nurtured not only on the federal level, but also on the state level.
The State of Bavaria, for example, maintains a network of international representative offices in twenty-three countries across the globe in view of its own particularistic heritage, but also because German aerospace, as well as such firms as Audi and BMW, have a significant world presence.
While this fragmentation of foreign policy strengthens the role of the chancellor, it poses a challenge to the Federal Foreign Office and the traditional primacy in foreign affairs, which is characteristic of how foreign relations have changed from the time of Mettemich and Bismarck until the present.
In this context, the difference between foreign relations and foreign policy is important, as the latter is ideally the coherent implementation of defined national goals and interests in competition with other states.
This ministry has thus developed into a crosssectional body that shares expertise and interacts with other specialized ministries.
To enhance its expertise and to take into account the wide spectrum of foreign relations, which affect foreign policy, more than 25 percent of personnel at Germany’s embassies and consulates are not diplomats from the Foreign Service but officials from other federal ministries.
In 2001, Andreae and Kaiser stated that the primacy of foreign policy still rests with the Foreign Office, Oppermann and Hoese believed in 2007 that only in the realms of peaceand security policy, policy in the UN, and policy concerning Germany’s engagement in the multilateral alliances or organizations (as well as concerning armaments verification and armaments export, human rights, and international law) does the Foreign Office still hold the central responsibility.
However, the position of the foreign minister hinges on the primacy of foreign affairs for the Foreign Office.
Without this primacy in the cabinet, no unified German position can be put in hand.
The procedural rules of the federal government—as with other nations—foresee that only after having contacted and informed the Foreign Office may a representative of a foreign country be received, and all negotiations with other countries may be conducted only with the approval of the Federal Foreign Office, which can decide to participate in any negotiations.
He has not only expertise in foreign policy but also rich experience of a particular kind in view of the present crisis and its background.
The Role of German Bundestag and Bundesrat in Foreign Policy The executive branch of the government has a strong position in foreign policy decision-making, while the legislative branch—the parliament —exerts its influence via the checks and balances: the parliamentary provisional rights.
Usually the government and the parliamentary majority stem from the same party and are part of a coalition; thus, approval for foreign-policy decisions can proceed without friction.
In addition, a two-third parliamentary majority is required for all aspects where further transfer of sovereignty to the EU is foreseen.
The Bundestag and its members of parliament have no right of initiative in the remits of foreign policy and thus can accept or reject only the laws that are presented for parliamentary decision.
Nevertheless, if the representation at the state level in the Bundesrat does not equal governmental majority representation, then the opposition can exert participatory control of the government’s actions.
The Bundestag has multiple non-legislative instruments of parliamentary control, which is especially useful for opposition in the parliament.
The instruments include the possibility to cite members of the executive to testify before the Bundestag or its subcommittees to explain government policy or to set up committees of inquiry if 25 percent of the members of parliament agree to do so.
Concerning the deployment of the Bundeswehr and the 1950s-1980s dilemma between Article 87a and Article 24 of the Basic Law, the Federal Constitutional Court ruled on July 12, 1994, that a parliamentary decision needed to be taken on request by the government to engage militarily in the framework of multilateral institutions, the Article 24 interpretation of the mission of the Bundeswehr.
The Bundestag can only accept or deny the military deployment, which necessitates that government cooperate and inform the members of parliament, which also goes along the parliamentary groups.
In Germany, members of parliament usually focus on specific fields of expertise and normally remain in that domain throughout their political career.
A foreign policy expertise is confined to certain members of the legislative who specialize in this field.
National Structures and Multilateral Integration,” in Germany’s New Foreign Policy: Decision-Making in an Interdependent World, eds.
This fact implies that when the government wants to pursue its foreign policy objectives successfully, it needs to coordinate with the parliament, while contentious issues in a coalition government will be dealt with via the coalition committee.
While the party leader of the SPD, Sigmar Gabriel, who is also the vice chancellor, took over the Ministry of Economics and Technology, Frank-Walter Steinmeier once again took over the Federal Foreign Office.
Out of the twenty-three committees of the current legislative period, several permanent parliamentary committees are of significant relevance concerning foreign policy towards Russia, namely, the Committees on Affairs of the European Union, Budget, and Foreign Affairs.
These committees, each which concentrates on its specialized area of policy, consist of the members of the five political parties according to their relative representation in the Bundestag.
In addition, the German Bundestag entertains a variety of parliamentarian groups engaged in international relations between the respective parliaments, such as the German-Russian Parliamentary Friendship Group, which is currently chaired be CDU Member of Parliament Bernhard Raster, and which acts as a catalyst for dialogue between the Russian State Duma and the Bundestag.
The strong position of the executive versus the legislative branch in the realms of foreign policy has been confirmed multiple times by the Federal Constitutional Court.
However, in the public sphere and in the political decision-making process, the Bundestag and the Bundesrat are important actors in foreign affairs if it comes to governmental accountability, legitimization, and broad public support and understanding.
A diffuse, unpredictable, and increasingly unstable security environment, which affects Germany’s interests and parameters for foreign policy, has replaced the fonner bipolarity of the Cold War.
In the past couple of years, in turn, the parameters of the 1990s have changed severely in the wake of the United States war on terror, the global economic crisis, and mounting security crises around and in Europe, as well as the shift of global power to Asia and away from the Euro-Atlantic axis.
German foreign policy is rooted in the normative foundation of the Basic Law of 1949, which has stood the test of time in a remarkable way.
Article 26 of the Basic Law obliges the federal government to ensure the maintenance of international peace at all costs and limits arms export, making any infringement an unconstitutional and thus criminal offense.
And yet, such statecraft has well advanced Gennan national interests, which itself have changed since unity in 1990 in the face of domestic and international forces.
Therefore, Germany’s primary interest is a status quo of a stable and secure environment of western-oriented values and institutions, which means “a strong Europe and a liberal, rule-based international order with free and open states and societies.
In a realist paradigm, the interests and power materialized in economic strength assure Germany’s survival in an anarchic and competitive world, as Germany defines its national interests in terms of power, not in the form of military capabilities, but in economic strength in a generally peaceful world of more or less ideological consensus.
In this fashion, the so-called long lines of Gennany’s traditional foreign policy characteristics—multilateralism, European integration, and transatlantic partnership—are still valid in 2015, but with different accentuation because Gennany’s has become increasingly self-confident in Europe and in the World, while the world order itself shows significant signs of disintegration or a violent and inevitable reordering.
The manner in which Schroeder opposed the United States plans for invading Iraq and the fact that Germany allied with Russia and France caused the most significant and deep rupture in USGerman relations since 1945.
But the German “special way” was also a renunciation of the traditional multilateral approach for Gennany, as Schroeder was “prepared to act without reference to multilateral institutions,” as he declared that Germany would not participate even if there would be a UN Security Council resolution.
The WikiLeaks scandal, the revelations of Edward Snowden about United States signals intelligence, and the possibility that the United States National Security Agency targeted German citizens, as well as a revulsion against such United States firms as Google and Facebook, have gathered since 2008 and hanned relations.
Germany’s Westbindung has been weakened by selective decisions, and the onceprominent commitment to multilateralism transitioned from “reflexive” to “selective” multilateralism in the first decade of the twenty-first century.
Gennany will always opt for a multilateral approach where it deems necessary but will act bilaterally when it does not.
Admittedly, despite Gennany’s economic power, it is increasingly less capable of acting unilaterally.
The advent of the crisis in Ukraine in 2014, however, poses a test of such policy that allows few of the luxuries of choice that might have been said to exist to opt out and or to shift burdens, as happened in the period from 1990-2011.
Nevertheless, Germany’s foreign policy after reunification has been dominated more by continuity than by significant change from the alliance cohesion of an earlier epoch or the emphasis on continental interest narrowly defined, although change occurred mainly in the employment of instruments, such as military force, which probably signifies the most relevant change.
Within foreign policy, the chancellor uses Germany’s new self-confidence and powers to mediate between Russia and the West, primarily the US, thus acknowledging Gennany’s bridging function in Europe.
Whether intended or not, with the crisis in Ukraine and the advent of Russian irredentism by force of arms, German statecraft must master a problem of singular difficulty for which old formulas of general peace and entente are unworkable.
So far, Merkel’s foreign policy aims to strengthen the European integration amid domestic and international sources of violent disintegration, and she argues that a more cohesive European policy, especially defense and security policy, will be key to an enhanced transatlantic partnership.
In 2012, the Foreign Office introduced the tenn Gestaltungsmacht (a power that shapes the international order, a vague reference to Bismarck and Willy Brandt, the efficacy of which has been put to perhaps too rigorous a test in Ukraine) in the context of broadening Germany’s relations with rising powers like China, India, and Brazil, with the objective to strengthen Gennany’s economy and prospects for export as inner-European demand declined in the wake of the financial and Euro crises.
This aspiration to ride the upward tide of globalization characterizes the will to widen the zone of stability and economic growth around Germany’s center and beyond.
In the end, Germany’s foreign policy finds itself caught between export-driven Realpolitik and value-based Moralpolitik.
Steinmeier promised to address these trials of policy in what are uncharted waters.
To avoid possible misconceptions and enhance cooperation over confrontation according to its foreign policy culture, Germany’s Russia Policy is an important part of Gennan foreign policy and has an important impact on the nations power leverage itself as a civilian power with the additional aspiration to be a shaping power.
Germany’s Russia Policy Germany and Russia are fated to share close, interdependent relations.
After 1990, Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who enjoyed a close relation with Mikhail Gorbachev and later with Boris Yeltsin, prioritized Germany’s Russia policy in order to ensure the complete withdrawal of Russian troops from Gennany and to avoid any obstruction of the domestic post-reunification developments in Germany.
After 1998 and under the Gerhard Schroeder cabinet, Russia policy became a high-prioritized policy area even more in view of the different world view of the socialist chancellor, which had been declared a Chefsache, meaning detennination through the chancellery, or rather, the chancellor himself.
It is argued that the close personal relations of Putin and Schroeder came because of similar personal backgrounds because both politicians’ families were from the poor, working social class, both had earned degrees in law, both had worked their political way up towards the highest echelons of political power, and both shared a barely bridled affection for the trappings of showy wealth and the good life.
Schroeder’s decision to declare a Sonderweg (a special German way) in 2002-2003—contradictory to its traditional multilateralism as well as Atlanticism—and thus oppose the United States invasion of Iraq welded Putin and Schroeder’s friendship even closer.
The clear prioritization of a “Russia first” approach during the tenure of Kohl and Schroeder was intensified by Schroeder’s pronounced personalization of Germany’s Russia policy.
Schroeder’s statecraft was even more pointedly of an eastern orientation than that of Willy Brandt in the epoch 1969-1974.
During his term as chancellor, social democrat Gerhard Schroeder employed a Ostpolitik revived—a modification of the successful and traditional Ostpolitik under Willy Brandt and others—and “change through rapprochement” became “change through trade,” as the SPDs thought that enhanced economic relations would automatically lead to political and societal change in Russia.
In this regard, Kundnani calls Ostpolitik revised an illusion, as the reference to Brandt’s Ostpolitik, even a modified Ostpolitik, neglects the fact that while change through rapprochement did not aim at ideological change, change through trade did exactly that.
Moreover, the slogan Wandel durch Handel is usable for any continuation of trade in any political situation in order to justify commercialism under any circumstance.
Thus, it came a no real surprise that the slogan Wandel durch Handel only paid off in economic terms for those firms positioned to profit most.
Steimneier was one of the architects of Schroeder’s Russia policy and continued in Merkel’s first cabinet as foreign minister, pursuing, on the basis of Schroeder’s Russia policy, a path tenned “modernization through interdependence,” which continued to aim at the economization of GermanRussian relations amid the rigors of globalization with a Eurasian continental focus.
Prospects and Implications,” CRS Report for Congress, January 17, 2006, 11.
He proclaimed a German-Russian modernization partnership with a European dimension, certain that, by offering such a modernization partnership, Russian society, the government, and the state would become more open, transparent, and guided by rule of law.
Such policy would create more opportunities for German-Russian exchanges.
However, with the sudden Georgian War in August 2008, a caesura happened.
With the world economic crisis and the apogee of United States power, a change of climate had taken place that few expected and which represented a crisis for the policy of transformation through trade whereby persons close to policy makers ignored how the advocates of power and empire were assuming new power in the Kremlin.
She was a leading woman, and, at the same time, she was a person who revived traditions of statecraft from former times.
Most significant, however, was Merkel’s experience with the dominant Soviet security and military presence in the GDR until 1989.
After all, to Moltke is ascribed the ideal—to be more than you appear—which could just as easily be Merkel’s motto as well.
Merkel repeatedly addressed the lack of democratic reform in Russia, which presently became retrograde , and she called for guaranteeing human rights and rule of law while carefully balancing her words.
While a special relationship with Russia was maintained during the first Merkel cabinet, especially due to Steimneier’s initiatives from the Federal Foreign Office, the coalition with the liberal FDP after 2009 finally led to an end of the special status of Russia in the Gennan government, and a sober tone replaced the comfortable and friendly tone that had been characterizing Germany’s hopeful Russia policy under Kohl and Schroeder.
On a personal level, Merkel avoided meeting Russian Prime Minister Putin and sought to support his successor Dmitri Medvedev, as the latter was regarded as the embodiment of the “New Russia,” a Russia that would moderni z e and engage in democratic reform.
The chancellery, and partially the Bundestag, exerted more influence in this regard.
However, Gennan policy towards Russia had not been a top priority for the chancellor during the Christian-Liberal coalition from 2009 to 2013, as in addition the expertise in the Bundestag and the government decreased, and the emphasis of policy shifted to the Euro crisis.
Meister concluded that Germany and Russia conferred about the same topic but had diverging interests and priorities, which led to increased bilateral misunderstandings.
The lack of reciprocity on the Russian side, which was one of the core foundations of the German approach, leads to a dilemma and casts a shadow on the state of Germany’s relations with Russia, which have been continuously worsening since the Georgian War of 2008 and the world economic crisis of the same year.
In 2012, Germany’s Russia policy under Merkel suffered another major setback when Putin became, for the third time, Russian president and swiftly and without hesitation destroyed all hopes of reform that were invested in Medvedev.
The latter became Russian Prime Minster, but he was only a shadow figure to be seen pliantly receiving orders from the boss—a perfect castling for Putin.
This sudden and unexpected move for the West augured no good for anyone.
After the 2012 return of President Putin, Merkel increasingly questioned the value of partnership with Russia, a country that opposed western democratic values and in the beginning was faced with rising protests among the population in Moscow.
While representatives of German businesses committed to eastern markets, especially via the Committee on Eastern European Economic Relations, put pressure on the government to avoid harsh criticism of Russian politics, many representatives of non-governmental organizations and media criticized the chancellery for taking a too-soft approach and for not supporting Russian society sufficiently.
Such stresses and strains are perfectly normal in diplomacy, but given the imperative for trade in statecraft, such policy has shifted the balance to economic interest groups with an eastern orientation—an old phenomenon with an unlovely past.
With the 2013 federal elections, a new grand coalition between the SPD and the CDU/CSU was formed, and Frank-Walter Steinmeier became, for a second term, Germany’s minister of foreign affairs in Merkel’s third cabinet.
Germany’s Russia policy, guided by an Ostpolitik revised, needs to make pressing decisions in light of a moral dilemma between a value-based Moralpolitik, embedded in the West, or a German Sonderweg, an interest-guided Realpolitik.
Moreover, a critical person must ask whether the endless recitation of Egon Bahr’s heroic story with Willy Brandt (from the construction of the wall in 1961 until the collapse of same in 1989) is appropriate in what is plainly a new era, the rules of which are hardly evident, and the violence of which is more toxic and aggressive than might be said to have existed in the thermonuclear-dominated stability of the high Cold War that allowed the FRG to act as it did from 1969 until 1989.
The return of Machtpolitik under Putin heralded itself in 2008, became dominant in 2014, and has meant a rupture in Germany’s existing statecraft.
This fact gave the West, especially the United States, important, leading roles in integration for what turned out to be great success in German national interest in 1989, and which, since 9/11, has unfortunately lost meaning for many Germans.
Until reunification, Germany’s foreign policy towards Westbindung and Brandt’s Ostpolitik aimed at overcoming the European division with a repeat of what had been a remarkably peaceful diplomatic revolution and non-violent revision of the European order.
In this regard, foreign and domestic policy in Germany were deeply interconnected because matters of foreign policy, especially towards the Soviet Union and East Gennany, directly affected the lives of all Germans.
Exemplary are the unpopular, but equally necessary, foundations of the Bundeswehr in 1955 and the NATO-double track decision in 1979, which both faced strong civil opposition in both East and West Germany.
Despite the deployment of military forces outside of Central Europe in 1994, civil society in Germany still remains highly skeptical of the use military force as an instrument of foreign policy and prioritizes diplomatic means and civilian instruments, as the use of military force is seen as last resort.
Although the public has only indirect influence on foreign policy formation via the electoral vote, its opinion is an important scale for the measurement of governmental politics.
In Germany, civil society is still affected by the burdens of the Cold War and national division, where West Germans were influenced by a democratic political system with a free market, while East Germans were socialized under a communist political system with a planned economy and a strong secret-police presence.
However, in spring 2014, amid a world order of growing violence and economic turmoil, the interest in foreign policy in Germany was high, wherein 68 percent of the populace were strongly interested in foreign policy.
German Civil Society after Reunification Germany’s identification as a civilian power can be seen as a Leitmotif of public opinion , not only since reunification, but since the founding of West Germany in 1949.
In the GDR, the people and their identity were influenced by Soviet domination and political socialization, isolated from the cosmopolitan forces of the West—a fact not wholly appreciated by West Germans who newly discovered the society of the former GDR in 1990 for themselves and had great trouble fully understanding what they found there.
This fact notwithstanding, today the nation is led by two especially prominent former citizens of the GDR, the irony of which is noteworthy and the meaning of which would require its own analysis.
An opinion poll conducted in April 2014 showed that 49 percent of the German population foresees a median position for Gennany between Russia and the West, while 45 percent foresee a Gennany embedded solely in the West.
The desire for a third path is a corollary of the old notion of a German special path because it is adapted to the present.
It is not an especially new phenomenon because it was present in the Weimar Republic, in the Third Reich, and in the Cold War in various iterations.
As such, this idea operates in civil society in various forms, especially among those critical of a western orientation, or a western European orientation.
The glory of the centrality of Germany and the residue of the Cold War is confirmed in a recent study from the Pew Research Center, showing that, in East Germany, only 44 percent of the respondents are in favor of stronger relations with the United States than with Russia, while in the West, 61 percent of the respondents favor strong relations with the United States rather than with Russia.
This phenomenon plays a role today in the Ukraine crisis since 2014 as to the fate of Ukraine and the willingness among a significant percentage of the German population to embrace and argue for Russian apologia.
Opinion polls show that the younger generation, the post-reunification generation, is more willing to engage internationally in order to protect human rights, though not necessarily with military force.
In this context, the older generation beyond 60 years is especially wary of military operations abroad, with 90 percent in favor of reducing the Bundeswehr deployments.
Nevertheless, despite the current rift in US-German relations over free trade or the NSA eavesdropping in Germany, 62 percent of Germans regard the United States as a reliable ally, and 57 percent favor stronger ties with the US, while 60 percent want Germany to engage in the Ukraine conflict in close relation with the United States and Western partners.
German civil society, due to its legacy, has had a difficult relationship with its military since 1949.
With the factual abolishment of conscription on July 1, 2011, the fear arose that the Germans would distance themselves even more from the Bundeswehr, which would led to diverging development between society and German military and which would have implications for foreign-policy decisions.
With Bundeswehr operations in Afghanistan and an increased number of civilian and German casualties, the Germans’ difficult relations with foreign policy hard power became more strained.
Policy, Strategy and Institutions in Germany,” in The Routledge Handbook of Civil-Military’ Relations , eds.
Twenty-five years after reunification, the German public seemed to have transfonned “Never again Auschwitz” to a modified “Never again War” theme to cater to a self-perception of being a peaceful, post-heroic society.
With the Ukraine crisis and the Russian annexation of the Crimea closing in on its first anniversary, 51 percent of Germans thi nk that the crisis does affects each German citizen’s life, while only 30 percent dismiss any influence of the current crisis on their life, which remains to be seen.
Think Tanks and Mainstream Media on Foreign Affairs As shown in previous chapters, foreign-policy decision-making takes place in small, elite circles in Berlin that are fitted into the mass of opinion in a process of debate and democratic give-and-take, which can get quite polemical.
While Germany enjoys a wide spectrum of media outlets, its foreign policy expertise, especially in relations to Russia, has declined significantly since 1990, as such well-known and respected weekly newspapers, such as Die Zeit or the business-focused Handelsb/att, no longer maintain their own correspondents in Moscow.
This trend arises specifically from changes in priorities since 1989, as well as the decline of excellent journalism, generally, as a consequence of the media phenomena of the twenty-first century.
With the availability of the whole Internet reaching beyond national borders and the possibility of everyone posting articles and comments, journalistic objectivity is in decline, and polemics of the most primitive sort has made an astonishing comeback, as it was with the worst of yellow journalism of the late nineteenth century.
In foreign affairs, where people cannot personally witness evolving events like war and peace, which might be possible with domestic events, the media plays a very central role in shapin public opinion.
This effect can be exploited by those wholly unconcerned by democracy and checks and balances as propaganda campaigns in the Internet, which is becoming increasingly common in the current Ukraine crisis.
The Ukraine crisis occurred a hundred years after the outbreak of war in Europe in 1914, and with it revived the most vicious and calumny-laden practices from a century ago, all of which are ideally suited to flourish in the digital free-for-all.
For example, pro-Russian protesters, referring to the Ukraine crisis, accused the West German-based media of failing to analyze postcommunist Gennany conectly.
Such enraged critics also rebuke analyses of contemporary Russia, partially based on individual socialization under the communist system in East Germany.
In this regard, it is a thin line for the average German citizen to differentiate between objective news coverage and state-backed “information” with propagandistic tendencies, such as witnessed by the Russian state-backed TV station RT (fonnerly Russia Today), which is also available in Germany and Great Britain.
The small circles, where foreign policy is discussed on a professional level, are primarily located in Berlin, close to the decision-makers.
These institutions, however, have been overshadowed by the last quarter century of more or less European unity, as well as an emphasis on the Middle East, in which German expertise looms less prominent in public life than in European security.
The major political parties represented in the Bundestag support political foundations, which are interlinked with the parties, but also with parliament itself.
These foundations, with their own research and policy branches, are further linked to the chancellery and federal ministries because they engage significantly in international policy analysis and act in concert with foreign policy.
Linking the Worlds of Foreign Policy and Transnationalism,” in Germany’s New Foreign Policy: Decision-Making in an Interdependent World, eds.
Wolf-Dieter Eberwein and Karl Kaiser , 206. 98 means to strengthen West German democracy during the Cold War, the political foundations have created outreach program with projects in most countries across the globe promoting democracy and free markets, such as the Konrad Adenauer Stiftung , the political foundation of the CDU, named after the first German post-war chancellor.
Nonetheless, with the priority in the former Soviet region, the KAS has maintained its Moscow office since 1990 but is facing increasing pressure by the Putin government.
For example, recently the project leader of the KAS-sponsored EU-Russian dialogue was denied entry to Russia and was informed about a travel ban into Russia until 2020 without any given reason.
In addition, the SPD-affiliated Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, as well as the KAS, have been searched and computers have been seized by Russian law enforcement in the wake of a State Duma adopted law that defined nearly all foreign non-governmental organizations as illegal foreign agents.
Despite the fact that the allegations against the German political foundations were dropped after the intervention of the German Federal Foreign Office, police raids caused a feeling of insecurity among Russian civil society and German political foundations.
The annual security conference has grown into the German key forum in addressing international security challenges, usually with a high number of representatives from the highest level of decision-making, including head of states and governments.
This event in the Bavarian winter offered the mise en scene for the shift in German-Russian relations in presentations by Vladimir Putin that at first garnered little notice.
The event finds a medial echo in the German press and resembles an opportunity for strategic discussion amongst the experts, but also for possible political statements aimed at the public in Germany.
In 2014, Germany’s President Joachim Gauck, as well as Defense Minster Ursula von der Leyen and Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, used the Munich Security Conference to collectively call for a stronger role in international politics with more responsibilities in terms of hard and soft power for Germany.
German-Russian Interests Groups and Their Influence Besides the academia, think tanks, and mass media, specialized interest groups in society, culture, and economy exert a significant influence on Germany’s Russia policy, groups that resemble an additional organized link between society and the government while promoting their individual interests.
Based on customs again reaching back more than a century, titans of industry and trade are engaged in inside lobbying—to influence the political decision-making process via the political establishment directly, but also through outside lobbying— shaping the public opinion, especially by supporting German businesses that invest in Russia.
Voicing the ideas and concerns of a large portion of the German economy, the Ostausschuss, founded in 1952, encompasses the Federation of German Industries, the Association of German Banks, the German Insurance Association, the Foreign Trade Association of the German Retail Trade, and the German Confederation of Skilled Crafts.
Its ranks are further composed of over two hundred companies from the German Mittelstand to stock list major corporations, such as the car manufacturers Daimler, Volkswagen, the Deutsche Bank, or Lufthansa.
In 2014, the annual conference was postponed, and it has been put on hold since then in light of the Ukraine crisis, although the German government’s Russia liaison, Gernot Erler, announced that the dialogue would be continued, though he did not say when.
Meanwhile, the Ostausschuss remains the most significant interest and lobby group concerning Germany’s Russia policy.
According to Oppennan and Hoese, the success of lobbying, especially inside lobbying, depends on privileged access to the highest level of political decision-making—a unique characteristic of the Ostausschuss, which unites the elite leadership of the German economy.
THE ANNEXATION OF CRIMEA When Russian President Vladimir Putin addressed the Federal Assembly on March 18, 2014, about the annexation of the Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol as new Russian entities to the Russian Federation, he made clear that “in people’s hearts and minds, Crimea has always been an inseparable part of Russia.
Most troubling regarding the fate of peace in Europe, however, has been Putin’s blow to the statecraft of Germany.
With the record of Gennan-Russian relations in mind—periods of heights and depths, or rather, of cooperation and confrontation having followed each other—the 2014 Ukraine crisis and annexation of Crimea has constituted an event of singular importance unseen since 1989 or even 1945.
One cannot refute its consequences for the region, and for Europe as a whole, as well as for the rest of the world.
Even as the June 2015 Russian statecraft attempts to return to a friendly normalcy amid the ongoing war in eastern Ukraine, initiated with a shaky ceasefire, the system of international power on the metalevel in Europe seems shaken and in a daze, which may last for years to come.
This generalization is especially applicable in terms of the German-Russian relations, personalized in the respective regimes of Chancellor Merkel and President Putin.
Although branded by some critics partly as Russlandversteher , guilty of a knee-jerk apologia, public opinion in Germany has shown a clearer attitude as the crisis matured and became more severe throughout the course of 2014.
By spring 2015, one year after the annexation, a vast majority of 85 percent of Russians regarded the annexation of the Crimea as irreversible.
After the raid on Moscow by Crimean Tartars in 1571, and thereafter continuous raids by Crimean Tartars until 1783, the annexation ended the raids on Russians in the southern territories.
Russian rule over Crimea following Catherine II’s reign enabled the establishment of the Black Sea Fleet and opened possible Russian access to the Mediterranean via the Dardanelles and the Bosporus Strait—a long-time Russian strategic goal.
This southern thrust into Ottoman Europe and into conflict with western powers ultimately also led to the Crimean War of 1853-1856, which ended in a humiliating Russian defeat.
Only the most fanciful Ukrainian nationalist might have imagined that Ukraine would be independent one day and therefore would not align under Moscow’s future control.
While arbitrariness most likely was not on Khrushchev’s mind, the exact reasons remain contested, although it is assessed that infrastructural and economic factors, such as the missing land connection to the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, led to the decision.
During the Cold War, within the Soviet Union, Crimea had become not only a well-known holiday destination, but also the setting of several novels in Russian literature and the 1823 poem by Alexander Pushkin “The Fountain of Bakchisarai” (“The Fountain of Tears”), which made Crimea prominent and supported the Russian idea that Crimea, since the dawn of national consciousness in fonner times, had always been an integral part of Russia.
The general Russian perception of Ukraine as “Little Russia” is widespread among Russian nationalists and especially those who have revived Pan Slavic, romanticist dreams of the nineteenth century.
Nevertheless, this perception contested by Ukrainians, who addressed “Russification” as a threat to their national identity.
By 1989, 73 percent of people living in Ukraine were ethnically Ukrainian, while 22 percent were ethnically Russian and dominated the eastern and southeastern parts of Ukraine.
Such a mixture of nationalities was typical in Tsarist Russia because the same was true in all the multinational empires of Eastern Europe.
This ethnic distribution did not, however, correlate with the attendance of language schools, as “47.5% of schoolchildren studied in Ukrainian language schools, . . . 47% in their SovietRussian counterparts.
This sentiment was especially rooted in the Western parts of Ukraine where existed a Polish and Habsburg tradition, and was especially prevalent in the dissident movements of the 1960s and 1970s when the Soviet KGB ensured that half of the political prisoners in the Soviet Union came from Ukraine.
Due to the turmoil in Moscow and the weak Soviet position in 1991 after the attempted coup in Moscow, the Ukrainians gained the opportunity to declare independence—an opportunity the former chainnan of the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet, Leonid Kravchuk, executed August 24, 1991.
This signifies why it is difficult “east of Kiev and west of the Volga ... to identify who is a Ukrainian and who is a Russian” after multiple centuries of interaction.
Whether Crimea belongs to Russia by dint of international law, the peninsula has a major strategic relevance for Russia, especially for the Russian Navy.
The Black Sea Fleet, which has been in the harbor of Sevastopol since the first annexation of Catherine II in the eighteenth century, has been the hallmark of world power and the capacity of Russia to exert its influence in the international system of states against the old empires and then against NATO in the 1970s with the rise of the Soviet fleet.
The RussianUkrainian agreement for the lease of Sevastopol and other military bases in Crimea was supposed to end in 2017 and had been on the diplomatic agenda between Moscow and Kiev for quite a while.
Only with the election of well-known Victor Yanukovych in 2010, and a subsequent reorientation towards Moscow, was a new lease agreement signed in April 2010, which prolonged the usage of the bases for another twenty-five years (until 2042) and which narrowed Ukraine’s NATO membership probabilities.
With the Russian 2014 annexation, the future of the Black Sea Fleet has been secured, and former Ukrainian limitations on the fleet size are not applicable anymore.
Massive allegations of electoral fraud initiated large-scale protests with more than five hundred thousand people protesting the outcome of the elections peacefully in a camival-like atmosphere centered around Kiev’s Maidan Place.
Under pressure from the public, the Ukrainian Supreme Court, on December 3, 2004, condemned the elections and ruled that a third round of elections would be held on December 26, 2004.
However, Yushchenko appointing Yulia Tymoschenko as Ukraine’s first female prime minster did not lead to unity but to accusations of corruption, which created severe divisions among the parties of the Orange Revolution.
Consequently, the Ukrainian political establishment became preoccupied with internal affairs of power and influence instead of addressing the enormous consequences of the economic and financial crisis in 2008.
Despite the pro-Western ambitions under Yushche nk o’s presidency—with NATO membership aspirations and the development of closer relations to the European Union, Ukrainians voted for Victor Yanukovych in 2010 because they were tired of scandal-ridden internal political affairs, the nation’s stagnation in the rigors of the free market, and the debris in eastern Europe after the world economic crisis.
For the Kremlin, the 2010 change of government in Ukraine—and thus the end of Ukraine’s Orange Revolution—meant a chance for rapprochement with the West because the United States had acknowledged the elections in Ukraine as free and fair, thus signaling Moscow to accept the electoral outcome.
Moscow had openly supported status quo candidates in Georgia and Ukraine.
Therefore, the so-called “color revolutions” in Georgia and Ukraine came as a shock to the decision-makers in the Kremlin.
These shocks automatically defined the Russian position as opposition to the new governments, especially because President Putin had personally promoted Yanukovych’s first presidential bid in 2004.
Only months after NATO’s 2008 Bucharest summit, Russian troops intervened in the Georgian province of South Ossetia, claiming to protect Russian citizens, which had their residences in South Ossetia, and sparked the Russo-Georgian War.
Russia’s decisive action in Georgia caught the West by surprise, but it did not lead to a change of foreign policy towards Russia, as most nations, including Germany, after condemning the Russian intervention, went back to business as usual.
In Crimea, the number of Russians had been growing over the years, especially between 1994 and 2004 when Russia had given citizenship to Ukrainians in Crimea.
In 2008 after the Russo-Georgian War, Allison wrote that the Russian modulation of postSoviet borders in the Caucasus had a threatening connotation for political leaders in Kiev, who rightly feared that Moscow might use the Russian population in Crimea as a pretext for coming “to their ‘defence’ in some future crisis.
The following chapter IV outlines major actors and the parameters of Russian foreign policy, focusing on the relevance of the near abroad, as well as relations to Ukraine.
Russians were longing for an authoritarian president like him to bring order, stability, and international recognition back to Russia and its society.
The president started his redefinition of the center-periphery relations in times when the Russian economy recovered and began to prosper due to increasing oil prices, which affected Russia’s approach to international affairs.
Russian foreign policy can be seen only in the context of the Soviet Union’s disintegration since 1989 and its earlier legacy as a European and Eurasian great power, starting from the medieval times of Kievan Rus and through the 1980s.
While from 1945 until 1989 the world was characterized by the bipolarity of the two super powers—United States and Soviet Union—the rump of Russia as heir to the USSR faced severe domestic tunnoil in post-Soviet times, beginning in the early 1990s.
This turmoil led to the perception that Russia was internationally weak.
Ill that Russia was not a superpower, but it nurtured the aim to become so again, a fact obscured prior to 2008.
This decision constitutes a diplomatic revolution that puts the post-1989 European order into question and poses an existential challenge to Gennan foreign and security policy, which has long-assumed that no such post-imperial ambitions might operate from Moscow.
Putin learned his own acute lessons from the Yeltsin legacy, and in order to act with the support of the Russian legislation—having been strongly influenced by Yeltsin’s Presidency—Putin engaged in aligning the Federal Assembly to his ends in a kind of presidential authoritarianism not unlike De Gaulle, but also in a profoundly different spirit than the Fifth Republic in the 1960s.
By bringing United Russia in line with the decisions of the Kremlin and re-introducing the functions of bureaucratization, as well as the career function of the party, Putin succeeded in dominating the main parliamentary party of the Duma.
United Russia became an instrument of Putin’s power structure, especially because most members of the inner circle closest to the president are not members of the party, having consolidated their power positions, and thus are not in need of additional protection through the party affiliation, which is supposed to signal loyalty to the authorities—that is, to Putin.
Although, the majorities in the Duma were changing with the subsequent Duma elections, in the sixth Duma as of December 4, 2011, Putin keeps a stable majority with 53 percent for United Russia until 2017 as a result of the latest parliamentary election.
Additionally, one of the first reforms Putin engaged in when he came to power was a reform of the Upper House—the Federation Council—where two representatives from each federal region were elected.
However, as the Constitution did not define the selection process, the Kremlin proposed to appoint the respective members of the Federation Council, as opposed to electoral representation or personal representation by the elected regional governor.
Although the president is head of nation state, the prime minister is head of the government, which encompasses a number of federal ministries, but also multiple federal agencies, like the Federal Migration Service.
However, all securityand intelligencerelated agencies, such as the Federal Intelligence Agency or the Federal Security Agency, report directly to the president.
The prime minister, currently the former president, Medvedev, is also appointed by the president and confirmed by the State Duma.
The prime minister’s role in foreign policy is not as strong as the president’s; nevertheless, he oversees the actual implementation of domestic and foreign policy, as well as of financial and monetary policy, prepares the federal budget, and is responsible for the rule of law and ensuring human rights.
These elite circles have been increasingly dominated by the appointments of siloviki, that is, those quite at odds with a western orientation and with no love for the ideal of checks and balances.
Loyalty and personal trust in and to Putin and vice versa also seemed to be why why Putin relied heavily on keeping like-minded people around him, the so-called siloviki, the men of the security branches, the intelligence services, and the military who since 2000 have done their best to restore their power lost in the years since 1991.
The strong relations between newly generated wealth and the power circle around the Russian president, which were set up by the oligarchs under Yeltsin’s administration in the 1990s, was taken over by the siloviki, making them the new and powerful elite in Moscow, in particular because the expanded authority to the secret services after 1991, which include the task to “suppress political dissent at home,” has not been recalled.
Under Putin, the siloviki representation among the Russian political elite has risen constantly, and after 2008 reached 67 percent within the ranks of the national leadership and 32 percent average across the executive and legislative branches.
The Duma Committee of International Affairs, headed by Alexander Pushkov, a member of United Russia, does not play a significant role in actual foreign policy-making in Russia but supports the views and the implementation of the Russian president.
The last player in foreign policy in Moscow is the Federal Security Council, whose importance has reemerged under the current chairman, fonner director of the FSB, Nikolai Patrushev.
As part of the presidential administration, the Federal Security Council is responsible for drafting policy to defend “the vital interests of individuals, society and the state against internal or external threats.
Despite the 2011 protests in Moscow’s streets, which appeared to herald a kind of Orange Revolution in the metropole, the dominant role of the Kremlin and the elite circles of siloviki remain currently uncontested, if not ameliorated among rising nationalism in regards to the Ukraine crisis and the annexation of Crimea.
Nonetheless, from the time of its victory over the Swedes in the Northern War through World War II, Russia and the Soviet Union were part of the five great European powers, which then became the bipolar order of the Cold War.
As victor of World War II and a superpower during the Cold War, Russia played an important part as a global power, able to shape international order through its participation, power, and energetic defiance of the United States and its European and Asian allies.
The historic subsequence of enormous influence and power, followed by total defeat or collapse in 1989-1991, is perceived by observers of Moscow as one reason for the inherent fear of Russia’s political elite for Russia’s survival and territorial integrity.
After the end of the Soviet Union in 1991, new independent nations evolved around Russia, which depend substantially on Russia, especially in tenns of trade and energy.
These nations also contain a large number of Ethnic-Russians residing in these countries.
This issue mirrors the multinational character of Tsarist Russia and later the Soviet Union, but also the classic Eastern European multinational empires, which expired in 1918-1919 with a catastrophic legacy in the years 1919-1989.
In retrospect, Russia’s foreign policy has not always been as violent or as truculent as is has grown to be in the last couple years.
The influence of the siloviki was obvious in such a policy, calling for a prioritization of dominance in the post-Soviet region over multilateral approaches in international relations with countries outside the former Soviet Union.
Regarding Ukraine and Georgia, the assertion of Russia’s privileged interests could be interpreted as a message to the West not to interfere in what had once been a Europe between the great powers laden with explosive instability.
The declared Ukrainian will to aspire to NATO membership, especially in the midst of the domestic turbulence that led to the Maidan protests in 2013-2014, was perceived by the Russians as threatening in a new quality of urgency.
While Russia was basically compensated by the West for the first round of NATO enlargement in 1999, the second round in 2004 ignited heavy opposition among the Russian elite, especially within the military, in that the Baltic States were a core part of the former Soviet Union.
This fact led Yeltsin to declare that the accession of the Baltic States into NATO would overstep a red line.
Paralleling naive hopes that Russia would overcome its anger about NATO’s enlargement, Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov warned that Russia would not easily accept pennanent deploying of missile defense infrastructure.
Consequently, when Poland announced the bilateral agreement between Warsaw and Washington to host an interceptor system for missile defense and Patriot air defense units on a rotational basis in Poland, a Russian general allegedly threatened Poland indirectly with the possibility of nuclear retaliation.
Ma nk off argued that, by ignoring Russian objections about NATO enlargement eastwards, the second round of NATO ascension prepared the path to the Russo-Georgian conflict in 2008.
A similar perception can be observed in Russia concerning the European Union.
In 2003, the EU introduced the European Neighborhood Policy , which was supposed to replace the bilateral approach to a unified strategy for eastern and southern neighbors.
At the same time, Russia would be able to modernize Russia’s economy as competitive on a global scale and employ the instruments of soft and hard power.
While under Yeltsin, Russian media was developing according to Western editorial standards of independence, including private ownership with prospects of advertising revenues.
But the Putin administration began interfering in the editorial work, as well as using coercion to change media coverage according to the guidance of the Kremlin.
After media coverage of the Kursk submarine catastrophe, the terrorist attack on the Dubrovka Theater, and the Beslan school attack in 2004, which suggested deficiencies in the executive branch, the government secured full control of all three major TV channels in Russia by the end of 20 04.
However, the development of a Russian middle class centered in Russia’s major cities led to the desire for more liberalization and critique of Putin’s increasingly authoritarian reign, but also for a higher standard of living.
After the 2011 presidential elections, large protests against the government erupted in Moscow and other major cities as allegations of election fraud arose.
A major domestic factor, if not the major factor, is the Russian economy.
After the Russian gross domestic product fell 50 percent from 1990 to 1995, inflation spiked and unemployment rose.
While Russia acquired enormous debt, the recovery of the economy coincided with Putin’s rise to president.
The economic recovery and decline in Russia’s debt enabled a more assertive foreign policy and opened up opportunities for enhanced military refonn that had been underway since 2008.
In operationalizing the national interests, the military reform is supposed to ensure the provision of adequate tools for hard-power foreign policy, and as such, the reform is a “direct reflection of what the government has made Russia’s national interests.
The reforms call for the military to modernize, specialize and professionalize.
For the domestic message, it is important for Putin to be portrayed and perceived as the strong man in Russia in order to not be contested, but especially in order to unite the population behind the Kremlin’s foreign policy, which uses the paradigm of nationalism and xenophobia to get the masses mobilized for a common Russian cause, as determined by the Kremlin.
Contemporary foreign policy has to consider the domestic sphere while a population worries more and more about its future, with 80 percent of Russians believing that the standard of living will decline and the economy deteriorate.
However, when asked to name the primary reasons for the economic situation in Russia and the increases in prices, 45 percent attribute the problems to the rise in the price of oil; another 33 percent hold the sanctions of the West responsible; and only 23 percent name Russian foreign policy regarding Crimea and Ukraine.
However, despite increasing challenges to Russia and especially to its economy in the wake of the Crimea annexation, 83 percent of Russians think favorably of President Putin and trust in his foreign policy decisions.
EVOLUTION OF EVENTS IN THE UKRAINE CRISIS OF 2014 When Leonid Kravchuk declared Ukraine’s independence in 1991, nationalists in Russia were already questioning the legal grounds of Khr ushchev’s 1954 transfer of Crimea to Ukraine—a question that in 1992 led to an unsuccessful initiative in the Duma to declare the transfer illegal.
Currently, however, a new initiative to denounce the legality of Kh rushchev’s decision is being prepared in the Federal Council, in which Putin enjoys comfortable support.
In the fall of 2013, just short of the EU summit in Lithuania, the Ukrainian economy was in distress.
The economy had been in recession since 2012 with a declining GDP, leading to an average 0 percent GDP change in 2013, a federal budget that could not be met, while external debt rose from 76. percent in 2012 to 81 percent in 2013, due to weak demand and limited access to European capital markets, as well as a risk of failure to implement domestic macroeconomic reforms.
The news of Yanukovych’s decision to halt the EU association agreement ignited spontaneous protests of pro-Euro and pro-West factions within the Ukrainian population in the center of Kiev on November 21, 2013.
In Europe, the decision was received with disappointment, anger, and confusion, but encouraged democratic opposition to the decision, as the European Council stated in the joint declaration after the event that “the participants of the Vilnius Summit take note of the decision by the Ukrainian Government to suspend temporarily the process of preparations for signature of the Association Agreement and Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area between the EU and Ukraine.
The West’s hopes gained traction as, despite calculations by the Ukrainian government and the Kremlin, the protests centered around the Maidan in Kiev did not lose momentum, but strengthened and repeatedly turned into violent clashes with riot police.
With continuing back-andforth diplomacy between Brussels, Kiev, and Moscow, negotiations on the EU association agreement continued, in which the Foreign Ministers of France, Germany, and Poland—the Weimarer Triangle—took the lead in mediating an acceptable solution.
While the occupation of the Maidan continued, the beginning of the Olympic Games in Sochi, Russia, on February 9 were paralleled by a calmer situation in Kiev until February 18, when violence again erupted and led to bloody clashes, culminating in the morning of February 20 when snipers engaged protesters and eighty-eight people were killed within forty-eight hours.
The outburst of violence started when Yanukovych tried to push a set of laws through the Ukrainian parliament, which would criminalize public demonstrations—laws similar to those that Putin introduced over the course of several years.
During the signature procedure of the truce on February 21, the majority of security and police forces began to withdraw from inner Kiev after parliament had adopted a resolution in the wake of the bloody Euromaidan Thursday, calling for all forces of the Interior Ministry to return to their barracks.
Although this order was not given by the president, the forces withdrew, which caught Yanukovych completely by surprise.
These decisions automatically overturned the truce signed on February21, as the proposed government of unity in Ukraine was never set up and constitutional reform, foreseen for March to September 2014 in Ukraine, would not have been possible in light of early elections.
While the Verkhovna Rada voted to appoint fonner parliamentary Speaker Olexander Turchynov as Ukraine’s interim president, Moscow denied the new government any recognition, arguing that Victor Yanukovych would be the only legitimate president of Russia and calling to fulfill the deal brokered on February21.
The large Russian military exercises held in late February close to the Ukrainian-Russian border virtually covered the back of the emerging opposition movement in eastern and southeastern Ukraine and gave a clear message to the Ukrainians, whether it was intended or not.
The members of the Crimean regional parliament voted in a closed parliamentary session—in the presence of intimidating pro-Russian gunmen—on a referendum of independence to be held on May 25 and appointed Sergey Aksyonov as the new Crimean prime minister.
On February 28, unidentified armed soldiers, perceived to be Russian forces without any identifying insignias, blocked the Crimean airports of Simferopol and Sevastopol, and together with Crimean self-defense forces, seized the main administration buildings on the peninsula.
The rapidly evolving events in Crimea were paralleled on February 28 by proposals in the Duma to adopt a bill that would facilitate the accession of foreign territories to the Russian Federation after a popular referendum was taken.
All over Crimea, anned groups of “Little Green Men”—a reference by journalists to the color of the uniforms and unconfirmed origin of the soldiers—and pro-Russian self-defense militias took positions around Ukrainian military installations and critical infrastructure, taking charge of the whole of Crimea.
As it became increasingly obvious that Russia was interfering in Crimea on a large scale, NATO, as well as the G7 leaders and the EU, called upon Russia to adhere to the basic principles of the UN Charter and the 1997 Black Sea basing agreement.
On March 6, the EU discussed a sanction regime towards Russia in the context of its involvement in Ukraine.
The new Crimean government decided to bring forward the referendum on Crimea’s status from May 25 to March 16, which parallel the Ukrainian presidential elections.
The failure of German-led mediation between Russia and the West on March 5 at the foreign ministerial level, and the new timing for the illegitimate referendum, sped up the EU process to agree on sanctions.
In Gennany on March 13, the chancellor gave a policy statement to the deputies of the Bundestag, where she stressed several important key points concerning the situation in Crimea.
Russia’s actions in Ukraine undoubtedly represent a violation of fundamental principles of international law.
In the referendum held on March 16, the Crimean population was asked whether they sought an accession to Russia, which the Crimean parliament had already endorsed on March 11, or to return to Crimea’s 1992 constitution of autonomy within Ukraine.
Under the intimidating influence of more than fifteen thousand Russian soldiers, armed pro-Russian self-defense forces, and armed Cossacks that have surrounded all Ukrainian military troops in Crimea, 96 percent of the people voted for accession to the Russian Federation, although the results were later called into doubt.
After having recognized Crimean independence on March 17, Putin delivered a sweeping blow to the West in his speech on March 18 and elaborated on all accusations made toward Russia in connection with the Crimean situation, especially on the accusations of violations of international law, stating, with reference to Western interventions in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Libya, that “they say we are violating nonns of international law.
Firstly, it’s a good thing that they at least remember that there exists such a thing as international law—better late than never,” while continuing to deny any breach of international law.
With that, Russia mastered the formal annexation of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol in an Anschluss -like operation.
In the first week of April 2014, armed pro-Russian protesters seized government buildings in the Eastern parts of Ukraine, igniting new fears for separatist threats to Ukraine’s stability after the loss of Crimea.
In a 2015 TV documentary, Putin made clear how detennined the Russian president was regarding the operation to take over Crimea.
INTERNATIONAL AND GERMAN REACTIONS TO THE RUSSIAN ANNEXATION OF CRIMEA After the change of government in Kiev and the ousting of former President Yanukovych, the West hoped to have calmed the situation in a highly divided Ukraine.
However, after pro-Russian protests turned violent in eastern and southeastern Ukraine, and especially with the pace of events advancing in Crimea, supported by the massive intervention of the “Little Green Men,” an initial international paralysis could be observed, even if only briefly.
In recognition of Russia’s dominant role in the sphere of influence, efforts for consultations and mediation were widely used in an approach to find a solution with Ukraine and Russian leadership that continued to deny having an active role in the events in Ukraine.
Thus, after the annexation of Crimea, the EU and United States sanctions of the first level were imposed on Russia, which included twenty-one Russian and Ukrainian officials who were involved in the violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity, while the United States acted against high-level Russian politicians in terms of visa restrictions and freezing financial assets.
In the direct wake of the Crimean annexation, the United States and Canada imposed additional sanctions aimed at Russia’s economic leaders, while Canada halted any military cooperation with Russia.
The G7 leaders announced on March 24 that Russian membership would be suspended, and the upcoming G8 summit in Sochi, Russia, was called off, while the United States added more individuals and companies to the sanction list.
In Germany, Joe Kaeser, the chief executive officer of Siemens (a major technology and engineering group), met with President Putin on March 26 as a sign of support and referred to the crisis in Ukraine, the annexation of Crimea, as “short-term turbulences,” to which Kaeser would not pay much attention, hoping that the economic relations between Russia and Germany would not be further strained.
Although the German public attitude towards Russia had declined in early 2014, it was still divided over the question of how to address Russia, as only 38 percent of Germans favored economic sanctions, 19 percent favored the suspension of Russia’s G8 membership, but only 40 percent foresaw a stronger role for Germany.
Among the dead were one hundred and ninety-six Dutch passengers, given that flight MH17 originated in Amsterdam.
Therefore, it comes as no surprise that popular attitude, especially in the Netherlands and Germany, changed dramatically, and calls for tougher sanctions against Russia were voiced.
Although only 40 percent favored a stronger role for Germany after the annexation of Crimea in March, this figure jumped up 19 percent by the end of July to 59 percent, while 80 percent of the Germans blamed Russia for the increased violence.
The exact crash site was within the combat zone between Ukrainian forces and pro-Russian separatists, and the recovery operations were severely hampered.
Russia denied any involvement in the incident and explained that Ukrainian fighter jets shot down the airliner.
Russia’s obstructing behavior in trying to bring the responsible persons for the slaughter of the passengers to justice and its denial tactics—seen not only in the MH17 incident, but throughout the Ukrainian crisis—led to additional rounds of sanctions on July 25 and 30 with nations like Australia, Japan, Norway, and Switzerland joining the sanctions against Russia.
Over the course of 2014, with intensive fighting in eastern Ukraine, several sanctions were added to the list, which were supposed to remain in place for at least a year before they would be put on the table for reevaluation.
So far, sanctions have been considered tough; and along with the political blame and continuous demands at the Kremlin’s address to exert its influence towards lasting peace in Ukraine, they show an impact on Russia.
In Germany, the sanctions are paralleled by the cancellation of Russian-German governmental consultations and the silent support, of opposition from the Ostausschuss after the tragedy of MH17, especially in that economic bilateral trade relations will be affected.
According to the Federal Foreign Office, “in 2015, bilateral trade declined by 35 per cent compared with the previous year, to EUR 7.74 billion.
A military option was never on the table in the United States or Europe, and least of all in Gennany, where the chancellor ruled out any military engagement early on during the crisis, but for a small part to an OSCE mission, which in the end was not executed.
Consequently, as Putin’s forceful change of borders required an answer by the democracies of the West, only various possibilities of sanctioning Moscow were available.
While economic sanctions usually target a country and its economy as a whole, the initial sanctions on Russia were interpreted as “smart” sanctions in that they targeted selected individuals that bore responsibility for the Ukraine crisis and the annexation of Crimea, instead of the whole of Russia.
This has severe impacts on the economic stability and flow of foreign investments.
As German foreign policy has been caught between interest-led Realpolitik with Russia in terms of economic interdependency and valued-based Moralpolitik, the evolution of sanctions against Russia were well considered by those in power.
Even before the MH17 disaster, Merkel and Steinmeier had used the same language in their public appearances, deliberately showing unity in the crisis, although criticism was heard regarding the penalizing approach to Russia.
Critics of the grand coalition’s approach were found in the party Die Linke and in the “Russian-Firster” sections of the SPD, such as the fonner state premier of Brandenburg, Matthias Platzeck —now chairman of the German-Russian Forum—who called for Germany to endorse the annexation as a means of appeasing the relations with the Kremlin.
Reactions from the international community and Germany emerged piece by piece and could only be reactive to the events as they happened.
Putin, despite Russia’s enormous currency reserves, has to decide which course to take to pursue his foreign policy objectives.
Moscow’s current strategy of power politics —Realpolitik at its best—is costly for the country in that it is implemented at the cost of Russia’s economic development and international standing.
With their assets abroad frozen , the elites will become more dependent on the Kremlin.
The massive military exercises in 2014 and the Crimean operations are sufficient proof of the enhanced abilities since 2008.
The high approval rates for Putin show that the annexation of Crimea and the subsequent Russian course of action in eastern Ukraine, reported by a vast media propaganda campaign, have led to broad support for Putin’s regime based upon ultra-nationalist and anti-Western attitudes.
Berlin has long been Russia’s strongest asset in Europe when it came to mediating of diverging interests between the West and Russia, but also in terms of economic relations.
While most of the Western heads of state and government did not take part in the 70th commemoration of the German capitulation (the end of the European part of World War II), Merkel did go to Moscow but denied Putin her attendance at the biggest Russian military parade since 1945 and instead laid a wreath at the Russian Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.
To summarize, while Putin’s power play definitely paid off in the domestic sphere—at least for the short tenn—the international sphere has been contaminated by foul rhetoric and, from a Western perspective, broken promises from which Putin cannot back off without losing support and domestic approval.
In light of the sanctions and the implications for Russia’s economy, short-term and long-tenn consequences loom dark on the horizon.
However, because the sanctions are “shared pain,” and because the Western or German economy is also feeling the pain of deteriorating trade relations, it might be a gamble for Putin to count on the Russian tenacity to overcome the sanctions or to wait out however long the West can endure the situation.
After 1949, the Federal Republic of Germany emerged as a nation that oriented itself and lived by the rules and norms of the UN Charter as it integrated itself into the Western European and Atlantic system, ensuring that any doubts about German revanchism would have no substance.
Such fears were prevalent in the 1950s and 1960s, a time in which the FRG included a very large population of displaced Gennans from Central and Eastern Europe whose political orientation may have threatened to take a kind of revanchist form, but did not.
The proof of this fact came with the advent of Brandt’s Ostpolitik in the early 1970s and unification in 1990.
The significance of taking a rule-based approach for post-reunification in Germany derives from the forty years of national division and the Cold War.
All the same, Germany was rebuilt in the center of a possible thenno-nuclear battlefield and yet miraculously achieved its peaceful reunification, unlike during 1864-1871.
Directly after the fall of the Wall in 1989, Helmut Kohl recognized the Oder-Neisse-border once more to assure Poland and to confirm that Germany is deeply rooted in the rule of international law.
Brandt’s and Bahr’s Ostpolitik belongs to the past, of course, in that it reached its goals of reunification in 1990.
One would not know it in 2015, though, as Bahr’s account is invoked constantly, and often out of context, which does little good for him or for the present political situation.
Now the question is about Germany’s influence on Russia’s domestic development as a power in Europe and a nation that aspires to partake in identical values.
Guided by German gratitude for the Soviet Union’s support of overcoming the German division, Gennany felt responsible for supporting this Russian that optimists hoped would cleave to the western orientation of Germany from its Sonderweg after 1945.
While most of the Eastern European states were engaged within the frameworks of NATO and the ENP, Russia retained its special status for Germany.
The approach to Russia was two-fold, as “with the Ostpolitik, the modernization partnership is based on the concept of modernization through interdependence.
This shock exists for two main reasons, and it is no surprise that Germany has evolved as the key leader in approaching Russia in the wake of Germany’s post-2008 emergence as the power at the center.
This policy comes as Washington once again realizes that Germany is a key partner in all areas of European policy, and will be a key player in Europe on dealing with Russia.
Germany’s new role in leadership is a fact in the year 2014-2015 and an uncomfortable and unfamiliar fact for many amid a world of disorder that defies easy rules or a relaxed diplomacy.
ROOT CAUSES AND THE EXTENT OF FOREIGN POLICY CHANGE On March 2, 2014, when Putin, finally and with thinly veiled pride, admitted that the military forces in Crimea were indeed directly under Russian control, he overstepped the red line of statecraft in Berlin.
Germany’s government under Angela Merkel then reached a point of no return.
With Putin’s aggression accompanied by a coordinated mass-persuasion campaign in Russia that would have done the years 1915 or 1936 proud, the regime let loose a wave of nationalistic and pan-slavist rhetoric.
Moreover, Moscow did not recognize the new Ukrainian government and argued that the ousting of president Yanukovych was illegal, as was dealing with an alleged Nazi junta in Kiev to which they are not bound by any treaty.
The boldness and speed of events in 2014 caught a West (mesmerized by Islamic terrorism and world economic depression) by surprise.
With Germany’s current Ostpolitik in disrepair, Berlin is caught between interest-led Realpolitik and value-base Moralpolitik.
The crisis in Ukraine shows the strained limitations of this choice between interests and morality in diplomacy.
The conflict pushed the limits of these ideals to their world historical edge as the Zeitgeist brutally shifts from peace to conflict and ultimately crisis.
The imposed sanctions on Moscow by the western powers are not something that is taken lightly, and the pain of the sanctions imposed on Russia is shared by Europeans, foremost by those Germans whose cars are no longer sold to Russians and whose high quality steel is no longer forged for new towns and so forth.
Although Russia had only been Germany’s eleventh largest trading partner, at least three hundred thousand jobs depend on Russian export in a nation where export of high quality goods is the highest national purpose in the face of globalization.
Germany imported mainly gas and oil, 36 percent and 35 percent, respectively, from Russia in 2013.
The fact that Germany under Chancellor Merkel has emerged as the key player in negotiating with Putin and has imposed sanctions (although initially as a mere diplomatic sign, which is powerful and which creates “meaningful pain” in Russia) is evidence that even the pragmatic and reserved Chancellor Merkel has come to a point where enough is enough.
This quiet figure has taken on the mantle of statecraft from earlier times and must resist the alteration of the European peaceful order that fonns the basis of Gennan national existence of security, peace, and prosperity in a united Europe in a time of peace.
The Kremlin seems convinced that the confrontational course towards the West is better for ensuring Putin’s dominant position in domestic Russia and enhances Russia’s international image as a great and strong power.
Cooperation and all the glory of Wandel durch Annaehrung seems to have fallen from grace, and the prospects for a return to the status quo ante bellum are dim in June 2015.
To sum up, in regards of the main challenge of Germany’s traditional Ostpolitik, it has to be acknowledged that “Germany’s idealistic Russia policy is simply not compatible with Putin’s realpolitik” because the strategic environment has changed; thus, the makers of European and Gennan policy are required to try new approaches.
As discussed in Chapter III on the essentials of foreign policy, change can occur on four different levels.
Accepting the fact that Germany under Merkel has indeed changed its approach towards Russia in the wake of the annexation of Crimea and the continuing violence, it can be doubted that this change resembles just another routine, partial adjustment, which would widen the scope.
Such an explanation could be attributed to the post-Georgian War reaction after 2008, which returned rather fast to normalcy.
The current change is more a program change ignited by external shock of a fundamental kind.
It is an earthquake to rattle the already shaken edifice of Europe since the world economic crisis.
Program change, according to Herman, is inherently a qualitative change involving new instruments, such as sanctions to pursue an objective.
As Stent, Pond, and others have argued regarding the brutality of the aircraft shoot down, the so-called MH17 tragedy acted as a catalyst for the negative perception of the Ukraine crisis.
After all, a plane full of Dutch holiday-seekers brutally blasted from the sky in a war zone constitutes a sign akin to the Serbian irredentist mortar shells hitting the marketplace in Sarajevo in the early 1990s.
The subsequent public outrage in Europe and the German debate on how to deal with the crisis transformed the perception of the German public, leading to a 13 percent increase to 61 percent in support of a tough stance towards Russia.
For Putin, the hybrid or irregular warfare annexation of Crimea sent a clear message to the Russian population, but also to the international community, when he showed everyone that Russia is back as a great power on the international stage.
Once more, Germany, and this time, the most powerful Germany that has existed in a long time, both politically and morally, is once again the nation caught in between—mediating between the West and Russia and tom between values and interests.
However, in a more realistic approach, Germany is embedded in its western integration, which is being put to an unexpected and bloody test.
The Russlandversteher have voiced critique over the approach to Russia, and in the case of Matthias Platzeck has even called for acceptance of the annexation of Crimea in order to appease Moscow and return to normalization.
The percentage of Germans who are openly anti-American has probably grown since 9/11, and especially since Edward Snowden aspired to be a kind of digital Martin Luther, who will free Germany and all others from the vice grip of a digital hierarchy of all horizon secret police intruders with his WikiLeak theses hammered on the global commons.
Therefore, one must differentiate between the domestic politics of a German approach to Russia, far from being simply a Russia Firster approach, while recognizing that Gennany has more to lose if relations with Russia are in chaos.
This helps to make sense of the publicly voiced praise of Russia in light of the ever-growing significance of the NSA scandal in the public.
Perceptions of the Russia Firster approach need to take into account the high proportion of trade interdependency between Germany and Russia, as compared to the United States, where hardly any real trade relations with Russia exist.
Thus, sanctions have tougher consequences for Germany and its economy with the national focus on exports amid globalization and a growing Eurasian focus.
The public perception of Russia has also experienced significant change, especially after the MH17 disaster in July 2014, when the public opinion towards Russia plunged severely.
In August 2014, only 15 percent of the Gennans saw in Russia a trustworthy partner, having decreased steadily from nearly 40 percent in December 20 1 0.
But because the majority of Germans have seen the “real face of the Russian bear,” the Russlandversteher and the promoters of a Russia First will be less stentorian as long as Russia is reluctant to cooperate with the West within the rule of international law.
DIPLOMACY, SECURITY, AND VALUES Because foreign policy is chiefly a state activity undertaken to realize the state’s interests concerning its power, economy, culture, and above all, its security vis-a-vis its international partners and neighbors, one can suggest that German foreign policy has been successful in pursuing Brandt’s Ostpolitik from 1969 until 1990.
Such policy has assured the nation’s security based on a balanced approach between Westbindung, while it maintained a policy of dialogue, and Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union up until 1990 when the aim had been the reunification.
Such policy changed in the post-Cold War Ostpolitik after Germany had regained its full sovereignty and power in economic terms, it exerted its Ostpolitik as a geo-economic power focusing on interests, while hoping that the values would come along as the interests are pursued.
Germany, intertwined with a political and economic interdependent global system, has well understood that maintaining its strength requires first to help itself by fostering its own interests.
Further, Germany builds a power base from which it can shape the international order according to German values.
However, that might require weighing political implications against decisions that potentially cause negative impacts on its power base—a constant balancing of interests versus values.
As the world has become more violent and political culture eschews violence for classic liberal, or, as it is called “civil” values, such policies encounter a growing headwind.
The post-Cold War order that emerged in Europe has been shaped significantly by a united, peaceful, and secure Germany, which, over the last twenty-five years, developed an increasingly considerable weight in foreign policy on its path to nonnalcy in a globalizing world economy and world society.
However, with normalization comes responsibility for power, peace, and security, not simply prosperity in the balance of trade.
With waxing chaos in the Middle East, with the United States shrinking under the weight of its security burdens and domestic challenges, and with the truths of geopolitics at hand, Gennany’s politicians have called for Gennany and Europe to shoulder its burdens at the Munich Security Conference in 2014, a call reiterated by Germany’s defense minister in 2015 when she referred to leaderhip from the centre, a phrase that means more in German than it does in English, where it falls rather flat.
Armed forces in the classical manner are the last resort, and in German foreign policy is considered a source of domestic political pain for all that must touch such weapons.
For the last seventy years, Gennany reluctantly armed itself within the Atlantic alliance, where the decisive weapons lay in United States hands.
Germany has slowly and haltingly participated in military operations of any kind since 1994.
Although active military options are not on the table concerning the Ukraine crisis in the narrow sense, Germany needs to take into account the geopolitical and alliance cohesion consequences of Russia’s actions.
Putin has worked a miracle as concerns classic NATO security goals under Article 3 of mutual aid and self-help.
Despite the recent change of policy in Gennany, with a surprisingly tough tone and direct language, the West has to agree on new ways to approach Russia in view of the crisis.
So far, Merkel has retained the unifying momentum for her grand coalition, but also for the European Union, which is on shaky grounds regarding the Greek financial crisis.
The Gennan Ostausschuss will make sure that the Merkel administration is well aware of the economic costs for Gennany, while at the same time the SPD with Sigmar Gabriel tries to distinguish itself from the CDU, and the NSA scandal is increasingly becoming a domestic problem.
Insofar as foreign policy has an internal and an external factor, the latter has been widely described, and the internal factor needs to be monitored because a Germany that is in an election campaign mood might discuss any additional changes to the Ukraine crisis in a different way than it has so far.
To conclude on the question of whether the Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014 has changed Germany’s foreign policy regarding Russia, Germany’s answer is a new tone in foreign policy, use of tougher instruments, and the fact that Germany stands united in confronting Russia—united with Europe, but more important for Gennany, united within the grand coalition and the public will.
Putin miscalculated if he thought that Germany under Merkel would collapse quickly and would not endure standing up to the Kremlin; however, Germany and the West wrongly assumed that Putin would bend quickly before the sanctions, which he did not most probably will not anytime soon.
Thus, Merkel did not only stand up to Putin’s actions in Ukraine, but also re-prioritized strategic objectives of the European security order over economic objectives.
For Germany, this means that the new strategic security environment with a new political map of Europe requires a new German power—a Germany willing and able to safeguard the European security order.
Oriented towards the status-quo, Russia feared losing Ukraine from its sphere of influence, something Putin was not ready to accept.
While Russians were mostly interested in the technological transfer, though not in societal change and democratic values, the idea of cooperation through trade ran aground, especially because losing a tight grip on society would negatively affect the Kremlin’s authoritarian grip to rule the country and stay in power.
Thus, Putin challenged the post-Cold War security order, and in this regard, the fundamental change in Gennan foreign policy is not all about Ukraine.
But the root causes are foremost about the validity of the European security order based on the principles of rule of law and the notion of Westphalian peace therefore the inviolability of national borders and sovereignty.
The international perception of Gennan foreign policy as a Russian Firster approach falls short of recognizing the overall context in which Germany conducts its Russia policy.
Based on the traditional Ostpolitik, Germany had to balance between East and West in order to achieve its objective of peaceful reunification, while later, economic interrelations were the main drivers of post-1990 engagement with Russia and former Soviet republics.
Thus, the decision to change the program, as undertaken by Angela Merkel and Frank-Walter Steinmeier, clearly showed that German foreign policy is not about Russia Firsters but all about the peaceful and prosperous European security order.
RETAINING CREDIBILITY AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR GERMANY’S FOREIGN POLICY The fundamental change of Germany’s approach to Russia is inevitable if German foreign policy is to remain credible and reliable in the eyes of its partners.
However, the challenge for Berlin is to find the right balance in its approach to Moscow because it is also inevitable that it will re-engage with Russia in the future.
Trenin, talking about the German balancing act, put it quite well when he pointed out that “a radical, values-first strategy is emotionally satisfying and may be politically useful in the short tenn, but otherwise it is usually fruitless.
By contrast, a wholly unprincipled value-less approach leads to the moral abyss.
Multiple scholars argue that insufficient research capabilities and expertise threaten to constitute a structural change, which could negatively influence future German administrations.
For Gennany, the relevance of Russia and the post-Soviet region is of utmost importance in understanding Russia.
Challenging the traditional Westphalian system, the advent of the Ukraine crisis and the annexation of Crimea in 2014 poses a test of Germany’s foreign policy—its Ostpolitik —that does not allow any of the luxuries of choice that might have been said to exist to opt out and or to shift burdens, as happened in the period from 1990 to 2011.
Germany cannot outsource these security policy decisions because it needs to take a clear stance towards Russia.
The Baltic States and Poland will expect at least a clear sign of reassurance from Germany.
With Russia testing the limits of contemporary European order or challenging them by repetitive action, it must be assumed that other regions (e.g., Georgia, Crimea, eastern Ukraine) might follow if the West’s reactions are not able to bring about change.
For example, the Moldovian region of Transnistria was among the regions named in this regard.
Expectations regarding Gennany are high because not only do the Eastern neighbors look to Berlin.
Even though Crimea is still Russian and eastern Ukraine is still a pro-Russian rebel area backed by Russia, the sanctions regime helped significantly to reduce violence, for the moment.
If the Western sanctions regime towards Russia will hold and Russia’s economic decline will continue, then the fear of Russia turning east to China becomes a real alternative from the Russian side.
Another risk is the current crisis in Europe, with Greece and Cyprus being reluctant to impose new sanctions or to renew existing sanctions.
Germany, with its power, geographical position, and historic legacy, is obliged to take a leading role in shaping Europe’s future and ensuring continuity in solidarity, and by so doing reframe the approach to Russia.
Currently, Russia shows no sign of backing off from its chosen path, so the sanctions will remain an instrument in the Western approach to Russia, and the redefinition of Europe’s and Germany’s approach to Russia is necessary.
The current Gennan approach, in which Merkel takes a tougher stance towards Russia, employs sanctions that are hurting German business interests, but the constant line of communication she maintains with the Kremlin could be seen as a continuous evolution of traditional Ostpolitik.
But by using the stick and not only the carrot, Berlin accepts the responsibility in international affairs, and in this regard changed its policy over the annexation of Crimea and continuous violence in eastern Ukraine.
The Ukraine crisis of 2014 (sparked by Putin’s aggressive reaction to the proWestern Euromaidan protests in Kiev and subsequently the Russian takeover of Crimea for fear that the region might break away from Russia’s sphere of influence and its privileged interests) has altered the European security order.
In light of constant Russian military snap exercises and enhanced NATO exercises, the risk for accidental war has not been higher since 1983, when perceptions arose that the Soviet Union mistook the NATO exercise Able Archer as preparations for a real nuclear war.
Therefore, Germany is obliged to use its unique position, not only to avoid accidental war, but more importantly to resolve the crisis between Russia and the West.
In 2016, Germany will become the chair of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe and could use that position to re-engage with Moscow and to foster re-establishment of a European security order with a firm transatlantic partnership, as there is no alternative to cooperation with Russia.
Gennany’s Ostpolitik will continue; however, the fundamental program change will ensure that Germany can take over the responsibility, as it is rightly expected to do.
German Institute for International and Security Affairs and German Marshall Fund of the United States.
Ostausschus der Deutschen Wirtschaft [Committee on Eastern European Economic Relations] and German-Russian Chamber of Commerce.
