Russia’s annexation of Crimea in February 2014 took Belarus’s president, Alexander Lukashenko, by surprise.
He hesitated between implicit recognition of Russia’s actions and a desire not to damage his relationship with Ukraine, his country’s third-largest trading partner.
And ultimately decided on a stance of ambiguous neutrality towards the parties to the conflict.
But in the same month Belarus voted against a UN resolution that made a similar charge, though it stopped short of any sanctions against Russia.
Although Lukashenko was a vocal critic of the Maidan protests in Kiev, which brought down Ukraine’s former president, Viktor Yanukovych, he nonetheless attended the inauguration of his successor, Petro Poroshenko in June 2014.
That same year, as the Donbass conflict escalated, Belarus helped Ukraine by granting it credit to buy fuel for its land forces and military support aircraft — behaviour at odds with its image as Russia’s strategic ally.
Kazakhstan’s president, Nursultan Nazarbayev, has also worked hard to ease the tensions between Russia and Ukraine.
Kazakhstan depends on Russia for a third of its imports and would welcome the lifting of western sanctions against its neighbour.
Russia’s counter-sanctions on the West, imposed without consulting the other members of the Eurasian Economic Union, have also hurt the Kazakh economy.
The obligation on Ukraine since January 2016 to send goods to Kazakhstan via Belarus, rather than directly through the Russian Caucasus, has been particularly troublesome.
The Kazakhs have responded to Russia’s unilateralism by strengthening their cooperation with Ukraine.
In October 2015 Poroshenko visited Astana to sign an economic agreement, an occasion which allowed both countries to reassert their commitment to respecting sovereignty and national territorial integrity.
The Syrian conflict has enabled Nazarbayev to attract attention to his country, which rarely features in the news.
In May, Astana played host for the third time since January to peace talks intended to consolidate the ceasefire between rebel forces and the Assad government.
The presence at the table of delegates from Turkey and Russia — which, with Iran, initiated the talks — was due to Nazarbayev’s peacemaking efforts with Turkey’s President Erdoğan and Vladimir Putin, following the rift caused by Turkey’s shooting down of a Russian bomber on the Turkish-Syrian border in November 2015.
After the attempted coup in Turkey in July 2016, Nazarbayev was the first head of state to visit his ‘brother Erdoğan’ — a reference to the fact that Kazakhs are a Turkic people.
He made the visit in spite of the instruction he received to close 33 Kazakho-Turkish high schools that are part of Fethullah Gülen’s Hizmet movement, accused by Erdoğan of responsibility for the failed coup.
On 5 December 1994, Russia, the United States and the UK undertook to guarantee Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
In exchange Ukraine agreed to honour the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to transfer the arsenal it inherited following the break-up of the USSR to Russia.
