Download the new cold war in pdf or read the new cold war in pdf online books in PDF, EPUB and Mobi Format.
Click Download or Read Online button to get the new cold war in pdf book now.
This essay collection presents a new examination and fresh insight into Sino-American relations from the end of World War II to the 1960s.
The compilation breaks new ground by exploring some of the untouched Chinese and Soviet Communist sources to document the major events and crises in East Asia.
It also identifies a new pattern of confrontations between China and America during the Cold War.
The Ukrainian crisis that dominated headlines in fall 2013 was decades in the making.
Competition between Russia and the West exacerbated Ukraine’s divisions.
This study focuses on the historical background and complex causality of the crisis, from the rise of mass demonstrations on Kiev’s Maidan Nezalezhnosti to the making of the post-revolt regime.
In the context of a “new cold war,” the author sheds light on the role of radical Ukrainian nationalists and neofascists in the February 2014 snipers’ massacre, the ouster of President Viktor Yanukovych, and Russia’s seizure of Crimea and involvement in the civil war in the eastern region of Donbass.
Revised and updated with a new preface on the Crimean crisis While most of the world was lauding the stability and economic growth that Vladimir Putin's ex-KGB regime had brought to Russia, Edward Lucas was ringing alarm bells.
First published in 2008 and since revised, The New Cold War remains the most insightful and informative account of Russia today.
It depicts the regime's crushing of independent institutions and silencing of critics, taking Russia far away from the European mainstream.
It highlights the Kremlin's use of the energy weapon in Europe, the bullying of countries in the former Soviet empire, such as Estonia, Georgia and Ukraine – and the way that Russian money weakens the West's will to resist.
Now updated with an incisive analysis of Russia's seizure of Crimea and its destabilisation of Ukraine, The New Cold War unpicks the roots of the Kremlin's ideology and exposes the West's naive belief that Putin's sinister and authoritarian regime might ever be a friend or partner.
The war in Ukraine suggests a new era of competition between the West and Russia.
It has revealed both fundamental differences in how European security is understood, and increasing friction in values.
A 'new Cold War' narrative, increasingly popular, interprets this competition as a resumption of the Cold War.
Many Western political figures and observers have asserted that Russia's president, Vladimir Putin, is trying to turn back the clock, even to rebuild the USSR, and therefore that the experience of the Cold War could offer useful lessons for politicians today.
The 'new Cold War' debate traps Western thinking about Russia in the 20th century.
It reflects, and encourages, a dangerous tendency on the part of politicians and military strategists to prepare for past wars.
It also offers a misleading sense of familiarity and predictability about Russia that does not take into account either the different international situation today or Russian adaptability to changing geopolitics.
On 17 July 2014 Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17 was shot down amid unrest in Ukraine, a conflict that led to a NATO-Russia standoff and the onset of a new period of East-West confrontation.
This is the first scholarly work on the Ukrainian unrest and the tragic downing of MH17.
It offers an analysis that challenges the Western consensus surrounding these events, emphasising the geopolitical and economic context of the West's standoff with Russia, the BRICS bloc, and the struggles over the EU's energy supply.
Based on previously unpublished government and NATO documents as well as a wide array of sources this book offers an analysis of global political economy and contemporary debates about Russia and East-West relations.
The Cold War ended twenty-five years ago, but tensions between Russia and the West are as bad as ever.
