This, of course, has been met with derision by Russia and heaping helpings of it.
The S-125/SA-3 Goa missile being repurposed as an Anti-Ship Missile is a significant leap in capability for Ukraine.
On April 18, 1988, during Operation Praying Mantis, the frigate USS Simpson fired four RIM-66 Standard missiles and the cruiser USS Wainwright fired two RIM-67 Standard missiles at Joshan, an Iranian Kaman-class missile boat.
The attacks destroyed the Iranian ship’s superstructure but did not sink it.
An obliterated superstructure not sinking sounds like a solid hole in the water to me.
Russia produces a tirade of nonsense, invective, and indulges in repeat saber-rattling and Wunderwaffe propaganda.
The “firehose” barrage against Ukraine continues, now expanded by claims Ukraine is preparing to attack the Russian puppet states in Donbas.
In Ukraine, Gen Muzhenko briefs Reuters on Russian buildup, stating “In front of us is an aggressor who has no legal, moral or any other limits.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and other NATO foreign ministers on Tuesday accused Russia of not being in compliance with the Cold War-era intermediate-range nuclear missile treaty.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced Tuesday that the United States will stop adhering to a decades-old nuclear treaty in 60 days unless Russia returns to compliance with the agreement.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced Tuesday that the United States is prepared to withdraw from a crucial weapons treaty signed by the world’s two greatest nuclear powers.
TRT World Published on Dec 4, 2018 NATO foreign ministers have met in Brussels.
Tension between Russia and Ukraine was high on their agenda following Russia’s seizure of three Ukrainian naval vessels and the detention of their crew last month.
Also on the agenda was the future of an important arms control treaty which has limited the deployment of nuclear missiles in Europe.
VOA News Published on Dec 4, 2018 United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo says the United States will withdraw from a milestone Cold War-era nuclear treaty unless Russia returns to compliance.
During a NATO ministerial meeting in Brussels Tuesday, Pompeo said the United States will abandon treaties and multilateral institutions that are not bolstering United States national security and sovereign interests.
VOA’s Diplomatic Correspondent Cindy Saine reports from the State Department.
Less than a year later, in Reykjavik, Iceland, they agreed on the parameters of future treaties on the elimination of intermediate-range nuclear forces, or INF, and the radical reduction of strategic nuclear arms.
A year after that, in 1987, the first of these treaties was signed in Washington.
The elimination of the entire class of nuclear missiles opened the way to a process of real nuclear disarmament.
The INF Treaty and subsequent treaties reducing strategic nuclear arms established an innovative system of verification, inspections, data exchange and mutual consultations to ensure that each side can confidently verify that the other is faithfully adhering to the treaty limits.
The Russian Foreign Ministry is denying United States and NATO allegations that Russia is violating a landmark nuclear that banned an entire class of weapons.
NATO foreign ministers at the meeting agreed with Washington’s assertion that a new Russian missile system violates the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty signed by President Ronald Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.
Russia has repeatedly denied the United States claims, insisting the SSC8 missile system at the core of the allegations does not exceed ranges stipulated by the treaty.
The United States ultimatum on the INF treaty is part and parcel of what Washington throws at Russia – from the Kerch Strait and the Skripals, to meddling in elections – that is not constructive, former American diplomat Jim Jatras said.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has warned that Moscow will follow suit if Washington pulls out of the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.
Putin spoke on December 5, a day after United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said that Washington would abandon the INF Treaty unless Moscow returns to compliance with the accord within 60 days.
Russian President Vladimir Putin says Russia would be forced to respond if the United States exits the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces arms control treaty.
EUROPE will be in the crosshairs of Russian missiles in a grim re-run of the Seventies arms race if the United States pulls out of a key nuclear deal, according to Vladimir Putin’s official spokesman.
VLADIMIR Putin has a hypersonic missile system that “cannot be intercepted” at his disposal, a Russian general has warned.
Russia will target countries hosting United States missiles if Washington goes ahead with plans to pull out of a landmark Cold War arms treaty, General Staff chief Valery Gerasimov said Wednesday.
MOSCOW – Kiev is deploying major offensive components to Donbass, with reports about preparations by the Ukrainian Armed Forces for military actions emerging, Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova has stated.
The Russian President Vladimir Putin explained why he did not answer the calls of the President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko, as Interfax reported.
The Russian Navy has deployed its newest large patrol ship Dmitry Rogachev to Sevastopol in annexed Crimea.
According to a statement of the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation, the newest patrol ship Dmitry Rogachev has made its first-ever visit to Sevastopol for another stage of state trials.
After the special mission, the Dmitry Rogachev will sail to Novorossiysk to perform further stages of trials.
Earlier the crew had successfully trained first artillery fire drills in zone of the Black Sea Fleet.
It also trained navigation at the maximum angles of rotation and ascent by simulators of marine, coastal and air targets.
The ship Dmitry Rogachevare primarily intended for duties such as patrol, monitoring and protection in open and closed seas.
Over the past few years, Russia’s Black Sea Fleet has fully renewed its submarines and coastal defense missile systems – the new Bal and Bastion complexes are protecting the entire Black Sea area.
Also, the Black Sea Fleet has received three frigates, small missile and other ships that are performing their missions in the Black and Mediterranean Seas.
New aircraft are arriving for naval aviation, for example, Sukhoi Su-30SM fighter jets.
Slovakia has expelled a Russian diplomat after information from military intelligence showed he engaged in espionage activities in the NATO and European Union member country, Prime Minister Peter Pellegrini said on Wednesday.
On November 25, Russia attacked and seized three Ukrainian gunboats and their crew while they were attempting to transit into the Sea of Azov through the Kerch Strait.
The move caused a wave of international condemnation, with Ukraine claiming it signalled renewed Russian aggression and pleading with NATO to confront Russia in the Black Sea region.
On the surface, it seems this is just the latest iteration of the Russian-Ukrainian military and political confrontation which the Maidan revolution sparked back in 2014.
In March that year, Russia occupied the Crimean Peninsula and used hybrid forces to start a civil conflict in Eastern Ukraine.
The Kerch Strait separates Russia proper from Russian-controlled Crimea and connects the Black Sea to the Sea of Azov.
In the aftermath of the annexation, Russia built a bridge across the strait, which Ukraine never agreed to.
On paper, movement in and out of the Sea of Azov for Ukrainian ships is regulated by a treaty signed in 2003 between Ukraine and Russia, which gives free access to vessels from both countries.
Since the Crimea bridge was completed earlier this year, Russia has been impeding traffic of commercial vessels bound for the Ukrainian port of Mariupol on the Sea of Azov and after last week’s incident, it has virtually imposed a blockade on it.
Given the subsequent exchange of accusations between Ukraine and Russia, it is important to make a number of points clear.
Russian Ministry of Defense has prevented the sale of new Bal-E coastal missile systems to Azerbaijan, according to Russian newspaper reports.
Russia will not sell the Bal-E coastal missile system to Azerbaijan because of the risks it may present to the ships of the Caspian flotilla located in Russian territorial waters, said in Kommersant’s newspaper reports.
The newspaper, referring to its own sources, explains that the reason for the disruption of supply lies with the position of the Russian Ministry of Defense, the supply in the department was considered inexpedient.
As also previously reported, the Republic of Azerbaijan has expressed its intention to procure “Bal-E coastal missile system from Russia.
According to Kommersant, Azerbaijan has been eyeing this missile system for a long time because of its need to protect its coastal zone of the Caspian Sea.
Bal-E is the export version of the BAL missile complex in service with the coastal missile unit of the Russian Navy Caspian Flotilla.
The system is used to guard straits and territorial waters, to protect offshore sea lines, naval bases, coastal infrastructure, as well as to defend the coast at amphibious landing threat directions within the missile launch range.
The United States and European Union can extend the sanctions against Russia due to the seizure of Ukrainian sailors and ships.
Kurt Volker, the United States Special Envoy to Ukraine made such statement as Interfax reported.
He also urged Russia to release captured Ukrainians sailors and ships as a gesture of goodwill before the holidays.
They should resort to de-escalation and return them…We hope that Russia will immediately return sailors,” he claimed.
German Ambassador to Ukraine Ernst Reichel says there is no consensus within the European Union about the introduction of new sanctions against the Russian Federation over of the seizure of three Ukrainian boats and the capture of 24 Ukrainian navy sailors in the Kerch Strait on November 25.
Meanwhile, the EU continues to discuss new sanctions in connection with illegal “elections” held in Russian-occupied Donbas on November 11.
First Deputy Speaker of the Ukrainian Parliament and Ukraine’s envoy to the Trilateral Contact Group’s humanitarian subgroup Iryna Gerashchenko and Deputy Assistant Secretary of the United States Department of State George Kent have discussed the issue of freeing prisoners of war and political prisoners in Russia, as well as the introduction of martial law in 10 Ukrainian regions.
NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg says the organization recognizes Ukraine’s aspirations to become member of the Alliance.
The International Court will consider the attack on Ukrainian sailors as the episode of the aggressive war that Russia wages against Ukraine – not the separate case.
Prosecutor General Yuriy Lutsenko added that the Ukrainian law enforcement agencies already prepared a presentation of collected evidence, which confirms the fact of military aggression of the Russian Navy against the Ukrainian ships.
Dmitry Peskov, the spokesperson of the Russian President made such statement answering the question on the location of the Ukrainian artillery boats “Berdyansk”, “Nikopol” and tugboat “Yany Kapu” in occupied Kerch as UNIAN reported.
It is, rather, the prerogative of the investigative bodies, which hold the investigation and charge and you need to appeal to them to get to know it.
As far as we know, these boats are the physical evidence and they are relevant to the investigated case,” Peskov said.
As is known, three Ukrainian ships were on their way from Odesa to Mariupol to join the newly created Ukrainian naval base in the Sea of Azov.
Russian naval vessels and aviation opened fire and wounded three Ukrainian servicemen.
Currently, 24 Ukrainian sailors face charges with ‘illegal border crossing’, as they stay in detention centers in Moscow.
Angela Merkel’s intention to step down from the position of leader of Germany’s Christian Democratic Union party, and later from the position of federal chancellor, threatens to cause trouble for Russia.
Merkel’s most likely successor as head of the ruling CDU, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, has criticized Russia for exacerbating the conflict with Ukraine, and has identified the Nord Stream 2 project as a possible target of response measures.
Refusing to support the project at all would be “too radical”, but Berlin may reduce the planned amount of gas transit through the pipeline, Kramp-Karrenbauer told ARD TV channel in an interview.
Germany must react to the growing political fears surrounding Nord Stream 2 – Gazprom’s third attempt to build a pipe that bypasses Ukraine – in light of Russia’s recent capture of three Ukrainian boats and their crews close to Crimea, stressed Kramp-Karrenbauer, who is leading in the battle for CDU leadership ahead of final voting at the end of the week.
According to her, the time has come to take a stricter stance with respect to Russia’s actions, including its annexation of Crimea and support of the rebels in eastern Ukraine.
On Friday, Kramp-Karrenbauer proposed another package of radical measures in response to Moscow’s refusal to release the detained Ukrainian sailors.
Europe and Germany in particular will “take on great responsibility” in matters of security and foreign policy, because they “have consequences domestically,” she emphasized.
The EU is considering the possibility of imposing sanctions on Russia for the Kerch incident.
The sides discussed the situation in Ukraine, first of all, the escalation of Russia’s war against Ukraine and the latest events in the Kerch area strait.
For her part, Tymoshenko thanked the United States for the help and support.
She called for tougher sanctions against the aggressor country and assistance to Ukraine’s Naval Forces,” her party’s press service said on Wednesday morning.
He stressed that the United States will continue to support the open door policy of NATO for the Ukrainian state.
NATO is beefing up its troop deployments across eastern Europe amid fears Russia’s “destabilising” behaviour in the Black Sea could spark open conflict with Ukraine.
Soviet-born oligarch Len Blavatnik is in business with two Russians under United States sanctions.
On Tuesday, Dec 5, the global social network Facebook was down or unreachable for vast numbers of users.
Paul Goble Staunton, December 4 – As hard as it is to imagine in the 21st century, Vladimir Putin is perfectly prepared to go to war to ensure that Ukrainian Orthodoxy does not gain autocephaly because once it does and once its status is recognized by others, the Kremlin leader’s imperial pretensions will suffer a defeat that he simply cannot tolerate, Yury Skobov says.
That is because for Putin and those who support him, Ukraine cannot be allowed to be independent of Russia in any fundamental way.
For Putinists, Ukraine is not a state, Ukrainians are not a nation, and Russia must dominate and include them all.
Indeed, the Kremlin leader and his propagandists have regularly insisted on those false propositions.
The other cause is the problematic geographic position of Crimea which Putin seized and annexed in 2014.
But the annexation of Crimea will remain a constant source of tensions which will give rise to ever new conflict situations,” each of which the Kremlin leader will try to exploit to achieve the destruction of Ukraine.
And having shown himself prepared to ignore all the existing rules of the game, he must continue to do so, even if the consequences become more serious.
It is not something that is achieved once and for all but rather something that requires ever more aggression and ever more violation of international norms and laws, the commentator says.
That has consequences that many leaders in the West have not yet been willing to face up to, Skobov suggests.
Politeness and appeals are not going to be enough to prompt Putin to change.
Nothing short of that will prevent Putin from behaving worse and worse and thus threatening the world more and more.
While Ukraine seeks international backing for its Black Sea standoff with Russia and asks NATO to increase its presence in the Black Sea, members of the alliance avoid taking military steps that will further escalate tension in the region.
It is possible to draw a number of strategic conclusions based on this growing list of cooperative initiatives.
First, their military-technical cooperation may help to speed up the transformation of the Ukrainian Armed Forces and assist in bringing them closer to NATO standards.
And on the other hand, Turkey is drawing on Ukraine’s own intellectual and technical resources, including tank engine or aircraft design and construction.
Indeed, it is easier for Kyiv to cooperate with a partner that has its own practical reasons to want to work with Ukraine than it is for Kyiv to collaborate with many Western partners.
Finally, Turkey and Ukraine’s close cooperation is driven by a national security interest to counterbalance Russia in the Black Sea region.
Russia’s latest provocative actions regarding the Sea of Azov are thus likely to further spur Turkey and Ukraine’s developing military strategic partnership.
It of course remains to be seen how far either side will push this cooperation.
But its further development in the military, political and economic spheres could contribute to preventing further Russian expansion and effectively deter it.
Thus, it is in the West’s collective interest to see this strategic military partnership between Kyiv and Ankara expand and flourish.
Western and Ukrainian responses to these events have often revealed confusion about the legal status of the Azov Sea and Kerch Strait.
Paul Goble Staunton, December 4 – Aleksey Arbatov, a foreign policy specialist at the Institute of World Economics and International affairs, says that “any armed clash between Russia and the United States with a high degree of probability will escalate into nuclear war,” a warning reflecting an all too real possibility but also one intended to keep the United States from responding to Russian aggression.
At the beginning of the Cold War, the two leaderships engaged in several “tests of strength,” but after the Caribbean missile crisis in 1962, they became “much more careful and began to respect one another as worthy opponents and even to search for a basis of professional mutual understanding,” Arbatov says.
The military leaders of the two countries now “do not respect each other,” despite the obvious reasons fore ach to do so.
Instead, they calmly talk “about the possibility of war and even of nuclear war,” despite the certainty that such a conflict would have completely unacceptable consequences.
Not only has the World War II generation passed from the scene, so too has the one that was at the center of the Cold War.
According to Arbatov, “It sometimes seems that the present-day leaders of the great powers and their advisors who are responsible for the security of their countries and the entire world consider themselves to be the first people on this earth as if no one lived before them” or had anything to offer them.
And there is less pressure on them to learn quickly because people around are focused on all kinds of things other than the threat of a new war.
At one level, of course, Arbatov’s argument is compelling; but at another, there is a problem.
His words are far more likely to be accepted by political elites in the West which clearly do not want war than by Vladimir Putin and his entourage in the Kremlin who constantly talk about a conflagration.
And because that is so, one can hardly avoid the conclusion that at least in part Arbatov’s real message is that the West should not stand up to Putin’s aggression because that could lead to a nuclear war, an argument that is very effective in the West but one that does nothing to prevent the Kremlin leader from continuing his assault on the international order.
During the interview, General Viktor Muzhenko gestured to a series of satellite images which he said showed the presence of Russian T-62 M tanks stationed 18 km from the Ukrainian border.
Therefore, he believes this is evidence of a concerted build-up of Russian forces in the run-up to Nov., when Russia fired on and captured three Ukrainian vessels at the Kerch Strait, an action Kyiv’s leadership fears may be a precursor to a full-scale invasion.
Russia has no legal, moral or any other limits, the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine underscored.
It is very difficult to predict when it will occur to him to begin active combat actions against Ukraine,” Muzhenko said.
Ukraine was also expecting help from allies, mostly the United States, for equipment including air and naval reconnaissance, boats and weapons for ground troops, he said.
As the General summed up, Ukraine expects to complete the building of a military base on the Azov Sea, which had been planned before the navy clash, by next year.
Russia has been ramping up its forces near the border with Ukraine since August and now poses the greatest military threat since 2014, the year Moscow annexed Crimea, the commander of Ukraine’s armed forces told Reuters in an interview on Tuesday.
Ukraine is concerned about the dangerous escalation near in the Azov and Black Sea and along the border with Russia.
Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine Viktor Muzhenko said at the TV program on the ICTV channel that Russia increases the number of soldiers and military equipment near the border with Ukraine.
Therefore, we consider not just one direction – Luhansk and Donetsk regions – but the northeastern, eastern and southern borders of Ukraine as well,” Viktor Muzhenko said.
He also spoke about the creation of the Russian division consisting of two tanks and two motorized rifled regiments.
Obviously, the division is being created not for defensive actions, but for attacking,” the Head of the General Staff noted.
According to him, this division is part of the 8th combined-arms army deployed in Novocherkassk.
He also said that the Russian Federation had “almost doubled” the number of its ships in the waters of the Sea of Azov.
As reported, on November 25, Russian border ships committed the acts of aggression against three Ukrainian ships heading from the port of Odesa to the port of Mariupol.
The Russian special forces fired and seized three Ukrainian ships in the Kerch Strait and 24 sailors aboard.
On November 26, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine adopted a law approving the decree of the President of Ukraine on the imposition of the martial law for 30 days in 10 regions of Ukraine in connection with the aggression of Russia.
General Viktor Muzhenko gestured to a series of satellite images which he said showed the presence of Russian T-62 M tanks stationed 18 kilometers from the Ukrainian border.
For Muzhenko this is evidence of a concerted build-up of Russian forces in the run-up to Nov., when Russia fired on and captured three Ukrainian vessels at the Kerch Strait, an action Kiev’s leadership fears may be a precursor to a full-scale invasion.
The Kremlin’s spokesman on Monday dismissed as “absurd” the notion that Russia wanted to forcibly take over Ukrainian ports.
Answering the question at his meeting with Ivano-Frankivsk students on Tuesday on how Ukraine can counteract the large-scale anti-Ukrainian propaganda campaign pursued by Russia, which uses methods similar to those of Nazi propaganda mastermind Joseph Goebbels, Petro Poroshenko agreed with such a comparison.
President Petro Poroshenko emphasizes that Ukraine, as well as the whole world, is facing mass propaganda and distribution of fake information Russia has been exploiting in its hybrid war against Ukraine.
Everyone talks about Russia’s interference in the United States elections.
Everyone talks about Russia’s interference in the referendum in the Netherlands.
Everyone talks about Russia’s interference in Brexit,” he said, according to the president’s press service.
To Russia, any systems based on western values are like a bur in the throat.
That is why we are now united to confront a unique misinformation policy.
When democratic standards are used to ruin democracy,” the president said.
Ukraine’s security agency said it has thwarted a massive cyberattack and blamed Russia for the attempted attack that targeted the country’s court system.
The security service of Ukraine successfully blocked an attempt by Russian intelligence to carry out a large-scale cyberattack on information and telecommunication systems of Ukraine’s judicial authorities.
Compromised e-mails, infected with malware, had been sent to computers in various bodies of the country’s judiciary system.
Head of the Ukrainian Border Guard Service Petro Tsygykal has said his agency has asked heads of the border agencies of the neighboring countries in the west to beef up border security.
Tsygykal stressed that citizens of Russia or other countries who work for Russian special services may come from European countries.
Vasyl Bondar, Deputy Foreign Minister, stated that voting for this document is a domestic procedure required to cease the treaty.
As all of these court procedures required so that the international court can consider our lawsuit are completed, it does not have any value as earlier,” Bondar said.
Interfax Ukraine reports that the Prosecutor General of Ukraine Yuriy Lutsenko intends to send letters to the President of Ukraine and National Security and Defense Council with a proposal to introduce sanctions against certain legal entities and individuals of the Russian Federation for armed aggression against the Ukrainian Navy and Armed Forces.
I consider it necessary for the NSDC to consider this issue of imposing personal and individualized economic and other restrictions to Russian individuals and legal entities, in part freezing assets on the territory of Ukraine,” said Lutsenko on Monday evening.
According to the Prosecutor General, this freezing of assets should continue till the de-occupation of Ukrainian territories.
On the morning of November 25, Ukraine informed the Russian port of its intention to transfer three ships through the Kerch Strait, as required by the Agreement on the joint use of the Azov Sea and Kerch Strait.
However, at around 8:00m., Russian ships carried out acts of provocation against the Ukrainian vessels, even ramming into the Yany Kapu tugboat.
The Ukrainian ships decided to return to Odessa, but they were chased and subsequently attacked by the Russian military.
The Berdiansk and Nikopol boats were hit, and two crew members were wounded.
On November 28, the Kremlin-controlled court of Simferopol placed the Ukrainian sailors under 2 months of arrest – until January 25, 2019.
The Ukrainian side plans to serve a notice of suspicion to more than 10 Russian servicemen involved in aggression against the Navy of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, press secretary of Ukrainian Prosecutor General Yuriy Lutsenko, Larysa Sarhan has said.
A spokesperson for the prosecutor general said that during seven days of the pretrial investigation, 17 volumes of evidence of the Russian Federation’s aggression against the Naval Forces of the Ukrainian Armed Forces were collected.
The procedural management in criminal proceedings is carried out by the Military Prosecutor’s Office of the Southern Region of Ukraine,” said Sarhan. euronews Published on Dec 4, 2018 Shipments from the Azov Sea have resumed after Russia decided to partially unblock two critical Ukrainian ports.
And as tensions remain high between the two countries, experts worry about the upcoming elections in Ukraine.
Russia is mastering the forms and techniques of hybrid warfare at sea in the region of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
Ukraine Navy Commander Vice Admiral Ihor Voronchenko says Russia has resettled over 105,000 Russian citizens to Crimea since the Russian occupation of the peninsula in March 2014.
The Ukrainian official insists that Russian President Vladimir Putin’s ultimate goal is to create a military base in Crimea.
As tensions grow between Moscow and Kyiv, families living in two villages along the Ukraine-Russia border have been separated by a barbed-wire fence.
Ukraine’s representative in the TCG Yevhen Marchuk said this&nbsp;live&nbsp;on the&nbsp;Priamy&nbsp;television channel, an Ukrinform correspondent reported.
Both the balaclava and maskirovka serve a definitive military purpose in Eastern Europe.
Russia has spent decades perfecting this doctrine and is arguably the world’s most proficient actor of military deception.
For Myhalych, wearing a ski mask is just as essential as wearing combat boots and keeping his weapon clean.
The National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine has announced that it successfully tested a land-based cruise missile and upgraded S-125 missile system on 5 December.
According to statement, the tests of Ukrainian missiles proved that Ukraine is capable of defending its borders in the Black and Azov Seas.
This was stated by Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov upon completion of the tests at the military proving ground in the Odesa region.
According to him, significant results were achieved during the tests, in particular, a successful flight test of Ukrainian cruise missiles was carried out, and the coast defense system was worked out with the help of the modernized S-125 missile system.
Mr Turchynov reported that aviation was involved in checking the results of hitting long-range targets and that a special point on the Snake Island was equipped.
In addition, Mr Turchynov said that to strengthen coastal defense, the accuracy and reliability of hitting the conditional opponent’s watercraft by the S-125 missile systems, which had undergone a deep modernization at the enterprises of the Ukrainian defense industry, were checked.
This is a very good result, which proves that these modernized systems are capable of providing reliable protection against aggression both from the air and from the sea, and will significantly enhance the coast defense of the Black Sea and Azov coast”, – Mr Turchynov noticed.
After the tests were completed, the NSDC Secretary held a meeting with the leading developers of missile equipment and the military leadership to determine the priority areas for strengthening defense of the Black Sea-Azov region.
The meeting took place in a new command-and-staff mobile special telecommunication complex, which was involved in coordinating missile firing.
The check on the range and accuracy of defeating the surface targets of Ukrainian cruise missiles from the new coastal anti-ship complex Neptune was successful and important results were achieved during the exercises.
Turchynov said that in order to check the results of hitting targets at a long range, aviation was involved, and a special unit on Snake Island was equipped.
Neptune, the new anti-ship missile was successfully tested in Odesa region, southern Ukraine.
Stepan Poltorak, the defense minister stated this after the field probes held on Wednesday, December 5.
At this particular stage, the tasks were completed, and there’s even an opportunity to boost the current combat capacity ’, Poltorak said.
The minister added that the military tested an upgraded version of S-125, the surface-to-air missile system.
Thanks to the upgrade, the missile fired from it can hit the sea-based targets, too.
The firing test of Ukrainian missiles proved that Ukraine is capable of defending its borders in the Black and Azov Seas.
This was said by Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine , Oleksandr Turchynov, upon completion of the tests at the Odesa region-based military proving ground, Censor.NET reports citing the NSDC press office.
Namely, Ukraine-made cruise missiles successfully passed flight test while the coast defense was ensured by the upgraded S-125 missile system.
Turchynov reported that aviation was involved in checking the results of a missile strike on remote targets and that a special observation point was constructed on Zmiinyi Island.
In addition, Turchynov said that in order to strengthen coastal defense, the accuracy and reliability of the S-125 missile system, which had been substantially upgraded by the Ukrainian defense firms, was checked during a strike on a conditional hostile watercraft.
A total of eight launches were made and eight surface targets were destroyed.
This is an outstanding result which proves that these upgraded systems are capable of providing reliable protection against aggression both from the air and from the sea and will significantly enhance the defense of the Black and Azov Sea coasts,” Turchynov said.
Upon completion of the test, the NSDC Secretary held a meeting with the leading missile developers and the military leadership to determine priorities in strengthening the defense of the Black Sea and Azov Sea regions.
The meeting took place in a new specialшяув command-and-control center which was involved in adjusting missile fire.
Tests of Ukrainian missiles have proved that Ukraine is capable of defending its borders in the Black and Azov Seas.
The minister insists that the protection of minority rights is inseparable from security issues.
Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin said that Kyiv will firmly defend its interests in the row with Hungary, at the same time doing everything to help the Hungarian community in Ukraine.
Klimkin will hold a meeting with his Hungarian counterpart Peter Szijjarto at the OSCE ministerial summit in Milan.
Tamara Tarnavska opened the first animal shelter of its kind in Ukraine in 1997.
