In August, the failed coup attempt against Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev had significantly strengthened the hand of the republics in their push for greater autonomy.
Stanislav Shushkevich, the Belarusian leader, had invited Boris Yeltsin and Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk to Belavezha both to find a mutually acceptable formula for the Soviet Union’s dissolution and to agree on a structure to govern relations among the republics in their newfound independence.
The role of Ukraine, second in importance only to Russia among the Soviet republics, was key in determining the viability of the union.
On 1 December, 90% of the Ukrainian electorate, including a majority of ethnic Russians living there , had voted for independent statehood.
Gorbachev had held a summit of the republics’ leaders during the previous month, in a last-ditch attempt to cobble together a new Union Treaty, but Kravchuk had not attended.
At Belavezha, Yeltsin sought some kind of supranational umbrella strucSamuel Charap is IISS Senior Fellow for Russia and Eurasia.
He said that Ukraine had already determined its path in the referendum, and that path was independence.
The Soviet Union no longer existed, and parliament would not allow him to create new unions of any kind.
The need to preserve economic cooperation among the republics compelled Kravchuk to consider a new supranational structure.
And Yeltsin did not insist on maintaining a union, because he both sought independence for Russia and recognised that a union that excluded Ukraine would be meaningless.
In addition to noting that the Soviet Union ‘is ceasing to exist as a subject of international law and a geopolitical reality’, the agreement created the Commonwealth of Independent States , headquartered in Minsk, which had limited powers over issues such as trade, finance and migration.
All three countries’ shared interest in breaking away from the Soviet Union’s centre overrode their disagreements about the terms of the divorce.
And both the Russian and Ukrainian presidents were willing to engage in genuine give and take.
Nearly 23 years later, on 26 August 2014, the Belarusian president invited his Russian and Ukrainian counterparts to a seemingly similar gathering in Minsk.
Both the issue – the nature of the relationship between Russia and its neighbours, particularly Ukraine – and the participants were essentially the same, although Kazakhstan and the EU were also represented at the meeting.
Unlike the summit at Belavezha, however, the Minsk gathering produced no agreements of any consequence.
The situation in the country has been steadily deteriorating, and international tensions progressively escalating.
This steady downward trend has been punctuated by a series of false denouements.
The media – and some Western policymakers – have seized on these events as signs of a definitive turning point in the crisis.
However, each event has proven immaterial to the steadily worsening realities both on the ground and in the international system.
Of course, journalists cannot be blamed for the natural human cognitive bias towards narratives with discrete beginning and end points, be they happy or otherwise.
But an analysis of the fundamental drivers of the conflict suggest that we are moving further away from a genuine resolution.
We can expect the Ukraine crisis to continue until the root causes are at least ameliorated, if not fully addressed.
While the latter now rightly receives the most attention, it is important to recall that the crisis began as a domestic Ukrainian one.
Since gaining independence, Ukraine has featured strong regional divides as a fact of its political life.
The events that led to the change of power in February this year, and the civil conflict that began thereafter, exacerbated these divisions.
An inclusive political process will be needed to return to a semblance of normal politics.
While the protests centred on Maidan Square were largely a broad-based civic movement, the revolutionary vanguard – without which the change of power would not have occurred when it did – was an amalgam of armed, far-right groups.
That change dramatically shifted the balance of power in Kiev from the south and east of Ukraine to the country’s west.
The Yanukovich government drew 75% of its ministerial-level leadership from the south and east of the country, with 42% from Donetsk, Yanukovich’s home province.
While that government was equally regionally unbalanced, the south and east are home to nearly 50% of the country’s total population.
New appointments in the interim have slightly righted the balance in Kiev, but the war in Donetsk and Luhansk broke the scales.
Donbas accounts for 15% of Ukraine’s population, 16% of its GDP, 25% of its industrial output and 27% of its total exports.
But the population there was hostile to the post-Maidan government even before the shelling of the regional capitals began.
The promise of greater regional autonomy, which might have reduced this hostility and transformed Ukraine’s diversity from a weakness into a strength, remains unfulfilled.
Poroshenko’s proposed decentralisation plan was a half measure at best, and was devised in secret without input even from members of the governing coalition.
Unsurprisingly, it has stalled in parliament and will now likely be delayed until after the early parliamentary elections scheduled for 26 October.
Early parliamentary elections might have proven an effective glue for the polity if they had been conducted before the war intensified.
Just as attitudes have hardened in the conflict zone, so too have those in Kiev and the rest of the country.
Those paramilitary groups – one of which openly embraces Nazi symbolism, while another is led by a violent convict – will be a potent radicalising political force once they return from the front-lines.
Efforts to create a new party to fill the void have only just gotten off the ground.
Meanwhile, it remains unclear how Donbas will vote in the current security environment, particularly given the exodus of hundreds of thousands of its residents to Russia and other parts of Ukraine.
In short, Ukrainian domestic politics is more divisive and polarised than ever.
And there is no process to reverse the slide under way; instead, events such as the war and the election campaign are making it worse.
Although this crisis became international when Russia invaded Crimea following the late-February change of power, its root cause at the strategic level was the failure of the post-Cold War European and Euro-Atlantic institutional architecture to achieve its stated aim of creating a Europe that was whole, free and at peace.
Instead, Russia has seen the eastward enlargement of the European Union and NATO as an economic and security threat, while most of the country’s neighbours see membership of these organisations as not only the key to prosperity and security but also as the only means of keeping Moscow’s imperial ambitions at bay.
It would not have invaded Crimea in February, nor would it have destabilised the east.
It would not have sought guarantees that Ukraine would stay out of the Alliance, nor would it have taken steps to undermine Ukraine’s EU Association Agreement.
Counterfactuals aside, Russia wants a say on matters that the United States and Europe consider to be none of its business.
In the narrow sense, those matters include Ukraine’s geopolitical and geo-economic future, and its constitutional structure.
But, even if compromise can be made on those issues, the broader conflict between Russia and the West will not come to an end until some agreement is reached on the broader European-integration agenda.
Russia’s brazen actions in Ukraine, and the United States and EU sanctions in response, have made even a discussion of these issues, let alone a new agreement on the underlying principles, seem like a distant fantasy.
Meanwhile, Russian and Western leaders are preparing their publics for confrontation, not compromise.
The outcome they demand – and that the Ukrainian authorities pursue on the ground – entails an immediate halt to Russian intervention and assistance to the insurgents that would allow government forces to crush the insurgency, establishing full control over Ukraine’s sovereign territory.
As United States President Barack Obama said on 29 July, the sooner the Russians recognize that the best chance for them to have influence inside of Ukraine is by being good neighbors and maintaining trade and commerce, rather than trying to dictate what the Ukrainian people can aspire to, rendering Ukraine a vassal state to Russia … the sooner we can resolve this crisis.
But, for President Putin, this scenario represents total strategic defeat and public humiliation.
He will therefore keep the insurgency in Ukraine alive until he gets a deal on his terms.
If the rebels are crushed, he will lose his leverage, and then Russia, he seems to believe, will have ‘lost’ Ukraine to the West, an outcome that he cannot accept under any circumstances.
For Western policymakers, it is Russia’s determination that ultimately makes this crisis so different to others in the post-Cold War period.
Never before have they faced a major nuclear power as an adversary in a regional dispute occurring in that power’s backyard.
In Kosovo, Russia was an opponent, but Kosovo barely registered in the hierarchy of Russian nationalsecurity imperatives.
And eastern Ukraine is one of a few places beyond Russia’s borders in which Moscow can deliver the assets required to sustain an insurgency.
Moscow took the decision to do everything it takes to avoid losing Ukraine several months ago.
In other words, without a negotiation process involving genuine give and take, Western sanctions will fail to change Russian behaviour.
Talking to Moscow is a policy of necessity; it is not one that any Western leader would want to embrace publicly.
If they want Ukraine to survive, however, they might not have a choice.
Its economy is already teetering on the brink of collapse, sustained only by a massive IMF loan.
An insurgency that continues into 2015 might well send the economy over the edge.
III The Minsk meeting began with televised speeches by the heads of state, all of whom were sitting around the same table.
In his remarks, Poroshenko said, ‘we do not impose, and do not want anyone to impose on us, a constitutional structure or international integration course.
This will affect entire sectors of our economy and agriculture, with all the consequences for economic growth and employment rates.
He went on to explain that Moscow would take steps to protect its economy should its concerns go unaddressed.
Unless these conditions are created, summits might make for good headlines, but they will not make history.
Research and Policy Consulting, 11 Kremlin, ‘Speech at the Meeting of the June 2014.
The Ukraine, ‘Ya gorzhus’ tem, kak Neo-Nazi Brigade Fighting ProPrezident vel peregovory – Ministr Russian Separatists’, Telegraph, 11 Klimkin’, 28 August 2014.
Aug 2014; Philip Shishkin, ‘Ukraine 13 Pavlo Klimkin, Twitter, 27 Taps Volunteers Fueled by Anger, August 2014.
