On July 8-9th 2016, NATO is holding its second summit since the Ukraine-Russia crisis.
In Newport, Wales in September 2014 a “crisis summit” took place a few months after Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the invasion of Ukraine.
In my opinion, NATO was given breathing space to re-energise and formulate new strategies to counter Russian revanchism.
This was provided primarily by Ukrainian soldiers, volunteers, civil society activists and “ultra” football fans who defeated Russian President Putin’s “New Russia” project in eastern and southern Ukraine and re-took control of the bulk of the two regions of the Donbas.
NATO would have had to cope with a far more expansionist and victorious Russia if – as Russian nationalists planned – Ukraine had disintegrated with large areas of the country being annexed or becoming satellite enclaves of Russia.
Second, whether the Republican candidate Donald Trump will be elected next United States president in November; whereas the Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton is a committed supporter of NATO, Trump has derided the organisation and talked of the United States withdrawing.
Thirdly, until 2015 only five of NATO’s 28 members spent the proposed two or more per cent of GDP on defence.
Ukraine spends five per cent, which is more than any NATO member – of course this is from a smaller GDP and with losses from high levels of corruption tolerated by the authorities.
The Wales and Warsaw summits will seek to deter and contain Russia which is widely viewed to be revanchist.
First, although critical of Putin’s policies in eastern Ukraine, Russian democrats support his annexation of Crimea.
Second, democrats have no possibilities of coming to power in the near future in Russia.
Four battalions with 1,000 soldiers in each have been created for Poland and the three Baltic states with a fifth battalion possibly for Romania, which could be transformed into permanent forward bases.
A new Black Sea Defence cluster will be composed of Romania, Bulgaria and Turkey and NATO partner countries Ukraine and Georgia.
Although Russia has returned as a threat to NATO, today’s world is different than that of the Cold War.
Information warfare is an important element of hybrid war in which Russia spends a lot and Russia is a master of cyber-warfare and has hacked the email accounts of German and United States political leaders.
Similar threats against Ukraine and Georgia are long-standing; witness Russia’s invasion of the latter in August 2008.
First, revanchist Russia has increased support for NATO membership in Ukraine, Finland and Sweden with support in the latter growing from 17 per cent in 2002 to 37 per cent today.
But, unlike Georgian leaders, President Petro Poroshenko has not used the high popularity for NATO to lobby for Ukrainian membership.
If President Viktor Yushchenko had supported an orange coalition then United States President George W Bush would have visited Kyiv in June, Ukraine would have received a MAP in Riga summit in November and by 2010, Ukraine could have been a member of NATO deterring Russia from attacking Ukraine.
Ukraine’s militia have become a police force and its Ministry of Internal Troops, a National Guard.
Ukraine’s generals rarely visit the front line and soldiers in the conflict zone have little respect for officers in Kyiv.
NATO remains concerned about Russian penetration of the Security Service of Ukraine while transformation of the still neo-Soviet and over-manned SBU and border troops is urgent.
The third step is to recognise that Poland is an extremely important supporter of NATO maintaining an open door policy for new members.
The first is Ukraine should offer its experience in fighting Russia’s hybrid war in analytical methodology, concepts, doctrines and lessons learned.
Ukraine would provide education and training and supply experts on hybrid war and urban warfare.
Ukraine could offer its experience of fighting Russia’s hybrid war in analytical methodology, concepts, doctrines and lessons learned.
The second is Kyiv can offer the use of strategic airlift , the world’s biggest transportation planes for transporting NATO troops and equipment during exercises and crises.
The third is the successful Lithuanian-Polish-Ukrainian brigade could be replicated with a new Romanian-Bulgarian-Ukrainian brigade.
While solidifying NATO’s eastern flank against a revanchist Russia, the Warsaw Summit should also be the occasion when Ukraine lobbies hard for NATO to recognise its vital contribution to regional security as a stepping stone to future membership.
Democratization, Corruption and the New Russian Imperialism is a modern political history of Ukraine from 1953 to the present.
