The common understanding is that since Russia refuses to hand back Crimea to its rightful owner, which is Ukraine, there is no real sense in talking about it.
So the issue has been what is known in diplomatic parlance as ‘parked’, and we should instead focus on getting a solution in Donbass, in eastern Ukraine.
Given that Russia refuses to even acknowledge that it is party to the conflict in Donbass it is very hard to get any talks together.
In Crimea, Russia is definitely acknowledging everything it has done – although it claims it was rightful – so Russia is at the table and we can start talking.
And if we get a deal on Crimea, that could be a back door into getting a deal on Donbass, and that in turn could get a back door into solving the problems of security order in Europe as a whole.
And add to that, I believe the structure of a deal in Crimea would be easier than the structure of a deal in Donbass because Crimea is more of an isolated problem.
It would have to have several steps; the first would obviously concern sovereignty.
But instead of pursuing a bargaining strategy where you say ‘you have to do as we tell you’, a bargaining strategy could be formulated that creates maximum confusion by throwing in Kosovo, the Turkish invasion in Cyprus, South Ossetia, go back to the Helsinki Final Act.
If you throw as many cards as possible on the table, it generates a situation where you can bargain.
And I can make it look, to my home audience, like I got away with the win.
And we should also remember that the Baltic States were annexed by the Soviet Union, but the West never recognised that formally.
Still, it was possible to do business there and to deal with Moscow although we had this fundamental disagreement.
The second step would need to be the recognition that there is a win-win, and to convince the Russians that there is a win-win.
If we lift sanctions from anybody who comes even close to Crimea, which is the case now, and allow foreign investment and foreign business with Crimea both from outside and from Ukraine, then that would take a big load off the Russian Federal Budget, which would be very helpful.
There are a lot of foreign businesses that would love to go into Crimea, with the resort areas and the offshore drilling prospects.
The third step would need to be the recognition that Russia does have legitimate security interests in its naval bases in Sevastopol.
Before the Yanukovych government collapsed, which triggered the crisis and subsequently the war in Ukraine, there was general recognition that Ukraine was non-aligned, and should remain non-aligned.
And go back to guarantees that Russia has the naval base in Sevastopol for a long time into the future.
If we could add some security guarantees that Ukraine would not shut down water and electricity supply to the bases in times of crisis, and maybe lift sanctions from anyone who wants to build a bridge across the Kerch Strait, so that Russia gets a connection to the Russian mainland.
So a deal comprising these components, I believe, would be acceptable for the Russians, and they should be acceptable for the West given the tremendous wins we could get out of it.
The problem is, there is no ‘or else’ because we have taken all force options off the table so Russia knows it will get away with blue murder, and sanctions aren’t working.
And its essential mainly because if we don’t do anything to unlock negotiations that will get Russia back to the table, then the alternative is simply frightening.
The war in Donbass is probably going to start again very soon, we’re going to have a ‘Minsk 3’, a new peace agreement that nobody believes in and meanwhile Ukraine is collapsing.
It’s high time now to start thinking about something that people have already said is unthinkable.
Namely, start with Crimea, and go from Crimea move to the Donbass, and from there to get Russia back to the international bargaining table for a solution for getting us all back on track on cooperative security in Europe.
The internationally recognised Ukraine territory of Crimea was annexed by Russia in March 2014.
The Ukraine armed forces were evicted from their bases on 19 March by Crimean protesters and Russian troops.
The military intervention and annexation took place in the aftermath of wide unrest across southern and eastern Ukraine.
