A BLENDED STRATEGIC APPROACH TO A RESURGENT RUSSIA By Craig Nieman Lieutenant Colonel, United States Air Force Intentionally left blank DETERRENCE AND ENGAGEMENTA BLENDED STRATEGIC APPROACH TO A RESURGENT RUSSIA By Craig Nieman Lieutenant Colonel, United States Air Force A paper submitted to the Faculty of the Joint Advanced Warfighting School in partial satisfaction of the requirements of a Master of Science Degree in Joint Campaign Planning and Strategy.
The contents of this paper reflect my own personal views and are not necessarily endorsed by the Joint Forces Staff College or the Department of Defense.
Sigr Intentionally left blank ABSTRACT Over the last decade, Russia’s increased aggression towards its neighbors has raised concerns over the stability of the European continent.
Cyber denial attacks on Estonia, war against Georgia, annexation of the Crimean peninsula, and the support to rebels in Ukraine’s Donbass region have all come during Vladimir Putin’s watch.
Contemporary reactions to Russian aggression advance the notion that the United States and its NATO allies should diplomatically and economically isolate Russia while increasing the alliances’ hard power projection to contain and deter further aggression.
This strategic approach represents an extreme pendulum swing that is a polar opposite of the U.S.’s 2009 approach to ‘Reset’ relations with Russia by engaging diplomatically while reducing military strength.
By applying an analysis of Russian strategic culture and national interests, this thesis offers that instead of replacing engagement and disarmament with isolation and containment, a blended solution of both deterrent strength and engagement would achieve better results in line with United States national interests.
DEDICATION This work is dedicated to my family who patiently endured months of my focus on a singular subject that did not involve sports, Legos, or home improvement.
PUTIN’S RISE AND CONSOLIDATION OF POWER.11 Putin’s International Objectives.
During this time, Russia has conducted cyber-warfare in a 2007 dispute involving ethnic Russians in Estonia.
It has engaged in cyber and conventional war against Georgia in 2008 and continues to occupy disputed territories inside that sovereign nation.
In 2014, Russia occupied and annexed Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula while that nation was in the turmoil of a revolution and is suspected of continuing to support a rebellion in Ukraine’s Donbass region in the east.
Most recently, Russia has deployed troops and aircraft into Syria to prop up a failing ally.
Many of Russia’s aggressive actions are at odds with the U.S., its NATO allies, and their common interests.
All of these actions have occurred while Vladimir Putin has been the President or Prime Minister of Russia.
President Putin is leveraging Russian Nationalism to help achieve his strategic goals, which may include designs for a new Russian Empire.
He is also using the tensions with NATO as an excuse to consolidate his domestic power and extend his personal reign as Russia’s leader.
The most recent showdowns with the West over Ukraine and then again in Syria, have enabled him to sustain his approval rating at greater than 80% since January of 2014.
As he proved from 2008-2012, he may still remain in control of Russia indefinitely by taking the role of Prime Minister in between Presidential terms.
Ultimately, it is likely that the United States will be dealing with Putin as the leader of Russia for the foreseeable future.
What makes him a most dangerous opponent is that he has slowly eliminated much of his political opposition, and has the support of an ever thinning elite class.
Putin has consolidated power within what was hoped to be a budding democracy and has slowly steered it closer towards a more traditional Russian autocracy.
By doing so, Putin has gained a wider latitude to take these aggressive actions, allowing him to achieve both his personal desire for power and the restoration of Russian international prestige.
This strategic approach represents an extreme pendulum swing that is a polar opposite of the United States administration’s 2009 approach to ‘Reset’ relations between the United States and Russia by engaging diplomatically and reducing military strength.
Thesis Russian President Vladimir Putin is seeking to revise the international status quo and challenge the United States’ dominant international position.
To do this, Putin seeks recognition of Russia as a great power in a multi-polar world no longer dominated by the United States and western international organizations.
He also desires an increase in Russian power and prestige by re-establishing Russian dominance over former Soviet states and historical spheres of influence.
Russia is vigorously engaging nations and international organizations where the United States and its allies are weak to achieve gains in national power.
These gains continue to be at the expense of western interests, the NATO Alliance, and stability in Europe.
Therefore, the United States must change its strategic approach to Russia and show its strength as a deterrent, with a synergized application of Diplomatic, Informational, Military, and Economic instruments of power, to prevent further Russian aggression, while also reassuring Russia that it can still achieve its strategic goals that positively contribute to the international environment.
The Rise of Russia's New Imperialism, written and published in 2014 prior to the Russian incursions in Ukraine, the author correctly predicts the continuation of Russia’s antagonistic actions on its periphery, beyond the 2008 War with Georgia.
In the final concluding words of the book, Van Herpen uncannily foresees a scenario that “if Ukraine were to opt for deeper integration into the European Union, a Georgian scenario could not be excluded, in which the 3 Kremlin could provoke riots in Eastern Ukraine or the Crimea, where many Russian passport holders live.
This thesis will seek similar insights by defining Russia’s strategic culture and the importance it plays in reaching a better understanding of our adversary.
It will explore the Russian history that has helped shape this common identity and form the interests of the Russian people.
The work will review the history of Putin’s rise to power inside of this culture and the methods he has used to maintain his position of leadership, in an effort to reveal his strategic goals.
With this framework in place, the paper will leverage Harry Yarger’s The Strategic Appraisal to explore Russia’s current military doctrine and national security documents in an effort to define their national interests and national security strategy.
It will then apply Graham Allison’s three conceptual frameworks for analyzing foreign policy to question the Russian Federation’s recent actions in Syria and determine if these activities conform with Russia’s strategic documents.
With a comprehensive consideration of Russia’s national interests and strategy in place, the paper will seek to identify friction points where Russian strategy could lead to future conflicts with the United States and/or its allies.
The thesis will then weigh a theory of deterrence, as defined by Thomas Christiansen in The Contemporary Security Dilemma and dissect two deterrent efforts, the Korean War and the Cuba missile crisis to provide salient points on both unsuccessful and successful deterrence.
When this analysis of strategic culture is compared with a nation’s strategic documents it could further help indicate if a nation’s desired ends are enduring, therefore core national interests and less likely to be compromised on, or if they are perhaps more malleable.
Autocracy and Expansionism “If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles.” -Sun Tzu, The Art of War.
Implications for Nuclear Option (Santa Monica,CA: RAND Corporation, 1977), 8.
These differences trace back to the disparate security environments in which these two nations were fonned.
The United States has enjoyed a relatively secure environment through its short history.
Moments of war in the homeland merely punctuated the perpetual peace and security that two vast oceans and minimally threatening border nations provided.
On the other hand, Russia has endured numerous foreign invasions throughout the centuries.
The threats have come from every side, whether they were Teutonic Knights invading from the West, Muslim Arabs from the south, or Mongol Hordes from the east.
Russians suffered extraordinary casualties during the last world war, with estimates of over 25 million military and civilians killed.
An environment of relentless war and casualty, punctuated by periodic peace, provides an explanation for Russia’s perpetual focus on security.
Because of this insecurity, Russians are accustomed to giving up many more of their liberties for the greater good of the state.
This greater sacrifice of freedoms ensured a strong state that was capable of providing greater security against these frequent attacks of foreign invaders.
Russian autocratic rulers have often tapped into this cultural insecurity, while using Russian nationalism, Pan-Slavism, and Christian Orthodoxy as pretexts for further territorial expansion.
Pan Slavism is described as a tribal nationalism that always insisted its own people were surrounded by a world of enemies and they are one against all because fundamental differences exists between these people and all others.
The Soviet regime also tapped into this cultural norm, briefly adding the spread of communist ideals as a fourth pretext.
At this point, Russia became the only Orthodox country left in the world.
By the 18 th and 19 th centuries, Russian Tsars slowly incorporated Orthodoxy more and more into their regimes.
The Tsars began to see themselves as the defender of the faith, using Orthodoxy as a basis for legitimation of their rule and as an integral part of the state control mechanism.
It was at this time that Nicholas I’s deputy minister of public education, Sergey Uvarov, “coined opportunity.
This is again expressed in the modern age by Russian Pan Slavist Nikolay Danilevsky in his 2010 complaint from Rossiya I Evropa , that Europe doesn’t recognize the Russians as equals.
Priests were paid by the state and a clerical head of church position was established at the right hand of the Tsar.
Externally, the unification of the Orthodox faith became the banner call for Russia’s southern expansion into the Ottoman Empire.
In this territory, Greeks, Bulgarians, Romanians, and Serbs all shared the Orthodox faith but were ruled by the weakening Islamic Ottoman Empire.
It is during this campaign against the Ottomans that Russia once again found itself facing some familiar western nations that had concerns over the growing power of Russia in that region.
France, and eventually Britain, joined the Ottomans in a campaign against Russia by laying siege to Sevastopol and the Crimean Peninsula in the Crimean War.
The important role Orthodoxy played in historical Russia’s association with security, rule legitimation, and expansionism remains pertinent today.
Originally a liberal democratic movement, Pan Slavists quickly embraced autocratic rule for two reasons.
The first was that there simply was “not enough support in Russian society for liberal-democratic 12 Van Herpen, Putin’s Wars, 34.
The Christian Scientist Monitor, Jan 4, 2016. htty://ww’w.csmonitor.com/Worid/Euroye/20l6/0l04/Czarist-echo-RussianOrthodox-Church-drives-to-restore-its-yolitical-clout . 9 ideas... and that the task of unifying all Slavs was considered more important than democratic reforms.
It reached intense levels by 1891 under Alexander III and continued to develop during the reign of Nicholas II as it morphed further into ethnic Russian nationalism.
In aggregate, Russia’s strategic cultural exhibits realism in its external and internal behaviors by which national interests, sovereignty, independence, self-reliance, and force play major roles.
PUTIN’S RISE AND CONSOLIDATION OF POWER With an understanding of how the themes of security, expansionism, autocracy, orthodoxy, and nationalism help define Russia’s strategic culture, the rise of Putin into this realm is easier to explain.
Putin was a low-level KGB agent operating in Eastern Gennany when the Soviet Union collapsed.
As member of the Soviet apparatus, at some level he believed the fa 9 ade that the nation was successful, powerful, and wealthy.
It had profound problems, but these could be solved by such a great nation.
Petersburg and soon found a transformational place in Mayor Anatoly Sobchak’s 1989 administration as an assistant.
Corruption was rampant as the former state controlled economy entered privatization and ended up in the hands of a few.
Putin’s experiences in this environment shaped his view on the demise of the Soviet Union and failure of liberal democracy.
In 1996, Sobchak lost his mayoral election and the new regime later accused him of corruption.
Putin refused to work for the incoming mayor and allegedly helped Sobchak flee to France to avoid charges.
His loyalty and capability quickly caught the attention of the Yeltsin administration which had just won national re-election in 1996, 1 Judah.
The country continued on its economic downward spiral until it eventually reached bottom in April, 1998, and Russia defaulted on its IMF loan.
At this point, disorder characterized the Russian democracy, which helped usher in a more authoritarian rule that was palatable to the populace, as long as it brought order.
In 1998, President Yeltin had his fifth heart attack and continued to appear even more intoxicated and out of control at his international and national appearances.
This is preconditioned by the inseparable characteristics of its geopolitical, economic, and cultural existence.
According to Ben Judah’s interview with Boris Berezovsky in Fragile Empire, Berezovsky made his fortune in Russia in the 1990’s as the country went through privatization.
He became part of the Boris Yeltsin inner circle as a billionaire owner of the country’s main television station, Channel One.
In his interview he describes the consolidation of former state assets into the hands of a few super elites as political favor in exchange for loyalty to Yeltsin and assistance in assuring his re-election.
Berezovsky claims to have chosen Putin as Yeltsin’s successor, but later became an open critic of Putin’s policies as Putin steered Russia towards authoritarianism.
This culminated in Berezivsky’s resignation from the Duma in the spring of 2000.
Later his media channel criticized Putin’s handling of the submarine Kursk accident and not soon after, numerous corruption charges that had been dropped, resurfaced, and Berezovsky fled to Britain.
He became vocal opponent of Putin, accusing him of committing war crimes in Chechnya, staging the 1999 Moscow apartment bombings as a terror attack, and suppressing freedom of speech.
He was later found dead, hanging in his home in Britain 8 months after the interview.
His first year as prime minister ushered in a 10% growth rate for the Russian economy on the heels of the default.
His timing was impeccable as his first two presidential tenns saw an upswell in the state coffers, which benefited from the huge rise in prices of oil and gas.
Putin’s reign also saw a reemergence of nationalism amid the nostalgia for the lost great empire that once was.
The archives of the KGB, which had been temporarily opened, were closed again.
The great autocratic and imperialist tsars, especially Peter the great, Catherine the Great, Nicholas I, and Alexander III, were rehabilitated and reestablished in their full glory.
In September 2000 Tsar Nicholas II was canonized and became an official Orthodox saint.
Once in power, Putin began to consolidate his gains in order to realize the strong state power that he believed it must have.
Putin took advantage of the bitter tasting chaos left from Russia’s period of liberal democracy to subvert the weakening of central control that had characterized the first decade of democracy.
The Rise of Russia’s New Imperialism (Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2014), 53.
Under Yeltsin, the leading Russian oil company Gazprom “seemed to be investing in everything apart from its own pipelines and reserves.
Petersburg, head of his electoral campaign, and... first deputy head of the Presidential Administration,” Dmitriy Medvedev.
Medvedev remained chairman until he was elected in 2008 to succeed Putin as Russia’s president.
Over the last decade in control, Putin has consolidated the wealth of the nation and control over many of the nation’s key industries and corporations into the hands of a few loyal oligarchs, and consolidated the military and FSB in the hands of trusted loyalists.
With these mechanisms in place, Putin is now in firm control of Russia.
His objectives are the nation’s objectives, the nation’s strategy is his strategy, and will be for the foreseeable future.
Managed Democracy is alleged to be coined by Yeltsin’s Chief of Staff Alexander Voloshin.
Meaning a democracy in name with similar institutions of the western inspired liberal democracies, but with much more centralized control and power at the executive.
There is a multiple party system but they support the same central leader.
The state owns much more of the essential industries in the economy, natural resources, and media control.
There remains a suspicion in Russia that the United States dominates existing international organizations and that those in turn serve western interests.
Because of this, Putin has preferred to build his own international organizations.
The SCO started out as a border settlement charter, but has now expanded into joint military exercises, cooperation on counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics, and as an exchange for cultural cooperation.
Pakistan, India, and Iran were later invited for observer status, while the United States has asked to observe, but has been denied.
Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan were joined by Kyrgystan, Tajikistan, and Armenia as original signatories.
Then, in 2013, both Afghanistan and Serbia were granted observer status.
Then, in 2011, Putin announced the Eurasian Economic Union , as a rival to the European Union, with Customs Union partners, Belarus, Russia, and Kazakhstan as the founding members.
Finally, Putin has attempted to play up the BRICS organization as another body that he hopes to leverage for international prestige and power.
Putin hopes that the BRICS development bank would challenge the western dominated IMF and World Bank.
Collectively, Putin’s foreign policy strategy is to engage any and every nation possible in any alliance or partnership that could challenge United States and European dominated international organizations, while bringing international leadership prestige home to Russia.
The hosting of the 2014 Olympic games, 2016 Hockey World Championship, and the 2018 soccer World Cup are all part of re-establishing Russia’s great power status.
RUSSIAN STRATEGIC APPRAISAL This paper defines strategy as a framework with which to achieve a nation’s desired political ends.
The strategic framework also encompasses the ways in which the means are applied to achieve the desired ends.
The strategic framework has levels; Grand Strategy, which is associated with the synergy of all instruments of power, and Strategy, which is the framework for each individual instrument.
Both Grand Stategy and Strategy rely on national policy to define the desired ends to achieve and provide boundaries for the ways and means.
How the ends, ways, and means are applied, focused, and/or constrained are in line with enduring national interests and the nation’s strategic culture.
National interests and national strategic culture are considered semi-malleable over time, but represent the most enduring qualities, concerns, and objectives of the nation that focus and shape how a nation crafts policy and strategy over time.
Russian National Security Strategy In May 2009 President Dimitriy Medvedev approved the National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation until 2020.
The strategy highlighted Russia’s perception of the world and its own security situation, and defined Russia’s national interests and strategic priorities.
Of primary importance is the confirmation that Russia intends to continue to rely on nuclear deterrence and nuclear parity vis-a-vis the United States.
The NSS also demonstrates that Russia perceives there is a failure in the current global and regional security architecture which it believes favors United States and NATO interests.
Additionally, the document strongly voices opposition to further eastward enlargement of NATO or expansion of NATO’s military infrastructure into nations on Russia’s borders.
The NSS also opposes the expanded use of NATO’s forces outside of its regional boundaries.
At the time, there was a significant and enduring NATO presence in Afghanistan on Russia’s exposed southern front.
This force relied on a logistics train through and the fostering of relationships with the central Asian states, which Russia perceived as its sphere of influence.
When coupled with an erosion of Russian influence over fonner Soviet spheres in Eastern Europe and the Caucus in favor NATO influence, this new front represented a grave concern to Russia’s interests.
Additionally, it specifically calls out unilateral development of a global missile defense system and the militarization of space as perceived threats, as it does for certain policies directed at the counterproliferation of nuclear, chemical, and biological threats.
It also states that Russia is willing to build a strategic partnership with the United States on shared interests, but emphasizes it as an equal partnership.
It seeks new agreements with the United States in disarmament and arms control, confidence building measures, non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, antiterrorist cooperation, and the regulation of regional conflicts.
According to this strategy, the key national interests of the country in both the international and military spheres lie in the protection of Russian sovereignty, its independence, and its territorial integrity.
Its military is expected to remain strong enough to prevent military aggression against both Russia and its allies.
Additionally, the document establishes a belief in the country’s position as a great power and aspires for it to become one of the more influential power centers in a multipolar world.
There are also numerous declarations through the document that affirm Russia’s commitment to the adherence of international law.
Yet, these statements are strictly about international law’s protection of a nation’s sovereignty and again alludes to Russia’s belief that the 3 President of the Russian Federation, National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation to 2020.
The Russian NSS is similar to that of the United States in that it ties economic prosperity and independence as a mechanism to achieve the desired level of national security.
Russia recognizes its GDP dependency on the export of raw materials and is concerned by its dependency on foreign investments and trade for its economy, especially in agriculture, and on its import dependency on foodstuffs, technology, and medications.
A key Russian goal is to become one of the five biggest world economies by 2020.
Pragmatically, Russia associates its energy and natural resource exports and reserves as a source of strength and influence on the international stage.
The strategy acknowledges that international policy will be focused on access to energy reserves to include the Barents Sea, Artie, Middle East, Caspian Sea, and Central Asia.
As a warning, the NSS states that it cannot exclude the possibility that the competitive struggle for dwindling resources worldwide may be solved with the use of military force.
This could be a reference to competing Artie claims, as well as Russian concerns that nations either covet or will covet its underutilized territory, especially as the world food and water supply reaches critical levels vis-a-vis world population growth.
Russian Military Doctrine The 2014 Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation focuses more narrowly on the military priorities required to ensure its nation’s security.
This analysis will focus on specific areas and aspects where the Military Doctrine is unique or provides either width or depth to areas covered by the Russian National Security Strategy.
In the Doctrine, 5 President of the Russian Federation, National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation to 2020.
The document also expands on the nations and regions it views as critical to its national interests and specifies the varying degree of engagement the military is to have.
An analysis of Russia’s military engagements will aide the examination of future sources of friction in a later chapter.
The document describes its concern regarding the show of military force or exercises within nations or territories contiguous to Russia or its allies and the mobilization of military command and control elements to control operations under wartime conditions.
This is a fairly straight forward concern over the frequency, character, and location of NATO’s exercises, rotational deployments, and the accompanying command and control standup that occurs during these events.
Russia will place itself on a higher military alert during these occurrences as it believes NATO’s increased mobility posture could also indicate a prelude to intervention in Russia or its allies.
This is a common theme throughout the document indicating the fears the Russia’s leadership has of invasion.
It believes the United States has historically demonstrated the capability and intent to intervene in a sovereign nation that does not comply with United States values or interests.
The Russian Military Doctrine voices concerns over actions taken by ‘foreign powers’ that have exacerbated military and/or political situations and created conditions to justify the use of military force inside of another sovereign nation.
This appears contradictive to Russian actions in Ukraine, but 6 President of the Russian Federation, Military’ Doctrine of the Russian Federation.
The Military Doctrine illuminates the inherent fear and suspicion of a nation that is obsessed with its own security, the embodiment of a key element of Russian strategic culture.
There is an underlying concern that ‘Color Revolutions’ or Arab Spring scenarios could play out within Russia.
Russia fears the establishment and training of anned force elements inside of Russia or its allies and worries that these entities could try to forcibly change its constitutional system and destabilize the internal political situation.
The Doctrine speculates that military power is not necessarily the primary method for achieving these types of aims.
Instead, the document voices concern over possible information warfare on the population, especially the youth, for the purpose of undennining the historical, spiritual, and patriotic traditions of the nation.
Later, the Military Doctrine expands on those concerns by characterizing modem warfare to include the foreign financing of political and public movements and the wide use of public protest from the population.
To ensure internal security against this disruption, the document directs the anned forces to be prepared to execute martial law upon direction of the President.
The Russian Doctrine continues to emphasize political and military cooperation first and foremost with Belarus, and secondly with the Russian recognized ‘Republics’ of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Additionally, it directs military engagement and 9 President of the Russian Federation, Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation.
Russia, Nicaragua, Venezuela, and the pacific island of Nauru. 22 commitments to the Collective Security Treaty Organization and Shanghai Cooperation Organization and as well as with specific member states of these organizations.
The Military doctrine also adds that one of the armed forces’ many main missions includes supporting Russian interests in the Arctic.
The Doctrine lays out additional areas of military concern that could be used as areas of mutual interest with the United States.
Russia expresses concern about the militarization of space to include conventional direct strike weapons.
It sets an objective to conclude an international treaty on the prohibition of various types of weapons in space.
Additionally, the document explores the threat and spread of international terrorism, transnational crime, and threats to freedom of navigation by piracy.
The document also describes Russia’s willingness to militarily support operations sanctioned by the United Nations Security Council or other entities empowered by international law.
Finally the document highlights a mission for the armed forces to protect and defend Russian Federation citizens living outside of the Federation against armed attack.
This statement on the surface appears no different than the United States intent to protect its citizens at home or abroad.
However, as subsequent chapters will describe, there are large communities of millions of ethnic Russians living in nations adjacent to Russia.
As we 12 President of the Russian Federation, Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation.
Russian Security Council Secretary, Nikolai Patrushev conducted an interview with the Russian newspaper Rossiysjaya Gazeta, where he highlighted the changes for the updated document.
Many of these changes reiterate areas previously explored in the 2014 Military Doctrine.
This includes an emphasis on the threat that continued NATO expansion poses, the destabilizing effects that would accompany the creation of a global missile defense system, and NATO’s perceived global offensive posturing.
The Secretary also labels new threats and explains the intent behind some of Russia’s more recent international and domestic activities.
First and foremost the Secretary describes changes to Russia’s domestic security environment that are very internally focused.
The drop in oil prices, coupled with economic sanctions by the west, and exacerbated by the nation’s economic dependency on raw material export, is affecting government revenue.
He believes Russia has shown resilience throughout the imposed economic sanctions, but says that the new strategy will seek to avoid domestic instability through economic growth and diversification of the economy to include the strengthening of its military industrial complex and advancement in technological fields.
To prevent this and address other weakness, the strategy has internal focal areas that are meant to be bulwarks against outside influence and intervention, to include an emphasis on traditional spiritual and moral Russian values.
With economic sanctions in effect, the strategy places a value on the spiritual over the material, family, service to motherland, and historical unity of the country’s people.
Many of these themes are areas where Russian leadership perceives western culture and values are capable of corrupting the populace.
The Secretary also references the interventions in the Middle East and North Africa as resulting in the strengthening of international terrorist organizations.
This has produced long-term instability in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and Syria that need solutions.
The new strategy emphasizes the importance of partnerships with the United States and Europe on the basis of common interests, including economic ones, but again insists on equal partnerships.
However, Russia realizes that overt confrontation with the US. will harm both its national security and internal stability.
The Secretary acknowledges that Russia needs to avoid restarting an arms race.
This assertion is indicative of both Russia’s inability to sustain such a pursuit and its reliance on nuclear parity to achieve the desired balance of power.
It believes the United States is willing to threaten Russian sovereignty and perceives that the law of force has replaced international law.
It bases this assertion on their view that the United States and its allies have violated national sovereignty on numerous occasions and for various reasons from Grenada, Panama, and Serbia, to the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq, and most recently in Libya and Syria.
In each of these cases the United States invoked different sources of legitimization from international law to intervene; whether it was the UN’s Responsibility to Protect in Serbia or the protection of United States citizens in Panama and Grenada.
Russia’s perspective is that when they invoked similar reasons for Russia’s interventions that they met unreasonable unneccesary resistance from the United States and west.
This perceived double standard futher stimulates Russia’s view that many of these international institutions have simply become tools to serve western interests.
Russia views great power status as being derived from territory first and foremost.
This is logical as Russia is the largest country in the world by landmass.
It approaches the world with a thousand year history as not only a European, but also Asian power, with a bit of a chip on its shoulder.
The fundamental rule of Westphalian sovereignty is to refrain from intervening in the internal affairs of other states and that each state has the right to determine its own domestic authority structures.
The principle of non-intervention is traditionally associated with the Peace of Westphalia of 1648, a treaty between the Prussian states, though Krasner advocates this wasn’t explicitly articulated until a century later by a Swiss Jurist publication in 1758.
There is a widely held belief that throughout history Russia has never been quite accepted as a European nation or treated on equal terms with other European nations.
Additionally, Russia has maintained its autocratic, centralized, and vertically controlled ruling structure long after the rest of Europe developed into more democratic systems.
Russia sees a threat to its future prosperity and thus its ability to remain a great power, from its projected population decline and its inability to effectively exploit its own territory and resources.
Additionally, Russia faces challenges from its over-dependence on energy exports and from the negative effects that rampant corruption has had on economic growth and state revenues.
The Russian government has been unable or unwilling to reform the country’s energy-dependent economy, even though the current low prices of oil and gas now limit the nations abilities to further moderni z e its military.
As the Soviet Union, Russia experienced the power and respect from Europe and the world that they always thought they deserved, and they want to reclaim that standing.
For Russia and Putin, the 1990’s attempt at western liberal democracy is seen as a failure and there is no going back.
During this period, Russians believe that they were embarrassed and exploited from within and by the west.
Russia also seeks to expand the reach of their new international organizations that claim to focus on mutual national interests shared with potential partners, but at their heart, the organizations target the inclusion of nations or regions where Russia wants to gain or maintain its influence.
These international organizations also court nations, regions, or affiliations that have been or that they perceive to have been marginalized or excluded by the western dominated organizations.
An example of this included the invitiation to Greece to take a loan from the BRICS development bank as an alternative to the EU loan with its imposed austerity measures during the Greece bailout woes of mid 20 1 5.
In the second presidential tenn of Vladimir Putin, Russia abandoned it path towards integration with greater Europe and the west and instead began to pursue goals that would put it at odds with the rest of Europe.
Putin laid out objectives for Russia to maintain its preeminence over former Soviet states and retain influence over the states on its borders as buffers to its perceived threats.
Many of Russia’s external actions have also been attempts at consolidating power and promoting internal security.
Interventions in the Ukraine and Syria promote a rally around the flag effect that reduces criticism of government polices during wartime and increases popular backing for the leadership.
This level of support and acceptance of the repression of freedoms is unsustainable unless concrete economic improvements for its citizens are forthcoming and there is a guarantee of security for the populace.
This drives the regime’s perception of its vulnerability and fear of foreign influence over its internal political affairs, foreign cultural and informational influence on the populace , and its over dependence on raw materials and on western economic models and trade to sustain its economic growth.
Strategy Case Study A study of Russian strategy through a review of its strategic documents serves as a foundation for further analysis of its recent foreign policy actions.
This section leverages Graham Allison’s three conceptual frameworks for analyzing foreign policy, as a way to validate the “why” behind Russia’s actions.
Allison’s three models look at international decision making through different perspectives.
Model II, views actions through the lens of critical organizations of the state and how their standard operating procedures affect decisions, and Model III focuses on how these actions affect or are affected by internal government politics.
Though each of these models by themselves cannot answer ‘the why,’ collectively they can provide a framework of explanations through different lenses that 27 President of the Russian Federation, National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation to 2020. 29 ultimately will be closer to the truth.
Through this comparison the analysis will reveal if any hidden agendas exist or if Russia is simply pursuing its strategy as defined in its strategic documents.
This section will examine Russia’s recent actions in Syria, and how these align with the interests of Putin as the leader of Russia, the interests of key governmental organizations, and with internal Russian politics.
The previous chapter on the rise of Putin clearly demonstrates that he is firmly in charge of steering his nation’s foreign policy.
Russian strategic documents clearly describe the importance and value of preserving old allies and fostering new allies.
Russian strategy also describes Russia’s concern with the preservation of a nation’s sovereignty and the negative influence that regime changes have had on the stability of nations to include Libya, Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria, and on the growth of international terrorism.
The toppling of Gadhafi and subsequent mutilation of his body following the uprising in Libya deeply affected Putin’s psyche.
Putin could not allow his Ukrainian ally and its fonner leader, Viktor Yanukovych, to be taken by that nation’s coup d’etat, and he could not allow Russia’s long term ally, Assad, to be taken either.
Thus the supply of weapons and eventual insertion of Russian forces into Syria served to prop up and protect a failing ally in an important region of the globe where Russia has few allies.
Putin is willing to expend the time and resources on this endeavor because it also serves multiple facets of Russia’s national interests.
Russia’s involvement in Syria also reflects its national interests in the global environment at large.
Putin’s strategic documents declare his intent to be a leader in global affairs.
Russia’s commitment in Syria guarantees it an important voice with regards to an area and issue of global concern.
Russia’s involvement also serves as a venue to highlight their resolute support of national sovereignty and assertion that meddling in another nation’s affairs breeds nothing but instability.
This force insertion also serves to secure their key military installation at Tartus, the only Russian naval base on the Mediterranean coast.
Finally, Russia shares the global concern over the spread of Islamic extremist terrorism.
Russia felt threatened by the unconstrained operation within Syria and rise to power of many of its old Chechen War adversaries.
It does not wish to see them return, nor does it want extremism to take hold in other, predominately Muslim, areas of both Russia and its neighbors.
The timing of Russian involvement reflects a perceived opening to achieve many of these goals.
The continued failure of United States policy and its actions to support moderate rebels in the Syrian conflict and to act decisively against ISIS created the opportunity for Russia to enter the region.
Additionally, European and world opinion may have swung more in favor of achieving a guarantee of stability and the removal of ISIS, and therefore may be less concerned now over the removal of Assad’s regime and creation of a democracy.
The decision to insert Russian forces at this time, as world opinion changes, could help stabilize a regime friendly to Russia, create prestige for Russia and Putin alike, and preserve Russian access to the Mediterranean port.
Additionally, assisting Assad has 31 created new opportunities for Russia to advance its relationship with Iran, Shi’ite Iraq, and the Shi’ite community at large, all entities that have strained relations with the United States 32 Allison’s second model views an action through the lens of the critical organizations of that state and they way that their standard operating procedures affect decision making.
When it comes to the Middle East and Syria in general, there are a number of Russian national interests in play as they relate to some key government entities in Russia.
The military and the oil oligarchy are two of these very important organizations which have a vested interest in Russia’s involvement in Syria.
The military is a fraction of the size that it once was at the height of the Soviet Union, but still owns some of the world’s most advanced military hardware, to include nuclear weapons.
In the 2014 Military Doctrine it was charged with advancing Russia’s national security strategy, maintaining world-wide access commensurate with a great power, and to defend its allies.
The seizure and subsequent annexation of the Crimean peninsula, which includes Sevastopol, the primary wann water port of the Russian fleet, furthers the notion that the Russian military values the access to the Mediterranean Sea that both Sevastopol and the port of Tartus provide.
Additionally, overtures in the past with Cyprus for port access, reinforces this view that Russia sees wann water port access to and through the Mediterranean as essential to achieving its national security strategy.
At present, the Russian military has also leveraged this presence in Syria to establish an air base in Latakia, their first in the region.
Oil and gas accounts are the largest single source that the Russian state relies on for up to 50% of its revenue.
Additionally, many of the Russian elite and state power brokers have wealth tied to the state oil companies.
At present, oil is at a decade low and revenues are much more constrained than in the past.
Russian access or influence in the Middle East oil rich region, to include greater relations with Iran, may advance the oil oligarchs’ bottom line directly or indirectly.
If Russia is able to bolster its presence in the region, Russian companies may gain greater access to develop and exploit regional oil.
Additionally, if Russia is successful in aiding the EU to achieve its two primary objectives, stopping ISIS and stopping the refugee flow, Russia may be able to leverage an easing of the economic sanctions against it.
Finally, at the core, instability in and around the Middle East has more often than not, translated into increases in oil prices.
With Russia’s economic growth and dependence on oil and gas revenue, higher prices in oil translates into greater Russian wealth and power, no matter the cause.
The final look at Russia’s intervention in Syria is through the lens of internal politics.
This was on full display in 2012, when protests broke out over his return to the presidency.
Since then, the Ukraine conflict created a rally around the flag effect promoting nationalist fervor.
Putin needed a new and possibly more successful campaign in Syria to revive popular support, secure his power, and suppress opposition.
A look at Russian intervention in Syria from the three vantage points illuminates Russian strategy and national interests in application.
The intervention appears entirely consistent with the Russian National Security Strategy and its associated international objectives.
A comparable look at Russia’s actions in the Ukraine or Georgia would most likely yield similar results.
Though Russia many have additional clandestine agendas at work that are not apparent in their strategic documents, their current actions in Syria are also consistent with Russia’s strategic culture and enduring national interests.
The next chapter will look to build on this knowledge base in order to discuss areas where Russia’s strategic culture, enduring national interests, and security documents point to likely friction areas with the United States and its allies in the future.
FUTURE FRICTION AREAS Russia’s prevailing world-view regarding power is one that sees a United States dominated unipolar world as unacceptable.
It also realizes that a return to the balanced bipolar world of the Cold War is unachievable.
Thus, Russia is detennined that the world should be multipolar, and that it will be one of the great power centers.
This overarching worldview informs Russia’s actions on the world stage.
Finally, Russia may be at the precipice of a shift in its strategic approach that in the past has often relied on its military as its primary means to achieve its goals.
In an analysis of their strategic documents there are indications that Russia realizes that economic power may actually be the best means to achieve its security.
If this was the case, this shift would represent a potential opportunity for re-engagement.
Internal Unrest As described in the analysis of Russian strategic culture, the Russian people are traditionally more tolerant of authoritarian regimes, but only to a certain limit.
This limit is predicated on the nation providing the people with the level of security they require, the feeling of prestige they want for their state, and the level of prosperity that was promised.
When these needs are not met, the people’s sacrifice of freedoms becomes less tolerable.
Riddled throughout the strategic documents are indications that Putin’s regime fears internal unrest and is especially paranoid that the west will finance or flame this unrest.
Since Russia values sovereignty over all else, any criticism or perceived meddling of a foreign government or entity in the Russian government’s internal affairs will become an immediate source of friction.
Ethnic Russian Populations President Medvedev’s five principles and the subsequent publication of the 2014 Military Doctrine describe the right of Russia to intervene militarily under the pretext of the protection of Russians.
Russian actions in Estonia in 2007, Georgia in 2008, and the Crimea and Donbass in 2014, have established this proclaimed right as a credible threat to future stability.
The nations bordering with Russia that have the most ethnic Russian populations are Ukraine with the largest population, Kazakhstan with the second largest, Uzbekistan, Moldova, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
Interestingly, over 3. million Ethnic Russians live in the United States, making it the third largest Russian diaspora.
Russians make up roughly 25% of Estonian and 27% of Latvian populations.
The greatest concentrations of Ethnic Russians are in the Crimea and the Donbass region, followed by the eastern sliver of Estonia along the Russian border.
There are also large concentrations of passport holding Russians both in the Transnistria and southern Moldova.
In the geo-strategic environment, large populations in Kazakhstan are relatively secure since that nation is fully wedded to Russian sponsored organizations.
Unrest or perceived threats to any of these diaspora communities, especially in the three nations specified would represent the most likely risk of future conflict with Russia.
Former Soviet Spheres of Influence The Russian National Security Strategy until 2020 and the 2014 Military Doctrine describe the importance of the fonner Soviet states and buffer nations along Russia’s border.
Putin has attempted to invite many of these same nations into the various international organizations and collective security treaties Russia has created.
Nations within this sphere and belonging to these organizations are critical allies for Russia and any change to that status would be cause for Russian concern.
Of these, based on international associations, Belarus is the now the number one priority ally for Russia, with Kazakhstan close behind.
Any attempts by European nations to court Belarus into any association, agreement, or into the European Union would provoke a stark reaction from Russia.
Any outreach to Kazakhstan would be met with a similar reaction by Russia.
The frozen conflicts of Abkhazia and South Ossetia are also non-negotiable for Russia.
Russia has demonstrated a willingness to undertake militarily hostilities in Georgia even though that nation had fostered United States relations.
Russia has included these ‘republics’ in its strategic plans, defense commitments, and has invited them into its international organizations.
Through these actions they have effectively blocked Georgia’s ability to join NATO or the EU, since these unresolved conflicts prevent membership acceptance.
A number of these states do not belong to the CSTO or EEU, but the Russian NSS has openly described their desired inclusion.
Moldova is the most concerning of the CIS nations for the NATO alliance.
As a member of the CIS, the EEU extended an invitation to Moldova, which has chosen instead to pursue an association with the European Union.
Competing International Blocs Russia has indicated its desire to challenge western dominated institutions.
As described in both national security strategies, Russia perceives that the United States and Europe dominate most of the international organization power centers in the globe.
It lists the United States and E.U. as economic rivals, NATO as a military rival, and the UN agencies of the World Bank, IMF, and dollar based world economic system as barriers.
These organizations play a dual role of both providing international prestige and power to Russia, as well as challenging western based organizations for power.
Additionally, Russia will continue to try to expand the EEU as a counterbalance to ELI expansion.
The pull between these two organizations and the ultimate choice by the former Ukraine president Yanukovych to stop EU membership is one of the root causes behind the 2014 Ukrainian revolution and the greater Ukraine crisis.
How nations align with these two economic unions may be a source of friction in the future.
The United States and NATO should have similar concerns about Russia’s creation of the CSTO as a Warsaw Pact revival.
This organization is a reaction to Russia’s perceived threat from further NATO expansion and is attempting to court non-aligned nations.
Afghanistan and Serbia have been invited as observers, and indications are that Iran may follow.
However, this organization could also serve as a bulwark against the rise China and its influence in central Asia.
Arctic Claims In its 2002 Arctic claim submission to the UN, Russia moved one step closer to consolidating its hold over one of the last vestiges of unclaimed territory left in the world.
This area is of utmost importance to Russia’s sense of great power status, which is derived from its territory and its vast, yet unclaimed natural resources.
The United States currently estimates that the Arctic could contain 15% of the earth’s oil, 30% of the natural gas, and 20% of its liquefied natural gas.
Additionally, Russia intends to open 16 ports along Arctic coastline, as well as 13 airfields and 10 air defense radar stations in the region.
With five nations, including the United States laying claim to this region, how this competition plays out could lead to a future conflict between the United States and Russia.
Changing this thinking will require a strong response from the United States to deter Russia’s pursuit of its interests that are counter to the United States interests, and to shape Russian efforts to instead focus their energy on interests that also benefit the United States.
Deterrence Theory Thomas Christensen in The Contemporary Security Dilemma, asserts that assurance must accompany deterrence.
The nuance of this point is that the United States threat to these core interests were credible and that the Soviet Union was 1 Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War.
An example of the failure of deterrence and reassurance can be found in the Korean War.
The United States forces in the area and South Korean forces on the peninsula did not represent a credible enough military threat to deter North Korea and its Russian and Chinese sponsors from invading the south.
Likewise, later in the war, following the Inchon landing and the United States move north across the 38 th parallel towards China, the United States was “insufficiently reassuring” to China that it would stop at the Yalu and not attack it.
This lack of assurance led to China’s perception that attack into China was inevitable, and led to the ensuing escalation of the Korean War and Chinese invasion.
As the United States looks to deter modern Russia from further aggression, it must be careful to also reassure Russia that its core interests will be protected.
In October of 1962 the Soviet Union and the United States came close to nuclear war over the Soviet insertion of nuclear missiles into Cuba.
The United States responded with a naval blockade, the visible threat of 200,000 invasion troops in Florida, and a verbal threat of air strikes or invasion.
By the 28 th of October, Krushchev announced the withdrawl to the communist Presidium.
There is much speculation and analysis over the decisions that were made and why they were made.
Some of this has speculation has been aided by the release of records in the United States and Russia, though the Russian records were 4 Christensen, “The Contemporary Security Dilemma,” 8. 42 later closed.
There are important takeaways from this incident that still apply today.
First, it is widely believed that Kh rushchev thought he could get away with placing missiles in Cuba and that Kennedy would not stand up to him.
Secondly, that a strong military response and the threat of an invasion changed the Russian leader’s calculus.
Finally, the Kennedy and Krushchev letters confirm that the missiles were removed because a compromise had been struck that reassured both nations’ core national interests.
Krushchev promised to remove the missiles, if his more important national interest, the sovereignty of Cuba, was guaranteed by a United States pledge of non-invasion.
There is also an indication that the United States agreed to the eventual removal of nuclear missiles in Turkey that similarly threatened Russia’s security.
In this example, the United States effectively applied a strong military deterrent to roll back Russian aggression, while assuring Russian core interests of sovereignty and security.
United States STRATEGIC APPROACH There are two competing international relations worldviews that dominate much of the discussion over the modern United States strategic approach to Russia.
These different ways of looking at the international environment are at the heart of many of the misunderstandings between the two nations.
The first worldview is Realism, which in short believes that states will first and foremost act in their own national interests.
In doing so they will act predictably in the international environment as they engage in actions that increase their power.
Liberalism is founded in the conviction that international institutions foster a greater interdependence between nations and can thus lessen the likelihood of war.
Gregory Miller, lecture Introduction to International Relations Theory, 25 Aug 2015.
Conversely, the recommendations from the Liberalist worldview is that the United States should engage diplomatically with Russia, increase Russia’s involvement in international organizations with the U.S., and reduce the United States military strength that is perceived as threatening to Russia.
The problem is that these opposing solutions do not account for the distinctive ways that Russia, the U.S., and its European allies, all see themselves and approach international relations.
These three stakeholders have unique strategic cultures and different worldviews that requires a blended solution to ensure stability for the region.
Historically, the U.S projects a Liberalist worldview throughout its founding documents and National Security Strategy.
In these documents the United States champions democracy for all, the universal nature of American values, and economic freedom, and then espouses the benefits of international cooperation through organizations and treaties.
However, in practice, much of the world sees the United States acting just as often in its own national interests, displaying a more Realist worldview.
This perspective holds that the United States is interested in maintaining its primacy and power in the world of diplomacy and economics, and only joins in treaties or organizations that are in its national interests.
It perceives power as relative and believes that as the U.S., EU, and NATO have increased their power, it has come at the expense of Russian power.
Likewise, if Russia is to regain power, it would be at the expense of these same entities.
Russia also feels that its security is threatened by these specific entities, which is why it identifies the U.S., EU, and NATO as the targets for any rebalancing of power.
Fueling Russia’s insecurity is its perception that the United States says one thing, but does another.
Therefore, it does not trust the United States and does not believe the United States will respect its national sovereignty.
Additionally, the Russian’s believe they have tried the “western way” of liberal democracy, but were not fully supported or accepted by the west, and thus they fell into the chaos and decay that accompanied a rise in crime across the nation and take over by the oligarchy.
It is this perceived betrayal and lack of trust that underpins Russia/ United States and Russia/westem European relationships.
Additionally, because of this negative experience, the United States and Europe must now accept that Russia is not going to become a liberal democracy anytime soon.
They are also not going to join the European Union and help create a post-modem era for that region.
Russia has historically approached the international environment with a Realist worldview, and that will not change.
Centuries of conflict among European nations appears to have been quelled by European unification and integration.
The EU’s shared beliefs of multilateralism, non-military solutions to conflict, and democratic and humanitarian values, all define their Liberalist worldview.
As the United States refines its strategic approach to the region, it will need to find a way to blend its own competing worldview with that of Russia and the EU to create a balanced solution for regional stability.
The United States must understand that there are three paths that can be taken.
The Liberalist path the United States has been on is one that has allowed Russian aggression and expansionism to go unchecked.
The opposite Realist path will most likely lead to a new cold war and all that such a war would bring with it; regional tensions, conflict over the arctic, conventional military build-up, increased espionage and cyber conflict, and even proxy wars.
An increase in tension could then lead to a renewed nuclear arms race, especially since Russia does not have the resources to create the kind of conventional capability that it would need to credibly confront the United States the way the Soviet Union once did.
In fact, all indications are that a conventional build up from the West would further push Russia into behaving much like the West did to counter the build up 7 Igumnova, “Russia’s Starategic Culture Between American and European Worldviews.
The fact is, that over the last decade, many of the United States and European approaches to Russia have served only to push Russia towards seeking a stronger relationship with countries in the East.
For the U.S., power has long come from its hard sources; a strong military and economic engine.
However, the U.S.’s hidden source of power and influence in the world has been its international appeal and universal support of prosperity and freedom for all;e. its soft power.
Teddy Roosevelt’s corollary “speak softly, but carry a big stick” was about the nation peacefully engaging and negotiating with adversaries, while keeping the stick in hand as a credible threat, though not holding it over their heads.
The reality is that the United States is not going anywhere and continues to grow more powerful.
However, the real message that the United States should emphasize is its belief that this growth does not come at the expense of others,e. that power is absolute and not relative.
Other nations can grow stronger without affecting U.S.’s perception of its own strength and power.
Instruments of Power The United States strategic approach to Russian revanchism should include demonstrating a credible deterrent strength, but with an assurance of sovereignty and security for all of the region, to include Russia.
The contemporary approach of United States deterrence seeks only to provide assurances of security to its allies and by doing so it neglects the nuance of Christensen’s theory of deterrence, as described in the previous chapter.
Reassurances, to Russia, must be built into deterrent threats, so that Russia will not fear being deprived of its core national interests if it complies with the United States and NATO’s demands.
The United States can deter future Russian aggression first and foremost by recognizing Russia’s core national interests, providing a credible assurance of their protection, while also possessing a credible threat to these interests to ensure compliance.
The United States can respect Russian sovereignty and assure Russian security by continuing the defensive posture of NATO as a guarantee for European peace United States DIME efforts should focus on reassuring Russia about these core interests, while showing the capability to hold these intersts at risk if required om order tp deter Russia from its more aggressive and destabilizing pursuits.
This statement questions the credibility of United States threats and undennines a key requirement of deterrence theory.
The United States lost some of this credibility when it confirmed that Assad crossed the red line and used chemical weapons on his citizens, and then did nothing about it.
The United States has similarly diminished its credibility from a Russian perspective, as the United States is seen as having violated the sovereignty of several nations over the years, despite the legal basis used by the United States for these interventions.
The important diplomatic actions needed, include calming real Russian fears that they will be the next nation invaded, either overtly or covertly,e. an assurance of Russian sovereignty.
Additionally, The U.S., in conjunction with NATO, should assuage Russian security fears through a cessation of NATO expansion, while working to persuade Russia that the nature of their aggression is what is driving nations to pursue NATO membership.
Diplomatic steps can focus on areas of mutual interest, as described in the review of Russia’s NSS and Military Doctrine, to engage with Russia on the equal terms they desire; Anti-terrorism, transnational crime, humanitarian assistance, etc.
However, these proposals to isolate Russia internationally would be counterproductive at this juncture and an unacceptable course of action to our European allies.
It is also counterproductive for the United States to avoid its leadership role in the ongoing multilateral discussions seeking to solve the conflict in Ukraine.
Additionally, the United States should remain an active leader in finding long term solutions for Syria.
The United States should leverage Russian involvement in Syrian talks to start a dialog on Ukrainian solutions, as these two critical issues are important national interests for both nations involved.
Informational Russia perceives a direct threat to its national sovereignty.
The expansion of NATO to its borders, rhetoric against Putin’s regime, and the regime’s perception that westerns are meddling in Russian internal affairs are cause for their gravest concerns.
Russia believes NATO’s defensive reactions to the Crimea annexation, with increased forward military posturing and an increased exercise regime could be a prelude to a NATO invasion of Russia.
The United States strategic messaging should emphasize the importance of borders and the sovereignty of all nations in Europe to include Moldova, 14 Carafano and others, “ United States Comprehensive Strategy Toward Russia.” 51 the Baltics, Poland, and Russia.
The United States should also reopen and explore Russia’s UN proposals for cyber norms.
This is a topic that could futher cooperation between the nations and should be explored through additional research.
Military While the diplomatic and infonnation instruments seek to assure protection of Russia’s core interests, the United States also needs to display a credible strength.
It needs to reverse the perceived power vacuum created in Europe following the United States re-balance to the Pacific strategy.
The NATO Wales Summit agreement that holds nations to their 2% military spending obligation is the right response, but since the agreement allows nations up to ten years to get there, it is not immediate enough.
The balance of power void, real or perceived, requires an immediate shift to cover the gap.
The recent stop gap announcements by the United States to inject greater military power into Europe is a good first step, but falls short.
The United States military presence in Europe has drawn down from its 300,000 personnel high during the Cold War to 35,000 troops.
The increase of equipment and rotational presence, that is being suggested for 2016, is merely a band aid fix compared to the steps that must be taken to provide a long term deterent solution.
Therefore, the United States should consider renewing the expansion of the European missile defense system, pennanent forward basing of troops in Poland, and an increased naval presence and the creation of strategic basing closer to the Arctic.
The type of equipment and capability that should be re-introduced into Europe is a topic that could be further explored.
The exploration would be wise to consider the destabilizing effect that purely offensive capability would have on the region.
Russia is already fearful for its security and the introduction of too much offensive capability could lead to a security dilemma, where an anns race could further destabilize the region.
Additionally, the military power must focus on building NATO partner capacity and United States military to Russian military exchange.
The exchanges and dialog should focus on common interests and concerns; international terrorism, transnational crime, and WMD proliferation.
These actions should include an invitation for the Russian military to observe humanitarian assistance and counter-terrorism exercises as a first step.
As exchanges and dialog grow, the United States could eventually seek to invite Russia to observe NATO defensive exercises and gain a United States or NATO invitation to similarly observe the Shanghai Cooperation Organization exercises.
Economic Both Russia and China seek an alternative vision of global governance and development, especially western backed economic institutions like the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Economic sanctions against Russia are pushing 53 them further towards that model and integration with the east instead of the west.
Additionally, indications are that the pain from the economic sanctions as felt in certain European countries is loosening the resolve of those imposing the sanctions since Europe used to get 30 percent of its natural gas from Russia.
With Europe highly reliant on Russia for energy and fairly well integrated with Russia’s economy prior to the conflict, the sanctions will not be able to last much longer, and the United States and Europe will lose their leverage.
Progress in Syria with the promise of reengagement on Ukraine could be the right carrot and stick approach to tie the loosening of sanctions to.
CONCLUSION Over the last decade, Russia’s increased aggression towards its neighbors has raised fears for the continued stability of the European continent.
Cyber attacks in Estonia, war against Georgia, the annexation of the Crimean peninsula, and the support to Ukraine’s eastern rebellion and Assad’s failing regime in Syria, are all actions consistent with Russia’s undeterred pursuit of its national interests.
As the chapter on Russian history and strategic culture revealed, aggressive expansionism has often gone hand in hand with the rise of strong autocratic Russian leaders.
These leaders have often leveraged certain unifying identities, such as Christian Orthodoxy, Pan-Slavism, and Russian nationalism, as they seek to rally the Russian people’s support in pursuit of security for the nation and as a means to suppress discontent in their pursuit of power.
President Putin’s rise to power and continuing grip over the nation only serves as a confirmation that Europeans have held false hopes for Russia to quickly become a liberal democracy and to integrate into the greater European Union.
As its strategic documents reveal, Putin does not want Russia to become yet another European Union or NATO nation, or a pawn to western dominated institutions, or worse, a lone outlier, as the nations on Russia’s periphery join these institutions.
He seeks to expand Russian influence over its former Soviet spheres through alternate international organizations and economic and military alliances.
Instead of integrating Russia into western institutions, the growth of these institutions towards Russia’s borders have caused Russia to act out of fear.
This fear is a primal instinct rooted deeply in Russian strategic culture and in its continual quest for security from its perceived enemies.
This quest often puts Russia at odds with the U.S., 55 NATO, and the European Union.
Russia’s continued pursuits could lead it into additional conflicts with the United States and Europe over key issues like ethnic Russian populations throughout Eastern Europe, the growing interest in the Arctic access and resources, and the suppression of democracy in Russia.
In the chapter on deterrence theory, Christensen illuminated examples from the past where Russia has been successfully deterred from pursuing its objectives that were at odds with the United States His theory proposed that deterrence is effective only if a credible threat is accompanied by a credible assurance.
This thesis elucidates that sovereignty and security are two of Russia’s core national interests and that assuring these interests is what Russia values the most.
The United States must be capable of both putting these interests at risk and assuring their protection, as a way to deter Russia from pursuing objectives that are counter to the United States interests.
Yet, deterrence theory postulates, and history shows, that a pure application of military power, without the proper diplomatic outlets and assurances in place, could lead to an undesired escalation of conflict.
Instead, by pursuing a strategic approach to Russia that blends deterent strength, that a Realist nation understands, with the assurance of their core national interests, that they need, the United States and its European allies, could achieve greater stability and security for Europe.
Carafano, James Jay, Ted Bromund, Dean Cheng, Luke Coffey, Lisa Curtis, Helle Dale, Michaela Dodge, David Inserra, Bruce Klingner, Daniel Kochis, Ryan Olson, James Phillips, Ana Quintana, Bryan Riley, Brian Slattery and William Wilson.
Principles of the State Policy of the Russian Federation in the Arctic Until 2020.
Lost in Translation: Yeltsin and Putin Legacies, Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2007.
He was selected for Joint Undergraduate Navigator training Pensacola, Florida and F-15E Weapons Systems Officer training at Seymour Johnson AFB, North Carolina, graduating in Jun 2000.
He has completed numerous F-15E operational and training flying assignments at Mountain Home AFB, Idaho and Seymour Johnson AFB, as well as a Joint Staff assignment at Yongsan, South Korea.
He has completed two flying deployments in support of operations in southwest Asia and has been awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross and Air Medal, amongst others.
LtCol Nieman, just completed Command of Air Combat Command’s Training Support Squadron, Langley AFB, Virginia.
He is married to the former Jennifer “Gigi” Jordan of Garland Texas and they have four sons, Calvin, Isaac, Nicholas and Daniel; ages 13 to 7.
