Although Russian foreign policy has been increasingly active, observers note that the principles guiding it have been largely consistent since the Soviet Union's collapse in 1991.
According to the Russian government, the eastward ""geopolitical expansion"" of NATO and the EU has led to ""a serious crisis in relations"" between Russia and the West.
A second principle is to establish Russia as one of a handful of dominant poles in global politics, capable in particular of competing with the United States.
Beyond these fundamentals, debates exist on a number of related issues.
Such issues include whether strong responses by outside powers can deter Russian aggression or whether these responses run a risk of escalating conflict; how much states that disagree with Russia on key issues can cooperate with Moscow; whether the Russian government is primarily implementing a strategic vision or reacting to circumstances and the actions of others; and the extent to which the Russian leadership takes actions abroad to strengthen its domestic position.
Current members of these organizations mostly have joined voluntarily, if not always enthusiastically.
Although these aims could include the facilitation of trade and investment, as well as protection against a variety of external threats , they also may include a desire to appease Russia, ensure opportunities for labor migration, promote intergovernmental subsidies, and bolster regime security.
It has around 75% of the EEU's total population, approximately 85% of EEU members' total GDP, and more than 95% of CSTO members' military expenditures.
Russia maintains active bilateral economic, security, and political relations with CSTO and EEU member states, and observers often consider these bilateral ties to be of greater significance than Russia's multilateral relations within these two institutions.
Russia's main military facilities in CSTO member states consist of bases in Tajikistan, Armenia, and Kyrgyzstan and radar stations in Belarus and Kazakhstan.
Russia's partners also have cultivated strong ties with other countries.
Kazakhstan, in particular, has developed strong relations with China and the West, particularly in the energy sector.
Although Armenia and Belarus have close bilateral relations with Russia in the security and economic spheres, they also have established economic ties to Europe.
Both Armenia and Kazakhstan have established institutional partnerships with NATO; Armenia is a troop contributor to the NATO-led Kosovo Force and Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan.
For more than 13 years, Kyrgyzstan hosted a major military base and transit center for coalition troops fighting in Afghanistan.
These three states opt to pursue independent foreign policies and do not seek membership in Russian-led or other security and economic blocs.
Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan are significant energy producers; they partner with Russia but also have developed major alternative transit routes for oil and natural gas.
In addition, Russia has cultivated a partnership with Uzbekistan, although the latter has competed with Kazakhstan for regional leadership in Central Asia and has long-standing disputes with Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan.
Russia's relations with Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine have been the most difficult.
Georgia has consistently pursued NATO membership and served as one of NATO's closest non-allied partners in Iraq and Afghanistan.
All three states also have concluded association agreements with the EU that include the establishment of free-trade areas and encourage harmonization with EU laws and regulations.
Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine also have territorial conflicts with Russia, which stations military forces on the states' territory without consent.
Following a steady worsening of relations with Georgia, together with increasing clashes between Georgian and separatist forces, Russia went to war with Georgia in August 2008 to prevent Georgia from reestablishing control over South Ossetia.
The war resulted in the expulsion of Georgian residents and the destruction of their villages, as well as Russian recognition of the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
Russia has periodically imposed embargoes on key imports from Georgia and Moldova, although both states have managed to partially normalize relations with Russia.
Many observers consider that of all the post-Soviet states, Ukraine has been the most difficult for Russia to accept as fully independent.
Even before 2014, the Russian-Ukrainian relationship suffered some turbulence, with disputes over Ukraine's ties to NATO and the EU, the status of Russia's Crimea-based Black Sea Fleet, and the transit of Russian natural gas via Ukraine to Europe.
Under Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych , such disputes were largely papered over; by the end of 2013, Yanukovych appeared to make a decisive move toward Russia, postponing Ukraine's association agreement with the EU and agreeing to substantial financial assistance from Moscow.
The decision to postpone Ukraine's agreement with the EU led to the so-called Euromaidan protests, a government crackdown on demonstrations, and violent clashes between protestors and government forces that eventually led to the demise of the Yanukovych regime.
Ukraine's armed conflict with Russia emerged soon after Yanukovych fled to Russia in February 2014.
In late August 2014, Russia began stepping up its support to separatists in reaction to a new Ukrainian offensive.
However, the protocol failed to end fighting or begin a process of achieving political resolution to the crisis.
The parties met again in February 2015 and reached a more detailed, twelve-point cease-fire agreement, known as Minsk-2.
This agreement mandates a total cease-fire, the withdrawal of heavy weapons and foreign troops and fighters, and full Ukrainian control over its border with Russia.
The agreement calls for prisoner exchanges, the provision of humanitarian aid to residents of the Donbas, and the establishment of an international monitoring regime.
The agreement also requires the Ukrainian government to adopt constitutional reforms to provide a special ""decentralized"" status for the separatist regions, hold local elections, and pass an amnesty law.
The Ukraine conflict has heightened long-standing tensions between NATO and Russia.
Even before the Ukraine conflict, post-Cold War efforts to build a cooperative NATO-Russian partnership had at best mixed results.
Allies sought to assure a suspicious and skeptical Russia that NATO did not pose a security threat or seek to exclude Russia from Europe.
The principal institutional mechanism for NATO-Russian relations is the NATO-Russia Council , which was established in May 2002, five years after the 1997 NATO-Russia Founding Act provided the formal basis for bilateral cooperation.
Recognizing that NATO and Russia face many of the same global challenges and share similar strategic priorities, Russian and NATO leaders structured the NRC as a ""consensus"" forum of equals with goals that included political dialogue on security issues, the determination of common approaches, and the conduct of joint operations.
Formal meetings of the NRC were suspended in April 2014, although meetings reconvened in 2016.
Nonetheless, disagreements within the alliance and between NATO and Russia persisted on some core issues.
In particular, although a 2010 agreement to pursue cooperation on missile defense was seen as a significant breakthrough, ensuing negotiations were marked by disagreement and increasingly vocal Russian opposition to NATO plans.
The United States has been a key architect of and contributor to NATO's reassurance and collective defense initiatives, and it has sought to adjust United States force posture in Europe in response to Russian actions.
The enhanced United States military presence in Eastern Europe—dubbed Operation Atlantic Resolve—has primarily consisted of increased rotational deployments of air, ground, and naval assets and a significant increase in military exercises.
To fund these increased United States military activities, Congress has appropriated around $2. billion since 2015 for a new European Reassurance Initiative in the Department of Defense's Overseas Contingency Operations account.
On four separate instances during 2014, Russian fighter aircraft intercepted United States and Swedish reconnaissance aircraft.
In June 2014, Russian aircraft approached the Danish island of Bornholm in what appeared to be a simulated attack.
In September 2014, Russian aircraft over the Labrador Sea practiced cruise-missile attacks against the United States mainland and Russian aircraft violated Swedish airspace while conducting a mock bombing run.
In September 2014, Russian officials detained a Lithuanian shipping vessel operating in international waters in the Barents Sea and towed it to Murmansk.
A ""massive outburst"" of Russian air activity occurred along NATO's borders in October 2014 in conjunction with a large Russian military aviation exercise.
In October 2015, United States fighter aircraft intercepted two TU-142 reconnaissance/antisubmarine aircraft that reportedly came within one nautical mile of the aircraft carrier USS Ronald Reagan east of the Korean peninsula.
In January 2016, an SU-27 reportedly came within 5 meters of a United States RC-135 over the Black Sea.
On two other occasions in April 2016, Russian SU-24 bombers made several low-altitude passes of the USS Donald Cook in the Baltic Sea, reportedly coming within 10 meters of colliding with the ship.
In September 2016, an SU-27 fighter aircraft intercepted a United States Navy P-8 conducting routine operations in international airspace over the Black Sea, reportedly coming within 3 meters of a collision at one point.
Another two SU-24 aircraft and an IL-38 maritime patrol aircraft also flew near the destroyer.
Like NATO, the EU has had to reconsider its relationship with a more assertive Russia and the implications for European security and stability.
Crafting common EU policies has been challenging, given various EU member states' different national histories and economic relations with Russia.
Many in the EU have long advocated for a pragmatic ""strategic partnership"" with Russia based largely on commercial and energy ties, as well as practical cooperation on certain foreign policy issues.
Countries such as Poland and the Baltic states, by contrast, have tended to view Russia more as a potential threat to themselves and their neighbors.
The sharpness of such divisions within the EU appeared to diminish before 2014, but Russia's annexation of Crimea caused a distinct shift in perceptions across the board.
Traditional advocates of pragmatism moved more into alignment with those who have tended to view Russia with greater wariness.
Furthermore, many in Europe have expressed concern about Russia's efforts to expand its influence on the Continent by other than military means.
Media reports and outside experts contend that the Russian government is seeking to influence European politics, elections, and policymaking with an array of tools.
Many European leaders worry about the possibility of Russian interference, including through cyberattacks on government or political party computer systems ahead of important national elections in France, Germany, and elsewhere in Europe in 2017.
Over the summer of 2015, Moscow began a gradual buildup of Russian personnel, combat aircraft, and military equipment inside Syria.
Russia began airstrikes in September,80 initially focusing on Syrian opposition targets, including some groups reportedly backed by the United States.
In 2016, Russia expanded its targeting to include Islamic State forces, although it continues to target U.S.-backed rebel groups occasionally.
In addition, Russia continues to resupply Syrian military forces, although Russian officials have stated that they are merely fulfilling existing bilateral contracts.
Going forward, Russia may continue operations against Syrian rebel groups, with the aim of weakening any credible or capable opposition to the Asad government.
In the short term, Russia potentially could extend its operations in Islamic State-held areas of central and eastern Syria.
As U.S.-assisted Syrian Democratic Forces move toward the Islamic State's declared capital at Raqqah, they eventually may be operating in proximity to Russian and/or Turkish forces.
Over the long term, Russia may seek to retain influence with the Syrian government by advising and assisting the Syrian military.
Russia has negotiated agreements to maintain a long-term presence at both the Tartus naval facility and the Hmeimim airbase, but it could still gradually reduce its military footprint in the country to focus on other regional or international priorities.
Analysts have offered a variety of motivations for Russia's intervention in Syria.
In general, the series of losses suffered by Syrian government forces in 2015, concerns about United States and other third-party security assistance to Syrian opposition groups, and the potential for broader U.S.-led coalition military operations in Syria all may have contributed to Russia's decision to directly enter the conflict when it did.
The prospect of Asad's defeat—assuming Moscow believed such an outcome was possible—could have had several negative implications for Russia.
It could have meant the loss of a key ally in the Middle East, a region in which Russia was seeking to expand influence to help establish itself as a global power and peer competitor to the United States.
It also could have set another major precedent for violent regime change in the Middle East , something Moscow has increasingly opposed as a dangerous example to Russia's neighbors and, ultimately, to Russia itself.
Finally, Russian authorities have insisted that the final beneficiary of the Asad regime's collapse would be the Islamic State and other extremists who would be the likely victors in the ensuing contest for national power.
Extremist success in Syria could promote the spread of Islamist extremism to other countries, including within Central Asia and Russia itself.
Russian authorities claim that up to a few thousand Russian citizens, predominantly from Muslim-populated republics in the North Caucasus, have fought with the Islamic State and other extremist movements in Syria and Iraq.
Since Russia's intervention, commanders once affiliated with the Al Qaeda-aligned Islamic Emirate of the Caucasus, established in 2007, reportedly have pledged allegiance to the Islamic State and formed a local affiliate, the Wilayah Kawkaz.
Russia's leadership may have believed that intervention, although potentially risky, could help to avoid certain negative outcomes.
In addition, the leadership may have believed that intervention could achieve additional objectives if, as expected, it shored up the Asad regime, bolstered Russian influence in Syria, and staved off the collapse of the state and a takeover by Islamist extremists.
In addition, analysts have suggested that international criticism and sanctions related to Russia's actions in Ukraine encouraged the Russian government to seek ways to reassert its global influence.
By intervening in Syria, Moscow could demonstrate its ability to project military power past its immediate neighborhood, test existing and new capabilities, and make Russia an unavoidable diplomatic player on an issue of significance to the United States and other countries.
With the exception of its Syria intervention, Russia's foreign policy priorities traditionally have focused primarily on the post-Soviet region and the West.
Russia is one of five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, where it plays a significant role.
Until 2014, Russia was a member of the Group of Eight , together with the West's seven leading economies .83 It is also a member of BRICS, an alternative group of states with large economies that also includes Brazil, India, China, and South Africa.
In these and other international fora, Russia has engaged on global issues such as nonproliferation , counterterrorism, counterpiracy, and global health.
Russia has constructed nuclear power plants in Europe, Iran, India, and China, with more under construction or planned.
In addition, Russia has cultivated a variety of bilateral partnerships around the globe.
In Asia, Russia's main partner is China, with which it has close security, economic, and political relations, although Russia has concerns about China's inexorable rise.
It also has developed good relations with India, Pakistan , Afghanistan, Vietnam, and across Southeast Asia.
In the Middle East, Russia's Syria intervention is exceptional in scope but reflects a long-standing policy of fruitful relations with regional governments including Algeria, Egypt, Iraq, Libya, and Sudan.
In Latin America, Russia has sought to reengage with Soviet-era partners Cuba and Nicaragua, as well as Venezuela, Brazil, and others.
In sub-Saharan Africa, Russia has not developed similarly strong relations.
Russia's armed forces surprised most United States and European observers with their actions in Ukraine starting in March 2014 and in Syria starting in September 2015.
Since the end of the Cold War, conventional wisdom about the Russian military has tended to indicate a force in relative decline, with aging Soviet-era equipment and with technology and a philosophy of warfare lagging well behind that of the United States and many NATO allies.
Analysts noted that the shortcomings of Russia's military appeared to be confirmed by its relatively lackluster performance in the 2008 conflict with Georgia.
Russian special forces, elite airborne troops, and naval infantry effected a swift and bloodless seizure of Crimea in March 2014.
The subsequent Russian involvement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine highlighted the practice of ""hybrid warfare,"" centered on the use of irregular ""separatist"" forces covertly backed by the regular military, along with an information and propaganda campaign orchestrated to create misdirection and spread an alternate international narrative.
The campaign in Syria, in addition to serving a number of broader Russian interests and diplomatic objectives, has allowed Russia to test and display how various components of its military work together in an expeditionary setting.
At the same time, Russia has been upgrading or constructing new facilities in the Arctic and reactivating Soviet bases in the Arctic that fell into disuse with the end of the Cold War.
In December 2014, Russia launched a new Arctic Joint Strategic Command.
In addition, Russia has been forming two new brigades specializing in Arctic warfare.
The reform program has focused largely on streamlining command structures and increasing professionalization, increasing unit combat readiness and personnel training, and reequipping forces through an ambitious acquisition program.
Although many of Russia's reform efforts have faced myriad challenges, partial reversals, and other setbacks, some of the efforts appear to have been at least partly successful in achieving their objectives and yielding improved capabilities.
The plan calls for upgrading 11% of military equipment each year, with a final goal of increasing the share of modern weaponry to 70% of total inventory by 2020.
For 2015, President Putin related the expected share of ""modern weapons"" was 32% in the Army, 33% in the Air Force, 40% in airborne units, and ""over 50%"" in the Navy and aerospace defense forces.
Some analysts have questioned the definition of modern in this context, noting that in some cases the term appears to include newer versions of older designs.
Although the SAP has achieved some significant results, the process also has faced considerable challenges and encountered delays.
Since 2014, the Russian economy has been negatively affected by falling oil prices and international sanctions, with a prolonged recession accompanied by severe currency depreciation, high inflation, and increased capital flight.
The downturn has strained public finances and complicated long-term budgetary and planning efforts.
Accompanying an overall decline in defense spending from 2016, the approval of a new 30-trillion ruble SAP for the period 2016-2025 was postponed until 2018 due to the instability of economic conditions.
Russia's Western Military District stretches from its border with Finland in the north to its border with northeastern Ukraine and includes Kaliningrad, a Russian territorial exclave wedged between Poland and Lithuania.
The Western Military District includes the 6th Army, 20th Guards Army, and 1st Guards Tank Army; the 6th Air Force and Air Defense Army, as well as Airborne Troops; the Baltic Fleet , naval infantry, and coastal defense forces; and intelligence, support, and special forces units.
In May 2016, Russia announced plans to put two new divisions in the Western Military District and another in the Southern Military District , totaling approximately 30,000 new troops.
Russia also has stationed military forces in the breakaway regions of Georgia and Moldova without these states' consent.
Since Russia's 2008 war with Georgia, its military bases in Abkhazia and South Ossetia have housed some 3,500-4,000 personnel each.
In Moldova, Russia continues to deploy 1,500-2,000 troops in Transnistria .96 In 2016, Russia finalized an agreement with the de facto authorities of Abkhazia, establishing a joint group of military forces in the occupied region.
Since 2009, Russia has significantly increased the frequency of large-scale strategic exercises and short-notice ""snap drills,"" serving to bolster the readiness of its forces, rehearse for a variety of contingencies in its neighborhood, and gain experience in the rapid redeployment of large numbers of personnel and equipment.
In 2009, Russia alarmed many United States and European observers with exercises rehearsing an attack on Poland and the Baltic countries and culminating in a simulated nuclear strike on Warsaw.
In March 2013, the Russian Air Force reportedly conducted a mock nuclear strike against Sweden.
An exercise involving 150,000 troops in February and March 2014 unfolded in conjunction with the seizure of Crimea and helped to mask the operation.
At the tactical level, smaller-scale unit exercises and live-fire exercises reportedly also have increased in frequency.
NATO officials assert that Russia has staged about a dozen unannounced, large-scale, snap military drills in 2015-2016, including in the run-up to the July 2016 NATO summit in Warsaw.
Besides testing units' readiness for battle, mobilization procedures, equipment, and command systems, the exercises are presumed to be a signal to NATO through the display of forces and weaponry.
NATO countries such as Poland, Romania, and the Baltics are concerned about a repeat of tactics used during the takeover of Crimea, with putative exercises morphing into an actual assault operation.
For more than 25 years, the U.S.-Russian relationship has gone through positive and negative periods.
The spirit of U.S.-Russian ""strategic partnership"" forged by Presidents Bill Clinton and Boris Yeltsin in the early 1990s was gradually overtaken by increasing tension and mutual recrimination, in large part as a consequence of disagreements over Russian efforts to reestablish a sphere of influence in the post-Soviet region and over United States promotion of NATO enlargement to Central and Eastern Europe and military intervention in the former Yugoslavia.
Presidents George W Bush and Vladimir Putin believed they could restore U.S.-Russian relations, particularly in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
The two countries reshaped their relationship on the basis of cooperation against terrorism and the economic integration of Russia with the West.
However, tensions arose again around a number of issues, including the Iraq War; the so-called color revolutions in Ukraine, Georgia, and Kyrgyzstan involving protests against electoral fraud that unseated corrupt regimes; Russian energy and security pressure on its neighbors; and United States and NATO plans for missile defense.
Cooperation continued in some areas, but the August 2008 Russian-Georgian conflict caused bilateral ties to deteriorate to their lowest point since the Cold War. the removal of chemical weapons from Syria.
In the wake of the Magnitsky Act, the Russian government also moved to dismantle a number of other links between Russia and the United States.
The day after the act was introduced, President Putin signed Russia's ""foreign agent"" law requiring foreign-funded organizations that engage in activity seeking to affect policymaking to register and identify as foreign agents.
In September 2012, Russia requested that the United States close down foreign assistance under the United States Agency for International Development.
Russia also was removed from the G8, and the United States, EU, and other allies introduced sanctions on Russia for its actions.
Former President Barack Obama, in issuing decisions to curtail economic relations, declared Russia's activities in Ukraine as threatening the peace, security, stability, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of Russia's neighbor and, in turn, as constituting a threat to United States national security.
To date, designations are based on authority established in the executive orders.
In issuing the executive orders, President Obama identified individuals and entities subject to economic restrictions for having undermined the stability of Ukraine, misappropriated its state assets, annexed Crimea to Russia, used illicit armed force in Ukraine, or conducted business, trade, or investment in Crimea.
Any individual or entity designated pursuant to these orders is subject to the blocking of assets under United States jurisdiction, prohibitions on transactions with United States persons, and denial of entry into the United States.
The Department of the Treasury, which has authority to designate individuals and entities, has continued to do so since the initial findings of 2014.
In addition, in what are known as sectoral sanctions, the Department of the Treasury has restricted selected transactions related to investment or debt holding in a number of key financial, energy, and defense companies, as well as transactions related to the development of deepwater, Arctic offshore, or shale oil projects.
For example, the Ukraine Freedom Support Act specifically mandates sanctions against state-run arms exporter Rosoboronexport; Russian entities that transfer weapons to Syria, Ukraine, Georgia, or Moldova; and Gazprom, if the company is found to withhold natural gas from NATO member states.
Russia has not reversed its occupation and annexation of Crimea, nor has it dropped support for the Donbas separatists.
Since sanctions were introduced, however, Russia has signed two agreements that recognize all of the Donbas as a part of Ukraine and Russian-backed rebel military operations have been limited to areas along the perimeter of the current conflict zone.
On January 6, 2017, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence released a declassified report on Russian activities and intentions related to the 2016 United States presidential election.
In the United States, targets allegedly included a number of Republican-connected individuals, including state-level officials and campaigns, as well as former NATO Supreme Allied Commander Phillip Breedlove and former Secretary of State Colin Powell.
On December 29, 2016, President Obama imposed sanctions for election-related malicious cyber activity by expanding an existing executive order issued in April 2015.122 The Obama Administration identified nine individuals and entities, including Russia's two leading intelligence agencies, as subject to sanctions for election-related malicious cyber activity.
Designees are subject to blocking of assets under United States jurisdiction, prohibitions on transactions with United States persons, and denial of entry into the United States.
Congress has begun to investigate Russian interference in United States elections.
In January 2017, the House and Senate Select Committees on Intelligence announced inquiries into Russian cyber activities and ""active measures"" surrounding the United States election, as well as more broadly.
The Senate Armed Services, Foreign Relations, and Judiciary Committees have launched or announced related investigations.
In addition, the 2017 Intelligence Authorization Act proposes the establishment of an executive interagency committee for countering active measures by Russia to exert covert influence.
During the Cold War, arms control negotiations and treaties played a key role in the relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Arms control negotiations were often one of the few channels for formal communication.
The talks provided the United States and the Soviet Union with a forum to air their security concerns and raise questions about plans and programs.
During the 1990s, as the relationship between the United States and Russia improved, arms control no longer played a central role in fostering cooperation between the two nations.
Currently, the New START Treaty and the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty are the two fundamental nuclear arms control agreements between the United States and Russia.
The New START Treaty expires in 2021, though it may be extended for a period of five years; the two countries must meet the treaty's limits on strategic arms by February 2018.
The treaty also limits each side to no more than 1,550 deployed warheads.
In addition, the treaty requires extensive monitoring and inspection activity.
The United States and Russia also are party to other arms control treaties and agreements.
Some of these agreements mandate strategic exercise and missile launch notifications.
The United States signed a ""hotline"" agreement with the Soviet Union in 1963, establishing a permanent means for emergency communications; this agreement was updated in 2008.
The United States and Russia still use the system; reports indicate that President Obama used it to communicate with President Putin about the hacking and interference with the United States elections.
The two countries also established Nuclear Risk Reduction Centers in 1987.
These centers have served as a mechanism for the parties to provide notifications and transmit data mandated by bilateral arms control agreements and the 1988 Ballistic Missile Launch Notification Agreement.
Consequently, the NRRCs remain significant for the implementation of other agreements.
In addition, since 1992, the United States has spent more than $10 billion to help Russia dismantle nuclear weapons and ensure the security of nuclear weapons, weapons-grade nuclear material, other weapons of mass destruction, and related technological know-how.
This funding supported the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program managed by the Department of Defense, along with nonproliferation programs managed by the Departments of Energy and State.
These programs helped to transport, store, and eliminate weapons in Russia.
They also funded improvements in security at storage areas for nuclear weapons and materials.
Over time, the United States allocated a growing proportion of its funding to projects that focused on securing and eliminating chemical and biological weapons and securing storage sites that house nuclear warheads removed from deployed weapons systems.
The memorandum of understanding that governed implementation of U.S.-Russian cooperation in threat reduction and nonproliferation expired in June 2013.
In its stead, the United States and Russia signed a new bilateral protocol to a 2008 Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Program in Russia Framework Agreement, a vehicle under which countries aid Russia with Soviet-era weapons cleanup work.
Under this new framework, the two countries agreed to cooperate on some areas of nuclear security but nuclear weapons dismantlement and chemical weapons destruction projects ceased.
The United States and Russia also continued to cooperate on nuclear nonproliferation objectives in other countries, such as removing weapons-usable fuel from research reactors, and planned bilateral nuclear research projects.
Joint nonproliferation efforts declined further after Russia's actions in Ukraine.
In April 2014, the United States Department of Energy put certain joint research projects and meetings on hold.
The most prominent remaining bilateral nuclear security projects in Russia ceased in 2016.
In the first weeks of the 115th Congress, many Members of Congress have expressed their sense that the United States should adhere to core international commitments and principles as the Administration seeks to rebuild relations with Russia.
Introduced January 6, 2017; referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
Introduced January 13, 2017; referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and in addition to the Committees on the Judiciary and Financial Services.
Introduced February 2, 2017; referred to the Committee on Ways and Means.
To provide for congressional oversight of actions to waive, suspend, reduce, provide relief from, or otherwise limit the application of sanctions with respect to the Russian Federation, and for other purposes.
To require certain actions regarding Russian Federation noncompliance with the INF Treaty, and for other purposes.
Asserting that Congress should expend the resources necessary to investigate thoroughly the nature and extent of Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election, including whether there was collusion between persons associated with the Russian government and persons associated with the presidential campaign of Donald J Trump to influence the outcome of the election.
Establishing a Joint Committee on Russian Interference in the 2016 Election and the Presidential Transition.
Expressing the sense of the House of Representatives regarding unanswered questions into the fate of Raoul Wallenberg.
Calling on the Russian Federation to stop the violence in Ukraine, and for other purposes.
Introduced February 3, 2017; referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
Urging North Atlantic Treaty Organization member countries to meet or exceed the two percent gross domestic product commitment to spending on defense.
A bill to establish an independent commission to examine and report on the facts regarding the extent of Russian official and unofficial cyber operations and other attempts to interfere in the 2016 United States national election, and for other purposes.
Introduced January 4, 2017; referred to the Committee on Rules and Administration.
Introduced January 11, 2017; referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
Introduced January 12, 2017; reported by the Select Committee on Intelligence on January 20, 2017.
Introduced January 12, 2017; referred to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs.
A bill to provide for congressional oversight of actions to waive, suspend, reduce, provide relief from, or otherwise limit the application of sanctions with respect to the Russian Federation, and for other purposes.
Introduced February 8, 2017; referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations.
A bill to provide for compliance enforcement regarding Russian violations of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, and for other purposes.
A resolution expressing the unwavering commitment of the United States to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
