But For Whom?"",""inLanguage"":""en-US"",""keywords"":""Features \u0026 Blogs, Russia, Ukraine, Picks"",""author"":{""@type"":""Person"",""url"":"""",""description"":""Carl Schreck is an award-winning investigative journalist who serves as RFE/RL\u0027s enterprise editor.
He has covered Russia and the former Soviet Union for more than 20 years, including a decade in Moscow.
He has led investigations into corruption, cronyism, and disinformation campaigns in Russia and Central Asia, as well as on poisoning attacks against Kremlin opponents and assassinations of Iranian exiles in the West.
But For Whom?"",page_type:""feature story"",page_name:""Crimea Is A \u0026#39;Sacred\u0026#39; Land.
But For Whom?"",short_headline:""Crimea Is A \u0026#39;Sacred\u0026#39; Land.
But For Whom?"",long_headline:""Crimea Is A \u0026#39;Sacred\u0026#39; Land.
December 04, 2014 22:29 GMT By Carl Schreck Russian President Vladimir Putin and former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych during a 2013 ceremony in Kyiv marking the 1,025th anniversary of Christianity of Kievan Rus.
Ukrainians, however, could deploy the same logic to justify Crimea’s inclusion in the modern Ukrainian state, historians and religious experts say.
This interpretive impasse is among several competing historical, religious, ethnic and political claims to Crimea, a Black Sea peninsula that was home to Greek colonies some 2,500 years ago and controlled by various kingdoms and empires until Russia annexed it from the Ottoman Empire in 1783.
In his December 4 state-of-the-nation speech, Putin compared the site of Vladimir the Great’s baptism to holy sites for Jews and Muslims in Jerusalem.
Given that the conversion of Kievan Rus established the Orthodox foundations for future Russian and Ukrainian states, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko could take the same message to his electorate, said Karl Qualls, a professor of Russian and modern European history at Dickinson College in Pennsylvania.
Tatars And Greeks The Crimean Tatars also have a strong historical claim to the peninsula, with their ancestors having lived there as far back as the 13th century, Qualls noted.
The mainly Muslim Tatars administered their own khanate there in the 15th century and became an Ottoman vassal state until Crimea’s annexation into the Russian empire by Catherine the Great in 1783.
According to the 1897 census taken in the Russian Empire, Crimean Tatars constituted more than one-third of the population on the peninsula.
Crimean Tatars began returning to the peninsula in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and currently constitute around 13 percent of Crimea’s 2 million population.
Crimean Tatar leaders have accused Moscow-backed authorities on the peninsula of targeting their community for criticizing Russia’s annexation of Crimea in March.
Qualls said the word “indigenous” is a misnomer when describing any single population in Crimea.
Greeks, who constitute a tiny minority in Ukraine according to its most recent census in 2001, could make a solid argument for recognition as an indigenous people of Crimea given that Khersones, mentioned by Putin in his state-of-the-union speech, was an ancient Greek city-state, Qualls added.
Arcane Reference During a meeting with Russian historians last month, Putin made a similar reference to the Crimea’s central importance to Russia as the site of Vladimir the Great’s baptism.
Putin is employing religious themes to “give more legitimacy to the illegal annexation of Crimea, at least in the eyes of the Russians,” said Hovorun, research director at the Institute of Theological Studies at Kyiv-Mohyla Academy.
One poll conducted last year, however, suggests Putin’s religious reference may be somewhat arcane for most Russians.
According to the poll conducted by the Public Opinion Foundation, just 25 percent of Russians surveyed were able to recall that the conversion of Kievan Rus to Christianity took place under Vladimir the Great.
With reporting by Reuters Carl Schreck Carl Schreck is an award-winning investigative journalist who serves as RFE/RL's enterprise editor.
