Russian New Art of Hybrid Warfare in Ukraine Soňa Rusnáková1 Abstract The main aim of this paper is to analyse the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation.
For the purposes of the paper, the theory of hybrid warfare was chosen as an analytical category.
Throughout the paper, the concept of hybrid warfare is examined and applied on case study of Crimean annexation.
Hybrid warfare, especially in connection with Russian actions in Crimea has been an intensely debated concept.
There is an ongoing debate among scholars concerning the meaning of the concept, its existence and employment by the Russian Federation.
This paper showed that the article of Valeriy Gerasimov – the incumbent Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Federationinvoked a new warfare strategy for the Russian Federation which was consequently for the very first time in its full spectre and effectivity employed on case of Crimean annexation in March 2014.
Russia, Ukraine, Crimea, hybrid warfare, annexation INTRODUCTION Due to its actions in Crimea which can be approached as a projection of the new capability of Russia to simultaneously employ vast spectrum of warfare means in one battlefield, the concept of hybrid warfare has become more and more interlinked with the new military thinking of Russia and most importantly, the attention was directed towards the effects this new Russian warfare style might have in the future on security of neighbouring and ‘near abroad’ countries.
New Challenges Demand Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying Out Combat Operations was released in February 2013 in Russian military newspaper.
However, the opinions of scholars on the interpretation of Gerasimov vary.
The article is in the West known as the ‘Gerasimov’s Doctrine’ and considered to affirm the new orientation of Russian military operations towards hybrid warfare.
According to scholars who advocate this position, due to the fact that Russia significantly lags behind the USA and NATO in terms of its conventional capabilities, it has to rely on developing rather non-conventional capabilities 1 Mgr.
The hybrid warfare has become “Russia’s new art of war” , an updated military strategy of Russian military directing its future operations.
One of the main objectives of this thesis will be to advocate this view on Russia and hybrid warfare as its new military thinking, used not only to adapt to new security era of hybrid threats, but demonstrating that Russia itself poses a serious security threat for neighbouring countries by projecting its offensive hybrid capabilities into the post-Soviet region.
According to them, the West is misinterpreting the article and is overanalysing it since the article is merely a foresight on how future military operations are and will be in general conducted worldwide.
McDermott further adds to these perceptions that Among these untested and certainly unproven assertions are the ideas that Moscow has developed a doctrine and operational strategy referred to as “hybrid warfare,” or that its operations in Ukraine can be explained by reference to new and evolving defense and security capabilities.
Usually the elements of unconventional/irregular/non-linear operations such as diplomatic, political, economic, social, financial, information and psychological ones can be regarded as falling under the category of soft power.
However, the understanding of these means and their range varies between the West and Russia.
Such understanding is in contrast with the Russian approach because it is based rather on attraction than coercion.
These actions are evaluated by Russia as threatening its state interests and undermining its spheres of influence.
In the context of Crimean annexation, the debates over the definition of the concept of ‘hybrid warfare’ and more specifically its understanding as a new way of waging war by Russia have arisen.
For this reason, it is necessary to define its meaning and take a closer look on debates encompassing it.
Scholars agree that hybrid warfare is neither an entirely new phenomenon nor that it can be attributed exclusively to Russian actions in Crimea and Ukraine in general.
The concept came to the light for the very first time in 2002 when William J Nemeth used it to refer to the tactics of Chechen guerrilla against Russia during the Second Chechen War in 1999-2009.
But the concept has become more popular among scholars after Frank Hoffman used it to describe the tactics of Hezbollah during the Lebanon war in 2006 which is assumed to be one of the most suitable examples of hybrid warfare.
The level of complexity of actions performed by the non-state actor and its effectiveness was unprecedented.
Drawing on the experience with Hezbollah’s sophisticated and complex operations, the first theoretical basis for the concept of hybrid threats and warfare can be traced to Hoffman’s Conflict in the 21st Century published in 2007 where the author analysed the hybrid methods implemented by this nonstate actor as well as defended the novelty and uniqueness of the concept of hybrid warfare itself.
Although there is no unified and mutually agreed definition within the academics, there are several characteristics upon which its advocates find consensus.
In its broader sense the hybrid warfare can be characterized as difficulty in distinguishing between the state of peace and war as well as blurring warfare modes by simultaneously merging unconventional and conventional, irregular and regular, non-linear and linear, covert and overt methods of waging war by non-state actor or state, plus having attributes of being dynamic, flexible, unpredictable, subversive, complex and multidimensional.
Hybrid threats incorporate a full range of modes of warfare, including conventional capabilities, irregular tactics and formations, terrorist acts that include indiscriminate violence and coercion, and criminal disorder.
Another definition by Glenn proposes that hybrid threat is “An adversary that simultaneously and adaptively employs some combination of political, military, economic, social, and information means, and conventional, irregular, catastrophic, terrorism, and disruptive/criminal warfare methods.
For the purposes of this paper the most accurate understanding of hybrid warfare will be a …form of warfare that includes a range of multi-modal activities that can be conducted by state or non-state actors.
Emphasis is placed on simultaneous and unprecedented fusion of a variety of means such as political, military, economic/ financial, social and informational using conventional, irregular, catastrophic, terrorist and disruptive/criminal methods to achieve political objectives.
However, the main dispute line among scholars rests in the controversy of novelty of the concept of hybrid warfare.
Just as there are proponents advocating that hybrid war is a unique, distinct phenomenon that requires to be examined individually as a method of warfare, the opponents argue that there is nothing new about the concept of hybrid warfare since the multidimensionality of warfare methods and the interconnectedness of regular and irregular tactics was typical also for warfare further back in the history and in the most extreme case even doubt the existence of the concept itself.
Therefore the principal debate over the concept centres on whether compound and hybrid warfare are interchangeable concepts or whether they deserve to be approached respectively.
Hoffman refuses to admit the blurring of these concepts, further explaining differences between them and broadening the definition of hybrid warfare.
However, in case of hybrid warfare the tactics of regular and irregular forces “…become blurred into one force in the same battle space, creating a layering of threats.
Therefore because of these explanations, in this paper the concept of hybrid warfare will be approached respectively, as a unique concept existing on its own albeit not entirely novel, but taking into account its strategical, tactical and operational synergy as distinctive from the compound warfare.
The cyber threat is potentially seriously destructive to state’s security in particular if we consider the high level of dependence of state’s defence, security and intelligence systems on computer technology and internet, having impact on command and control as well as leak of sensitive information.
Depending on the intention, the level of covertness can vary from open attack to anonymous attack, the latter providing the opportunity for the attacker to refrain from being taken liable for the harmful cyber actions.
To achieve these ends, the information warfare emerged as one of the most efficient tools of hybrid warfare with its main objective of influencing the attitude of population.
Through the manipulation and influence of population, the challenger can affect the policies of government of the targeted state.
Thirdly, the cyber and information operations can be considered as part of broader psychological operations2.
Apart from propaganda, the examples of such psychological tools can be the demonstration of military power, the build-up of troops at the proximity of borders, military exercises and simulations, military parades, attempts to undermine the legitimacy of government…On the one side, they are “…used to demoralize, disorient, and confuse hostile groups.
Against such groups, psyops are employed as an offensive weapon…”, whereas on the other side “They can also be used, however, to unite, inform, and bolster the morale of nonhostile groups.
Among its instruments can be assigned the freezing of bank accounts, the ban on imports and/or exports as well as on loans for banks and companies, restricted traveling, measures causing the decrease in production and investments, power cuts, the disruption of infrastructure and other forms of economic blackmailing and intimidation.
This most often means taking advantage of targeted state’s vulnerabilities in terms of the lack of its own natural resources and its dependency on other state’s natural and energy resources.
Even though the introduction outlines this shift as generally applicable, what is noticeable by further reading throughout the article is that Gerasimov continues to broaden this view only in relation to United States and explicitly referring to its foreign policy which is interpreted as threatening Russian interests globally.
As explanations are used colour revolutions that have occurred in the northern Africa and the Middle East which are mentioned, rather than addressing the contemporary warfare style in a broader understanding or providing other distinct examples.
Still, the article resembles the traditional Cold-war narrative where Russian identity in foreign and security policy is almost exclusively determined and threatened by the actions of the USA, NATO, EU and their foreign involvement.
In the first part is especially highlighted the Arab Spring which is in the article approached as a source of knowledge for Russian military elites, the lessons learnt, providing the guide on what to expect from military operations of the 21st century, but also how to wage them.
But maybe the opposite is true — that precisely these events are typical of warfare in the 21st century.
By this he recognized that modern warfare requires layering of various threats, total war, and the important role population plays in destabilization of enemy’s internal order, cohesion of its essential institutions and therefore its defeat from inside.
The following parts of the article are dedicated directly and explicitly to Russian military strategy.
Here Gerasimov sums up the previously gained experiences from waging wars in Afghanistan, North Caucasus and even the World War 2, describes its current state and necessity of future improvements.
There are in particular three vital points relevant for this thesis that can be derived and which additionally confirm that the hybrid warfare is not a mere myth in Russian military thinking.
This part seemingly refers to the awareness of technological superiority of the United States and NATO forces over the Russian forces.
Gerasimov criticized the lack of innovative thoughts in Russian military as compared to the World War 2 and emphasized the necessity of new ideas.
Next, the analysis of the context that contributed to the effectiveness of Russian hybrid war will be presented.
Then, the application of concrete unconventional and conventional means of hybrid warfare will be demonstrated on Crimean operation.
These specificities are important for deciding on the employed character of hybrid operations and selection of hybrid means.
Ukraine is undoubtedly a very specific case and several specific factors enabled effective hybrid warfare in order to achieve the political end the annexation of Crimea and therefore the demonstration of great Russia revival.
In case of Russia and Ukraine, the matter of ethnicity is indeed the most relevant for explaining contemporary situation.
This impression is even strengthened by the amended law on defence from 2009 that enables Russian armed forces to intervene abroad – apart from other – for the reason “to protect Russian citizens abroad from armed attack” (Dmitry Medvedev signed the Federal Law, 2009) which is in contrary to international law.
Applied on case of Ukraine, the State Statistics Committee of Ukraine (AllUkrainian population census 2001, 2003-2004) suggests, that according to the latest census of Ukrainian population conducted in 2001, there are 8,334,100 of Russian nationals4 inhabiting Ukraine, measured in percentage terms 17.3%, of the entire Ukrainian population what represents the largest diaspora of Russian population abroad.
From this number, 95.9% of Russians consider Russian language to be their primary language and only 3.9% of these Russians approach Ukrainian language as their mother tongue.
The Autonomous Republic of Crimea inhabits 1,180,400 of Russians which is in total 58.5% of total population of Crimea.
The number of Russians in Crimea exceeds other nationalities inhabiting the peninsula.
These demographic statistics make especially favourable conditions for Russia to be taken advantage of.
Some of the sources of grievances that emerged throughout the history between Russia and Ukraine and are relevant for contemporary situation are those related to common ethnicity – for example, Western historians agree that Russians, Belarusians and Ukrainians “…share a common origin and only began to diverge ethnically following the Mongol invasions…This is also the view of most Russian historians.
This act has later become the root of disagreement between both countries due to the question of the legacy of the transfer.
As it can be seen the interpretation of certain historical realities still drives current foreign and security policy of Russia.
Thirdly, the civil societies of post-Soviet countries are generally labelled as weak.
Euromaidan has brought about a decisive break with the typical ‘postSoviet’ model of civil society…Overall, post-Soviet societies were generally characterised by apathy, low social capital (meaning the quality and density of social networks and interactions beyond one’s immediate family and friends) and profound mistrust of all public institutions.
However, on the other side, in terms of cohesiveness of population, the disunity of population over the inclination of the country towards the West or the East significantly deepened its fragmentation.
It is this fragmentation that makes Ukraine an easy target for hybrid warfare despite the increased civic engagement in public affairs that was sparked by Euromaidan.
This dependence makes neighbouring countries vulnerable if Russia decides to employ economic or energy instruments in pursuit of its goals.
As far as energy imports are concerned, Russia and Ukraine share a history of serious disputes over the supply of gas and its redistribution to Europe through Ukraine what even led to cut off supplies from Russia.
Prior the current crisis with Russia “… Ukraine was dependent on external energy sources, mainly from Russia.
After the crisis Ukraine is reducing its dependence on Russia by diversifying import partners in order to prevent Russia from exploiting former dependence vulnerability for the purposes of hybrid warfare.
Observing the context will help us to understand how Russia took advantage in available context and applied the above mentioned specificities in it for the purposes of hybrid warfare.
Ukraine’s potential admission as a member of the alliance was unthinkable to Moscow, given the economic, cultural and ethnic ties that run deep into the history of the two states.
Russia was also alarmed by the possibility that Ukraine may host BMD components on its territory.
The character of this document was unprecedented due to the fact that its signing would represent a breaking point, the decision on future direction of Ukraine towards the EU rather than Russia.
On 18 March 2014 Crimea was annexed by Russia as a reaction to the changing situation.
The most important feature of information warfare that enabled the annexation of Crimea is Russia’s reflexive control through the substantial Russian speaking minority and sympathizers on the peninsula.
The objective of Russian information warfare in Crimea was to in secrecy deceive, confuse, convince and attract Russian speaking minority inhabiting the peninsula without any resistance or use of force by employing the manipulation of information in such a way that is beneficial for Russia’s political objectives, in this case to evoke the rise of pro-Russian sentiments and through this to legitimize its illegal actions – the annexation of territory.
The Crimean operation perfectly shows the essence of information warfare: the victim of the aggression – as was the case with Crimea – does not resist it.
Holding the 'referendum' contradicted with the Ukrainian constitution and did not meet the basic internationally agreed standards institutionalized in the Code of Good Practice on Referendums freedom, secrecy, equality as well as universality of election.
This was one of the most dangerous examples of how Russia misused the high percentage of its misinformed ethnic minority in Crimea for its political objectives.
The same institute conducted a survey in May 2013 concerning the preferred affiliation of the residents of Crimea.
Apart from this case, the information warfare on Crimea employed also the form of media censorship.
Russia also successfully achieved control over telecommunications including the notionally independent internet, and thus successfully isolated Crimea from independent news from the outside world.
These actions had also further reaching goals than annexation of Crimea which was only the demonstration of hybrid warfare on operational level.
Moreover “Further disclosures detailed the jamming of Ukrainian naval communications.
As it could have been seen, Crimean cyber operations were part of broader cyber warfare targeting also Ukraine.
Moreover, the reports from the American FireEye firm specialising in malware research state that after the annexation of Crimea it “...tracks more than 30 million ‘callbacks,’ the messages sent back from infected computers, allowing hackers to control them remotely.
Russian psychological operations are especially aimed at on the one hand delegitimizing and intimidating the opponent and on the other hand perfecting the image of Russia in the eyes of domestic and foreign public and legitimizing its actions.
Probably the best example of psychological operations in Crimea was the effort to legitimize Russian invasion of Crimea by delegitimizing Ukrainian government through evoking fear as a political tool.
Crimea was saved by prompt intervention, but the south and east of Ukraine fell into civil conflict” (Putin’s Gambit, 2014, para.
By this misuse of the concept, Putin aware of losing his ally Yanukovych also recalled the historical fear of Nazis fighting in Crimean campaign during the Second World War in 1941 which was one of the greatest bloodshed on the Eastern front.
With this are also connected subversive efforts from Russia that pursue to undermine the legitimacy of Ukrainian government and the EU, NATO and the USA as its affiliates.
It is then understandable where the conspiracy theories on the EU, NATO and USA pro-fascist inclination came from.
The combination of means together – the invention of a non-existent threat accompanied by the historical fear, restricted access to alternative media and information from the outer world and the seeming will to protect the citizens make Russian strategy especially dangerous and effective.
Nato fighters policing Baltic airspace were scrambled 68 times along Lithuania’s borders this year, by far the highest count in more than 10 years.
The FSB was and continues to be active in Crimea mainly in persecution of dissidents of the regime.
The Russian parliament’s lower house approved amendments that would see all public incitement to separatism penalized.
Violation of the law through the media or the Internet will now be punishable by up to five years in prison.
Although peace has been established in our land, there still are scums who want chaos, disorder, and war.
They live among us, go to the same shops as we do, ride with us in public transport.
Several examples of this persecution by the FSB can be traced in Crimea.
The FSB is then glorified as “anti-terrorism agency” fighting “Ukrainian saboteurs” what seemingly legitimizes its actions and reprisals in the eyes of public.
A Russian soldier and a Federal State Security agent were killed during these actions.
However, the presence of conventional military means also cannot be refuted in case of Crimean operation.
In February 2014, the presence of armed men dressed in military camouflage was spotted in Crimea.
On February 27 the parliament of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the Council of Ministers in Simferopol was seized by these armed men while hoisting the Russian flag on governmental buildings.
In particular, SOC was behind the seizing of the local parliament on September 27.
This act made it possible to elect the Russian ‘marionette’ Sergei Aksenov as new Crimean prime minister.
Furthermore, SOC also led the takeover of the Ukrainian military’s headquarters and a number of other hard-target military compounds.
These were, however, operations that demanded more troops than SOC could provide.
The organization was therefore aided by units from Spetsnaz-GRU and naval infantry.
The SOC, however, was always in the lead… On tactical and strategic level, Russia Today turned the information warfare on special operation forces too.
As was already mentioned, some of the most occurring actions of this kind were illegal persecutions of journalists and their mistreatment.
In the previous case of persecution of Crimean journalists by the FSB, victims witnessed to the Centre to Protect Journalists that “ Authorities detained Kokorina and initially refused her access to her lawyer, the center said.
This is another example how Russia misused pro-Russian Ukrainian population in its paramilitary operations on Crimea for broader political objectives.
In addition to this, pro-Russian self-defence forces supported by Russia in Crimea were gradually emerging.
Moreover, there were also hints that Russian nationalist biker gang Night Wolves, known for maintaining close ties with Putin, were linked to subversive operation in Crimea.
According to Guardian, Stoked by the Kremlin’s narrative that Ukrainian ‘fascists’, aided and abetted by the CIA, had overthrown a legitimate, pro-Russian government…Kuznetsov left his family in Moscow in February 2014 and headed south.
In his interview for Guardian Kuznetsov proclaimed that “…We were the first to be given weapons and to patrol Sevastopol.
Ukrainian authorities had, therefore, proposed imposing asset freezes and other sanctions against Chernomornaftegas…Ukraine’s foreign ministry spokesperson MaryanaBetysa criticized Russia’s removal of the rigs, calling it a violation of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and a wide-scale robbery of assets and natural resources by an aggressor state that occupies part of Ukraine’s sovereign territory.
As Broad further points out in supporting these claims, When Russia seized Crimea in March, it acquired not just the Crimean landmass but also a maritime zone more than three times its size with the rights to underwater resources potentially worth trillions of dollars…the move also extended Russia’s maritime boundaries, quietly giving Russia dominion over vast oil and gas reserves while dealing a crippling blow to Ukraine’s hopes for energy independence.
Moreover, it seems that Russia used its experience from Crimean socalled independence ‘referendum’ also in case of poll deciding on signing new electricity power supply treaty with Ukraine.
The energy warfare reached also to tactical and strategic levels, however, projected in the form of cyber-attacks.
The BlackEnergy3 malware whose older versions are notoriously known to be used by Russia was discovered in cyber-attacks against Ukrainian power grid.
CONCLUSION This paper demonstrated that despite the voices of Russian elite and certain scholars, the content of Gerasimov’s article cannot be underestimated and simplified to the plain description of the current and future global security environment as well as it cannot be refuted as a basis for new model of warfare strategy directing Russian foreign and security policies.
Moreover, as was shown on the case of Crimea, there is no way to dismiss the high probability that this style of warfare will reappear in Russia’s future operations given its unprecedented effectiveness.
On the contrary, Gerasimov’s article provided a theoretical basis not only for a new warfare strategy for Russian military, but even renewed Russian military thinking.
This renewed thinking underpinned by Gerasimov appeals for a more inventive, innovative and in the article’s rhetoric also more aggressive strategy which strives for revision of the international order with Russia being a more engaged and a more – if not the most prominent actor.
The Anatomy of Russian Information Warfare – The Crimean Operation, a Case Study.In Centre for Eastern Studies.
Putin reveals the moment he ordered the plot to take control of Crimea.
Contemporary War, Military Planning and the Advent of Unrestricted Operational Art.
ISIS and Russia in Action, A Comparative Study of Non-State and State Forms of Non-Linear Warfare.
Radvanyi, J , Psychological Operations and Political Warfare in Long-term Strategic Planning.
Nato Countries Begin Largest War Game in Eastern Europe Since Cold War.
Putin’s Information Warfare in Ukraine – Soviet Origins of Russia’s Hybrid Warfare.In Institute for the Study of War.
Vladimir Putin offers Ukraine financial incentives to stick with Russia.
