It has to be said that Viktor Pinchuk of all the Ukrainian oligarchy has always been the most intriguing for this blog.
He had managed to become a multi-millionaire through his engineering creativity before marrying the daughter of former President Kuchma – and thereafter leveraging that marriage during the Kuchma epoch to move from being a multi-millionaire to a billionaire.
His time directly in Ukrainian political life as a parliamentarian was really rather brief and began in the same year as his marriage to former President Kuchma’s daughter in 2002 and ended with the “Orange Revolution” of 2004/5 with Mr Pinchuk having backed Viktor Yanukovych.
Despite easily being able to buy his way into any parliament, he chose not to do so.
Since then his political influence has been indirect insofar as manifesting via parliamentarians both national and local that are loyal to him.
It should also be noted that “his people” are generally far more subtle than the drones of Kolomoisky, Firtash or Akhmetov.
He also has a penchant for collecting famous friends – The Clintons, Damien Hirst, Elton John etc.
In fact, aside from feeding from the State subsidy trough and self-interest indirect political machinations, Mr Pinchuk set about rehabilitating his image through philanthropy and his own foundation from 2006 onward with very little domestic public oratory or prose.
The annual YES conference is a Pinchuk brainchild that he funds – which in 2016 notably saw Mr Pinchuk pay Donald Trump to speak at via a video link despite his association with the Clintons for many years.
Perhaps a lesser known fact was that during the “Revolution of Dignity”, Mr Pinchuk funded the provision of medical supplies to treat the injured.
Aside from a few historical legal battles, most notably with Ihor Kolomoisky over assets, Mr Pinchuk rarely features in the news – unlike many of his peer oligarchs.
There is in fact very little that can be attributed to him personally by way of public statements or on the record oratory.
It was something of a surprise therefore when an article appeared in the WSJ, authored by, or ghost written and then attributed to, Viktor Pinchuk.
The article has ruffled many Ukrainian feathers, both political and societal, being prima facie interpreted as a plan for capitulation to The Kremlin.
In a nutshell he spoke out in favour of elections in the “DNR” and “LNR” by politely forgetting about Crimea if it meant an end to the deaths in the occupied Donbas, the abandoning of any thoughts of joining NATO and the creation of a formal understanding that Ukraine would not be joining the EU any time soon.
Now to be fair, there are those on the Crimea Committee of the Verkhovna Rada, even of patriotic leaning, that have privately told the blog that they foresee Crimea returning to Ukraine only if the Russian Federation implodes in similar fashion to that of the USSR – and if that be so then the returning of Crimea will be an issue dwarfed by the ramifications of such an implosion for Ukraine more generally.
That said, there is none on the said committee that would advocate anything other than “Crimea is Ukraine” as a domestic and international policy – quite rightly.
Only the completion of the Aquis Communautaire can do that – and that is a process Ukraine has not even asked to commence.
The simplest way to view the Association Agreement is as a document that brings “European norms” to Ukraine at a speed at which Ukraine can achieve them – ie it brings “Europe” to Ukraine at a speed and in chunks that Ukraine can handle/digest.
For Ukraine to go to the EU, an entirely different thing, then it is the Aquis that is the only route – a route more demanding than anything within the Association Agreement.
Likewise, whatever Ukraine may or may not do with NATO, it is currently a long way from being at a civilian and military standard by which it could join.
In short, Ukraine is decades away from meeting the requirements of the Aquis for EU accession – if it ever applies.
It is probably about a decade away from fully meeting the civilian and military standards required for NATO entry – should it ever ask to join.
Those are the bureaucratic realities and limitations of Ukrainian reformation and their speed – notwithstanding political limitations of those that would have to agree to any Ukrainian accession.
Peace at any cost does not bring peace – it brings an armistice fated to fail at some undetermined point in the future.
The answer may be that the article was written and published in the WSJ specifically for one reader.
It may well be that Mr Pinchuk has little belief that what he has written will become policy and be implemented.
However, just as with voting at the UN, it is not that uncommon to see some nations prima facie voting against their own interests in order to curry favour with others – in the full knowledge that the vote will be vetoed by yet another.
Perhaps the end result here, considering Mr Pinchuk’s penchant for collecting “friends” like the Clintons, Damien Hirst and Elton John etc, is that Mr Pinchuk may be seeking to become the Ukrainian “name” most liked and granted most access by Donald Trump – no differently than Nigel Farage is angling to get more personal interaction with Donald Trump than UK Prime Minister Theresa May.
If Mr Pinchuk can achieve a personal status that grants him more access to Donald Trump than President Porosehnko simply by writing something he believes Mr Trump would read agreeably within the WSJ, then he may feel it a gamble worth taking with the repercussions among Ukrainian domestic politics a prize worth chasing.
One year ago, the blog lauded the passing into statute of a new civil service law, a law that addressed two significant historical issues – “…..the Ukrainian civil service has frequently appeared as a source of disillusionment and frustration.
This entry will not concentrate upon the usual failures associated with Ukrainian policy, be that policy good, bad, or counterproductive – the usual failures of implementation.
It is sufficient to say that implementation is at the very least problematic, and also that the processes employed to deliver results/civil service appointments have been far from transparent nor the standards consistent when carrying out the basic legislative requirements of civil service appointment.
Shoddy, less than transparent and inconsistent implementation and internal processes aside, that such really rather good legislation has survived 12 months without sabotage is in itself worthy of note.
Those hardened souls that have several times had to scramble to man the ramparts to beat back attempts at sabotaging this statute have managed to do so – thus far.
Those battlements will have to be robustly manned once again in 2017, for sabotage is once more at the gates.
MP Artur Gerasimov has submitted Draft Bill 4370-1 which would effectively destroy much of the right-minded text within the current statute.
His proposed amendments would critically undermine the a-political and professional civil service the current legislation provides statutory framework for.
Not good when institutional independence, structure and processes have to be robust enough to repel political shenanigans if Ukraine is to move forward with a fully functioning State nervous system.
Indeed he is a recognised “presidential representative” within the Verkhovna Rada.
Ergo that the President is unaware of Draft Law 4370-1 being submitted by his Verkhovna Rada envoy is somewhat unlikely.
The question is whether Mr Gerasimov submits it on behalf of The Bankova and by extension President Poroshenko – or not.
Without providing an unnecessary curriculum vitae and full personal history, a brief outline of the last few years is sufficient to paint a picture of this legislative assassin.
Skimming over his various scandals mostly contained within the Donbas, it is sufficient to state that he is closely associated with Sergei Shakhov a dubious “businessman” from Luhansk.
Mr Shakhov in turn is closely associated with former Prosecutor General Viktor Pshonka, part of “The Family” that formed the elite of the former Yanukovych regime.
Indeed Mr Gerasimov stood for election to the Verkhovna Rada in a single mandate seat ably supported by the shadowy team of Sergei Shakhov.
Mr Bezler’s participation in the election campaign of Artur Gerasimov clearly occurred long before the current events within the Donbas.
Nevertheless Mr Bezler and team were employed for the purposes of intimidation and voter bribery.
During that failed 2012 election campaign, Mr Gerasimov did not hide the fact that he was in the orbit of Petro Poroshenko.
A reader will not be surprised therefore that Mr Gerasimov eventually made it to the Verkhovna Rada in 2014, not by winning a single mandate seat, but via the plain sailing of proportional representation and the party list of President Poroshenko’s party.
Indeed it appears Mr Gerasimov and President Poroshenko go way back – although specifically how and why remains somewhat opaque.
Nevertheless as President Poroshenko puts loyalty ahead of ability, for him to tap Mr Gerasimov as the presidential representative within the Verkhovna Rada in May 2016, there is some form of personal bond and/or understanding.
Mr Nedavoy is inextricably and undeniably linked to the wanted and much loathed Yuri Ivanyushchenko, a close ally of former President Viktor Yanukovych.
There is perhaps no need to continue and sufficient has been written for a read to draw their own conclusions about the character and morality of Mr Gerasimov.
From this glossary however, it is difficult to see who benefits from Mr Gerasimov’s Draft Bill 4370-1 if not The Bankova, or those most trusted by the President to misuse the system the “right way” – Messrs Granovsky, Kononenko and Berezenko.
If this draft Bill passes through the Verkhovna Rada then toxic executive political interference will once again legitimately sully and/or mortally wound the internal workings of the civil service.
The President will then either sign it into law if the cacophony of shrieks and screams from European “friends” and Ukrainian civil society prove not to be loud and rude enough, or he can veto it and the issue can be internally spun as a false flag for external consumption and “proof” of an unwavering trudge toward European normative.
If the Europeans and Ukrainian civil society have any sense however, the maximum efforts will be made to have this Draft Bill withdrawn, or smothered by the relevant Verkhovna Rada committee before it ever gets as far as a vote.
Still, regular readers all knew that quality legislation would sooner or later be subjected to attempts at sabotage – it always is in Ukraine.
For my erudite readers, a 24 hour hiatus from policy and politics and a climb from that grubby valley unto the high arts and cultural peaks with noteworthy and dates for the diary over the festive period.
The New Year sees the Odessa Philharmonic performing 12 concerts at as many venues around Italy.
For the true connoisseur, there is no orchestra as accomplished with its Viennese programme anywhere east of Vienna, therefore expect a magnificent return to Odessa and all things Viennese on 15th and 17th January.
It goes without saying, highly recommended. 26th January is for those with a taste for Haydin and Beethoven. 13th February is for the lovers, with the traditional Valentine’s programme. 21st February Mr Earle heads to Moscow’s Tchaikovsky Hall to dabble in some Grieg and Sibelius. 25th February for the many admirers of Verdi in Minsk who will receive a splendid performance of Aida.
Having made a particular point of lauding the Odessa Philharmonic with regard to all things Viennese when it comes to performance, it is worthy of pointing out that whenever it play its Polish programme, it is also at its best.
The agenda is going to be full and no doubt the meeting will be prickly affair.
The agenda sees Ukraine as the lunchtime topic for discussion – and perhaps that is because Ukraine is probably the agenda item least likely to cause indigestion compared to all other items up for discussion.
Greek issues apparently do not appear this time – there are only so many hours in a day.
The issue with the Dutch Association Agreement is one of optics for the domestic Dutch constituency.
In order for the Dutch to ratify the agreement and finally close the bureaucratic process they insist upon official recognition that in ratifying the EU – Ukraine Association Agreement, it is not a pathway toward EU accession for Ukraine.
Further, they require official recognition that it in no way affords EU guarantees regarding collective security guarantees or obligations to military aid.
Lastly that it does not provide an entitlement to financially support Ukraine.
It may appear politically ugly considering that only The Netherlands remains to ratify the agreement and now seeks such official understanding to pacify its domestic electorate, but to be quite clear the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement offers none of these entitlements/EU obligations toward Ukraine anyway.
Nowhere does the Association Agreement infer, let alone state, that the Association Agreement is a stepping stone toward EU accession.
The clauses regarding defence and security offer no expectations of collective security or obligation to military assistance.
It has always been abundantly clear that any and all financial aid to Ukraine comes with conditionality relating to reform.
There is only one way for Ukraine to formally accede to the EU, and that is to first formally apply, and then go through the Acquis Communautaire 31 – 35 chapters therein.
There is no denying that if Ukraine complies with the Association Agreement fully and in its entirety that for almost all Acquis chapters it will have traveled perhaps 80% – 85% of that journey in each and every chapter.
However there will be few, if any, where it will have traveled the full distance whereby that Aquis chapter will be then closed.
Ergo there would be a few more years thereafter to complete that process if embarked upon at all.
Indeed perhaps there is a need to better conceptualise the legality and spirit of both the Association Agreement and the Acquis Communautaire in fundamental terms.
Therefore, as politically ugly and difficult to digest for some the Dutch requirements may be, they actually make no difference to the legalities of the Association Agreement, nor the spirit in which it was negotiated and offered.
Ergo, it can be expected, despite the ugly optics, that the Dutch will get the official recognition that they seek even though some Member States will cringe whilst agreeing.
To get the Association Agreement over the finish line by officially acknowledging what is not contained in the Association Agreement will ultimately be a price paid.
Clearly from the agenda items, the Ukrainian issue is the least likely to put a Member State leader off their luncheon.
For good measure the Brexit issues are to be discussed at evening dinner – after UK Prime Minister Ms May has left the Summit and the building.
In fact Ukraine for once , may prove to be one of the easiest agenda items.
A very short entry to bring a reader’s attention to the official EU overview of Ukrainian progress during 2016.
Predictably the issues where Ukraine invariably fails is left to the concluding paragraph.
Whilst all eyes will be upon Mikhail Saakashvili and the inaugural gathering of his newly minted “Rukh New Forces” in Kyiv on 27th November, and its possible political rise – not to be confused with the old “Rukh” political party which may well see a revival simply and deliberately to insure confusion on any ballot paper – the political/influential decline of Dmitry Firtash continues apace.
More so than any of the other oligarchs associated with PoR, such as Rinat Akhmetov or Sergei Liovochkin etc.
He finds himself marooned in Austria following a thus far unsuccessful United States attempt to extradite him over corruption accusations.
Matters will not improve for Mr Firtash – they will actually deteriorate further.
There is a matter of €500,000 cash being provided to ex-Stasi officer Nina Vilkening to facilitate desired outcomes via the Chief Commissioner of the Criminal Police Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, who received €300,000.
No doubt inquiries will continue and as none of the defendants are particularly youthful, it is not beyond the realms of probability that a deal can and/or will be cut with defendants in order to bring to light the full extent of Mr Firtash’s active involvement in bribery among the German institutions.
Thus it may yet prove only to be a matter of time before Mr Firtash is wanted by Germany – an extradition request that will not be denied by Austria.
Whilst this may now be appearing upon the horizon, the Spanish are far ahead of the Germans.
Spain has admirably been pursuing “Slavic” organsied crime for several years.
Russia has publicly decried Spanish investigations, reports and arrest requests for several years.
Only recently a number of Ukrainians, including the son , of the former Mayor of Kyiv, have been arrested for organised criminality and money laundering in Spain.
Bravo Spain – an example for Austrian and UK banking and organsied crime investigative bodies to follow.
Mr Firtash, and two other as yet unidentified Ukrainian businessmen, have now fallen foul of Spanish investigations.
Judge Ignacio Sánchez García-Porrero leading the Spanish inquiry seeks Mr Firtash and the two as yet unidentified Ukrainian businessmen’s delivery to a courtroom in Spain.
Whether all the dirty money belongs to Mr Firtash, or whether some is from associates will perhaps become apparent as and when he is brought before a Spanish court.
With known associates ranging from Semyon Mogilevych the Russian “Don of Dons”, through the entire former Cabinet of Viktor Yanukovych’s ousted government, a debt and thus beholding to Russia’s Gazprombank of between $4 and $5 billion, and by extension a beholding to Yuri Kovalchuk who personally arranged such loans, just whose dirty money Mr Firtash is suspected of laundering is unclear at this stage.
Nevertheless, the Spanish have been diligently working upon the misuse of their territory and legislation for several years when it comes to Slavic organised naughtiness.
Extradition to Spain, no differently than the possibly forthcoming extradition request to Germany, when received by Austria will be a far smoother, almost seamlessly slick affair compared to the request from the United States – as all such matters within the EU Member States are.
That is the entire point of the EU Arrest Warrant and the EU Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters.
Therefore, whilst a reader may be caught up with the hype surrounding a possibly rising political party headed by Mikhail Saakashvili, the continued fall of the Firtash star may well become a very messy, public and revealing fall indeed.
Once within Spanish jurisdiction, even if the Spanish case ultimately fails, by that time there will be the existing United States request and a probable German case that the Spanish can extradite him to.
The outlook for Mr Firtash currently looks rather bleak – a lesson for Ukrainian kings and pawns alike.
