Accepted 2 January 2018 This resulted in what is almost certainly a permanent change KEYWORDS in sovereign territory, with the former gaining and the latter Ukraine; Russia; Donbas; losing the strategic Crimean peninsula.
But Russia’s moves also geopolitical storylines; set in motion a violent conflict in the Donbas region of eastern public-sourced data Ukraine.
Although the United States and the NATO alliance have advocated a geopolitical storyline that attributes blame for this to Russia, close scrutiny of the evidence they have adduced in this regard fails to establish this culpability conclusively.
However, by utilizing data collected and analyzed in the public realm, it is possible to determine with more certainty that, in certain places and at given times, Russia was indeed the aggressor.
The rapidly increasing amount of public-sourced information globally and the growing sophistication of analytical methods by nongovernmental groups presages more complete understanding of such conflicts without reliance on official information.
Introduction Russia’s seizure and subsequent annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea region in early 2014 ushered in heightened tensions between Moscow on the one hand and the European Union and the United States on the other.
But it is Russia’s alleged complicity in the subsequent spread and intensification of fighting to the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine1 in the summer of 2014 – the subject of this paper – that poses an even greater risk to peace and security in Europe, inasmuch as that crisis has already resulted in thousands of casualties, well over 1. million internally displaced persons, and widespread destruction.
As such, it is usually taken as a point of departure that Russia has indeed, by whatever means, violated Ukraine’s territorial sovereignty, most obviously by its capture of Crimea.
Indeed, the USG and NATO have adduced evidence purporting to prove Russian aggression in the Donbas specifically, evidence that has been widely accepted uncritically by established journalists and by most foreign affairs commentators.
Thus, it behooves us, in light of the seriousness of the situation, to delve more deeply into what exactly is the evidence brought forward officially that might lend credence to claims of Russian malfeasance.
Further, we should ascertain if unofficial information is available that might shed additional light on what is a prime example of Clausewitz’s maxim that “war is the realm of uncertainty,” and what the implications of those data sources might be for geopolitical analysis writ large.
Adducing facts and attributing hostile acts Governments present information to shape discourse consistent with the state’s goals in the conduct of its international relations.
Governments, as well as international and non-governmental organizations, work furiously to establish and propagate their storylines by providing information through official channels and via print and digital media.
Further, this anonymity allows an aggressor state to present a more compelling denial of complicity in hostile acts through its own storylines.
That a reported event shown in satellite or ground level imagery occurred at the time and place stated would be a good starting point.
That a vehicle, aircraft, or missile is in fact of the type or model indicated, and that imagery thereof is sufficiently detailed to make that determination and place it at a particular location is another.
Or that holes in the ground that are purported to be artillery or rocket impact craters caused by firing across a border are in fact of the size and shape known to be caused by such impacts, and that the axis of attack can be determined by forensic analysis, likewise might be relevant.
Acquiring and analyzing data from, say, satellite imagery that would meet such a standard has long been almost entirely within the control of governments and, again, governments have been loath to release such information to the public.
When combined with rapidly expanding networks of telecommunications users, the public collection, analysis, and dissemination of types of data hitherto usually closely held by governments is rapidly transforming and enhancing the public’s ability to not only observe, but to confirm, what states have, or have not, done on the ground.
Briefly, there are four major technological changes that, taken together, have enabled the very rapid expansion of public-sourced data analysis; the first three involve technologies that originated in the military or government sector and migrated after a time into the civilian world.
Other innovations, such as exponential increases in data storage capacity, more capable software, and powerful algorithmic search engines further enhance the capability to process and analyze information gathered from private sector surveillance systems – such as commercial satellite imagery – or by individuals or groups outside government.
A central tenet of official intelligence analysis is that the efficacy of a product is enhanced by the incorporation of data from multiple sources; that is, the interpretation of satellite imagery might be more relevant if ground-level photography or video of an event were available as a complement.
Often referred to as “all-source analysis” in official intelligence parlance , this practice should also apply to research on national security issues or events – geopolitics – conducted in the public realm.
Although the armed conflict phase of the Russia-Ukraine crisis begins with Russia’s invasion of Crimea in February 2014, the focus of this paper will be on the much narrower time frame of June-August 2014, by which time the fighting had shifted to eastern Ukraine and during which the most intense combat of the war took place.
It is not my intent here to take up the related and important question of whether these actions constitute “acts of war” in terms of international law, as those are essentially political judgments made by the interested parties.
Certainly the scale of fighting in the period June-August 2014 in eastern Ukraine would appear to any reasonable person to be warfare; that is, it involved large numbers of troops in typical military formations, accompanied by armor, artillery, and air strikes.
Whereas the separatists are undoubtedly important actors in the conflict, and their existence allows the Russian state to obscure its role in the military dimension of the crisis, the focus here is on the direct action of states in armed conflict rather than involvement through proxies.
As noted above, because of the time frame focus here, we leave aside the earlier Russian invasion and subsequent annexation of Crimea; important as it is, the subject has been extensively analyzed elsewhere (see Mankoff 2014; Menon and Rumer 2015, Ch.
The issue at hand is how the storyline portraying Russian actions in June-August 2014 in eastern Ukraine has been shaped by two of the most important external actors in this conflict, the USG and NATO, via the release to the media of selected intelligence products.
Russia and the battles for the Donbas If the Russian conquest of Crimea was accomplished by stealthy means and involved little, if any, loss of life, the situation in the Donbas very quickly morphed from civil unrest to actual war with large numbers of military and civilian casualties and widespread destruction of towns and cities and economic infrastructure.
On July 1, following a brief ceasefire the Ukrainian government, employing both regular army formations and fighters from the “volunteer battalions” or private militias, launched a major offensive against separatist forces and gained significant territory in both Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, to the extent that the pro-Russian rebels were driven into pockets around the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk proper.
However, sections of the border with Russia remained under separatist control, allowing Russia to resupply or equip rebel fighters or even infiltrate Russian troops into Ukraine.
Moscow, perhaps anticipating the overthrow of the pro-Russian government of Viktor Yanukovych, had carefully laid the groundwork for both supporting the DNR and LNR and/or preparing for direct action against Ukraine if necessary by initiating a series of large-scale military exercises as early as February 2014.
These exercises involved tens of thousands of troops, many of which were deployed along regions bordering Ukraine.
From that time, ever-larger concentrations of Russian troops and huge numbers of tanks, armored personnel carriers, and various types of artillery were massed inside Russian territory just across the Ukrainian frontier.
With the survival of the DNR and LNR hanging in the balance as the Ukrainian government offensive progressed in July 2014, there is broad consensus among academics and members of the foreign affairs commentariat that Russia was simply not prepared to allow the Ukrainian government to crush the separatist insurrection in the Donbas, and accordingly, took direct military action itself to insure the survival of the DNR and LNR regardless of the consequences (Menon and Rumer 2015, Ch.
Again, how those actions –transferring armor and other heavy weaponry across the Russo-Ukrainian border; conducting cross-border rocket and artillery attacks against Ukrainian units operating inside Ukraine; and, sending units of the Russian army into Ukraine – might be verified by official and public-sourced data is the purpose here.
Within a matter of weeks the territory previously gained by government forces was lost and, importantly, as were other areas to the south within Donetsk Oblast as far as the Sea of Azov right up to the outskirts of the vital port and industrial center of Mariupol.
The absolute nadir for the Ukrainian government cause was the virtual annihilation of a large concentration of their troops and equipment near the town of Ilovaisk , after which debacle Kyiv agreed to an internationally brokered ceasefire (“Minsk I”) effective September 5, 2014, bringing to a tenuous end this phase of the war.
Official and public-sourced storyline evidence From the time when it became obvious that Russia was intent on invading, occupying, and annexing Crimea, the USG and the NATO alliance (not to mention European national governments and the EU) have made literally dozens of statements, press briefings, information releases, and diplomatic demarches condemning Moscow’s actions against Ukraine and demanding that Ukraine’s territorial sovereignty and integrity be respected.
When that respect was not forthcoming, as is well known, a series of economic and other sanctions were imposed to alter Russia’s behavior, sanctions that have had little, if any effect on turning Russian public opinion against the Putin government and have not, as of this writing, brought an end to the fighting in the Donbas.
As events unfolded through the summer and into the fall of 2014, the official storyline emanating from Washington and Brussels continued to place the blame for the violence in eastern Ukraine on Russian meddling and later on Russian aggression.
To provide evidence backing up their storyline, it would thus obviously fall to the USG and NATO to provide sufficient official information relating to Russia’s alleged actions.
Later, however, it appeared that more sophisticated weapons and ammunition of all types were being supplied by Russia.
The first serious instance wherein Russia’s complicity in this conflict might be definitively established via the release of official information was the alleged movement of three tanks and multiple launch rocket systems across the border from Russia into Ukraine in June 2014.
The acquisition of heavy armor by the separatists, even in such small numbers, was a very serious matter; the aphorism “If you want to make an impression, send a tank” is apt.
As dramatic as the imagery released by NATO might seem at first glance, it does not conclusively demonstrate that the tanks observed on the Russian side of the border in the satellite imagery are the ones shown in videos from inside Ukrainian territory.
The presumption is that the three MBTs on the transporters subsequently moved toward the Ukrainian border and eventually were off-loaded and are later found moving through cities in eastern Ukraine.
In the public-sourced images from inside Ukraine included in this official release, the tanks are identifiable as T-64 MBTs, but bear no national markings.
We are thus left with a fairly substantial but clearly circumstantial case wherein the official evidence presented fails to validate the assertion put forth by the USG and NATO concerning Russian complicity in this alleged escalation of the fighting in eastern Ukraine that the introduction of armor and other heavy weaponry across the Russo-Ukrainian border would connote.
Possible answers are that USG/NATO intelligence did not have higher resolution imagery or other types of intelligence that would allow for the identification of the suspect T-64 MBTs on the Russian side of the border; that they had that information but were precluded from releasing it out of concern that sources or methods relating to its acquisition and analysis would be compromised; or that they had that information but preferred not to release it for other reasons.
The other question that arises from the USG/NATO briefing is the unsophisticated use of the public-sourced imagery showing the T-64s inside Ukraine.
The second public-source image of a T-64 in Snizhne, Ukraine, in the NATO information release has no locational corroboration whatsoever.
Further, there are other photos of that same tank available on the Internet that would have allowed an analyst to identify that specific location by reference to landmarks identifiable with street level or overhead imagery even absent any embedded geo-tagged metadata, and quite possibly to ascertain the time of day depicted in the photo.
Given these shortcomings in the official release, it is no surprise that within 48 hours Russian Internet bloggers attacked the evidence as superficial.
In summary, information about the June 2014 Russian tank incursion released to the public by official sources does not show conclusively that the MBTs imaged inside Russia were transferred to the pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine.
There were reports yesterday on these three tanks that you were talking about, which you said was an escalation.
There were reports that these in fact were Ukrainian tanks that had been kind of ripped off by the separatists.
In this case, however, other public-sourced information, specifically the videos and photos of the T-64 tanks driving through what are supposed to be Ukrainian cities, is helpful in understanding what actually happened in this case, but is also not dispositive.
Mark Galeotti provided a timely and appropriately cautionary initial analysis on June 14 pointing to the fact that NATO did not identify the MBTs on the Russian side of the border as T-64s, and that there was at least the possibility that the T-64s seen in the public-sourced video inside Ukraine could have been captured by the separatists from the Ukrainian army or from depot storage in Ukraine.
Ukrainian bloggers, who no doubt have their own agendas, posted videos of the T-64s moving through two towns and correlated the video with Google maps , but they misidentified the tanks.
Later, however, Adam Čech and Jakub Janda conducted a thorough search of public-sourced video to ascertain that the Donbas separatists did not possess tanks prior to the June 12 incident, lending credence to the transference from Russia hypothesis.
However, this particular public-sourced information, specifically the videos and photos of the T-64 tanks driving through what are supposed to be Ukrainian cities, is not helpful in determining what actually happened in this case absent a more detailed independent analysis to establish the venues from which they were taken or to provide any clues as to the provenance of the vehicles.
Nor was the inclusion of these public-sourced data in the official NATO press release on the June 2014 tank incident rendered in sufficient detail to establish that the tanks in question were in fact inside Ukraine.
As will be seen, this will change dramatically beginning with the events of July-August 2014.
Cross border rocket attacks in July and August 2014 As noted above, the July 1 Ukrainian offensive against separatist forces in eastern Ukraine began well.
One of the first indications of how difficult this would be came on July 11, 2014 when a motorized rifle unit of the Ukrainian army was severely mauled by a barrage of artillery rockets near the village of Zelenopillya in Luhansk Oblast , incurring heavy casualties and the loss of many of its vehicles.
However, preliminary public analysis of this event and subsequent rocket attacks in southeastern Ukraine began with the release of reporting by Michael Weiss and James Miller to the effect that some of these attacks – indeed, perhaps the July 11 incident – were actually launched from inside Russian territory in the direction of Ukraine.
Weiss and Miller, both of whom reported on the Syrian civil war, used videos taken of rocket launches; by geo-locating the camera positions with reference to ground-level imagery, they were able to establish that rockets were fired from a point in the vicinity of a town in Russia near the Ukrainian border toward Ukrainian territory.
What this analysis does not show, however, are the vectors between these rocket launches and specific impact areas inside Ukraine, which renders them inconclusive as to Russian culpability.The United States and NATO were quick to point to these attacks and to denounce them, building them into their evolving storyline in which Russia was supposed to be taking a more direct role in the Donbas fighting.
To emphasize their concern that these attacks added a new and more serious dimension to the conflict in eastern Ukraine, a series of public presentations and statements by top USG leadership were made to publicize the Russian actions.
We have detected that firing, and that does represent an escalation in this conflict.
Two of the four graphics, annotated on images from Digital Globe, juxtapose what appear to be firing sites for multiple rocket launchers and artillery on the Russian side of the border and impact crater fields on the Ukrainian side.
The Russo-Ukrainian border is shown, which provides a visual cue to back up the contention that the attacks were cross-border.
However, the specific location of the images is not provided; only a small reference map is included which makes it difficult to verify.
Second, and more importantly, no assessment is provided of the alignment of impact craters inside Ukraine that would provide the azimuth of attack back to the firing site inside Russia.
The other two images are of what are alleged to be rocket and artillery attacks within Ukraine; presumably, the point is that the artillery units are from the Russian army operating within Ukrainian territory, but this is not stated.
Higgins and his associates painstakingly compiled satellite imagery of both rocket launch sites on the Russian side of the border and impact crater fields on the Ukrainian side, and a further analysis of videos taken of rocket launches from Russian territory.
In addition to a much more detailed analysis of the suspected launch sites than that released by official sources, the Bellingcat report scrutinized over 1,300 impact craters within Ukraine to derive trajectories and then trace those back to firing locations within Russia.
From these data they ascertained to a high degree of certainty – much more of a “gold standard” than the official storyline version – that in several specific incidents over the period July 14 to August 8, 2014 the Russian army attacked Ukrainian government forces maneuvering inside the sovereign territory of Ukraine.
Actual Russian army units–not individuals or small groups of special operation troops–operating inside Ukraine to engage Ukrainian forces might account for the dramatic reversal of Ukrainian fortunes on the battlefield in August 2014, as it is difficult to imagine that the separatists themselves, even with Russian supplies and advisors, would have been able to achieve such a feat of arms.
In response to this newest dimension to the conflict, during State Department press briefings the USG made clear that it accused Russia of introducing units of its armed forces into the war.
Question : Yesterday, you decried what you said were incursions and for all intents and purposes an apparent invasion.
That looks all too real today, and the action has gotten much more serious, with direct contact between Russian and Ukrainian forces.
Because you didn’t really outline anything specific you were going to do yesterday.
First, three of the images purported to show Russian military equipment inside Russia, albeit near the Ukrainian border; clearly, from these three images it is not possible to deduce that Russian units are operating inside Ukraine.
A fourth image claims to show Russian self-propelled artillery (with support vehicles) moving east to west inside Ukraine, with the equipment alleged to be Russian because the vehicles are in an area where the Ukrainian army had yet to penetrate.
However, as before with NATO-released imagery, precise locations are not given, so that contention becomes more difficult to check.
Likewise, because the specific types of vehicles were not identified, one cannot rule out that they could belong to Ukrainian army units or was captured equipment being operated by the separatists.
Linking those photos to satellite imagery in the unofficial analyses provides a more comprehensive and compelling portrayal of Russian army activity in the eastern Ukraine theater of war than anything officially released.
As regards the first point specifically, as was stated previously, the overwhelming tendency of the epistemic sovereign state is to withhold information from the public or to characterize it in ways sufficiently vague as to cloak the full extent of the state’s knowledge about a given situation.
In some cases this is a reasonable approach; in other cases, especially when public sources are used in making the state’s case, the necessity for secrecy is less obvious.
Just what that adds to an assessment of the evidence actually presented, allowing one to move from “strongly suggestive” to “conclusive,” is not made clear.
Despite the occasionally expressed frustration at not having more compelling evidence from official sources, the tendency among the professional media is to defer to military and governmental authority.
But that cloak of secrecy, related in general terms earlier in this paper, is now being lifted in the specific case of the conflict in eastern Ukraine through the proliferation of public-sourced data and more sophisticated non-official analysis.
The public-sourced reporting on Russian activities in eastern Ukraine now manifests previously unseen scope and depth of analysis, including the tracking of particular types of Russian weapons and military vehicles (see Ferguson and Jenzen-Jones 2014), front-line reporting by new media organizations (in particular VICE News), the geo-location of “selfies” taken by Russian soldiers, geo-located texts posted to social media sites, information concerning the deaths of Russian soldiers killed in action in Ukraine, and even more detailed dissection of videos and satellite imagery.
It can also be the case, however, that such reporting aims to influence government policy and often advocates for an agenda tied to the priorities of funding sources.
Furthermore, these official releases are hamstrung by the perceived need to cloak certain details in secrecy despite the fact that imagery and other data are readily available from commercial sources.
On the other hand, public source investigations, although longer in gestation, provide much more persuasive evidence that Russian aggression did indeed occur.
This incongruity raises obvious questions about the depth of commitment of the external governmental/inter-governmental parties to pursue vigorously the case against Russia, perhaps to avoid direct military conflict with that country; the culture of protecting sources and methods involved in gathering and analyzing official intelligence even when open sources are being used; or to tamp down calls to provide more substantial military assistance to Ukraine.
This last, which raises the possibility of yet more Western involvement in a conflict that might escalate to a more serious level, is a possibility that most individual Western governments have been reluctant to entertain.
As noted above, the rapid expansion of publicly generated data such as those adduced in the Ukraine crisis and elsewhere, allows the critiquing of official storylines and attributing blame in a geopolitical context beyond that previously possible.
These official storylines, hitherto difficult to parse, are more likely now to be challenged without having to resort to breaches of official security.
As a result, analysis conducted wholly in the public realm will almost certainly enhance the study of geopolitics and at the same time allow for greater transparency into the actions of states, especially those involving territorial conflict.
The author wishes to thank participants at that conference and Gerard Toal for comments on previous versions of this paper.
