If this heats up, the stock market boom that has Russia outperforming the world will be revalued in short order.
The Market Vectors Russia exchange traded fund is up 38.35% year-to-date in dollar terms.
Over the past year, the weaker ruble has provided a lift for investors with ruble equity.
The ruble, helmed by central baker Elvira Nabiullina, is up 18.4% against the dollar.
While some in the Ukrainian government will tout progress on Europe’s Marshall Plan experiment there, it is clear that the country is in dire straits.
The only way to look at Ukraine right now is through the Minsk II Accords, which was essentially a cease fire agreement between the pro-Russia separatists and the Ukrainian government.
But squirmishes have occurred since in Donbass, an important industrial hub in a region that is known to house a few Russian defense contractors.
The positive break in previous trends in this crisis represented by the frozen conflict prospect may already have been priced into Russian markets, but the base case scenario underpins this year’s strong bounce-back in Russian assets.
Like the movie, the two sisters part ways, one believing she is evil and harmful, before the other shows her the error of her ways.
This will probably happen when Poroshenko and prime minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk are voted out of office.
Their approval ratings are currently in the gutter. initiatives on either side may be responsible for the past two months of fairly constant shooting and shelling, the very fact that this violence has not escalated into another full-blown conflict demonstrates the steady political will in both countries to prevent conflict escalation.
With Russia’s sanctions expiring in July, it is Moscow’s interest to play the good cop here and keep the separatists in line.
If they succeed, and if sanctions are lifted, then the recent rise in oil prices bodes well for Russia.
Putin’s track record during the present Ukraine crisis shows that his reactions can be aggressive and destabilizing.
But the important point is that something must happen to elicit such a reaction – and that “something” in this context would be another attempt at a military solution by the Ukrainian government, says Granville.
On April 26, Putin was asked by a state TV reporter whether the government would recognize the Donbass as independent from Ukraine, and possibly even annex it like it did Crimea in the Black Sea on March 17, 2014.
Say what you will, but a frozen conflict is better than an escalating one.
In the absence of any serious territorial conflict in the Donbass, combined with the Minsk II process remaining alive, then a typical E.U. compromise decision on sanctions is likely as late as December.
It is unclear whether the United States will follow, though both Brussels and Washington have walked hand in hand into this with sectoral sanctions first introduced last July, and then again in September.
Months later, the ruble traded in the 60s before falling to an all-time low of 70 to 1.
