During the presidential campaign, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko interviewed by the Ukraina TV channel, said that Crimea will be returned to Ukraine.
We've seen Putin's repeated statements that it won't happen before the election, as he hopes very much that they will elect anybody except Poroshenko and the Ukrainian government will crawl to him and give him Crimea.
That is why we're enhancing our military strength; we are strengthening our international support and providing for economic growth.
It is worth noting the Poroshenko's interview was aired ahead of the March 18 5th anniversary of Crimea's annexation to Russia.
And, in all those five years, they've been doing everything they could to destroy their own nationhood… There are other regions in the Ukrainian territory, which don't want to obey to the fascist Ukrainian government… It would have been better if the events of the famous Crimean Spring had happened 25 years ago instead of just five years ago… In in 1991, our Russian government, too, hadn't committed a number of tragic mistakes, then we could have protected the residents of Crimea and time wouldn't have been lost.
Crimea's Prime Minister, Sergei Aksenov, called Poroshenko's statements jive talk.
Russian publicist Alexey Melnikov wrote in his blog on Echo of Moscow that Ukrainian politicians repeats that they want Crimea back, but they do not say how.
According to Melkinov, the only way for Crimea to return to Ukraine is to convince Crimeans that Ukraine is better than Russia.
One of the issues of the electoral campaign is how to get back Crimea, which was annexed by Russia.
One candidate said that he was confident that, after his victory, Crimea would be returned to Ukraine.
Another one said that would be returned only after a change of leadership in Russia.
Many also do not deny that Ukraine is weak and can do nothing about it.
To act differently would be impossible, and if somebody in Ukraine is willing to give up Crimea, this will be the beginning of the end of the new Ukraine.
Also, today's Europe, created at the end of the Second World War, in principle, cannot recognize the annexation in any form.
For this fact, Russia is in a hopeless confrontation with Europe over Crimea.
Grigory Yavlinsky, leader of the liberal political party Yabloko, focused on the ""huge"" price that Russians had to pay for Crimea's annexation, adding that Crimeans themselves are nor freer nor safer than before 2014.
After Crimea, no country in the post-Soviet space sees Russia as a strategic reference point and key partner – neither the EurAsEC countries, nor the CSTO, nor Belarus, with which we are formally close.
On the contrary, all the nearest neighbors are scary and it is pleasant for them to deal with us.
The perfidious and heavily mixed with lies and propaganda violation of all international and Russian treaties and laws has led all former republics of the USSR to irreversible disappointment.
Vladimir Putin has turned Russia into a country that is perceived throughout the world today as an aggressive mafia state.
But even more damage to Russia has been caused by the fact that the Russian economy, being peripheral, is cut off from world connections and is opposed to them.
Millions of people lost their normal lives, becoming a bargaining chip in a stupid and hopeless geopolitical game.
Five years later, life in Donbass was destroyed literally and figuratively.
As in the USSR, the present authorities can no longer talk to the people without lies and hypocrisy.
