It provides perhaps the darkest picture yet of President Vladimir Putin’s motives, alleging that the takeover of eastern Ukraine began long before the EuroMaidan Revolution in Kyiv prompted President Viktor Yanukovych to flee power.
The high-profile murder of Nemstov on Feb. stoked fears that he had been killed to prevent the report from getting out.
Those concerns were amplified when Russian police confiscated materials from Nemtsov’s home in the wake of his murder.
Nemtsov’s fellow opposition activists – PRP-Parnas activists Ilya Yashin and Leonid Martinyuk, journalists Oleg Kashin and Aidar Muzhdabayev, and former deputy prime minister Alfred Koch – went to great lengths to get the report published, scrambling to put together all the notes and materials Nemtsov had left behind.
They maintain that Nemtsov was killed over the allegations in the report.
Kasyanov, however, acknowledged that much of the 65-page report simply documents previously reported revelations.
Yashin, the opposition activist who coordinated the report’s compilation, said he saw it as his duty to finish what his close friend Nemtsov had started.
Contrary to Putin’s claims of now Russian force involvement in Ukraine, Russian troops have played a decisive role.
According to the report, 70 Russian soldiers were killed in that battle after being sent to back up the separatist forces.
Although some analysts have portrayed Russia’s involvement in Ukraine as a sort of knee-jerk reaction to Kremlin-backed Yanukovych’s ouster in February 2014.
The report describes Putin’s actions not as damage control to retain influence in Ukraine, but as part of a premeditated plot to keep a solid grip on Ukraine that began as early as 2012.
The report traces Putin’s motivation to his dwindling approval ratings ahead of his return to the presidency in 2012.
Putin’s ratings began to fall significantly in 2011, putting Putin’s chances of reclaiming the presidency at an all-time low.His victory was only guaranteed by unfair elections, the report claims, but even after reclaiming the throne he was on a downward spiral, pushing legislation that became increasingly repressive.
Yanukovych’s ouster was not the motivation for Russia’s invasion, the report says, although it did “provide the perfect conditions for decisive action” on the part of the Kremlin.
Soon after Russia annexed Crimea, separatists began taking control in the eastern Ukrainian oblasts of Luhansk and Donetsk.
The motivation was likely “the success of the Crimean scenario,” according to the report.
Putin’s climbing approval ratings at home only reinforced his confidence in policies in Ukraine.
The price tag of the conflict for Russia is exorbitant, however, with the report estimating that the Kremlin spent about $900 million in the last 10 months alone.
Most of that has gone towards sustaining the “volunteers” fighting in eastern Ukraine.
The report’s authors also add the cost of the maintenance of the military equipment – $135 million.
That means Russia has spent about $1. billion on the war in Ukraine’s Donbas over the past 10 months.
Russia’s involvement is also blatantly obvious considering the number of Russian citizens in charge in Donbas, the report alleges, offering a list of Russian leaders.
Igor Girkin is perhaps one of the most high-profile Russian citizens involved in the conflict, and both he and Alexander Borodai worked for the Marshal-Kapital investment fund owned by Russian businessman Konstantin Malofeev, considered one of the insurgents’ main sponsors.
Any appointments or dismissals of separatist leaders are made in the Kremlin, the report says, citing the example of Denis Pushilin, the chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the self-declared Donetsk People’s Republic.
Girkin and Borodai also confirmed that they had to resign from leading positions under pressure from the Kremlin.
According to the report, other separatist leaders directly affiliated with the Kremlin include:Deputy Energy Minister of the Donetsk People’s Republic, Leonid Simunin, previously involved in the pro-Kremlin organization “Mestnye” and the neo-Nazi group BORN; and leader in Luhansk, Pavel Karpov, a Russian citizen who worked with Putin’s administration in monitoring nationalistic organizations.
The report also identified other Russians, organizers and participants in the war against Ukraine.
Arseniy Pavlov, “Motorola,” Sparta battalion leader, Russian citizen; Sergey Petrovsky, intelligence service, Russian citizen; Igor Bezler, Russian citizen, served in Russian army; Aleksandr Zhuchkovsky, Russian National-Democratic party, volunteer bringing ammunition to “strelkovaya gvardia;” and Aleksey Milchakov, “Rusich” commander, Russian citizen.
On July 17, the day of the catastrophe, Russian state-owned media ITAR-TASS and RIA Novosti announced that the rebels had shot down an AH-26 Ukrainian military plane near the town of Tores in Donetsk Oblast.
The same day, Igor Girkin confirmed on a social network that a plane had been shot down.
The time and place of the shooting were voiced by both the media and separatists and coincided with those of the Boeing catastrophe.
Perhaps more damning, shortly before the crash, Russian media admitted that the separatists had a Buk anti-aircraft missile system, which their leader Alexander Khodakovsky also confirmed to Reuters.
Yet, right after the MH17 crash, Russian media launched a propaganda operation, offering various versions of the tragedy to create a smokescreen around the investigation – ultimately to cover up the fact that the Russian missile was fired from within Russian-backed separatist-held territory.
Several versions blamed a Ukrainian fighter jet, including the official version of the Russian Defense Ministry, but such versions were quickly debunked.
The results of the international investigation have not yet been released.
Numerous independent investigations have agreed that the Kremlin separatists were to blame, however.
V, published in January, suggests that the MH17 was shot down by a Buk system brought from the Russian city of Kursk to protect Russia’s unmarked tank divisions fighting in Ukraine.
V also claimed the missile was fired by a Russian officer, as separatists would not have been able to operate it.
In March, several other news agencies published investigations supporting this version, including Germany’s WDR, ТВК, and SüdDeutsche Zeitung.
One key piece of evidence is a photo of a missile launch trail taken by a Torez resident four minutes after the launch, a photograph recognized as authentic by the Bellingcat investigative journalism group.
A detailed analysis of the photo also helped identify the site of the missile launch, which was plowed over soon after the catastrophe.
On March 30, the international investigation team comprised of experts from Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, the Netherlands and Ukraine, made a statement saying that the most likely version is that the Boeing was shot down by a Buk system from Russia.
The report documents the burial of regular Russian troops allegedly killed during fighting alongside separatist militants in the breakaway eastern region of Donbas, and incidents in which relatives received compensation in return for remaining quiet.
But it does not mention Russian rocket shelling of Ukrainian forces in the Donbas region from its own territory, despite claims by Ukraine, local soldiers and supporting satellite imaging produced by the West that back up such incidents.
At the presentation of the damning report in Moscow, Yashin was adamant that Putin should answer for the crimes of the separatists, saying he hoped the report might even lead to an international investigation into Russia’s involvement in the war.
And we have given ourselves the task of telling our citizens the truth.
Russia will get rid of Putin only when he becomes unpopular, and for that, we have to tell the truth about what he’s doing,” Yashin said.
Please support us in continuing to offer as we set out to do when we launched in June 2012 journalism that is truly independent and informed.
Contacts For editorial, advertising and general inquiries, please e-mail editor@sofiaglobe.com.
