The same two GRU operatives that attempted and failed to assassinate the Skripals in the UK are said to have also frequently infiltrated the Donbas in Ukraine – to “instigate conflict” in East Ukraine.
They are a direct accusation of Russia as actively in attempting to assassinate people inside another sovereign nation.
Russia is using the military to incite a revolution in Ukraine and others and is augmenting these forces with conventional Russian Army soldiers and officers.
Alexander Mishkin, a military physician who arrived in the United Kingdom on March 2 under the alias of Alexander Petrov, is also an operative with the GRU, the Russian military spy agency.
Mishkin was awarded with Hero of the Russian Federation medal – along with alleged accomplice Colonel Anatoliy Chepiga – and spent considerable amounts of time in Ukraine between 2011 and 2018.
During their time in Ukraine, the two suspects were likely active in GRU efforts to kick-start Russia’s war, investigators have claimed for the first time.
Mishkin was likely decorated by Russian President Vladimir Putin for his role in either extracting former President Viktor Yanukovych from Kyiv on Feb., 2014, amid the EuroMaidan Revolution, or for a later contribution to the Russian military takeover of Crimea, investigators said as they presented evidence at a U.K. parliamentary committee.
Robert Seely, a British member of Parliament who is on the foreign affairs committee, told the Kyiv Post that the evidence presented in London shows that GRU operatives in Ukraine at the time were likely acting as “firestarters” and were there to instigate conflict across the country.
In September, Bellingcat investigators revealed that the first Salisbury suspect, Ruslan Boshirov, was in fact a decorated special forces officer and GRU operative called Colonel Anatoliy Chepiga, who spent considerable time deployed on the Ukrainian border and likely saw active duty in eastern Ukraine.
On Oct., Grozev and Higgins affirmed that they’re “100 percent sure” about the revealed identities of both Chepiga and Mishkin and said they had no other reason to be in Ukraine as GRU operatives, other than to instigate conflict and support pro-Russian rebels.
The pair are believed to have smeared the novichok nerve agent on the front door of the home of former Russian double spy Sergei Skripal, released by Russia in 2010 in a prisoner swap after being convicted and sentenced to prison in 2006 for giving secret information to the British MI6 intelligence agency, a charge he denied.
Sergei Skripal, 66, and his daughter, Yulia, 34, were hospitalized for months after the poisoning but have recovered.
Police link the attack on the Skripals to a separate novichok poisoning on June 30 in Amesbury, that led to the death of 44-year-old Dawn Sturgess.
She and her partner Charlie Rowley were exposed to the nerve agent after handling a contaminated perfume dispenser.
But according to investigator Grozev, the GRU’s interference, manipulations and subversions in Ukraine are probably their crowning achievement so far, even if they didn’t trigger a countrywide, pro-Russian rebellion as they had hoped.
In 2014, Ukrainian journalists reported that Anatoliy Chepiga’s unit, the 14th Spetznaz Brigade had been mysteriously redeployed from far-eastern Russia to the border with Ukraine.
Photographic evidence purported to show that these soldiers were frequently flown into Donbas, Crimea or both on low-flying helicopters.
Investigators in the United Kingdom have confirmed that evidence is correct.
On the subject of what comes next, Bellingcat’s investigators have suggestions for the British and warnings for the Ukrainians.
In Ukraine, as the country approaches presidential and parliamentary elections in 2019, lawmakers and the public should prepare for significantly increased Russian interference.
In response to Russia’s war in eastern Ukraine, Seely is convinced that the conflict has actually had the ironic effect of bringing Ukrainians together – much to Putin’s dismay – and has also increased support and solidarity for Ukraine abroad.
