The HVC-304, interview in the above matter was held in Room Capitol Visitor Center, commencing at 10:08m.
Representatives Schiff, Himes, Sewell, Carson, Speier, Quigley, Swalwell, Heck, Maloney, Demings, Krishnamoorthi, Conaway, Wenstrup and Hurd.
Representatives Norton, Malinowski, Raskin, Rouda, Phillips, Engel, Perry, Meadows, and Zeldin.
Good morning, Deputy Assistant Secretary Kent, and welcome to the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, which, along with the Foreign Affairs and Oversight Committees, is conducting this investigation as part of the official impeachment inquiry of the House of Representatives.
Today's deposition is being conducted as part of the impeachment inquiry.
In light of attempts by the State Department in coordination with the White House to direct you not to appear and efforts to limit your testimony, the committee had no choice but to compel your appearance today.
We thank you for complying with the dually authorized congressional subpoena, as other witnesses have done as well.
We expect nothing less from a dedicated career civil servant like yourself.
Deputy Assistant Secretary Kent has served with distinction as a Foreign Service officer with deep experience relevant to the matters under investigation by the committees.
In his capacity as Deputy Assistant Secretary in the European and Eurasian Bureau you oversee policy towards Ukraine, Moldova, Belarus, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijani.
Previously he was deputy chief of mission in Kyiv from 2015 until 2018 when he returned to Washington to assume his current position.
Since 3 joining the Foreign Service in 1992 he has served among other 4 postings in Warsaw, Poland, Kyiv, Tashkent, Uzbekistan, and 5 Bangkok, Thailand.
Given your unique role, we look forward 6 to hearing your testimony today, including your knowledge of 7 and involvement in key policy discussions, meetings and 8 decision on Ukraine that relate directly to areas under 9 investigation by the committees.
This includes any effort by 23 the State Department, the White House, or any other entity of 24 the government to claim that in the course of your testimony 25 under dually authorized subpoena today, you are disclosing 7 1 information in a nonauthorized manner.
Should that not be the case, we expect you to 8 notify us immediately and we will hold those responsible to 9 account.
Instead, 22 Democrats are conducting a rushed, closed-door and 23 unprecedented impeachment inquiry.
Democrats are ignoring 45 24 years of bipartisan procedures designed to provide elements 25 of fundamental fairness and due process.
In past impeachment 1 inquiries, the majority and minority had coequal subpoena 2 authority and the right to require a committee vote on all 3 subpoenas.
The President's counsel had the right to attend 4 all depositions and hearings, including those held in 5 executive session.
The President's counsel had the right to 6 cross-examine the witnesses and the right to propose 7 witnesses.
The President's counsel had the right to present 8 evidence, object to the admission of evidence, and to review 9 all evidence presented, both favorable and unfavorable.
Most disappointing, Democrats are 13 conducting this inquiry behind closed doors.
We're 14 conducting these depositions and interviews in a SCIF, but 15 Democrats have been clear every single session that there's 16 no unclassified material being presented in the sessions.
As you know, I conduct myself as both chairman and ranking member in a very bipartisan way, and I think that should apply here as well.
I am -next to declaring war, this is the most important thing that the Congress can do under Article I To hide behind that, to have it in a 5CIF, to defy historical precedent that we conducted under both Nixon and Clinton, which guarantees the participation of counsel, White House counsel in the room in an adversarial way.
That was done during both prior impeachments, because both sides recognized that with a fair.
If -I would just urge you, if you're going to continue, and I've been back in my district for 2 weeks, talking to my constituents both Republican, and Democrat, and Independent, above all what they had in common was they wanted to see this done the right way.
I hope that this resolution will come to the floor so that we can participate in a democratic system, with a democratic vote, up or down, to proceed with this inquiry, so that it is backed by the American people.
To do so otherwise, I think, defies democracy, it defies fairness, and it defies due process.
And if we're going to 10 1 do this, for God's sakes, let's do it the right way.
I think my colleagues will certainly have 4 an opportunity to discuss these matters further, but in the 5 interest of moving ahead with the deposition I recognize 6 Mr Goldman.
This is a 8 deposition of Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, George 9 Kent conducted by the House Permanent Select Committee on 10 Intelligence, pursuant to the impeachment inquiry announced 11 by the Speaker of the House on September 24th.
Now, along with other 16 proceedings and furtherance of this inquiry, this deposition 17 a part of a joint investigation, led by the Intelligence 18 Committee, in coordination with the Committees on Foreign 19 Affairs, and Oversight and Reform.
This is a staff-led 24 deposition, but Members, of course, may ask questions during 25 their allotted time, and there will be equal allotted time for the majority and the minority.
My name is Daniel Goldman, I am the senior adviser and director for investigations for the HPSCI majority staff.
To my right is Nicholas Mitchell, who is the senior investigative counsel for the HPSCI majority staff.
And Mr Mitchell and I will be conducting most of deposition for the majority.
And I'll let my counterparts from the minority staff introduce themselves as well.
Good morning, sir, Steve Castor with the Republican staff of the Oversight Committee.
Now this deposition will be conducted entirely at the unclassified level.
However, this deposition, as you no doubt know, is being conducted in HPSCI's secure spaces, and in the presence of staff with the appropriate security clearances, and, as we understand as of this morning, your attorneys all have appropriate security clearances.
We understand that you received a letter from the State Department that addresses some of the concerns about the disclosure of classified information.
But we want 12 1 you to rest assured that, In any event, any classified 2 information that is disclosed is not an unauthorized 3 disclosure today.
As you no 9 doubt know, EO 13526 states that, quote ""In no case shall 10 information be classified, or continue to be maintained as 11 classified, or fail to be declassified"" unquote, for the 12 purpose of concealing any violations of law or preventing 13 embarrassment of any person or entity.
We would ask you to inform us of 16 that before you provide the answer, and we can as just the 17 deposition accordingly.
You and your attorney 23 will have an opportunity to review the transcript at a later 24 date.
We have previously 3 provided counsel with a copy of those regulations, but let us 4 know if you need additional copies.
The 6 majority 1 hour to ask questions, and the minority will be 7 given 1 hour to ask questions.
But if, at any time, you or your counsel need a 10 break, please just let us know.
Under the House deposition 11 rules, counsel for other persons or government agencies may 12 not attend this proceeding, and we understand that none are 13 here.
You, however, are allowed to have personal attorney 14 present during this deposition, and I see that you have 15 brought a couple.
At this time if counsel could please state 16 his or her name for an appearance for the record.
To your left there is a stenographer 21 taking down everything that is said, all questions and 22 answers, so that there is a written report for the 23 deposition.
For that record to be clear, please wait until 24 questions are completed before you provide your answers, and 25 all staff and members here will wait until you finish your 14 1 response before asking the next question.
The stenographer 2 cannot record nonverbal answers such as a shaking of the head 3 or an uh-huh so please make sure that you answer questions 4 with an audible verbal answer.
If a question is unclear or you 7 are uncertain about the response, please let us know and we 8 can rephrase the question.
You may only refuse to 11 answer a question to preserve a privilege recognized by the 12 committee.
If you do refuse to answer a question on the 13 basis of privilege, staff may either proceed with the 14 deposition, or seek a ruling from the chairman on and 15 objection, in person or otherwise, during the deposition at a 16 time of the majority staff's choosing.
If the chair 17 overrules any such objection, you are required to answer the 18 question.
It is imperative that you 22 not only answer our questions truthfully, but that you give 23 full and complete answers to all questions asked of you.
I swear that the testimony I am about to give is the truth and nothing but the truth.
But before we begin, Deputy Assistant Secretary Kent, now is the time for you to make any opening remarks.
Mark Meadows, North Carolina. 17 1 officer for more than 27 years, under five Presidents, three 2 Republican and two Democrats.
As you all know, I am 3 appearing here in response to your congressional subpoena.
I do 7 not know the Department of State's views on disregarding that 8 order.
Yet, this is where I find 17 myself today, faced with the enormous professional and 18 personal cost and expense of dealing with a conflict between 19 the executive and legislative branches not of my making.
Principled service to 9 country and community remains an honorable professional 10 choice, not just a family tradition dating back to before 11 World War II, one that survived the Bataan Death March, and a 12 3-year stint in a Japanese POW camp unbroken.
I hope the 13 drama now playing out does not discourage my son > 14 from seriously considering a life of service.
I served twice 19 in Ukraine for a total of 6 years, posted in Kyiv, first 20 during and after the Orange Revolution from 2004 to 2008, and 21 again, from 2015 to 2018, in the aftermath of the Revolution 22 of Dignity when I worked at deputy chief of mission.
In the summer of 2018, then-Assistant Secretary for European and Eurasian Affairs, Wess Mitchell asked me to come back from Kyiv to Washington early to join his team as Deputy Assistant Secretary of State to take charge of our eastern European Caucasus portfolio, covering six countries in the front line of Russian aggression and malign influence, Ukraine, Moldova, Belarus, Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan.
The administration's national security strategy, which Wess helped write, makes clear the strategic challenge before us great power competition, with peer or near-peer rivals, such as Russia and China and the need to compete for positive influence without taking countries for granted.
In that sense, Ukraine has been on the front lines, not just of Russia's war in eastern Ukraine since 2014, but of the greater geopolitical challenges facing the United States today.
Ukraine's success, thus, is very much in our national interest in the way we have defined or national interests broadly in Europe for the last 75 years, and specifically in central and Eastern Europe, for the last 30 years, since the fall of the Wall in 1989.
A Europe whole, free, and at peace -our strategic aim for the entirety of my foreign 20 1 service career -is not possible without a Ukraine full free 2 and at peace, including Crimea and Donbas, both current 3 occupied by Russia.
Starting in 2015 for former 24 Ambassador Pyatt, in 2017 for me, and in 2018 for former 25 Ambassador Yovanovitch.
You don't step in to the public arena of 4 international diplomacy in active pursuit of U.5. principled 5 interests against venal vested interests without expecting 6 vigorous pushback.
I suspect your questions may well involve some 17 issues, conversations and documents that span a number of 18 years.
The State Department is in the process of collecting 19 documents in response to the subpoena, not to me, but to the 20 Department that may contain facts relevant to my testimony.
I will, thus, 22 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 do my best to answer as accurately, completely and truthfully as I can to the best of my recollection.
And with those introductory words, I'm ready to answer all your questions regarding the subject of the subpoena, which has ordered me to appear before you today.
Could we get a copy, could staff get a copy of the Secretary's opening statement for us, please.
Q Mr Kent, I'm going to pick up just where you left off there about the documents.
A In the letter that was emailed to me on September 27th there was a request to appear voluntarily and to provide documents, yes.
A I received direction that from the State Department that at the same time you issued the letters to me you issued a subpoena to the Department, and therefore the documents would be collected as part of that subpoena request since they are considered Federal records.
A I collected all the different types of records that possibly could be considered part of the request and provided them to the listed authority at the State Department.
So the first interaction was with somebody I presume many of you are familiar with who works with our congressional liaison.
And initially, when I asked in email form whether I should start collecting documents, because I had received a personal request, I was instructed to await formal guidance, meaning formal instructions on how to fulfill the document production request, so that was the first interaction.
A The second interaction with the Department issued written guidance on how to be responsive to the subpoena for documents to the Department late on October 2nd and that was in writing.
A The instructions were sent from the executive secretary of the Department, Lisa Kenna.
The senior bureau official at the time was Maureen Cormack , and Maureen gave me a paper copy and said that the European Bureau staff on whom most of the requirements would fall would convene at 9 o'clock the next morning to discuss how we could fully be responsive to the request.
A We had roughly 20 members of European Bureau still there and followed the overall staff meeting of the morning which was from 8:30 to 9:00.
A We started going through the instructions of the State Department, which initially, the first paragraph identified a number of individuals as key record collectors.
We had two people in the room who are not members of the European Bureau staff, there could have been more, but they 26 1 self-identified as from congressional liaison 2 and from the Office of Legal Counsel at the 3 State Department.
They clarified that that was not an 4 exclusive list, meaning not only those people listed, but 5 others who might have records should also be responsive.
At any -I just want to back it up a little 7 bit and a little bit more generally here.
I appreciate your 8 detail, but we are somewhat -we didn't want to stay here 9 all night.
I did have several interactions with 21 other State Department officials on Tuesday, October 1st.
And there was a letter sent to these committees 5 that characterized interactions that I do not feel was 6 accurate.
And I was one of two career 11 foreign service officers which had received letters from the 12 committees, and I had not felt bullied, threatened, and 13 intimidated.
There was another line in there that suggested 14 that the career Foreign Service officers had requested the 15 committee's to route all communications through House liaison 16 and I think your colleague who -who sent me the 17 initial email on Friday night received my reply, which 18 indicated that I acknowledged receipt, and that our 19 congressional liaison had requested that the information be 20 routed to them.
So I was concerned that the letter itself 21 did not accurately characterize the interaction.
Perez, who is one of the top two career foreign services officers and oversees the personnel system, I had worked for her previously directly in a previous job.
And because I'd had no contact with the leadership of the Department outside of the European Bureau, I suggested that it was time that somebody engaged me personally, particularly since representations were being made about me.
And she said when that was finished, she would reach out and find somebody that would reach out to me.
And so she came back after an hour and said that the acting legal counselor of the Department, ""L"" in our parlance, Marek String, would reach out to me; that if I did not hear from him in 24 hours, I should contact her again.
He called me back through the Operations Center in the evening when I was already at home.
He said it was a very busy day, that they had responsive and were doing a lot and -but I'd known Marek previously and respected him.
If it weren't for Marek, we would not have had Charge Taylor out in Kyiv.
He helped with the process of getting him brought back on board as an Active Duty person.
So I respected his professionalism previously, so it was a professional conversation.
A He apologized, because I mentioned that there had not been an exchange.
A To the best of my recollection, again, it was a phone call at night when I was in my kitchen eating dinner at about 9 -between 8 and 9.
The guidance that we received in writing came shortly after close of business on the 2nd.
And 30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 then the next sort of point was the meeting, the guidance, our -the European Bureau's meeting at 9 o'clock on October 3rd.
That was also the time where I think the 3rd was when we formally -I formally engaged Andrew Wright as my counsel in this process.
And therefore, there were additional engagements, interactions with -through counsel.
A I can read the news, but as I've answered you before, I'm not aware -I did my role.
Obviously there were a lot of documents and records that I had that I needed to provide, based on the subpoena and the guidance that the State Department issues.
But having provided those records, I do not know the process on reviewing them.
There was a representative from L, as I previously mentioned, who attended the European Bureau guidance meeting on October 3rd.
The 7 exchange started when we were discussing the issue of who 8 needed to be responsive to the records collection.
And then I 12 mentioned Consular Affairs Assistant Secretary Risch, because 13 he had spoken to Rudy Giuliani several times in January about 14 trying to get a visa for the former corrupt prosecutor 15 general of Ukraine, Viktor Shokin.
And my read of the 16 request would include that. 17 took issue with my raising the additional 18 information, and the conversation rapidly, I would say, 19 either escalated or degenerated into a tense exchange.
I've got two questions here, so I don't know 24 how you want to manage -Representative Speier asked me a 25 question and you.
He objected to my raising of the additional information and said that he didn't think -I do not remember his exact words, but -he made clear that he did not think it was appropriate for me to make the suggestion.
I took the opportunity, then, to point out that that was the first -the meeting was the first time that we were discussing guidance for being responsive to a subpoena.
The request for the documents and the request for submission had been delivered on September 27th and we had less than 2 business days to be responsive. has then said, I don't think I should be even talking to you.
I should only talk to counsel, and I talked to your counsel last night.
The conversation ended at that point, but later on when I then picked up this issue of guidance and our responsibilities, he raised his voice again, suggested, as I told you before, I should not be talking to you, it is against the bar ethics, for me to contact and talk to you directly.
I said somebody provided information to the Secretary that he said publicly in Italy that the congressional committees were preventing me from talking to legal counsel.
And I said I've got 15 witnesses in a room hearing you say that you don't want to talk to me.
So I'm worried that you as working for this office, are adopting positions at odds with the language that your office is providing the Secretary of State.
My interest in this process was so that the State Department and the Secretary would be protected, and being fully responsive to the legal subpoena that had been issued.
A He said to me that he represented the Secretary of State and the Department's interest in this process.
And that was the end of that -and he also said that he was the author of the lines about the -of the letter that included the language about the bullying and intimidation.
I pointed out to him that I thought the language he had 34 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 then drafted, since he said was the drafter, was inaccurate.
I said, well, you say that the career Foreign Services are being intimidated.
There are only two career Foreign Service officers who subject to this process.
I'm the only one working at the Department of State, and the other one is Ambassador Yovanovitch, who is teaching at Georgetown.
So I'm not asking to you reveal anything that isn't already commonly known.
Q Did he disagree that Mr Risch should be included in the -A We did not return to that topic.
A Correct. then said, opened the door after a 35 1 couple of minutes and asked if I could come out.
I apologized for them 3 having had to hear an uncomfortable conversation.
I said 4 that it was important that they had been there as witnesses, 5 since that was likely the only such only conversation 6 engagement I would have with the legal staff of the State 7 Department.
And what I said 15 to him was what I hear you saying -I said that's called 16 projection.
He then told me, I 20 don't think it is appropriate for you to go back into that 21 room.
I told him that's not your business, that's my 22 meeting, but I will agree with you, though, I will go back in 23 and tell my colleagues that since I'm one of the chief 24 records collectors, I will go back to my office and resume 25 collecting records to be responsive to the request.
And the only other thing we did was I gave him my business card, he wrote his name and phone number in my notebook.
And he said, I imagine you will be writing up your version of this conversation and I will be too.
So I am not a lawyer and I understand there are different ways of signaling how serious the issue is, but yes, I was aware that an earlier set of letters were sent prior to the September 27th letters.
A There was no request for anyone to collect records prior to the subpoena that was issued, to my understanding, on the 27th.
A No, and I think as counsel can confirm, once our relationship was established, he, was taken off of my account, and while I did not participate in further conversations, my understanding is that the tone and further back and forth between L and my counsel was fully professional and respectful.
The initial document request under the subpoena was to the State Department and the State Department as part of its guidance did share the consideration that communications would be considered Federal records, and that they would be handling them, and that is a position that I accepted.
The letters that came in, the letter that 3 came to me on September 27th was sent concurrently with a 4 subpoena for those documents.
So I was responsive to the request under 7 subpoena to the Department for those records to be collected.
I would have to go back and look at the 12 written guidance that was issued on October 2nd.
But I will 13 say it was my understanding that I would provide the 14 documents as part of the subpoena to the Department for the 15 documents.
Any 16 record that I create in the performance of my professional 17 duties would be considered a record of the Department of 18 State.
A Now former, I guess, technically retired, he sent in his resignation letter, Michael McKinley, senior adviser to the Secretary of State.
I had had no prior interaction with Mr McKinley until the weekend after the letters were issued, and the story became news, and he reached out to talk to me.
I was out picking apples with my wife -Stribling Orchards, a very nice place in Markham, Virginia, if you ever want to get good apples -and he reached out to me through the Operations Center and said that he felt the State Department should stand up for its career Foreign Service officers and wanted to know if I had any objection to him trying to get the Department to issue a statement of that nature.
A I think said I think it is entirely appropriate for the State Department leadership to stand up for its career foreign service officers.
I asked him if he'd already floated the idea, and if he got any 40 1 responses.
And I did describe my -the 14 guidance meeting and what had occurred on the 3rd of October.
And 18 he asked if, in his capacity as a senior adviser to the 19 Secretary, in part, responsible for ensuring that the 20 Department leadership was connected to the career Foreign 21 Service, if I would mind sharing it with him so that he could 22 share it with other leaders of the Department, and I said I 23 had no problem.
A He later told me he shared it with the Deputy Secretary Sullivan, Under Secretary Hale, and I believe the counselor -sorry -acting legal, Marek String.
That's -so I presume that included people outside of the European Bureau, but I did not ask specifically which individuals he had engaged.
A I did ask him, one of the times he dropped by my office, I asked him if that statement had gone anywhere, and he said, no.
He's been an 2 ambassador in four places -three times in South America and 3 Afghanistan.
But he appeared to me in person to be a 4 genuinely decent person who was concerned about what was 5 happening.
Mr Kent, we're going spend some time 21 today discussing Ukraine policy as well as efforts by 22 nongovernment individuals to influence Ukraine policy.
As 23 you no doubt are aware one of the central players in this 24 investigation is Rudy Giuliani.
A So I think Giuliani, as a person, a private individual, has traveled to Ukraine over the course of the last decade.
A I never met with him, never been in the presence of him, never had any communication with him.
A The first indication that I heard of contacts in 2018 came in May 2018.
Q Were you still in -A I was in -I left Kyiv, Ukraine on August 12th, 2018.
A The next time I heard Mr Giuliani's name mentioned was on the 9th of January this year, 2019, when I was copied on an email that Giuliani was calling the State Department regarding the inability of the previous prosecutor general Viktor Shokin to get a visa to come to the United States.
Because I'm the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State covering Ukraine, and it was a matter about Ukraine.
A I was involved extensively in conversations and exchanges over the next 2 days, yes.
A Viktor Shokin served as prosecutor general of Ukraine from, I believe his appointment date was February 10th, 2015, until sometime of the spring, perhaps late February, early March 2016.
He was known to have been the godfather of then-President Poroshenko's kids.
A There was a broad-based consensus that he was a typical Ukraine prosecutor who lived a lifestyle far in excess of his government salary, who never prosecuted anybody known for having committed a crime, and having covered up crimes that were known to have been committed.
I believe it may have been from one of the staff in the Office of the Secretary of State, because Rudy Giuliani was trying to call into that office.
A The initial redirection was to the Assistant Secretary of Consular Affairs, Mr Risch.
Since it was about a visa, I think it was entirely appropriate for the matter to be referred to the part of the State Department that deals with visas.
I believe, with apologies to any German Americans, I think it is R-i-s-c-h, but sometimes names get changed.
My original German name was Kindt, K-i-n-d-t, and then my great-great-grandmother changed to anglicize it to K-e-n-t.
A There was a series of conversations between members of the Consular Affairs front office and European Affairs front office.
For the European office, that included Assistant Secretary Wess Mitchell and myself principally.
And to the best of my recollection, on the side of Consular Affairs, it would be Assistant Secretary Risch and the deputy assistant secretary for visas, who I believe is Ed Romatowski.
A Mr Shokin, as I mentioned, was well and very unfavorably known to us.
And we felt, under no circumstances, should a visa be issued to someone who knowingly subverted and wasted United States taxpayer money.
And as somebody who had a fiduciary responsibility for anticorruption programs, I felt personally strongly, Wess Mitchell felt very strongly that it was incorrect and so we stated that view clearly to our congressional -to or Consular Affairs colleagues.
A To the best of my recollection, the story that he conveyed to my colleagues in Consular Affairs was that Shokin wanted to come to the United States to share information suggesting that there was corruption at the United States embassy.
A Knowing Mr Shokin, I had full faith that it was bunch of hooey, and he was looking to basically engage in a con game out of revenge because he'd lost his job.
A To the best of my recollection, to my awareness based on the email exchanges, He may have had between two and three conversations with the Assistant Secretary in that period of time, Giuliani to Risch.
A I shared what I recall, and I presume that either that was in one of those conversations were an email exchange, but I couldn't tell you for sure.
A When the State Department was not being responsive, my understanding is that former Mayor Giuliani attempted to call the White House, and deputy chief of staff, my understanding deputy chief of staff, Rob Blair, then called the State Department to ask for a background.
He identified his role at that point to ground truth the situation and look out after the interest of the Office of the President.
I only know that Mr Blair reached out to us to ground truth the situation.
To the 6 best of my recollection, he said he was asked, which suggests 7 that he did not have the conversation himself.
I was at the embassy in Kyiv when a series of 11 corrupt prosecutors, including Shokin's team accused us of 12 not sharing our assistance to improve the prosecutor service 13 in Ukraine.
And to my understanding, because it was released 14 as part of the disinformation campaign, that included a 15 letter from April 2016 which I signed as Charge.
I said, did he know what the purpose was, and the Minister of Interior Avakov said it was to throw mud.
A At that point, to the best of my recollection, he mentioned specifically Masha and me, and then said others but did not mention the others.
A It would have either happened at the United States Institute of Peace or in my office, which is right across the street.
Frankly, at the time, he was the second most powerful person in the country after President Poroshenko.
It was to talk about his ideas about trying to bring peace to the Donbas.
And his comment about Lutsenko's trip and meeting with Giuliani was and, Oh, by the way, probably the last thing he said before we finished the meeting.
I would say that Mr Avakov likes to keep lines of communication open to all sides and -but I cannot say why he chose to share that information.
He thought Lutsenko was a fool to have made a private trip and to have done what he did.
A Mr Avakov is a very well-informed person, and I'm absolutely sure he knew who Giuliani was connected to.
A I cannot say with complete certainty, but I know that I shared the information that Avakov passed to me with 53 1 others.
The business card was the one 16 I used in 2015, the letter itself was completely fake with 17 lots of misspellings.
But I have never -no one has ever 18 shown me what Lutsenko might have been passing to Giuliani.
I could say -I cannot say for 13 certain whether I talked or whether I sent a brief email.
A Mr Lutsenko is somebody with whom the embassy had a long relationship dating back to the Orange Revolution period, which is when I first met him.
He was imprisoned for 2 years under former President Yanokovitch, and he came out and resumed politics.
When Shokin was forced out, the intent of then-President Poroshenko was to appoint someone he trusted.
And the question was whether someone who didn't have a law degree could be a reliable partner to try to reform the prosecutorial service.
So I had a series of meetings with him in the spring of 2016 to judge and assess whether he would be a serious partner for us.
Subsequent to that time, it was very clear that Mr Lutsenko was not any more serious about reforming the corrupt prosecutorial service than Viktor Shokin had been.
And at that point, our relationship -not personal to me, but the relationship between the embassy and Mr Lutsenko began to sour.
Again, he's a Ukraine politician serving as minister of interior, he was talking about another Ukraine politician serving as prosecutor general, and his focus was on that dynamic.
And because he said he'd heard my name mentioned, he'd passed that along.
Well, that was part of series of news articles that came out I believe starting March 20th, this spring.
There with a number of articles that were initially led by John Solomon of The Hill, who gave -who took an interview with Yuriy Lutsenko earlier in March.
And so, there was, I believe, video somewhere, there certainly were pictures of them doing interview.
One of those articles released because the interview on the first day Lutsenko had claimed that Ambassador Yovanovitch had given him a list in their first meeting of people not to prosecute.
Several days later, a list of names was circulated on the internet, with -the photograph had a copy of my temporary business card that I used for a short period of time in 2015.
So I think the card was genuine, and someone attached that to a list of names that was a hodgepodge of names.
Not the way that any American, or even Ukrainian, or Russian would transliterate Ukrainian names.
My best guess, just from a linguistics semantic point is the person who created the fake list was either Czech or Serbian.
This was the -it wasn't a letter, it was just a list of names with my actual business card attached.
As the news campaign, or campaign of slander against, not only Ambassador Yovanovitch unfolded, he had a very high -a media promise, so he was on TV, his Twitter feed ramped up and it was all focused on Ukraine, and it was focused on the four story lines that unfolded in those days between March 20 and 23rd.
A They unfolded both in the United States media and the Ukrainian media, simultaneously in peril.
There was a lot of tweeting, and of people that I had not previously been aware of, and then that also then played into late night television, subsequent days, both the Hannity Show and the Laura Ingraham Show covered this topic extensively.
It was, if not entirely made up in full cloth, 59 1 it was primarily non-truths and non-sequiturs.
The first part 3 was focused on any corruption efforts in which he went after 4 the Ambassador and other actors on anticorruption issues.
I 5 think that is where he claimed that we hadn't shared his 6 money, meaning his assistance to the prosecutor general's 7 office.
There were two story lines that 15 were launched more or less in parallel that were covered 16 extensively in the United States press, first by The Hill and 17 amplifiers, and in Ukraine by what are known as Porokhobots, 18 trolls on the internet, particularly Facebook, in support of 19 then-President Poroshenko and against the people that are 20 perceived to be Poroshenko's opponents.
So they are just names that 25 did not mean anything to me until they all of a sudden became 60 1 very active, talking about Ukraine and particularly the 2 activities of our embassy in Ukraine.
If I could -just for clarification 18 again, I think I mentioned one or two of the story lines, but 19 you said there were four story lines.
The third story line that came out the next 22 day was focused on the Bidens and Burisma, that was the third 23 story line.
A I received an email from our embassy on March 19th, the deputy director of the National Anti-Corruption Bureau for Ukraine, usually referred to as NABU, that was set up in 2015 and proved very effective at trying to investigate high-level corruption as it was intended to do.
And he came into the embassy and described his conversation the night before with a completely inebriated, drunk, Yuriy Lutsenko, and Lutsenko was angry.
He said he'd given an interview with an American journalist 2 weeks prior and that interview that he had accused the embassy of undermining him, and that was his motivation, and that the embassy had been supportive of the Democrat party, and was not supportive of the Trump party and that -so basically the lines of attack that then came out in the subsequent articles, Lutsenko shared with this other law enforcement individual, who then came and shared what he had heard from Lutsenko the night before.
Q And prior to March 19th, there was no other indication other than television or -A To the best of my recollection, the story was not in play publicly until the first articles appeared.
And to the best of my recollection, somebody from The Hill reached out to us in the early evening, or the very end of the work day on the 19th, and asked the press officer of the European Bureau whether we had reaction to a number of assertions, allegations.
A I believe, first of all, Mr Uglava had a very good working relationship with the embassy.
His organization, NABU, was one of the key anticorruption organizations that had been stood up after the Revolution of Dignity.
It was in its first year, it was functioning surprisingly well, meaning it was putting together investigations on high-level corrupt individuals.
And because of its initial effectiveness, which I think surprised a lot of people, it then became a target of people in places of influence, because it had been effective.
And one of the people that was looking to destroy NABU as an effective Bureau was Yuriy Lutsenko.
And that email should be part of the records collected, not individually, but the State Department has a system, that is supposed to automatically be able to pull all emails and cables that have key words.
That's my understanding of how that material should be provided eventually to the committees after review.
Q Could you just summarize for us the four lines that you -lines of -A I think the four story lines that played out in the media, the first one was the anticorruption line in which the embassy was attacked, and anti corruption actors in Ukraine were attacked.
The second line was the 2016 cycle, allegations that somehow, somebody, whether it was Ukrainians or people at the embassy had animus towards Paul Manafort.
The third line was a line of reporting related to the Bidens, and the interconnectivity between Vice President Biden's role alleged interconnectivity between Vice President Biden's role and pushing our anti corruption agenda, and the presence of his son, Hunter Biden, on the board of the gas company Burisma.
And the fourth line of attack was alleging that certain civil society organizations were funded by the Soros organization.
A When stories, media occurs about any of the issues in our area of responsibility, particularly when they touch on allegations or assertions about United States policy, or United States issues, the responsible part of the State Department with the press officers and the team in embassies work together to prepare press guidance, and that can be a combination of either guidance, if asked, or if a situation warrants it, 65 1 statements that would usually come out by the spokeswoman.
It accelerated on whatever 14 that Sunday was, because the son of the President issued a 15 Tweet in which he suggested that we needed more like 16 Ambassadors like Rick Grenell and fewer, I believe he may 17 have hashtagged Obama appointee was the point, and it was 18 taken by people as an attack on Ambassador Yovanovitch.
I mean, 20 this seems like it is a major threat to the Ambassador, and 21 major threat to the State Department.
A There was no high-level Department endorsement of Ambassador Yovanovitch.
Q Fabrications, a fake list, that is going to the heart of the ability of the Ambassador to serve effectively.
A This particularly after there were Tweets by members of the Presidential family, it was clearly a crisis for Ambassador Yovanovitch and a crisis that was threatening to consume the relationship.
So our recommendation to our superiors was that there should be a clear statement of support for Ambassador Yovanovitch.
Q Clear statement of support, and obviously there was a media statement -A The initial media guidance that we released and was quoted extensively was, I think, complete fabrication, utter nonsense as well as in rebutting Prosecutor General Lutsenko's allegation that somehow we had misdirected assistance met for the prosecutor general.
We said something along the lines that we had a fiduciary responsibility to the American taxpayer and when our assistance was not going to good use, we redirected it for more productive purposes.
When we got to the weekend, past the Sunday morning talk shows, saw the President's Tweet against the Ambassador.
A There were exchanges at this point with officials, including, to the best of my recollection, Under Secretary Hale.
It may have included the Counselor of the Department, Brechbuhl, at that point.
And there was a suggestion made, and I can't remember by whom, initially, but eventually, Gordon Sondland, our Ambassador to United States EU also joined some of the back and forth that Ambassador Yovanovitch should issue a statement, or do a video or tweet declaring full support for the foreign policy of President Trump, essentially asking her to defend herself as opposed to having the State Department defend her.
There was 5 no such list, and that was part of our reason for pushing 6 back firmly.
And -but that was part of, I would say, a 7 cluster of issues around the anti corruption theme.
Our advocacy is to help, in terms of 12 programming, is to build capacity, so they can have the 13 ability to go after corruption and effectively investigate, 14 prosecute, and then a judge allege criminal activities.
The 15 issue of whether we asked at any time that they follow up on 16 a prosecution, if there is a criminal nexus in the United 17 States, we have several different ways of conveying that 18 interest.
So we can do it in writing direct 21 from the Department of Justice, or we can have the legal 22 attaches engage their counterparts.
The types of conversations that we have that might be construed are different.
A Artem Sytnyk who is the still and the first head of the so-called NABU, National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine.
A To the best of my knowledge, yes, there were open prosecutor general investigations on Mr Sytnyk.
A What I would say, I would characterize the interactions as different because what we warned both Lutsenko and others that efforts to destroy NABU as an organization, including opening up investigations of Sytnyk, threatened to unravel a key component of our anti corruption cooperation, which had started at the request of Petro 71 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Poroshenko.
A I am sure that Mr Lutsenko has claimed that, but he also claimed that there was a list, and there was no list, and he made a lot of other claims.
And so as I said, this is an issue of believability about someone who routinely lies.
A He is one of the leaders of the NGO known as AnTAC, it's the anticorruption center in Ukraine.
It has also received grants from the International Renaissance Foundation, which is the Ukrainian name and arm of the Open Society Institute.
A The Open Society Institute was initiated 20-odd years ago by George Soros.
To the best of my knowledge, he was subject to harassment by the securities service known as the Security Bureau of Ukraine.
There was an incident where someone threw what's known as bright green, it's iodine-based disinfectant, and they actually threw it on his face near his house.
It can damage eyes but is oftentimes done as a form of intimidation in the former Soviet Union.
So because Shabunin was outspoken, he was certainly the target of harassment.
But I don’t know for certain whether there was an active criminal investigation by the prosecutor general's office.
A I believe when the person who was picketing his house and throwing this green material on him, and claiming to be a journalist even though he wasn't, provoked him, and Shabunin pushed him near his house.
A I think, you know, if we're going back -I don't know specifically about that particular incident or charge, but as a matter of conversation that United States officials had with Ukrainian officials in sharing our concern about the direction of governance and the approach, harassment of civil society activists, including Mr Shabunin, was one of the issues we raised, yes.
It included the country's leading rock star Slava Vakarchuk, who is now the leader of one of the parties in parliament.
It included very bizarrely a person who was a 74 1 friend of the current -the ex-President Poroshenko and was 2 head of the overseer of the defense industry named 3 Gladkovskiy, and in parentheses it had his previous name, 4 Svinarchuk.
The reason why that's memorable is because it 5 means a pig or a pig farmer, and he changed his name before 6 he went into government so he didn't have a name that said 7 basically Mr Piggy.
But no one knew that that was really -8 knew that was his name when the list allegedly was created in 9 2016.
Their names include 13 Mustafa Nayyem, Svitlana Zalishchuk, and Serhiy Leshchenko.
He ran for parliament as one of the young 23 pro-western members of then-President Poroshenko's party.
He 24 continued to act as an investigative-style public figure even 25 as a member of parliament.
And because he was an active parliamentarian, 3 because he had been an investigative journalist, he was 4 someone that the United States Embassy had known for years.
I believe Andy Kramer from The New 9 York Times was the first person to write a story in English 10 about it.
And so I believe, although I cannot 15 say for sure, that Mr Kramer may have shared that he had 16 talked to Leshchenko as one of his sources for that early 17 article.
So are you specifically saying about his 22 entire time, or what's the specific -23 Q Around that timeframe, which of course is you 24 know, mid -2016 is when he became involved with the 25 President ' s campaign.
Because Mr Manafort had spent a decade in 2 Ukraine, Ukrainians followed his reemergence as a United States figure 3 very closely.
Because Mr Manafort first appeared 8 in Ukraine in 2005 when he was hired by former Prime Minister 9 Yanukovych who tried the steal the election that became the 10 Orange Revolution, that was the end of 2004.
So Mr Manafort's time in 15 Ukraine started in 2005, and according to public records, he 16 participated up through the campaigns of 2014.
A I think it would be accurate to say, given what President Yanukovych did to the country, which was loot tens of billions of dollars, that there were many Ukrainians who in part blamed Paul Manafort for that success because he proved to be a brilliant political technologist in giving Yanukovych advice that helped him win the presidency.
A Well, I will just say, I was in Ukraine at the time so I don't know what the reaction was.
Mr Chairman, with all due respect, with all due respect, we didn't cross-examine you or -you're not the counselor.
But it seems that you're asking for an answer that's beyond the knowledge of a State Department witness.
A Again, I can't say how any individual, any American would react to a narrative.
I said that Paul Manafort was an extremely successful political adviser who had helped President Yanukovych win, and no one should underestimate his abilities to help any candidate that he advised.
And that was my assessment of his professional ability to help a candidate win, regardless of the country.
A You're asking me to speculate on what Yuriy Lutsenko, Rudy Giuliani, and John Solomon were doing, and I would suggest that's a question for those three individuals.
A It's hard for me to make an assessment since there were so many story lines put in play at the same time to assess how any one of those story lines had an effect on any given audience.
A Our primary concern was that our Ambassador and our embassy were being subjected to inaccurate accusations.
But as situational awareness, we followed or tried to follow because the volume was intense, the various different stories.
A I first became aware of the owner of Burisma, 80 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Mykola Zlochevsky, when I first went to our embassy in mid-January 2015.
At the time I was the senior anti corruption coordinator, but I'd already been selected to be the next deputy chief of mission.
He was going back to was to go out, because so much was happening at the time, the Russians were pushing the final push to take as much territory as they could, that they needed an extra officer.
And as well, Ambassador Pyatt thought I could be helpful in the anti corruption front.
I was asked by our professional Department of Justice former prosecutor, who was engaged in capacity building, | | if I would be willing to go in and talk to the prosecutor general's office, because in late December 2014, somebody in the prosecutor general's office of Ukraine -this is, to be clear, pre Lutsenko, pre Shokin, a different corrupt, ineffective prosecutor -who inexplicably had shut the criminal case that had been the basis for a British court to freeze $23 million in assets held by Mykola Zlochevsky.
That was an issue of our interest because we had made a commitment to the Ukrainian Government in 2014 to try to recover an estimated tens of billions of dollars of stolen assets out of the country.
The first case that U.S., U.K., 81 1 and Ukrainian investigators worked on was a case against 2 Zlochevsky, and that's because the British Serious Crimes 3 Office had already opened up a case, an investigation against 4 Zlochevsky.
And so, 8 again, I had a fiduciary responsibility -I'd previously 9 been the director of the office which provided that funds to 10 find out what had happened and why were our monies being 11 wasted.
And he laughed and 17 said, ha ha ha ha, that's what President Poroshenko asked us 18 last week.
And he 19 said $7 million, and it happened in May before our team came 20 in, May of 2014.
Somebody, a prosecutor under your 22 command, signed a letter on December 25 -which is not 23 Christmas in Ukraine.
They celebrate it late -and provided 24 it to the lawyer who provided it to the British judge before 25 the FBI and the Serious Crimes Office could react.
He did, however, say, well, I've 4 been friends with Zlochevsky for 21 years, and he's in Dubai 5 right now.
And I 6 said, no, I think you should actually arrest him next time he 7 comes back to Ukraine.
And the focus at that 14 point was on Zlochevsky the person, the ex-minister, when he 15 was minister of ecology, which oversees the unit that issues 16 the licenses to do substrata geologic exploration for gas.
Whatever the roster may say, he's the 83 1 beneficial owner, as they say.
So it's a legitimate company, but it does 9 not have a good reputation in Ukraine.
And it was the position of the United States when I 20 went into that office in February 3 that the prosecutor 21 general should, first of all, prosecute whoever took the 22 bribe and shut the case, and second of all, there was still 23 the outstanding issue of trying to recover the stolen assets.
If 6 you're asking about the corruption of the company, there is 7 the issue of how they got the licenses and then their 8 reputation.
And so our concern was primarily focused on the 9 fact that we, working with the U.K. and Ukrainian law 10 enforcement authorities, had frozen assets that, to the best 11 of my knowledge, were in accounts that were under his name.
Serious Crimes Office had opened up a case in the spring 17 of 2014, and as we were talking to the Ukrainians, how can we 18 be of help, there was a stolen assets recovery conference in 19 London co-hosted by the attorney general and the 20 U.K. counterpart and the World Bank that this became the test 21 case for our ability as partners in the U.S., U.K. playing a 22 key role together to try to recover stolen assets from the 23 previous government.
A I later became aware -I did not know it at the time because, again, my focus was on Zlochevsky -that one of the ways that they did was to appoint westerners to their board.
And I've served my entire life in government service, so I'm not familiar with corporate boards.
A The big name in Ukraine was former President of Poland, Aleksander Kwasniewski.
I've never met Mr Zlochevsky, and I do not know why they did what they did.
A It's become clear in public knowledge that Hunter Biden, the son of then-Vice President Biden, was also appointed to the board.
A Again, I've never had a conversation with 86 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 Zlochevsky, so I don't know.
I don't know how much corporate board members get in any country, but I understand a lot of people get paid a lot of money.
A Again, I don't work in the corporate sector so I don't know what standard board compensation would be.
A I have read articles, and I have no idea how much Burisma may pay its board members.
A I personally never met and I don't know if board members met with the embassy.
And there was no one affiliated with Burisma that asked to come to the embassy to meet me.
I will say that now that you mention it, there 2 apparently was an effort for Burisma to help cosponsor, I 3 guess, a contest that USAID was sponsoring related to clean 4 energy.
And he recounted to me an 20 exchange with another member of the AnTAC board named Daria 21 Kaleniuk, who criticized him because the Atlantic Council, 22 where he runs the Ukraine Project, agreed to take Burisma as 23 a corporate sponsor.
Maybe it would be helpful to just go through the chronology of the ambassadors.
A Again, I went to -I was then serving in Thailand afterwards, so I wasn't necessarily focused on Ukraine.
Q The fourth narrative you identified, you know, going after the civil society organizations -A Right.
NABU was a -well, it was -AnTAC was a civil society organization, and the other one that I recall being mentioned early on was something called the Ukraine Crisis Media Center, which was set up to help be a sort of platform for information about Ukraine starting during the Revolution of Dignity, 2014.
So, for instance, in May former Mayor Giuliani 4 alleged that former Ambassador Yovanovitch was going to work 5 for a Soros organization and after she left post, which was 6 false.
She went to work, still as a United States State Department 7 employee, as a diplomat teacher/lecturer at Georgetown.
Any other 18 organizations sort of fit into that -19 A Those were the only ones that I remember having 20 been mentioned, but, again, there are a lot of stories out 21 there.
You know, he made some statements that have been videotaped about how he played a role in removing Shokin, and as a result, you know, $1 billion in aid was freed up.
Again, as I've stated before, United States State Department officials feel when we're spending taxpayer money in a country we have a fiduciary responsibility.
So I'd like at this point to explain what we felt our fiduciary responsibility had been and why this became an issue of 92 1 policy.
The 4 previous year we'd worked with Minister of Interior Avakov, 5 whom I mentioned earlier to the launch of what was known as 6 the patrol police.
They were 7 trained by the California Highway Patrol, brand new police, 8 highest female police officer percentage in the world at the 9 time.
He 12 appointed, he, Poroshenko, appointed a new deputy prosecutor 13 general named David Sakvarelidze, that's a Georgian name.
And the focus was to create an 20 inspector general's unit inside the prosecutor's office that 21 could go after corrupt prosecutors.
We started working on that project, and 25 they hired a bunch of young, enthusiastic prosecutors.
And then in the summertime they launched what was going to be their first case, in the central province of Poltava, as a test case.
They had a businessman who complained he was being shaken down by a couple of corrupt prosecutors.
They worked with the security service, which had wiretap authority, and they tapped these two prosecutors whose names I believe are Shapakin and Korniyets.
And the reason why I'm going through all this detail is it's important to understand that one of those two prosecutors that was the first case turned out to have been the former driver of Shokin, who he made his driver a prosecutor.
So the people in the IG unit had no idea that the first corrupt prosecutor -and there were a lot of them -that they were targeting happened to have been the former driver and very close, personal friend of the prosecutor general.
When they arrested him -and the only reason they could arrest him is because the deputy prosecutor general heard about it and tipped them off, except he tipped off the wrong corrupt prosecutor in the province -Shokin went to war.
They tried to fire and put pressure on the judges who would issue 94 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 the warrants.
He eventually managed to force out everybody associated with that, including the deputy head of the security service, the intel service, who had provided the wiretapping coverage.
It was absolute warfare protecting his associate, and he destroyed the inspector general unit that we'd been standing up.
So then that was the wasting of United States taxpayer resources, and so that is the reason why the IMF, the U.S., and the European Union said collectively the justice sector and the prosecutor is so important for the success of this country and it's so important to reform it that Victor Shokin has shown that he's actively wasting United States taxpayer dollars and he's preventing reform.
The conversations that went between the embassy and the State Department were then brought ahead of the Vice President going to Ukraine in December of 2015, and Shokin's removal then became a condition for the loan guarantee.
A The visit that we're talking about by the Vice President was in December 2015, I believe.
He was actually the head of -he was basically the majority leader in parliament.
Q And there were similar issues with Lustenko that he wasn't a tremendous prosecutor.
You said his kids were -him and 11 Poroshenko were godfather to each other's kids.
And then you get the new guy, Lutsenko, who 14 you said is just as bad, also kids are -you know, kids 15 with -Mr Poroshenko and him are godfather to each other's 16 children.
First of all, the first phase -Yuriy 21 Lutsenko was prosecutor general for over 3 years, almost 3 22 and a half years.
And his 23 unwillingness to do anything and his venality and his 24 undermining U.S.-supported projects started within several 25 months.
Several 4 months after he became prosecutor general in the spring of 5 2016, for instance, former President Poroshenko in one of his 6 calls with then-Vice President Biden asked for a former, I 7 believe, New Jersey State prosecutor | by 9 had served for 2 years as an anti corrupti on 10 adviser under contract to the Department of Justice in 11 Ukraine and spoke Ukrainian fluently.
And, in fact, 12 Poroshenko had thought about appointing him as the first head 13 of the NABU, this National Anti-Corruption Bureau.
It's been reported that there was broad international consensus on Shokin.
When it comes to certain conditionalities, the IMF, particularly in the economic sphere, has, I would say, the primary voice.
When it comes to certain other efforts the United States oftentimes is the lead voice.
That includes in the security sector where we provide the most military assistance.
And we coordinate through the European Command with willing allies, like the Poles, Lithuanians, U.K., Canada, and in the justice sector, as well, the United States played -also had a lead voice.
I am not aware of any case that came to conclusion, but I do not have insight into what all the prosecutors do in Ukraine, and there are about about 25,000 of them.
Earlier on in response to the questions you were asked with regards to Burisma and Zlochevsky, it sounded like you were talking about actual corruption.
I have read claims by people that there were 13 investigations, but I have no specific knowledge about 14 whether those investigations were open or what the nature of 15 them might be.
I read stories referencing that in the last 24 several months after the series of articles starting in March 25 brought this set of issues to the fore.
The IMF keeps its own counsel, but oftentimes when they go on factfinding missions they often have conversations with embassies.
In terms of the European Union, traditionally in a country like Ukraine, the European Union Ambassador and the United States Ambassador coordinate very closely.
And since 2014 and the German presidency of the G7, there is a coordinating process for the G7 ambassadors plus the head of the European Union mission.
And they meet almost weekly, and they discuss issues and they go into issues like this in very deep detail.
My understanding is that the ambassadors spoke and compared views on their concerns that Shokin's continued presence as prosecutor general prevented any hope of prosecutorial reform.
As I said, Burisma had a reputation for being, first of all, one of the largest private producers of natural gas in Ukraine but also had a reputation for not being the sort of corporate, cleanest member of the business community.
To the best of my awareness, it was one of 7 these sponsor programs where it invited school kids or young 8 Ukrainians to come up with ideas for a clean energy campaign, 9 and there may have been something like a camera for the best 10 proposal.
And when I heard about 13 it I had concerns, so I raised those with the mission head of 14 USAID in country at the time and she shared my concerns.
So I would defer to my colleagues who are working on Central American policy.
But in line with your previous statements, the whole notion of looking at corruption in foreign governments and predicating foreign assistance on that, is an appropriate thing.
I believe that my colleagues who have worked on international narcotics and law enforcement see when there are funds appropriated by Congress to try to fight drug trafficking and improve the law enforcement systems in Central America.
It's intended to help our national interests to both stop the drug trafficking and improve the justice system so that corruption can be contained.
And I think based on your testimony, Ukraine has a strong and long history of corruption.
I would say that corruption is part of the reason why Ukrainians came out into the streets in both 2004 when somebody tried to steal the election and again in 2014 because of a corrupt, kleptocratic, pro-Russian government, which eventually collapsed.
And so Ukraine, yes, is a country that has struggled with these issues, but I would say also in the last 5 years has made great progress.
And just for the record, I signed with Chairman Engel a letter to obligate the funding security assistance to Ukraine.
So that is a normal issue of the diplomatic discussion at the highest level.
If you look at the political polling, if you go to IRI or NDI, both of which have done extensive polling in Ukraine since 2014, President Poroshenko, who was elected with roughly 55 percent of the vote in 2014, maintained that support through the first year.
And then as this controversy over the corrupt godfather of his kids, Prosecutor General Shokin, exploded in what was known as the diamond prosecutor affair -because one of the things they confiscated from his former driver was a cache of diamonds -his support levels, Poroshenko's support levels, as polled by the International Republican Institute in particular, plummeted from about 55 percent to the mid-20s over that period of time.
And so that was the issue that destroyed Poroshenko's credibility and his high-level support in the eyes of the Ukrainian people.
Actually, what I was going to 10 suggest is let's take a half an hour lunch break.
But those are the rules, and I'm 19 just reminding Members and staff they're not to discuss the 20 substance of the testimony.
Mr Secretary, I want to just ask you a few questions to follow up on my colleague's questions, and then I'm going to turn it over to Mr Mitchell to continue going through the timeline with you.
One question I have though is, we've come to learn of a meeting between Mr Giuliani and Mr Lutsenko, and there were some Ukrainians that were apparently -apparently came to believe that President Trump had called into that meeting.
Earlier in response to some questions from my colleagues in the minority you mentioned that there was an effort to get the top level of the State Department to issue a statement of full-throated support for the Ambassador and that statement was not forthcoming.
The statements of that nature could come from a variety of people or levels.
So I think we were looking for a statement of support from a high-ranking State Department official.
It's always most helpful if the top leader 4 issues a statement, but to be honest, I cannot recall during 5 that week whether he was on travel.
If he were on travel 6 then Deputy Secretary Sullivan might have been the 7 top-ranking official in the building.
I just don't recall on 8 those particular days who was essentially in charge.
You mention, I think, that in this 13 context that the suggestion was made to the Ambassador that 14 instead of or because there would be no statement coming from 15 the top that maybe the Ambassador should go out herself, 16 defend herself, and express her personal support for the 17 President.
I think I recall being copied on emails in 21 which Under Secretary David Hale made the suggestion.
I think 23 with Gordon he made the suggestion specifically to be 24 aggressive on Twitter or to tweet.
It may not have been -I don't think it was from him, but it was an exchange between Ambassador Yovanovitch and my guess would be leaders in the European Bureau.
Again, that is an email that should be a record that was collected and is part of the document collection.
There have been a number of public press reports that Attorney General Bill Barr and others at the Justice Department are essentially doing an investigation of the investigators into the origins of the Russia investigation.
I am not aware of any Justice Department inquiries to Ukraine regarding 2016, no.
I think you testified in an answer to my colleague's questions that at the time that it was United States policy and IMF policy and the policy of other allies and allied organizations that Shokin needed to go.
This was based on Shokin essentially dismantling an inspector general office the United States had helped fund to fight corruption in Ukraine, particularly in the prosecutor's office.
At the time this was occurring, in 2015, I 10 was in the capacity of the number two at the embassy, the 11 deputy chief of mission.
That was not something that I recall ever 17 coming up or being discussed.
My colleague also asked you about whether 19 it was appropriate to bring up the conversation -bring up a 20 discussion of corruption in the context of the President of 21 Ukraine asking for more javelins or expressing the need for 22 more javelins.
The first time I had detailed knowledge of 7 that narrative was after the White House declassified the 8 transcript that was prepared -not transcript, the record of 9 conversation that was prepared by staff at the White House.
As a general principle, I don't think that as 16 a matter of policy the United States should do that period, because I 17 have spent much of my career trying to improve the rule of 18 law.
And in countries like Ukraine and Georgia, both of 19 which want to join NATO, both of which have enjoyed billions 20 of dollars of assistance from Congress, there is an 21 outstanding issue about people in office in those countries 22 using selectively politically motivated prosecutions to go 23 after their opponents.
And that's wrong for the rule of law 24 regardless of what country that happens.
I would say that request does not align with what has been our policy towards Ukraine and many other countries, yes.
Q I'm going to pick up where Mr Goldman left off, which was the end of March of this year, 2019.
And you testified earlier that you met with the deputy director of NABU on about March 19.
Q And you received correspondence regarding a meeting that the deputy director of NABU had with someone in the embassy in Kyiv.
And the following day, March 20, was the day 11 that Mr Solomon published the article in which there was 12 video of part of the interview that he had with Mr Lutsenko.
It would have been on March 20 that the United States 21 Embassy, which is 7 hours ahead of us, and the press team at 22 the European Bureau would have worked to prepare guidance in 23 response to attacks against our Ambassador.
But I cannot 11 tell you in detail because press guidance is just that.
It's 12 then provided by a press officer in response to press 13 inquiries.
I can tell you that it was my language about 17 the fiduciary responsibility, the same language you heard me 18 use here today, because of my background in being the 19 director of the office which had the responsibility for 20 undertaking these programs.
Ambassador Sondland's communications would have been with Ambassador Yovanovitch, and then she would have communicated with the Department.
There would have been potentially communications with the European front office with Under Secretary Hale and Counselor Brechbuhl.
A It would have been over the next perhaps 10 days, basically the last 10 days of March.
A The articles came out, if not daily, almost daily, and they oftentimes combined two of the four themes I laid out before.
To the best of my recollection, there was never a new line of attack, but many articles combined two of the previous four themes.
And the suggestion was made to the Ambassador to release a tweet or make some sort of strong statement herself.
A This back and forth was done in the context of the upcoming, at that point, first round in the Ukrainian presidential elections that took place, I believe, on March 31.
So Ambassador Yovanovitch, in consultation with her press attache, made a decision, she informed us, to record some preelection videos encouraging Ukrainians to vote.
And as part of that process, she included in that a statement of support of the administration and the foreign policy, the administration of President Trump and its foreign policy.
And those videos that you just described, the purpose of them was to publish them in Ukraine.
These were videos that the embassy was already planning to issue in a preelection encouragement for Ukrainians to engage in their civic duties.
And so Ambassador Yovanovitch used that metaphor of civic duty in making reference to support as a career nonpartisan public official who supported and carried out the foreign policy of President Trump as she had with other Presidents.
A My understanding based on the email back and forth that I received from Ambassador Yovanovitch, including her press officer, was that her intent was to send a signal such as was being suggested by her within the context of something that was already being planned that was focused on electoral and presidential politics.
A I think that's a question that the committees could ask those outside of the European Bureau.
Normally the acting assistant secretary is the one who engages officials above our bureau, to include the Under Secretary of Political Affairs, David Hale, who has oversight over our bureau; on occasion, the counselor of the Department, Ulrich Brechbuhl; and then depending on the situation, as appropriate, the Secretary himself.
A I believe, to the best of my recollection, the counselor for the Department, Ulrich Brechbuhl, reached out and suggested to Mr Hannity that if there was no proof of the allegations, that he should stop covering them.
It could have been from the counselor, and it could have been from Acting Assistant Secretary Reeker.
A Because I'm the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State overseeing our relations with Ukraine, and I am normally the one who would have primary communications with our ambassadors or charges for the six countries over which I have policy oversight.
A I unplugged when we moved back to the United States and so we don't have a TV at home, so I do not watch TV at night.
However, the week you're referring to is the week of the Ukrainian presidential election, and so my focus that week was on the first round of results and what would be the potential impact on United States national interests if, as seemed likely at that time, there would be a new President.
If you had asked me that question before you gave me a timeframe, I would have given you a rough timeframe.
A To the best of my recollection, there is some sort of email regarding that, yes.
A The first person who asked her to consider extending her stay was me, and that was in January when she was back for the chief of mission conference.
We had a challenge in the process of finding someone that we would nominate to replace her.
And because of a different assignment, it was clear that that was not going to happen on schedule.
And we had concern -I had concern that the country, Ukraine, would be going through transition and we might not have an Ambassador there.
So I initially asked her to consider staying on through the election season in Ukraine.
There was presidential elections in the spring and then there were parliamentary elections scheduled no later than the fall.
A My proposal was through the end of the year to give us a chance to find a potential number -another nominee that the White House could put forward and possibly be confirmed and be out in Ukraine, or at the very least having an experienced Ambassador there through the most critical part of transition and then possibly have the Charge.
A Not that I recall, but it is possible that I talked with Wess Mitchell, who was our assistant secretary at the time.
My guess is that she thought about it for a little bit and got back to us, to me some point over the next month, which was prior to the conversation that you were referring to in March.
The 5th to 7th of March, I think, was the time 15 when Under Secretary Hale was there.
The media storm that 16 was launched with Mr Solomon's interview of Prosecutor 17 General Lutsenko started on March 20, 2 weeks later.
A To the best of my recollection, she indicated on April 25 that she'd been instructed to get on a plane to come back to Washington as soon as possible.
A I believe that was the first time I heard that instructions had been sent for her to come back to the U.S., yes.
A I understand that, because it was part of her opening statement that was published, she referred to a conversation she had with the Deputy Secretary of State.
A I was not having conversations with anybody on the so-called 7th floor State Department leadership about this issue.
A I, on a personal level, felt awful for her because it was within 2 months of us asking her, the Under Secretary of State asking her to stay another year.
Decisions had been made by the leadership of the State Department and ambassadors serve at the pleasure of.
So when an instruction comes down that is a decision that was being made.
Q So on May 6 the State Department issued a statement saying that Ambassador Yovanovitch was ending her assignment in Kyiv as planned.
A I believe that was something issued by the embassy in Kyiv not by the State Department, and it was in the form of a management notice.
A If I'd been the DCM, I don't think that's how I would have had that news be released to the embassy community.
A I think of a situation of that magnitude I would have called a townhall meeting and talked to people face to face.
If I 10 had still been the deputy chief of mission, I would have 11 handled notification of the embassy staff differently, so 12 that's -I am now the -that was my job from 2015 to 2018.
A Mr Giuliani, at that point, had been carrying on a campaign for several months full of lies and incorrect information about Ambassador Yovanovitch, so this was a continuation of his campaign of lies.
A I believe that Mr Giuliani, as a United States citizen, has First Amendment rights to say whatever he wants, but he's a private citizen.
His assertions and allegations against former Ambassador Yovanovitch were without basis, untrue, period.
A When it became clear that Ambassador Yovanovitch was going to be recalled, one of my responsibilities as the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State was to try to find and resolve how we are going to ensure that our key missions have appropriate leadership.
The person who replaced me had already 2 been moved early to be our DCM and Charge in Sweden, and so 3 we had a temporary acting deputy chief of mission.
So that 4 left the embassy not only without -the early withdraw of 5 Ambassador Yovanovitch left us not only without an Ambassador 6 but without somebody who had been selected to be deputy chief 7 of mission.
I had at one point thought of Bill 17 Taylor, but because he had not been a career Foreign Service 18 officer but had been a senior executive civil servant, I knew 19 that it would be very difficult to go through the process of 20 recalling him and getting in him in a position to go out.
And that took us 3 or 4 weeks, but 5 we eventually got to the answer that we achieved, which was 6 yes, and he went out as Charge, arriving June 17th or 18th.
And then Mr 15 Taylor went on to say that you, Mr Kent, described much more 16 than he knew, and it was very ugly.
Some of them were 12 interviewed -Mr Kulyk was interviewed, I believe -by 13 Mr Solomon.
Mr Giuliani publicized his meeting with Nazar 14 Kholodnytsky in Paris about the same time that he gave an 15 interview to censor.net and accused former Ambassador 16 Yovanovitch, me, and the entire United States Embassy of partisan 17 activity in 2016.
And we've already talked about his 18 engagement with Shokin and Lutsenko.
A I first heard their names through a series of conversations with a variety of people.
A There is a United States -I'll give you a series of points and I'm trying in my mind sort out what I heard from whom, when, but we're talking about the period primarily starting in April, possibly in March.
He sent an open letter complaining about corruption and pressure that he was facing, including he said, an effort to unseat the American Ambassador in Ukraine.
Second, I heard from people when I went to Ukraine in the first week of May that Giuliani associates were coming to Ukraine, and the names that were mentioned were Fruman and Parnas.
One of the people I met was an affiliate of the new President -President-elect at that point; he was not yet President -and his name was Ivan Bakanov.
And he mentioned Fruman's name, and he said and there's another one, I don't remember his name.
And also on that trip before I met with Bakanov, I met with Minister of Interior Avakov, the person whom I'd had the conversation I detailed in Washington in February, and he mentioned them as well, and said that they were coming in to Ukraine and that he -that was the first time that I heard that Rudy Giuliani was planning to come that week as well.
A He said that he had heard that they were coming to town and that their associate Rudy Giuliani was coming as well.
So I was in Ukraine I believe May 8th and 9th, and I believe I may have met Avakov the first day I was there, that would be the 8th, and he mentioned that he heard that Parnas and Fruman were coming, and that they were coming with their associate, the Mayor Giuliani.
He also told me that when he had been, he, Avakov, had been in the United States in February, he had communication that Mayor Giuliani had reached out to him and invited him to come and meet the group of them in Florida.
But he said did say that he was planning to have coffee with them, they had asked, and he was planning to meet them in Kyiv.
I met him before that, but he said that if they want to meet, I'll meet and have coffee with them.
Q If I recall when you had this conversation with Mr Avakov in February, Mr Avakov thought it was unwise what Mr Giuliani was doing.
I mean, that was his assessment as the minister of interior that the prosecutor general of his country should not make a private trip to the United States.
Zelenskyy told me the first time we met the December of 2018 that the person he had known the longest, that he had grown up on the same corridor in their apartment block from kindergarten was Ivan Bakanov.
A To the best of my recollection that was a conversation where we talked about what might happen since it was in between post election, pre-inauguration.
I asked him what jobs he thought he might be interested in or appointed to since his childhood friend was now the President-elect, and he described to me his interest in either being chief of staff or the new prosecutor general.
To the best of my recollection, the only name in that meeting that I wrote down -and that’s part of the records which I provided to the State Department -was Fruman.
And then later on he followed up because he couldn't remember the other name, which turned out to be Parnas.
And since I had met with Mr Avakov in the morning, I 3 repeated what Avakov told me.
He told me, you can always 4 meet and have a cup of coffee with people, you don't have to 5 make any commitments.
But I did not know their specific purpose in 13 coming to Ukraine on or about the 10th and 11th of May.
As I said earlier, at this point I was not a regular -I don't tweet personally, and I don't follow all the tweets of everybody.
The extent that I might have had concern, it would be what he might try to do as a private citizen involved in the U.S.-Ukraine official relationship.
Again, I did not know the purpose of his trip, I only heard that he might be coming in.
A That is not -relations between or communications between the leadership of the State Department and the White House at that level do not go through the regional bureau.
Q Do you know if there was any effort, I mean, they would have kept you in the loop if they were trying to make the case that, hey, you can't be believing this stuff.
And if you're thinking about removing Yovanovitch, hold on, let me -let us make our case.
A My understanding is that there were high-level discussions between the leadership of the State Department and the White House prior to the decision to recall Ambassador Yovanovitch, but those obviously were ultimately unsuccessful, and the account that I heard at the time is in accordance with what I read Ambassador Yovanovitch had in her statement on Friday.
What I said was that after the 4 State Department made clear that it was not ready to issue, 5 it was our understanding that former Mayor Giuliani reached 6 out to the White House, and then that was the point at which 7 Deputy Chief of Staff Blair was tasked with calling us to 8 find out the background of the story.
That was -I believe that conversation 21 occurred on the 11th of January, specifically about this 22 issue of a visa for the corrupt former prosecutor.
To the best of my knowledge he didn't try to travel to the United States and was denied, he did not have a visa.
To the best of my recollection, because of the acts of corruption affiliated with undermining United States programming and policy goals, we probably, if the visa had not expired prudentially, revoked the visa under the assumption that we don't want corrupt individuals coming to the United States.
Lutsenko was in office 10 3 years, and so he had more opportunity to take some action.
And as this case was developing, Lutsenko 7 became aware of it, and this corrupt official who was sort of 8 the apex of the scheme went to him or to the prosecutors and 9 became essentially a cooperating witness for them.
And then he went further and exposed 12 the undercover agents that had been a part of this case.
They were actually 15 engaged in pursuing an actual crime, whereas, he was 16 essentially colluding with a corrupt official to undermine 17 the investigation.
What we said was that all the 4 officials that were involved in this ring needed to be held 5 to account and prosecuted, and we needed to see that they 6 were taking seriously our concerns about the integrity of 7 their passports.
And as 18 I recall, there was a settlement where Burisma paid a penalty 19 for nonpayment of taxes, and at that point Zlochevsky 20 returned from his external home in Monaco and resumed a 21 public life in Ukraine.
We did, however, I mentioned earlier that at the 16 request of Petro Poroshenko, we made available a former New Jersey prosecutor ^ 18 let that contract lapse after roughly 9 months because it was 19 clear that Lutsenko was not going to push forward reform as 20 he had promised to us.
And I would say that there was less 10 consistent high-level engagement on Ukraine.
We worked 24 intensively with Nazar for almost 2 years, until we reached a 25 breaking point with him.
A mentoring trip to Romania where Laura Kovesi 4 is a very well-known anticorruption prosecutor and now the 5 lead prosecutor in Europe.
Because even though we saw 6 Kholodnytsky as an imperfect person, he was the new 7 anti corruption prosecutor, and his success, would be 8 Ukraine's success, would be our success.
There was suspicion that he had 11 been involved in corrupt acts, and under a Ukrainian warrant 12 a bug, a tap was put in his fish tank in his office.
And in 13 the course of the first 2 weeks, he was caught trying to 14 suborn a witness, coach him to lie, as well as obstruct 15 justice in a case that involved his hometown, in an effort to 16 bribe the minister of health, Ulyana Suprun, | So agreed to 18 for NABU and caught the effort on trying to give her a bribe.
And that if he were to remain as the anti corruption prosecutor, we would cease cooperating with him.
And he stood up, walked out, and you know, tweeted, you know, before he left the embassy compound that he was going to have a defiant attitude.
So we stopped cooperating with him once presented with evidence that he was actively suborning a witness and obstructing justice.
Q You have regaled us over the course of many, many minutes today about the deep issues of corruption in the Ukraine.
You talked in extensive detail that the problems are in the Shokin era, during the Lutsenko era, and even now with Kholodnytsky.
The accusation by former prosecutor 5 Lutsenko is that we didn't show him the money, but that 6 fundamentally misunderstood how our assistance is 7 administered.
And this was the issue in the letter that I 8 think is part of the packet that you may have received that I 9 signed in April 2016.
I 13 talked to one of his temporary deputy prosecutors who was a 14 reformist who later chose not to work with him.
They have this program, OPDAT, Overseas 23 Prosecutorial Development and Training.
Another was with the 24 United Nations organization called IDLO, International Development Law Organization.
And finally, a civil society association, AnTAC, the anti-corruption center.
I would hesitate to offer a number because I don't -it's been years since I've seen any spreadsheets.
Secretary, Mr Kent, I just want to go back to questions Steve asked earlier.
What was it going to take for the government to take the same position with Mr Lutsenko that you took with Shokin, and I've just been making a list.
And the guy he hired for this new prosecutor's office was every bit as bad.
We made our concerns about the ineffectiveness of Mr Lutsenko clear to his patron, the then President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko, but that assignment is made by the nomination of the Ukrainian President, and the dismissal requires a vote in the Ukrainian parliament.
I just want to clarify something that's been kind of veered on numerous occasions before you got here and today.
But in a kind of exchange on the last round the implication was is that there was a favor asked by the President for an investigation.
The implication was in the last round that 7 the President was asking to do him a favor.
Do the President 8 of the United States a favor, but the verbiage says do us a 9 favor.
As I'm reading the paragraph, it refers to 12 CrowdStrike and Mueller and then so on and so forth, and so 13 that is the first time I'd ever heard of this line of 14 thought.
There's nothing referred to in on page 3 24 regarding Biden or Burisma that can be connected with the 25 line, do us a favor.
And I just want to make the record clear 14 because for hours and hours in testimony over the course of 15 days here there's a continual characterization of these 16 events that are not true, that are not correct, per the 17 transcript.
I believe it is a matter of United States policy and 2 practice, particularly since I have worked in the area of 3 promoting the rule of law, that politically related 4 prosecutions are not the way of promoting the rule of law, 5 they undermine the rule of law.
I have never been in a position or a meeting 9 where I've heard somebody suggest that politically motivated 10 prosecutions are in the United States national interest.
I think if there's any criminal nexus for any 17 activity involving the U.S., that United States law enforcement by all 18 means should pursue that case, and if there's an 19 international connection, that we have the mechanisms to ask 20 either through Department of Justice MLAT in writing or 21 through the presence of individuals representing the FBI, our 22 legal attaches, to engage foreign governments directly based 23 on our concerns that there had been some criminal act 24 violating United States law.
As I mentioned, I heard that that was the 13 view expressed and conveyed by the Deputy Secretary of State 14 to her.
A I heard that the call was going to take place on -I heard that it would take place the day before on the 24th.
I was informed that it was finally scheduled by Lieutenant Colonel Alex Vindman, who's the director at the National Security Council responsible for Ukraine.
And I then emailed the Embassy suggesting that they send a communications officer over to the presidential office to check the quality of the line because it had been a long time since we had had a formal call, and sometimes those lines don't work when they get calls.
So as far as I know, the embassy did that to ensure that when the White House situation room called out the call would go through.
A There had been discussions on and off for awhile for a followup call to the congratulatory call on April 21st, the day that Zelenskyy won the presidency, and the timeline slipped until it was after the parliamentary elections.
Those occurred on July 21st, and the call eventually happened 4 days later on the 25th.
A I think that's a question you could ask people that work at the National Security Council.
A I read that there were some people who had some misgivings about the call, yes.
A I may have heard that there were some views, I did not understand what the views were behind that expression.
A I got the impression that there was at least one official uncomfortable, but I didn't understand what that was about.
I, the State Department, was in favor of a congratulatory call after the election.
A I believe I was aware that the White House Sit Room was going to try to patch through the counselor of the department, Ulrich Brechbuhl.
A It would not be normal to have the embassy patched into the phone call.
It may not have been the day after, but it could have been either July 26th or 27th, several days after.
He felt -I could hear it in his voice and his 2 hesitancy that he felt uncomfortable.
He actually said that 3 he could not share the majority of what was discussed because 4 of the very sensitive nature of what was discussed.
That had been a 7 short, bubbly, positive, congratulatory call from someone who 8 had just won an election with 73 percent.
That President 10 Zelenskyy tried to turn on the charm, and he is a comedian 11 and a communicator, but that the dynamics didn't click in the 12 way that they had on April 21st.
He 16 mentioned that the characterization of the Ambassador as bad 17 news.
And then he paused, and said, and then the 18 conversation went into the direction of some of the most 19 extreme narratives that have been discussed publicly.
He said that Zelenskyy said, if anything bad had happened in the past, that was the old team.
I'm a new guy, I've got a new team, and anything we do will be transparent and honest.
Q And is that as much as you can remember from your -A And then there was -I think the last thing that Lieutenant Colonel Vindman mentioned was there about a brief mention by Zelenskyy about United States -interested in working on energy-related issues.
Previously, I should have said, at the front earlier in the conversation, that he said that Lieutenant Colonel Vindman told me that President Zelenskyy had thanked the United States for all of its military assistance.
And Lieutenant Colonel Vindman told me that the President replied, yes, we do, and it's not reciprocal.
A He did not mention, to the best of my recollection, including the notes that I took, which I've submitted to the State Department.
Q And did you make any followup inquiries with him like, hey, can I come over and speak with you in a secure environment or learn more about this call -A None.
A That was the second conversation between the two Presidents in April, May, June, July, 4 months.
We at that point were focused on trying to sort through why the Office of Management and Budget had put a hold on security assistance.
So those were the next step issues in the relationship, both functionally in terms of military assistance, as well as in procedurally in terms of the possibility of a meeting.
A The start of World War II was the 1st of September 1939, so the commemorations were the 1st of September 2019 in Warsaw.
A That week, I believe the Monday may have been the 24th or the 23rd, so maybe the 23rd through the 27th was the week of the leaders' participation.
We have a weekly 19 secure video conference call with the leadership of Embassy 20 Kyiv, now led by Charge Bill Taylor, it is possible that I 21 discussed part of that with him subsequently.
The second half of August I was on vacation 7 with my f ami ly , so there's no contact there.
Her 9 mother and my wife were very close socially when 10 we were In Washington, I'm sorry, In Kyiv, so It essentially 11 was a social gathering, a meal shared.
I mean, the 12 President of the United States -you know, you related to 13 her that the President of the United States may have 14 mentioned her on a call with President -15 A As I think she may have said to you Friday, in part 16 because of the what the Deputy Secretary of State told her, 17 she aware of the President's views of her.
Ambassador Yovanovitch is 23 an intensely private person, she's an introvert.
And, again, 24 she's also someone who follows very strict what is deemed 25 proper and proprietary, and so that's -we did not linger on any conversation of that nature.
And I had mentioned that previously we used to run essentially remedial writing seminars for the officers in the European bureau as well as Embassy Kyiv, that I helped conduct, and she asked if I had the notes from that, and I said I did.
And so I passed her essentially the notes of presentations I had made about writing well.
The communication you had with Vindman on the 29th, and that was an estimated date.
It's several days later, depending on what day the call happened, during the week, it could have been the next Monday, it could have been the Friday, I just don't remember.
A I did not seek to revisit that issue nor did I talk to anybody else at the NSC about the call.
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman was clearly 9 extremely uncomfortable sharing the limited amount of 10 information that he did.
So he shared what he felt 11 comfortable sharing, and that constituted the read-out that I 12 received from him.
He made clear to me that he felt 16 uncomfortable sharing as much as he had actually shared.
So 17 the relationship between a director of the NSC and say 18 someone at my level is a relationship, it's intense, it's 19 frequent, and you have to develop a trust factor.
And he 20 made clear to me that he had shared as much as he felt 21 comfortable sharing, and I respected that.
Why don't we take a 10-minute break and 25 use the facilities, and we'll come back.
I think a 5 couple of my colleagues do, and then we'll go back to the 6 timeline with Mr Goldman.
If you turn to page 2 of that call record at the 10 bottom, this is again the July telephone call between 11 President Trump and President Zelenskyy.
We are ready to -this is President 13 Zelenskyy: We are ready to continue to cooperate for the 14 next steps, specifically, we are almost ready to buy more 15 javelins from the United States for defense purposes.
I would not have known except for the newspaper media coverage afterwards explaining what that was a reference to.
And the President goes on to say, I guess you have one of your wealthy people, the server they say Ukraine has it.
I can only again refer to the media articles that I have read subsequently about this explaining that there is, the founder of CrowdStrike who is a Russian American, and the media as said that that was a confused identity.
But that's again -the only basis I have to judge that passage is what I've read in the media.
And further on in the paragraph, the President says: I would like to have the Attorney General call you or your people, and I would like you to get to the bottom of it.
I wasn't on the call, and the first time I saw this declassified document record of conversation was after it was declassified by the White House.
When you 4 spoke to Colonel Vindman, he said there was certain very 5 sensitive topics he did not feel comfortable mentioning.
This whole passage, which you just went 8 through, he made no reference to it.
If he had read this to me, I would have asked 14 him what is CrowdStrike and what does that mean, because it's 15 just not clear to me just reading it.
As I said, other 16 people interpreted what the context was for that, but again, 17 I'll go back to what I said before.
If anybody did anything in 2016 that violated United States 20 elections or election laws that, you know, there's a reason 21 to investigate something with the United States nexus, we should open 22 that investigation.
And if the Ukrainians had a part in 23 that, then that would be natural for us to formally convey a 24 request to the Ukrainians.
Again, when he said that there were sensitive issues that he didn't feel comfortable talking about, I did not know what exactly he meant until I read this declassified memorandum of conversation.
Let me ask you about another matter that it appears he did not bring up with you.
That Biden stopped the prosecution and a lot of people want to find out about that, so whatever you can do with the Attorney General would be great.
That passage -he made no reference that would have in his limited read-out to me that would have matched that passage of the memorandum of the conversation.
Earlier you mentioned that media campaign against the Ambassador took place.
I could only see the figures that voluntarily associated themselves with that campaign in both countries.
Well in Ukraine, very clearly, the prosecutor general at the time, Yuriy Lutsenko, his press spokeswoman retweeted the tweet of Don Trump, Jr. attacking the Ambassador.
So very clearly, it wasn't just him personally as a Ukrainian, but the institution.
There were -I made references earlier to what were known as the Porokhobots, the trolls on social media who were active in support of Poroshenko.
And 10 days before the election, rather than attacking Russia or attacking his political opponents, as they normally did, they were attacking Ambassador Yovanovitch and me by name.
And then obviously the people in the United States that were promoting it.
Referencing Mayor Giuliani, you became aware of his activities in Ukraine.
His role in orchestrating the connections with information from Yuriy Lutsenko seemed to be a classic, you scratch my back, I scratch yours, issue.
Yuriy Lutsenko told, as I mentioned, Gizo Uglava, that he was bitter and angry at the embassy for our positions on anti-corruption.
And in exchange, it appeared that the campaign that was unleashed, based on his interview, was directed towards Americans, principally the Ambassador, as well as organizations that he saw as his enemies in Ukraine, the National Anti Corruption Bureau as well as the Anti Corruption Center.
Several Ukrainians at the time told me that they saw what Lutsenko was trying to do was get President Trump to endorse President Poroshenko's reelection.
It would not have made a difference either because Zelenskyy, as noted before, won with 73 percent.
To the best of my knowledge, in the first 4 phase of Mr Giuliani's contact with Ukrainians and his 5 efforts to orchestrate the media campaign, nobody from the 6 State Department had contact with him.
When I say the first 7 phase, that is essentially the phase involving Prosecutor 8 General Lutsenko through the election of President Zelenskyy, 9 which occurred on April 21st.
At a certain point, I believe in July, then 16 special representative for Ukraine negotiations, Volker, told 17 me that he would be reaching out to Rudy Giuliani.
And 19 THE CHAIRMAN: I just want to mention, we intend to go 20 through this in a timeline.
First of all, it's somewhat news to me, 22 and I'll pass it back if that's what you want, but it 23 seems -24 THE CHAIRMAN: We're going to get into all of this.
Based on what I know, Yuriy Lutsenko, as prosecutor general, vowed revenge, and provided information to Rudy Giuliani in hopes that he would spread it and lead to her removal.
Separately, there are individuals that I mentioned before, including Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman, who started reaching out actively to undermine Ambassador Yovanovitch, starting in 2018 with a meeting with former Congressman Pete Sessions on May 9th, 2018, the same day he wrote a letter to Secretary Pompeo impugning Ambassador Yovanovitch's loyalty and suggesting that she be removed.
And others also in 2018 were engaged in an effort to undermine her standing by claiming that she was disloyal.
So that's the early roots of people following their own agendas and using her as an instrument to fulfill those agendas.
Secretary, as the Deputy Assistant 3 Secretary of State for Eastern Europe and the Caucasus, It 4 would seem to me that you would be familiar with the efforts 5 by the administration to engage with Ukraine.
I've never in 27 years been on a 11 call made by a President of the United States.
I have never served at the National Security 15 Council, I've only served at the State Department and at 16 embassies overseas.
You said earlier that you 18 provided all of your documents to the State Department for 19 them to make available to us.
Likely the WhatsApp exchange between me and Ambassador, or sorry, Charge Taylor.
In parts of the world, WhatsApp has become a very active method of communication for a variety of reasons, it's considered encrypted, although I don't think text messages are secure.
And in countries like Ukraine there's actually no data charge for use WhatsApp, and that's what drives the use of social media, so they pay for text messages, but when they use social media apps they don't actually pay for that data.
So that has altered communications in parts of world by rate setting and how people communicate.
So in Latin American, for instance, and in parts of Europe and Asia, applications like WhatsApp have become the dominate form of communication.
There has been a lot of conversation earlier today from our colleagues on the other side of the aisle about Burisma as being a company that lacked some ethical commitments and moral compass of sorts.
There are many companies in Ukraine that 4 might fall into that category, yes.
If you took the roster of the richest 7 Ukrainians, they didn't build value, they largely stole it.
I would say that Mr Zlochevsky's actions 16 stood out in one way that he was the actual minister who 17 awarded himself the licenses to explore for gas exploration.
Going back to that July 25th call, 22 there was a lot of exchanges between Ambassador Sondland, Mr 23 Volker, and also the Charge Taylor about whether or not the 24 aid would be forthcoming, whether or not the statement would 25 be written.
I did not participate in those exchanges by virtue of the fact that, to the best of my knowledge, you don't have me as a participant in those exchanges, and none of those have been released.
I did have my own dialogue with Charge Taylor in the course of our work, in the same way that I had a dialogue with Ambassador Yovanovitch and with our ambassadors in Moldova, Azerbaijan, Armenia, and our Charges in Georgia and Belarus.
And I would like to address my colleague we're going to get to that through the timeline.
Can I suggest that we have the counsel continue with the timeline, and then as we get through it members can add in with questions.
Q Focusing your attention on May of this year when I believe you said that Rudy Giuliani met in Paris with Nazar Kholodnytsky, who was the prosecutor of the anti-corruption.
We 2 stopped cooperating with them approximately in March of 2018 3 when the so-called fish tank scandal emerged.
You have testified today 5 that Mr Giuliani met with Yuriy Lutsenko in January, that he 6 advocated to get the former Prosecutor General Shokin a visa 7 in January.
And then he met with a special prosecutor in 8 May, who the United States had ceased all former relations with.
And 9 Lutsenko and Shokin are generally, the general consensus 10 belief is that they either are or, at this point, or were 11 corrupt prosecutor generals.
And you also indicated that by May of this 15 point, Mr Giuliani had been on television and in the media 16 advocating for the four story lines that you summarized from 17 those March articles.
And then in May you went to Ukraine and you 20 had meetings with Ukrainian officials, two of whom mentioned 21 to you that Mr Giuliani wanted to meet with them.
Q Now, you would agree, right, that high-level Ukrainian officials don't meet with every private American citizen who travels to Ukraine.
Q So the Ukrainians certainly understood that Mr Giuliani was not a regular private citizen.
A They understood that Mr Giuliani asserted he represented Mr Trump in his private capacity.
A Ukrainians such as Arsen Avakov are experienced players willing to meet with anybody.
The team of the incoming president at that time, President-elect Zelenskyy, had spent their entire careers as a tight-knit group of entertainment company executives who had no experience in politics.
So they were looking to try to figure out to understand how to navigate political networks.
But at this time it would be my 9 best counsel to you to shield your President-elect from 10 private citizens.
As a general rule, we don't want other countries involved in our own domestic political process, no.
Q So around this -at the end of May, there was the inauguration of President Zelenskyy.
A The starting point was the conversation between Presidents Trump and President-elect Zelenskyy on election day.
President Zelenskyy asked if it would be possible for President Trump to come to inaugural.
President Trump suggested that he would talk to Vice President Pence, and schedules willing, that he hoped it could work out, but in any case, the U.5. would have representation at the inaugural.
And so we were 5 looking for an anchor, someone who was a person of stature 6 and whose job had relevance to our agenda.
Because he had traveled to 11 Ukraine, understood the issues, and energy was one of the top 12 three issues that we were working with Ukraine.
So that was 13 the start of that conversation, and then it was a matter of 14 building out possibilities.
As an 18 example, when President Yushchenko was inaugurated in Ukraine 19 in 2005, and I was the control officer on the ground at the 20 time, the delegation was Secretary Colin Powell in his last 21 act as State of State, and five Ukrainian Americans.
It included some Ukrainian American leaders here in the United States, as well as officials.
Former National Security Advisor Bolten weighed in at some point in the process, and eventually the White House settled on a list, which was, in the end, Secretary Perry, Lieutenant Colonel Vindman representing the NSC, Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker, and then our Charge in country at the time, Acting Joseph Pennington.
A He was not somebody that we initially proposed, but Ambassador Sondland has his own networks of influence, including chief of staff Mulvaney.
What did you understand Ambassador Sondland's role in Ukraine to be by March 17th of this -A Ambassador Sondland had started cultivating a relationship with the previous Ukrainian President Poroshenko.
He visited, as I recall, a ship visit to Odesa, which may have been where he first met Poroshenko and other leaders.
Q And you described an independent relationship that he had with the chief of staff.
A Well, I think the proof in the pudding is, after the delegation went to the inauguration on May 20th and had a meeting with President Zelenskyy -and that included Senator Ron Johnson, who was there not as part of the Presidential delegation but separately.
But he sat in the meeting with Zelenskyy, and then he joined a briefing to the President in the Oval Office on May 23rd.
It was Ambassador Sondland's connections with Mulvaney that got them the meeting with the President.
It was not done through the NSC staff, through Lieutenant Colonel Vindman and Ambassador Bolton.
A Well, normally for international issues, meetings would appear on the President's calendar because they were proposed by the National Security staff and pushed through the National Security Advisor.
In this case, the out-brief to the President of the inaugural happened because of Ambassador Sondland's connections through Chief of Staff Mulvaney, to the best of my knowledge.
Q So you're talking about President Trump's debriefing after the inauguration on May 23rd.
The Oval Office 2 meeting to talk about that and the way forward occurred in 3 the Oval Office on May 23rd.
If that 13 was during the time that President Poroshenko was the 14 President, that was earlier.
So he 16 did call President Poroshenko in March for instance after the 17 attack started on Ambassador Yovanovitch to suggest the 18 Porosheno back off.
So his acceleration of his involvement 19 in Ukraine and in our relationship was in one phase, just 20 starting the last month or two of Poroshenko's presidency, 21 and it accelerated after President Zelenskyy's assumption of 22 office on May 21st.
And they came out of 14 that meeting asserting that going forward they would be the 15 drivers of the relationship with Ukraine.
She gave a 2 readout to my office director who was probably acting for me 3 that week, mm|, normally office director of Eastern 4 Europe.
Kurt Volker gave a readout to his then-special 5 assistant, Chris Anderson , who is currently a language 6 student.
And Gordon Sondland would have given a readout to 7 somebody that would have been forwarded to us.
He said 18 that President Trump had been very angry about Ukraine, he 19 said that they were corrupt, and they had wished him ill in 20 2016.
The last point that I recall from the readouts was that there would be an accelerated search for a political nominee for Ambassador, as opposed to having a career Foreign Service officer proposed from the State Department.
A I have read the documents that have been made available to me as part of my read.
The Office of Intelligence and Research briefs me twice a week, but that does not mean that I've read every document about Russia, no.
Q No, I understand, there is specific document that the Intelligence Community assessment about Russian interference in the 2016 election.
And to the extent that it has been discussed in general in the media I'm aware of those findings.
Q And are you aware that Special Counsel Mueller indicted I believe 12 Russians and laid out an indictment -A Yes.
And we were very pleased that the 2 President agreed to call on election day on a Sunday.
We had 3 presumed that it might happen the next workday, which was a 4 Monday.
And as you might expect on a Sunday call when it was 5 probably past midnight in Ukraine on election night, 6 President Zelenskyy was in a good mood, President Trump was 7 very positive and congratulated him on a great win.
And invited President Trump to his inaugural, the 12 date to be determined.
And President Trump, as I said, 13 acknowledged he would try to find somebody appropriate to 14 attend.
We obviously stand ready to 4 be supportive but that's -that's their function.
Ukraine is an 8 important country that Congress appropriates roughly in the 9 ballpark $700 million a year in assistance and Zelenskyy won 10 a clear mandate for change and so we were supportive of a 11 visit to the White House, yes.
Starting from the beginning it was clear that he had a 18 prior association with a fairly notorious oligarch named Ihor 19 Kolomoisky and that was going to be a mark of his willingness 20 to really make a break from past relationships and stand on 21 principle.
And so in the Ukraine 7 context, it's very important to show that they can establish 8 a strong relationship with the leader of the United States.
And the United States spends a considerable amount of our 13 resources supporting Ukraine and therefore it makes sense.
The time on a 15 President's schedule is always subject to competing 16 priorities.
Special Representative Volker traveled frequently to Ukraine so it is possible that he may have gone in late May.
There was a coordinating meeting in the Department of Energy in mid-June, on June 18th.
Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker from the State Department, Acting Assistant Secretary Reeker, my direct supervisor, Tyler Brace, all attended that meeting in Secretary Perry's office, and they also connected recently arrived Charge Taylor from Kyiv.
So I would say that, to the best of my knowledge, after that May 23rd meeting, this June 18th meeting was the next meeting where a number of officials got together specifically to talk about policies and programs towards Ukraine.
To the best of my -what I am aware of is 3 that subsequent to the June 18th meeting, there was a 4 June 28th conference call between Secretary Perry, Sondland, 5 Volker, and involving Charge Taylor, at the end of which they 6 were patched through to President Zelenskyy.
Initially I have an email suggesting that 10 Ambassador Sondland on June 27th had written Charge Taylor to 11 suggest that that would be a U.S.-only meeting or a U.S.-only 12 call.
But in the end, on the next day, it turned into a call 13 with President Zelenskyy after a pre-conversation among the 14 Americans, based on what Charge Taylor has told me.
But again, that was I think a 19 period of time where the direction of our engagement with 20 Ukraine shifted into shall we say unusual channels.
His listed responsibilities were focused on negotiating with Russia over their war in Ukraine, and then Charge Taylor as the lead representative in country.
And so frankly, in that constellation Charge Taylor was the primary voice for our full interests as the Charge of our mission in Kyiv.
Q And one more question, you said that you learned of the call from Charge Taylor.
A He indicated that there was a discussion about the need to raise a sensitive issue with Zelenskyy.
And in that discussion Ambassador Volker volunteered that he would be seeing Zelenskyy in person the next week in Toronto and that was the meeting in which I participated on July 2nd.
A Kurt Volker told me that it was giving guidance to Zelenskyy on how he needed to characterize his willingness to be cooperative on issues of interest to the President.
A I did not have the full details of what exactly that was, but I think it was sending signals about potential investigations.
A The initial readouts I got were, yes secondhand from these three people.
My understanding is that she may have gotten it from deputy -then deputy national security advisor Kupperman.
She had a conversation with who was the acting deputy assistant secretary at the time.
I believe I got an email with readout of a conversation with Fiona, Chris Anderson's readout that he got from Kurt Volker and a third readout from someone in the State Department who worked with our mission to the European Union that would have had Ambassador Sondland's version.
Q So Sondland gives a readout to his staffer who writes it up, sends an email.
To the best of my recollection, she had a conversation with who is normally the director for Eastern Europe and, while I was away at my daughter's was acting in my stead as acting deputy assistant secretary.
My understanding again, this is now 7 third hand from is that Fiona's readout came from 8 Kupperman, not from her participation in the meeting.
A -the briefers to the President were those that represented lead officials and that would be Secretary Perry, Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker and Senator Johnson.
A And I wasn't in the meeting and wouldn't have been in the meeting even if I were in Washington.
A To the best of my understanding, all I know is that Charlie Kupperman -or Kupperman.
Kupperman, former deputy National Security Advisor Kupperman may have been in the meeting.
A I didn't ask if he was in the meeting, because when I returned from work I had three different version or readouts of the meetings from others.
And I had three different 7 versions of the meeting so I wasn't looking for a fourth.
So I would say I have more 19 communications with Lieutenant Colonel Vindman by email and 20 phone call.
He's a -he was a campaign planner before he came 2 over to the NSC and he has that campaign planning mentality, 3 you know, what's the goal and he'll plow forward.
He's a lieutenant colonel who spends his day 11 working on campaign plans.
I think if you talk to most State 14 Department employees will have an opinion that the role of 15 the National Security Council is to coordinate the work of 16 other agencies, not to task us.
I would say there's more tension 5 perhaps between him and the staff that work for me, but we 6 have a respectful working relationship.
But by the end of the 19 meeting, he'd been convinced and the version I recall hearing 20 was Ambassador Sondland helped draft it.
And to be honest, 21 the second version of the letter actually read better than 22 the first version.
I wasn't involved in either of them 23 because I had been on leave and eventually that letter was 24 signed.
I was, as I mentioned, in Ukraine and Kyiv at the 9 embassy on May 8th.
I did offer to have a restricted 10 townhall meeting for Americans, essentially, in our version 11 of the SCIF, and the country team, the meeting room, where 12 we'd have -and anyone who wished to have a conversation 13 about what had happened and the way forward.
Their question, as people working at 19 the embassy, was what was going to be the impact on them, on 20 the embassy, and on our policy towards Ukraine.
He was the one we 8 all wanted at that point, but we still had to work out 9 whether we could bring him back.
And those details with the 10 personnel system had not yet been finalized.
That there are those in the Ukraine 19 that wished him ill in 2016 and they were going to work 20 towards an Oval Office meeting, energy issues were important 21 and then you mentioned that there was a decision to put in a 22 new political Ambassador.
A He was called back essentially to government service because he knew all the players.
He's a bundle of positivity and gets along with everyone and he's a real leader.
He was a long time senior executive at the State Department, but he was a graduate of West Point who joined the 101st, and he was platoon leader in Vietnam and in Germany.
And that is the job of the White House because it is the President's prerogative to appoint, nominate an Ambassador and then the Senate's role to confirm.
Q During his tenure as Vice President, Joe Biden had a role with regard to Ukraine.
A I was, although his involvement in Ukraine predated my return to the Ukraine account.
I believe -it should be a matter of record, but I believe as Vice President he visited Ukraine six times, which probably is unusual for any country outside of the usual countries like Germany, like -216 1 one of which I believe would've been when the former leader 2 Yanukovych was there and then the subsequent visits 3 afterwards.
Pyatt as chief 15 of mission, Toria as the assistant secretary, and Vice 16 President Biden as Vice President.
I had come out on an emergency basis for my 25 predecessor I And I came out on 24 hours' notice to Ukraine the beginning of October for my third stint.
My understanding is that the conversations that were near-daily between Ambassador Pyatt and Toria Nuland regarding what to do on the way forward then included pitching the Office of the Vice President to push President Poroshenko to remove Shokin.
There was a similar push against Prime Minister Arseny Yatseniuk, who had several different corrupt political backers.
And there was one named Martynenko who was involved in all sorts of dirty business, including nuclear fuel supplies from Russia.
And so we pressured Yatseniuk to have one of his corrupt cronies resign, and Martynenko resigned.
And there was also the pressure on Poroshenko, on the corrupt prosecutor general, and Shokin was not dismissed, I believe, until early March, so 3 weeks after Vice President Biden's visit in December 2015.
Q The Vice President, he relates to some of these details on a video that's been published on I think the Wall Street Journal.
To the best of my recollection, he was at some conference, maybe Council on Foreign Relations, sometime in 2018, and he was telling the story in a sort of folksy manner.
And he describes a quid pro quo where, you know, $1 billion worth of aid would be held up until they fired Shokin.
A Again, I was in -briefly in Ukrainian language training at the time of his visit so I was not in Ukraine.
I would think that the State Department could produce documents related to the sovereign loan guarantees and the timing of those three guarantees to align the timing.
And I do not recall the exact timing of the issuance of those loan guarantees, but I'm not aware that they aligned perfectly with his visit to Ukraine on December 2015.
A To the best of my knowledge, the idea came from Ambassador Pyatt in discussion with Assistant Secretary Nuland and then was pitched to the Office of the Vice President.
I would just note 3 having read the subpoena that the document request was date 4 timed I believe starting January 20 or 21st, 2017.
And we're 5 talking about events that happened in November, December, 6 2015.
I know as was discussed earlier, the 13 United States the IMF, the European Union countries, we had all come 14 to the conclusion in the wake of the diamond prosecutors 15 affair that there was going to be no progress for reform on 16 the prosecutor general under Shokin.
I left the day before 19 Thanksgiving to fly back to the United States and to go into Ukraine 20 language training.
So at that point I was not privy to those 21 discussions in the two weeks prior to the Vice President's 22 visit.
This was an issue that Ambassador Pyatt and 4 Assistant Secretary Nuland in her visits that was an agenda 5 item that they were pushing.
And in the same way that the 6 Department of Justice official asked me to go in to the 7 prosecutor general office office in February 2015 and ask who 8 took the bribe and how much was it to shut down the case 9 against Zlochevsky, the Ambassador and Assistant Secretary 10 Nuland asked the office of Vice President if the Vice 11 President could push this tough message.
So I believe 17 it was pushing the Ukrainians essentially for an additional 18 what would be called a prior action before we would issue the 19 sovereign loan guarantee.
But I think that's something that 20 we would have to look at the documents from that period of 21 time.
You as the deputy chief of mission were not 23 involved in that process.
So in parts of 2015 I went out as essentially 25 the acting deputy chief of mission.
I then came back to the United States the day before Thanksgiving and was in the United States for 3. months for language training and then returned to Kyiv in late March 2016.
So in the 2 weeks prior to the Vice President's visit, I was already back in the United States as a language student as opposed to being an active participant in the conversations.
And you referenced Ambassador Pyatt, you referenced Assistant Secretary Nuland.
But this policy, this idea that we were going to call for Shokin's removal it didn't just develop in those two weeks.
You weren't involved in a discussion and a decision to say this is going to be our official policy we're going to ask the Vice President to do this.
I think someone made a reference to Ambassador Pyatt's speech in September.
Earlier -at some point today, he gave a strong, hard-hitting speech against corruption, and it was clear then that we were pushing for Shokin's ouster.
Nuland, the Ambassador, and you to 9 say, we're going to ask the Vice President to do it on this 10 trip.
Again, I do not -I could not -I was not 12 part of -I would say that on a daily basis Ambassador Pyatt 13 and Assistant Secretary Nuland had conversations, that was 14 conversations that the Ambassador would have on his office 15 with her on a secure phone and I'm sure there were additional 16 email back and forths.
But I cannot give you a precise date 17 other than to say that -18 I would say that on the record Ambassador Pyatt's speech 19 in Odesa, which I believe was in September of 2015 was a 20 powerful public statement of United States concern about the lack of 21 progress.
And I believe it may have specifically mentioned 22 both the shortcomings of prosecutor Shokin and reference to 23 our concern that the case against Zlochevsky had been shut 24 down and frozen money was released.
Again, the way a trip would normally be staffed, there would be conversations prior, there would be paper prepared and conversations prior to the trip.
And that oftentimes would be someone like Assistant Secretary Nuland going over and participating in a pretrip brief.
I think I -I don't recall -I mean, he gave a public speech and in the well of the Ukrainian parliament.
But this demand would have been delivered in private in his meeting with President Poroshenko.
I was a language student for a period of several months in the United States I was aware that he'd made the request.
I was also aware that Shokin remained an embattled prosecutor general for several months more until there was a vote held in their parliament to remove him.
It’s just that I 16 think that's a public mark where people could see this is the 17 American Ambassador speaking on the record about our concerns 18 about the lack of progress and the rule of law reform in 2015 19 a year and a half after the Revolution of Dignity.
At the 20 same time, there was constant private messaging, messages and 21 meetings that Ambassador Pyatt had in Kyiv, conversations or 22 meetings when Assistant Secretary Nuland would travel, and 23 conversations would happen when Vice President Biden would 24 talk to both President Poroshenko as well as then prime 25 minister Arseny Yatseniuk.
I would say that -well, again, we're now talking about conversations, of which I was not a part, that happened 4 years ago.
I do not think -my guess, to the best of my ability, I would anticipate that the issue of Shokin's status was raised prior to the Vice President's trip, possibly during a conversation.
But I was not on those calls between the Vice President of the United States and the President of Ukraine.
Well, as I said, my understanding of how that decision got to the point of having the Vice President raise that in the first week of December when he came to Kyiv started with conversations between Ambassador Pyatt and Assistant Secretary Nuland and then a recommendation that Vice President Biden pushed that issue when he visited.
A The message that I recall hearing back was that the Vice President's son Beau was dying of cancer and that there was no further bandwidth to deal with family related issues at that time.
A That would have been in February, because to the best of my recollection Beau Biden died that spring.
I then returned to Ukraine in August of 2015 and I believe he passed before then.
So the only time that conversation could have happened is in that narrow window between January, February, 2015.
It's easy in a conference room like this to have a considered discussion about things.
Ambassador Pyatt, I can tell you from working for him, would wake up between 4:58 and 5:01, because that was when I got the first email from him, and went to bed between 12:59 and 1:01, because that's when I would get the last email.
You referenced earlier the President's congratulatory note to President Zelenskyy.
A If there's a letter that's signed May 29th that would be the second version that was then signed.
The penultimate paragraph says, to help show that commitment -the last sentence of the penultimate paragraph says, I'd like to invite you to meet with me at the White House in Washington, D.C. as soon as we can find a mutually convenient time.
Q So this was the spiffed up letter or -230 1 A This is the letter that I understand that 2 Ambassador Sondland helped arrange, yes, sir.
I don't know who the drafter of the first version 10 was and I don't know how many people were involved in 11 production of the language of the second one.
By the end of the meeting he agreed to sign a 24 revised version and this is the version that he signed.
A Well, as I mentioned before, President Trump and President-elect Zelenskyy had this discussion on April 21st when President-elect Zelenskyy had invited President Trump to come to his inauguration, and he said, well, I will send somebody there, but I'd like to get you to the White House.
But, you know, as anyone who's ever staffed not just the President but a principal, you can have an agreement in principle to meet but then schedules are complicated, particularly when you're dealing with two Presidents of two countries.
A That would also probably in certain circumstances also be a fair assessment.
A When I visited in May I had the prime minister, and three ministers, and a former prime minister tell me that Poroshenko authorized the attacks -let me be careful.
He authorized Lutsenko to share the information with Giuliani that led to the attacks on Ambassador Yovanovitch.
A In an email I believe from the embassy it could have been Ambassador Yovanovitch, it could have been from the DCM at the time, Pam Tremont.
A My understanding based on also seeing how Ambassador Sondland has engaged Georgian leaders, because I also have responsibility for Georgia, is that when he meets leaders in Brussels -or, in the case of the Ukraine, he met President Poroshenko and other leaders in Odesa during the United States trip visit, he hands them his business card, he gets their business card, and then starts direct communication via WhatsApp or phone calls.
To the best of my knowledge, he did that with President Poroshenko as well as the then Georgia prime minister.
Q This is a letter to Poroshenko from Senators Menendez, Durbin, and Leahy about the Mueller investigation.
The United States Congress does not, as a matter of course, copy embassies on its correspondence with other countries, but we oftentimes do receive courtesy copies sometimes through the State Department.
A I honestly cannot remember, but I at least recall hearing about a communication which could have been this letter.
A Well, that there were some people expressing interest in whether Ukraine had possibly stopped cooperating.
This is not the first time I've heard it, but I honestly could not give you precisely, you know, information.
Again, this was not a communication that went through the embassy -Q Of course.
A -nor did we go to the prosecutor general to raise the concerns of the three Senators who sent this letter.
Do you know if anyone in the leg affairs -A At the time, I was working in Kyiv, so I would not necessarily have been aware.
My predecessor was Bridget Brink, who is now serving as our Ambassador in Slovakia.
So she was the Deputy Assistant Secretary at the time, so I'm not sure if this letter was passed through and was discussed.
Q If the State Department found out about this, do you think they would dispatch their legislative liaisons to talk with the Senators or their Senator's staff to -A Honestly, again, I was in Kyiv at the time, so I do not have knowledge of any interaction between the Senate's -three senators, their staff -Q Fair enough.
A Again, I didn't have any conversations with Mr Lutsenko as a general rule.
And so we didn't have a complete break in communications, but we did not -we, the United States Embassy, did not meet with him frequently.
Q Do you know if anyone at the State Department had a -picked up the phone and called the Justice Department and said, you know, this Lutsenko fellow is not so great.
I'll ask you one last question, and then our time is about to expire after this round.
There was some discussion about instances where Mayor Giuliani was operating in Ukraine and having meetings.
The other individuals that former Mayor Giuliani has chosen to associate in Ukraine have far less positive reputations in Ukraine.
Although, again, that would have had less impact in Ukraine, which was focused on its own issues and challenges at the time.
It was well known in Ukraine that his main paying clients in Ukraine at the time were the mayor of Kharkiv and a Russian Ukrainian oligarch named Pavlo Fuks.
Q Is this before 2016 -I'm sorry, before 2018 in the A I believe that Mayor Giuliani's association with Mayor Kernes and Pavlo Fuks contractually began in 2017.
We still have a lot of material to get through, and we want to try to get you out as a reasonable hour.
Secretary, I have just a few questions before I hand it back to Mr Goldman.
I want to go back to one of the origins of the narrative they were getting at.
You mentioned there were four false narratives in the Solomon article back in April of 2019.
Well, there were four narratives that were introduced, led off by the Solomon articles.
The first two were definitely part one, part two, but there were a number of different platforms in play that week.
I believe that the first day the two themes that were introduced were the anti corruption theme, and that was targeting the embassy, including the letter that I had signed in April 2016, and NABU, as in an organization, and then the 2016 conversation.
The discussions of the Bidens and Burisma was the third narrative theme that was introduced a day or two later.
And, in fact, that false narrative that the Vice President had pressured the firing of Shokin over Burisma, Lutsenko himself would later recant.
Mr Lutsenko has held many positions on many issues that are mutually exclusive, and including on this issue.
Well, in mid-May of 2019, Mr Lutsenko, were you aware, did an interview with Bloomberg in which he said he had no evidence of wrongdoing by Biden or his son.
Times, in which he said that the activities 3 related primarily to Zlochevsky's actions as minister, which 4 occurred several years before Hunter Biden came on to the 5 board.
So his interviews this year, subsequent to leaving 6 office, are more in accord with the facts as I understood 7 them at the time, than his assertions as prosecutor general.
So let me ask you a little bit more again 9 about this false narrative since recanted.
He was not allowing for reform of 20 the prosecutor general service, and in contrast, he actually 21 was actively undermining reform of the prosecutor general 22 service and our assistance.
The first one was held, I believe, in Denmark; second in London; and the third was hosted in Canada by the Canadian Government.
And Volker said, first a 19 phone call, which this is a conversation happening on July 2.
You have a reputation of loving and 2 cherishing this U.5.-Ukraine relationship and dedicating your 3 life toward strengthening the relationship between the United 4 States and Ukraine.
And 5 you get a readout from Lieutenant Colonel Vindman that 6 doesn't have a lot of details, and you don't try to get any 7 more information about the call.
I just want to better 8 understand your mindset that, once you got that readout that 9 was lacking substance, that you chose not to try to get any 10 more information.
This is what you've dedicated your life 11 towards strengthening this relationship.
I think some people try to be in the middle 14 of everything, and some people try to do their job based on 15 the conditions which they are issued.
My job is to represent 18 the State Department and try to promote our national 19 interests through the policies that have been discussed and 20 agreed to in the interagency format and to use the mechanisms 21 that the State Department has under its ability, including 22 programming funded by appropriations from Congress, to pursue 23 those national interests.
As I stated earlier, in my 27 years in the 2 Foreign Service, I've never been on a Presidential call, and 3 that is not normal for officials that are at the Embassy or 4 at the State Department.
The people who normally are on a 5 Presidential call are staff at the National Security Council 6 and the White House.
And I have not served as a detailee to 7 the National Security Council in my career.
I would say that it was standard procedure 15 for the director to give a readout to the Deputy Assistant 16 Secretary.
So, for instance, it was also Lieutenant Colonel 17 Vindman who gave me the readout in April after the 18 inaugural -sorry, the election day victory call.
So that 19 was standard practice, that the director for a country would 20 give a readout to the DAS so that the policy DAS at State 21 would know the substance of what was discussed so we could 22 make sure that our policy going forward was aligned with the 23 conversations had by the President.
I have not been a part of the meeting with 3 Zelenskyy since this call happened, and since I also -since 4 I first saw this text 2 weeks ago.
And of the meetings that 5 I had with Zelenskyy previously, the meeting in March 6 of 2019, which is when he was running as a candidate that was 7 Under Secretary Hale, Ambassador Yovanovitch, and myself, 8 when I came back in May, when he was President-elect 9 Zelenskyy, Ambassador Yovanovitch had already been recalled.
I only saw when he was Candidate Zelenskyy 17 with her, and at that point, the focus was on Under Secretary 18 Hale as the ranking visitor.
And in it, part of what President Zelenskyy says, quote: Her attitude toward me was far from the best as she had admired the previous President and she was on his side.
I have no idea because I do know that President Poroshenko thought she was not a fan of him.
That President Poroshenko had targeted Ambassador Yovanovitch, which is why I wanted to ask you about this particular quote from President Zelenskyy.
Did you have an opportunity to meet with President Zelenskyy and particular meetings.
I would say that, thanks to the appropriators on the Appropriation Committee, the amounts made available for assistance to Ukraine has increased yearly since 2014, yes.
I'm not the son of an Army cav or infantry officer, but I understand from my colleagues who do have such experience -and our Belarus desk officer was an officer who used Javelins -is that they are incredibly effective weapons at stopping armored advance, and the Russians are scared of them.
Earlier on, in one of the rounds, I believe this morning, there was discussion with regards to the firing of Ambassador Yovanovitch, and later on, you testified that you read the July 25th transcript.
The Ambassadors, I believe, collectively, the 4 G7 Ambassadors, plus the EU Ambassador, when they had a meet 5 with President Poroshenko, my understanding is this was the 6 type of issue that was raised.
Again, starting in August 18, 7 I was back in Washington, so I did not participate in those 8 meetings.
The trend line and the deterioration started about 9 the time I came back here to Washington.
I do not think it 14 was normal for the prosecutor general to be attending the 15 meetings when, you know, eight Ambassadors come in to see 16 President Poroshenko.
On any given month, there would have been 3 perhaps cases that rose to the fore as being emblematic of 4 the direction.
For instance, last December, 2018, one of the 5 candidates for President, Anatoliy Hrytsenko, was assaulted 6 in a parking garage in the city of Odesa.
A former Defense 7 Minister running for President was assaulted by thugs, and 8 there was no effort to investigate that.
That is a classic 9 example of intimidation, and the lack of an investigation is 10 a suggestion that those in power were not interested in 11 holding the people to account because the accounts indicated 12 that they were probably connected to the power organizations.
The Embassy, as part of its advocacy, would 16 have no doubt kept a running list and, in my experience from 17 when I was there, would have discussed this extensively with 18 the other likeminded Ambassadors.
And there was a collection 19 of Ambassadors to the G7 countries, plus the Ambassador to 20 the EU, met almost weekly.
And the issue of the 21 deterioration of the rule of law and the lack of 22 accountability and impunity for these attacks was a frequent 23 topic.
The initial attack occurred in the summer of 9 2018, I believe, that the activist eventually died in roughly 10 November of 2018.
Yeah, I just don't want to put any words in 12 your mouth, that's why I'm asking the question.
I honestly -the number of uninvestigated 20 assaults on members of civil society, the media, and the 21 opposition, as I said, eventually reached 100, and that was a 22 trend line and a message to everybody.
I would say that, in the last 3 years, the 10 most prominent case was this anti corruption activist that I 11 mentioned.
She 12 was in a town in Kherson, and according to activists, civil 13 society, and journalists, there were politicians connected to 14 President Poroshenko, which was also Prosecutor General Yuriy 15 Lutsenko's party, as well as the party connected to Yuliya 16 Tymoshenko.
And despite this general knowledge, there was no 17 firm action taken by the prosecutor general.
This was a case important for the rule of law 21 under a President who had run to change Ukraine, starting 22 with the Revolution of Dignity.
In that context, yes, both the Ambassador and I 14 raised concerns specifically about action taken without 15 evident merit to pressure civil society, the media, and 16 political opponents.
I was in Kyiv, and Kathy Kavalec was the 8 Deputy Assistant Secretary for Russia, and so I was not aware 9 of what the nature of engagement between Assistant Secretary 10 Nuland and Deputy Assistant Secretary Kavalec would have 11 been, no.
Q And so I just wanted to circle back to that, that I don't believe Ambassador Volker has released anything himself.
A I do not engage the media and have studiously avoided the media before coming here.
A I do not know how his WhatsApp messages made it into the public domain.
Q I mean, it's conceivable that somebody on the Hill side, I know that might come as a shock, would push certain messages out.
And that's in an office 24 that is under our what's known as the A Bureau, the 25 Administrative Bureau.
This morning, we were talking about the State Department's record collection procedure and responding to the subpoena.
A The only previous record request that I have seen, although I was not specifically named as a record collector, was the Senate's Select Intelligence Committee's request for documents related to Paul Manafort and Konstantin Kilimnik.
A Well, again, I have been present or seen the process happen twice, once when I was at an Embassy and, the other time, the past 2 weeks at the State Department.
At the Embassy, there was a mechanism where our information management resource, our specialists who work with the information systems, went through and were able to extract from the system of backups any emails that had reference to the individuals listed.
Subsequent to that, I did not have any discussions or coordination about what I would say personally.
The conversations with the counsel, legal office counsel, then went through counsel with I got several letters that were signed by Under Secretary of Management Brian Bulatao, and then there were a number of conversations that had, which I did not participate in.
And my wife visited her mother in hospital and then had a conversation with Masha.
And 7 generally, because of the budget and staffing patterns, they 8 ask for detailees, which the host agencies pay for.
And 9 generally they come from State, Office of Secretary of 10 Defense, or JCS in the Intel Community, and Treasury also 11 provides individuals.
Under Secretary Tillerson, when he had 12 our staff freeze, he tried to limit all detailees.
Those jobs are 21 incredibly draining, so most people are happy to do 1 year 22 and move on.
But he clearly got an extension to a second 23 year, but I've never discussed that issue with him.
But my 24 presumption is that, at some point, it was extended by a 25 second year.
He would reach out -I'm the Deputy 3 Assistant Secretary, but there's an office that works on 4 Ukraine, Moldova, and Belarus, and those are three countries 5 for which he had responsibility within the NSC, although he 6 was actually recruited to work on Russia, but he ended up 7 working on Ukraine, Moldova, and Belarus, so he is a staff of 8 one for those three countries.
So it was natural that he 9 would turn to an office that had multiple people working on 10 those countries to see if they could be supportive.
And 17 usually they would raise their complaints to their office 18 director, And if he did not feel his 19 conversations with Alex could provide sufficient relief, he 20 would ask me to weigh in.
So my return from 24 Kyiv, I started work the day after Labor Day in 25 September 2018, and his arrival to the NSC staff may have Catherine doing her 1-year stint, she had worked at the Ukraine desk at the State Department.
So my principal interlocutor when I would go to the NSC to have conversations generally was the State Department director, I travel on their own, but they often accompany principals.
I can say that Victoria Nuland was Assistant Secretary, sometimes Celeste Wallander and Charlie Kupchan would travel with her to countries, whether that would be Russia or Ukraine.
And, again, I spend most of my life in support of others, and so it hurts me to say this, but generally people remember who the principal on the trip was and not all the staff who actually do most of the work.
Q The story walks through Serhiy Leshchenko's role in publicizing the Manafort ledgers.
A I recall that those were documents apparently found at the former estate of the previous President who fled to Russia, Viktor Yanukovych, and it indicated individuals who had been receiving payments by the former ruling party.
I'm not going to ask you to, you know, adopt the article as, you know, personal endorsement or anything.
A That was a message -that was described in the shorthand of the desire to have -this was the Gordon Sondland messaging of what the Ukrainians need to say in shorthand 2016.
And in shorthand, it was suggested that the Ukrainians needed -Zelenskyy needed to go to a microphone and basically there needed to be three words in the message, and that was the shorthand.
A I recall reading a Politico article to that effect in the spring of 2017, yeah.
So if 2 you want to communicate with me, the prime minister of 3 Ukraine, you need to go back to the embassy and have them 4 download those apps.
We checked with our 6 communications and Diplomatic Security specialists.
The 7 assessment was that Viber was not as secure as WhatsApp, and 8 that we were authorized to use WhatsApp for communications as 9 long as records were saved.
A We obviously want Ukraine to have effective law enforcement and justice sector institutions.
That's in order to be able to investigate, prosecute, and judge any criminal acts.
When Ambassador Yovanovitch had her first meeting with the then new prime minister of Ukraine, Volodymyr Hroysman, who is 41 years old, and she arrived in August, so I'm presuming it was late August or early September, he asked if she were on WhatsApp and Viber.
He saw Rudy Giuliani as an issue 3 to be addressed, and potentially an ally to be incorporated 4 to get the United States President to where we wanted our relationship 5 to be, which is having a meeting.
And since 17 the President and Rudy Giuliani had communications on a 18 somewhat regular basis, he thought that it was a relationship 19 he had to try to work on if he could.
A Well, I think I can only share the conversation I had with Kurt, and the conversation was framed differently.
A I think that there are two people who -we’re talking at this point about a conversation that took place 3 months ago, that neither of us were taking notes.
And so, I would say that, you know, he has shared his recollection of the conversation, and I shared mine.
A When he said that he was going to engage Rudy Giuliani about Ukraine, because Rudy Giuliani was clearly influencing the President's views of Ukraine, I reminded him what Rudy Giuliani was doing in Ukraine and about Ukraine, about which I had concerns.
That's why I say that I think Kurt was approaching -in my understanding, he was approaching this issue tactically.
A I have subsequently seen his tweets, which -or not his tweets, the WhatsApp messages that Kurt Volker issued.
And so it appears to me, having seen those WhatsApp messages, that he was sharing his concerns with Ambassador Sondland and Ambassador Volker.
Q When Volker was communicating to you about various investigations that would occur in the Ukraine, whether it relates to Burisma 2016, is it possible -the way I understood his -you know, we spoke to Volker.
The way I understood his -the way he communicated it was that if there were Ukrainians engaged in misdeeds, corruption, then, you know -and it could relate to Burisma, it could relate to bringing Hunter Biden on the board, it could relate to Ukrainians doing nefarious things in the run-up to the 2016 election, then the Ukrainians ought to investigate fellow Ukrainians.
That used to stand 2 for Yalta European Strategy back when Crimea and Yalta were 3 under Ukrainian control.
And Charge Taylor indicated that 7 Ambassador Sondland was pushing a line that included having 8 President Zelenskyy give an interview potentially with CNN 9 during the YES Conference that weekend in which he would send 10 this public signal of announcing a willingness to pursue 11 investigations.
Although, Charge Taylor asserted to me 19 that both Tim Morrison and Gordon Sondland specifically said 20 that they did not believe that the two issues were linked.
That's what I recall him saying to me, again, orally 25 reading out of a conversation of which I was not a part.
But Bill Taylor then followed up with a video 9 conference, our normal Monday call in which he elaborated on 10 his conversations with both senior director Morrison on the 11 7th as well as with Ambassador Sondland on the 8th.
The next communication or data point that I can 19 recall was a WhatsApp message that Charge Taylor sent me on 20 September 7, which would have been, I think, the Saturday 21 after Labor Day.
President Poroshenko spent several 2 years also trying to get a visit to the White House, and that 3 was more happenstance, the visit he made in June 2017.
So I 4 have an appreciation that just because a leader of a country 5 wants to visit Washington and have an Oval Office visit 6 doesn't mean it that happens.
There was another track of what we were engaging 9 Ukraine formally through normal channels.
And then this 10 particular moment was the time where not just what I read on 11 tweets by private citizens, but a greater understanding of 12 actions taken by United States officials, in this case, Ambassador 13 Volker, that my concerns grew.
I think it was June 21, as well as some of the other story lines from earlier in the spring before President Zelenskyy was elected.
I just want to be clear that when you say politically motivated investigation -A That is what I'm referring to, yeah.
A I was not aware of the effort to negotiate the text of the statement that came out as a result of Ambassador Volker's testimony here, and the tweets that he released, no, not until I had read those.
A At the time, I had no knowledge of the specifics of the call record, but based on Bill Taylor's account of the engagements with Andriy Yermak that were the engagements of Yermak with Kurt Volker, at that point it was clear that the investigations that were being suggested were the ones that Rudy Giuliani had been tweeting about, meaning Biden, Burisma, and 2016.
Q And I understand you didn't know the contents of the call record, but now being able to read the call record as you have, you are referring to the Biden investigation that the President mentioned, as well as the CrowdStrike 2016 investigation.
And I told Bill Taylor, that's wrong, and we shouldn't be doing that as a matter of United States policy.
Q Had you had any conversations with -well -A About this issue, I mean, we had a -Q Yes.
A -regularly scheduled weekly teleconference that involved teams, and if there were anything sensitive, we could finish up in a one-to-one.
We also had a relationship that if there were needs, just like with any ambassador, they could call me up, you know, for an unscheduled conversation.
A I do not recall us having a conversation specifically, you know, if you will, out of the regular schedule until Friday, August 16.
And I say it's a Friday, because I was scheduled to get on a plane, leave my house at about 6:00m. to go to the airport, fly out to California to go hiking in Yosemite with my family.
Frankly, what a private citizen tweets is an exercise 11 in one way of First Amendment rights, but when you have United States 12 Government employees, or in this case, a special United States 13 Government employee potentially seemingly to align to that 14 view, that's when it became real for me and a matter of 15 concern.
A On August 15, the new special assistant to Special Representative Volker, Catherine Croft, came to my office and asked me, said she was trying to find out some information on behalf of Kurt.
And she said, you, George, know about our relations with Ukraine, particularly in law enforcement.
And I told her, I said, well, Catherine, there are two ways of looking at that question.
We have the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty, and we have the legal attaches at the embassy, and that's the way a law enforcement investigation should engage the Ukrainians.
The other option, which I -from the context of what has been spoken about in the press, maybe what you're asking is the political option.
And if you're asking me have we ever gone to the Ukrainians and asked them to investigate or prosecute individuals for political reasons, the answer is, I hope we haven't, and we shouldn't because that goes against everything that we are trying to promote in post Soviet states for the last 28 years, which is the promotion of the rule of law.
But given everything that you knew, and you certainty have indicated today that you were aware of the public narratives -A Yeah.
A I had presumed at the time, and I may have put in my notes just in parentheses, Giuliani, and that was the way I interpreted what he said.
He initiated the conversation, but it was very clear he was uncomfortable sharing this limited summary, including not going into the detail of the call itself.
A Kurt told me he was going to meet, and so, I had every reason to believe that he then followed up on what he said he was going to do.
But he did not share with me the exact contents of his discussions with the Mayor, no.
But, again, as I said, 2 it was a conversation that had a personal component that had 3 nothing to do with work, and then part of the conversation 4 had to do with work.
And as I mentioned 9 before, that's when I sent a message to the embassy 10 suggesting that they test the line to make sure the call went 11 through.
Is that -22 A At that point, I don't think he said that President 23 Trump discussed.
What I recall is that he said at this point 24 the conversation went into the most extreme narratives.
A As I mentioned before, it was clear to me that Ambassador Sondland had a direct connection with Chief of Staff Mulvaney, and that's actually how the May 23 readout was put on the President's schedule.
It was not, to the best of my knowledge, done through the national security staff and Ambassador Bolton.
A It was a conversation, but I will say that it was also not entirely about work.
We have a mutual friend whose wife died of cancer, and he is a Foreign Service officer and studied in St.
Q And the part that was about Ukraine, was there anything more that -257 1 call or a meeting, discussion.
But, again, I don't remember 2 the content, and also, keep in mind that we had 3 responsibilities -I only had responsibilities for six 4 countries.
I believe, in that conversation, 11 she expressed concern with Gordon Sondland's approach.
A Well, sending the right signal without the details of the -Q Without the details.
But the President was listening to the 5 Giuliani, Orban, Putin contingent -6 A I don't know.
Hill, in assessing the change from 9 late April to late May, but then we had also the instructions 10 coming out of that meeting leading to the signing of the 11 letter on May 29 and the efforts to help Ukraine particularly 12 in the energy sector.
Hill told us that she departed on July 19, and 14 that prior to leaving, she had a conversation with you.
One 17 reason why I recall more specifics from May is that as I was 18 looking through my notes to find records to provide to the 19 State Department to be responsive to the subpoena, I found 20 notes that I took when I talked to her in May.
When I was 21 going through my notes I did not find notes of our 22 conversation in July.
A I cannot recall what she said in that meeting besides giving me the brief readouts of those two meetings, but that was my takeaway, and that those two world leaders, along with former Mayor Giuliani, their communications with President Trump shaped the President's view of Ukraine and Zelenskyy, and would account for the change from a very positive first call on April 21 to his negative assessment of Ukraine when he had the meeting in the Oval Office on May 23.
Q And it was your understanding that Sondland, Perry, Volker, when they came back from the inauguration they were very positive about President Zelenskyy.
A We were cautiously optimistic that this was an opportunity to push forward the reform that Ukraine needs to succeed in resisting Russian aggression, building a successful economy, and, frankly, a justice system that will treat American investors and Ukrainian citizens equally before the law.
Q But the message from Orban, Putin, and Giuliani was different than the message that the State Department was relaying.
A conversation that I 12 recall, and I took notes actually dated to mid-May in which 13 we talked about the change of attitude and approach towards 14 Ukraine, and that was in the wake of meetings that President 15 Trump had, a meeting with Viktor Orban, the leader of 16 Hungary, as well as a call he had with Russian President 17 Putin in early May.
A We are, in your exploration of a timeline, not yet to the point where that became apparent to me that this is where United States policy -or not United States policy, where United States engagement was headed.
A Well, I think in retrospect, from the release of the WhatsApp messages, it started earlier than I was aware.
A I would say that the middle of August, specifically August 15 and 16, was when I became aware that this was actively in play.
I saw the picture that was tweeted out, maybe from Kurt Volker, maybe from Gordon Sondland, that had the two Ukrainians, which were Oleksandr Danylyuk and Andriy Yermak, close assistant and associate to President Zelenskyy, as well as the Americans.
And you had Secretary Perry convening a meeting with a number of State Department officials.
You had Gordon Sondland giving a public interview that the three amigos were now in charge of Ukraine, and by that he meant Perry, Sondland, and Volker.
I heard Volker say that to President Zelenskyy in Toronto, but I was in that meeting.
Volker just stated that coming out of the meeting with President Trump at the Oval Office, that those were the three officials that would be taking the lead on our policy towards Ukraine.
There's a schedule of -every Monday there is a generally scheduled secure video conference.
Usually it's with office director, deputy director from my side, and members of the country team on his side.
That was the schedule that dated back -Q Well, let me rephrase the question.
The message was relayed from my supervisor, Acting Secretary Reeker message relayed from Under Hale.
A All I know is that Assistant Secretary Reeker, after a meeting with Under Secretary Hale said that Under Secretary Hale had directed me to keep my head down and a lower profile in Ukraine.
A Well, I oversee policy for six countries, and this was a day or two before I was going on leave to go visit -attend my daughter's |m|| and go hiking in Maine.
And so I said, Fine, you're not going to hear me talk about any country for the next week and a half.
And I did cancel some public appearances on Ukraine in June, sort of think tank sessions around Washington.
So, for instance, whatever the anchor night was, he went to the leaders meeting, and I met with other Ukrainians who were there.
At the time I was on a multi-country swing that included, among other countries, Moldova and Ukraine.
The principals for that meeting were Ambassador Bolton and Oleksandr Danylyuk, who'd been appointed the head of the National Security and Defense Council in Ukraine, which doesn't have an analogous role to our National Security Council but has a name that sounds similar.
And Oleksandr Danylyuk is a Ukrainian official well-known to many of us who have worked on Ukraine.
And that was the nature of the exchange, at some point in July, either at Toronto or perhaps, more likely, mid-July in the State Department.
A We arrived, to the best of my recollection, on the 1st and departed late afternoon of the 3rd.
A I do not recall us having working meals together, but it was a hectic trip and generally, his -or hectic, not trip, but set of meetings.
There were a lot of Ukrainians there, and I had a lot of sidebar meetings with attendees at the conference.
A At the time, I was interested to see where this thought pattern would go.
I do not recall whether the follow-on conversation I had with Kurt about this was in Toronto, or whether it was subsequently at the State Department.
And when I asked him why, he said that it was clear that the former mayor had influence on the President in terms of the way the President thought of Ukraine.
And I think by that moment in time, that was self-evident to anyone who was working on the issues, and therefore, it made sense to try to engage the mayor.
Because former Mayor Giuliani has a track record of, you know, asking for a visa for a corrupt former prosecutor.
He attacked Masha, and he's tweeting that the new President needs to investigate Biden and the 2016 campaign.
A What I was aware of was that there was an interest, and Kurt was sending a signal of a desire to have Zelenskyy be cooperative, but I did not know the details of what the ask was on that date, July 2.
But he explained -he was, I would say, relatively transparent beforehand.
A Well, I think his goal, to my understanding, based on my conversations with him, he was trying to get through what seemed to be a hiccup in the communications, and wanted to get President Trump and President Zelenskyy together, counting on Zelenskyy's personal interactive skills to build rapport and carry the relationship forward.
A That was my understanding, based on what I heard from Kurt prior to the meeting, yes.
So sometimes I can get readouts 21 officially of meetings, but if you're not there, you miss the 22 sidebar conversations that can take place.
A There was not a discussion in the full format of everyone on both sides of the table.
However, prior to the meeting, Ambassador Volker told me that he would need to have a private meeting separately with the President, that he would pull him aside.
And he explained to me that the purpose of that private conversation was to underscore the importance of the messaging that Zelenskyy needed to provide to President Trump about his willingness to be cooperative.
And that happened -as the meeting broke up, he announced that he needed to have a private meeting.
He went around to the Ukrainian side of the table and pulled Zelenskyy, his chief of staff, Bohdan, and the translator.
I was standing about 10 feet of the way, introducing myself to Andriy Yermak and talking to him.
So that was -Volker had several minutes with Zelenskyy, his chief of staff and the interpreter.
And so I am juggling responsibilities for 3 these six countries and traveling to all six countries.
So 4 we are focusing on one of six countries today for which I 5 have responsibility.
So I do not live, breathe every single 6 second of my life focused on Ukraine, no.
The members are 12 going to have to go vote I think in about 20 minutes.
Mr Kent, thank for your patience and 21 diligence today, we are nearing the end.
Traditionally, foreign assistance was 5 appropriated under what's known as foreign military financing 6 in State Department budget.
Several years ago, Congress 7 started appropriating monies in the Defense budget.
And so 8 the Ukraine Security Initiative is monies that are made 9 available in the Defense budget.
And that is something that 10 was started maybe 3 years ago and has grown in scope.
And the direction in how we 24 spend that money is usually determined in a joint military 25 commission between EUC0M and the Ukrainian general staff administrative heads.
A The authorizers in Congress have put conditionality for the last several years on the second half.
So, for instance, this past year, $250 million, there was a conditionality on the second $125 million.
In a previous year, I don't know if it was the previous year -I don't know if it's the previous 2 years ago or the first year 3 years ago -there was that conditionality, but the appropriators did not appropriate as much money as the authorizers authorized.
My counterpart, Laura Cooper, plays a principal role in that, and the determination to Congress is made by the Secretary of Defense.
On the front end, 7 discussing what might be appropriate conditions, there is a 8 discussion, but ultimately that is a process, and the 9 specific conditions, and whether they have been met, is 10 determined by the Office of Secretary of Defense.
And, ultimately, the FMF is 16 also cut over to the United States military, specifically, the DSCA is 17 the executive military agent.
We don't spend and implement 18 the programming the way that we would, say, for law 19 enforcement programming.
It, again, is monies where we have 20 a greater policy role upfront and voice, but in the end, it's 21 executed by United States military components.
I was at the State Department in a security video conference, I did not recognize the face.
And I believe the individual representing 0MB at the time was not normally the person who did.
And the individual said that he 14 apologized, that he normally did not deal with these issues, 15 but this was the message he was asked to convey and he 16 conveyed it.
A Tyler Brace, our schedule C political appointee, former staffer for Senator Portman, who understand budgetary processes in great detail.
A We discussed what the significance of that was because none of us could understand why.
Since there was unanimity that this was in our national interest, it just surprised all of us.
A Well, eventually, the hold was released on September 11th, and the funds were then apportioned by 0MB to the extent that it was possible to spend them by the end of the fiscal year, yes.
And then Senior Director Morrison was looking to schedule a principal small group meeting that would involve the Secretary of State personally, Secretary of Defense, and Ambassador Bolton so they could discuss the issue and then take it to the President.
I photocopied quite a lot of notes, but certainly the statement of conclusions should be included, although now I'm thinking -I'm not sure if sub-PCCs have statement of conclusions.
But to the extent I took notes on that meeting, I would have included them, yes.
We were ending -approaching 8 the end of the fiscal year, and I believe that Laura Cooper, 9 speaking on behalf of the Pentagon, indicated that the DOD 10 comptroller had determined that they needed to move forward 11 by August 6th in order to spend the money and meet Congress' 12 intent.
Normally, the conversations with 0MB 17 prior to notification to Congress is a courtesy, not 18 something required under law.
And that is why the position 19 was expressed by Laura Cooper, to the best of my 20 recollection, that DOD counsel had determined that they would 21 move forward by August 6th regardless.
And I recall Senior 22 Director Morrison suggesting that the State Department also 23 review its legal requirements and be prepared to have that 24 briefed at the next meeting, which he set 3 days later, as a 25 deputy small group meeting.
A Again, this is about an account that was not appropriated to my department nor executed in my department, so I would defer to my colleague, Laura Cooper.
But to the best of my recollection, what she said in that meeting was that, according to DSCA, they may not be able to execute all of the requirements by the end of the fiscal year.
Q What did 0MB say, if anything, in response to Laura Cooper's -A OMB's position was what it had been on the 18th, that they were under the direction of their boss to put -hold all security assistance to Ukraine.
A That would be a matter of record because that was a PCC, and there’s a statement of conclusions.
And in the statement of conclusions, on the first page, there's a listing of all participants in the meeting.
A I had read about Mr Mulvaney's attempt to push a rescission at the end of the last fiscal year.
My understanding was that Secretary Pompeo protested vigorously, and the effort to have a rescission was then suspended.
And, ultimately, the same thing happened this year, this overall greater effort to have a rescission held up the process for much of August, but it was also lifted, and that left us with just the hold on Ukraine assistance.
That would also be documented in the document call, but it did not change the ultimate situation.
A The main takeaway for me was that Senior Director Morrison was trying to find out when Secretary of State Pompeo and the Secretary of Defense would both be in Washington so they could have an in-person principal small group meeting to discuss the same issue and then take it to the President.
The bottom line was the hold remained, and we needed a principal small group to carry the process forward.
Q But it's your understanding at the July 26th meeting that, again, there was unanimous support to release the funds to lift the hold.
A I didn't say that, but I believe that may have been one of the dates that Senior Director Morrison was attempting to schedule a principal small group meeting.
A To the best of my knowledge, because of the travel schedules of the two Secretaries, no.
A I am aware that many Senators, particularly from the Republican side, who had traveled to Ukraine from the relevant committees, called and talked to the President.
I'm aware that -I saw an email that Senator Inhofe had had about a 20-minute conversation.
He had visited twice when I was in Ukraine because Oklahoma National Guard was doing training at the main training base.
And my understanding is that Senate Majority Leader McConnell also called.
Obviously, we wanted to get the hold lifted so that we could get the money apportioned by 0MB and then obligated.
So we were 4 preparing for a decision so that we could ensure that the 5 money could be obligated before the end of the fiscal year.
So there was a coincidence of timing, but as I 12 referenced earlier in the communication with Charge Taylor, 13 he indicated to me that, in his communications with both 14 Senior Director Morrison and Ambassador Sondland, and this 15 would have been the weekend of the 7th and 8th of September, 16 that both of them insisted that there was not a direct link.
According to Charge Taylor, separately, Senior 20 Director Morrison, with whom he had a conversation on the 7th 21 of September, and Ambassador Sondland, with whom he had a 22 conversation on the 8th of September, had asserted that the 23 two were not directly linked.
And that part of the 11 conversation we ask all of our staff to leave, so it is just 12 one on one in a secure communication.
That was Senior Director Morrison 17 talking about his concern that Rudy Giuliani had had another 18 conversation with the President, as well as what Sondland 19 relayed Rudy to be his interaction.
A I believe I shared my concerns with my colleagues in the European front office.
And for large stretches of time earlier in 2019 it was our senior Bureau official and also the deputy assistant secretary, who oversees our relations with Western Europe, and that includes relations with Ambassador Sondland and the mission he leads in Brussels.
A I shared the -I shared the sense that I had heard from Charge Taylor that Ambassador Sondland was engaged in the types of conversations that he was engaged in on Ukraine even though that was not part of his portfolio as our ambassador to the European Union.
A Their offices are between 5 and 10 feet away from my office and so I -this was a direct conversation in their office.
Well, I believe, at least in 15 relation to the USAI, there were some concerns expressed in 16 the Pentagon, Office of Secretary of Defense, did a review 17 and responded that they felt that the conditions and concerns 18 that we had had been met and that the programming should go 19 forward.
A The hold was lifted on September 11th and we moved forward with notifying Congress and ensuring the funds were obligated before the end of the fiscal year.
We were not asked and we proceeded with what we needed to do in order to obligate the funds as to meet the congressional intent in appropriating them.
A They were receiving FMF, yes, and I believe the start of USAI was while I was there.
I do not recall specifically which fiscal year USAI funds started to be appropriated.
And therefore, the training that we do, which is probably the most valuable in training Ukrainians to fight, as well as the equipping that we do, have been critical to the success of the Ukrainian armed forces in defending their country.
At the same time I would say that we probably derive more benefit from the relationship than the Ukrainians do.
A That would be something to discuss in a classified manner, particularly with my colleagues from the defense and intel agencies.
So by the time I started engaging Ukrainians in person, it was a good news story.
A I was prepared for the possibility that it would not be lifted and therefore the conversations would be very difficult and I would not by able to provide an adequate understanding or answer.
A Fortunately, I didn't have to worry about that hypothetical because it was resolved essentially as I arrived in Ukraine.
A We -it was very clear that this issue was only going to be resolved they very highest level, and that's why Tim Morrison wanted to have Secretary Pompeo and SecDef Esper in the same place at the same time to have that conversation.
It didn't matter what the deputy assistant secretary or an assistant secretary or an under secretary or a deputy secretary thought.
A To the best of my knowledge, there was never a principal small group meeting on this issue.
I think it was clear starting, if not from July 18th, certainly from July 23rd, that this was an issue that had to be resolved in Washington, and it was a tough nut for everyone to crack without a lot of clarity.
A Once we cleared the deputy small group meeting, which I believe was July 26th, it was clear it had to be resolved at a principals level and above.
A Well, the principal small group, members of the Cabinet, who then could take the issue to the President.
So in the sort of climbing the ladder we started with a sub-PCC on the 18th.
And there was an attempt to schedule but lack of principals subsequent.
That was Tim Morrison driving the interagency policy review process in the way it was intended.
It strikes me that the association was a meeting with the White House, at the White House, not related to the security assistance.
But again, that's just my personal opinion, other people may have different opinions.
A I think there is the WhatsApp exchange where he expressed concerns that it might be linked.
But the same person, Ambassador 16 Sondland, said there was no quid pro quo on security 17 assistance.
But I believe I did 24 write that note up and share it with the records.
So I had two conversations with 5 two individuals on the 15th and 16th of August.
I had subsequent 7 conversations with Ambassador -Charge Taylor on the 9th of 8 September, another note to the file.
And then travel to 9 Ukraine, conversations there, return, note to the file, oral 10 brief.
And so two of them, 22 again, offices are collocated with mine, then Acting 23 Assistant Secretary Reeker's office is across the hall.
Q You testified earlier this afternoon about a conversation that you had with Charge Taylor about Zelenskyy making some sort of TV interview or address, public address.
A I mentioned what Ambassador Sondland had told Charge Taylor and that he conveyed to me, yes.
A I believe that's what I conveyed to you regarding the conversation I had with Charge Taylor on the 9th of September, referencing his conversation with Ambassador Sondland that occurred on the 8th of September.
Can you describe -who else was at that -11 A That was just Ambassador Taylor and me.
He went 12 out for a run, and I went down to breakfast, and we met and 13 talked 7:30 in the morning more or less.
Kurt said he felt that having three Americans on one Ukraine was too much, and he said if there were a second Ukrainian I could come.
I decided not to push it since we were involved in another event, as well as anticipating that there was going to be an awkward conversation, which there was.
And Charge Taylor provided me the details of that conversation over breakfast.
A Well, besides -the main part of the conversation was about negotiations with the Russians, and I won't mention that and that's not germane.
But the more awkward part of the conversation came when Special Representative Volker made the point that the Ukrainians, who had opened their authorities under Zelenskyy, had opened investigations of former President Poroshenko, he didn't think that was appropriate.
And when Kurt made a suggestion that Charge Taylor felt was inappropriate he weighed in with his own personal opinion, which that was not appropriate.
Q And Volker was directly linking the White House meeting and the investigations that were being pushed by the President.
A It was an elliptical readout that -by the readout that I heard from Charge Volker -sorry, Charge Taylor -that Kurt, Special Representative Volker, was referring to prior conversations that he had with Yermak and prior advice, meaning you should deliver the messages as we've discussed before.
The hoped-for interview with CNN with Zelenskyy did not happen during the conference.
Fareed Zakaria was one of the hosts, but there was no special interview.
A Subsequent to Ukraine, I went to Belarus, where I was in Belarus for 2 days, including the three-quarter day visit of Under Secretary Hale.
And then after that I went to Lithuania to outbrief our Lithuanian allies about the advances in the U.S.-Belarus relationship, because we -Under Secretary Hale announced that we were going to return an ambassador to Belarus, which we have not had since 2008.
It was very much focused on the intense engagement of many foreign leaders who were there at that time.
A That was my understanding of what Ambassador Volker and Ambassador Sondland were requesting of the Ukrainians, yes.
A The only meeting that I was a part of where this came up obliquely was with the foreign minister, Vadym Prystaiko.
And as I recounted, 10 there were two messages, there was what Ambassador Volker 11 said and what Charge Taylor said, and those themselves were 12 conflicting messages.
Ambassador Volker suggested that Andriy Yermak 16 should ensure that the agreed-upon messaging was delivered by 17 President Zelenskyy.
And Kurt 9 advised Yermak that was not a wise way forward for the 10 country.
And just to be clear, what Vice President Biden was doing was very fundamentally different than any advocacy for a politically oriented investigation.
The request for the dismissal of Shokin was related directly to him, to his actions in the diamond prosecutors case, in his undermining of our assistance to Ukraine.
The distinction is between conditionality to advance the national interest and conditionality to advance a personal interest.
And thank you so much for your patience and precision today and for the integrity that you have shown in every part of your career, Mr Kent.
You mentioned at one point a conversation with Fiona Hill in which she had relayed to you that the President had had phone conversations with Viktor Orban, the Prime Minister of Hungary, and Putin in which she told you that they had both, I think you said, talked down Ukraine to the President.
Well, to the best of my recollection, Fiona gave me a readout of both conversations at the same time.
It was a meeting at the White House, so it was an in-person meeting on or about May 13th.
The President's engagement of Orban included a 1-hour one-on-one, and then subsequently the Hungarian foreign minister, Szijjarto, and Ambassador Bolton joined.
He denies the existence of Ukraine as a nation and a country, as he told President Bush in Bucharest in 2008.
So that's his agenda, the agenda of creating a greater Russia and ensuring that Ukraine does not survive independently.
Viktor Orban's beef with Ukraine is derived in part to his vision, in my opinion, of a greater Hungary.
And there are about 130,000 ethic Hungarians who live in the transCarpathian province of Ukraine.
And ahead of next year, which is the 100th anniversary of the Treaty of Trianon, post-World War I, which resulted in more ethnic Hungarians living outside Hungary than inside, this issue of greater Hungary is at the top of Orban's agenda.
And so he has picked this particular issue and, for instance, blocked all meetings in NATO with Ukraine at the ministerial level or above because of this particular issue.
So his animus towards Ukraine is well-known, documented, and has lasted now 2 years.
You were also responsible for anticorruption efforts in EUR for some time.
George, look, I really, really believe this is a fundamental issue for the United States in Ukraine.
The corruption is the obstacle to the transformation to this country that we seek.
And I am prepared to use some leverage to do something about corruption in Ukraine, maybe even hold up a meeting, maybe even condition some assistance on the Ukrainians really taking this seriously.
I think for Ukraine as well as other countries that have never prosecuted any large-scale crook, putting one of the big fish, so-called big fish in jail would be a great start as a signal that there isn't impunity.
I think demonstrating that there's integrity in the prosecutor general's office is absolutely critical, particularly for post-Soviet countries.
And those two institutions in many of 4 these countries are fundamentally still not reformed 28 years 5 later.
What I referred to is strategic and institutional, and what they were working on was tactical.
I still believe they count on the United States as their best hope to get through very difficult times, yes.
Before I go to Chairman Engel, I just have two quick questions for you.
A I am familiar with the name only recently and only based on what I've read.
Q And I think you said that you may have discussed some aspects of it and that you don't recall what her response was.
And if there is other information that people want to provide context to try to trigger additional information, I'm open to that.
Q So you -it appears to us at least as if, A, you took a lot of notes about these events, and, B, you may have reviewed them prior to coming here today to testify.
In order for the Department to respond to the subpoena for document collections I went through my notebooks to find any notes from meetings that would be responsive to those -that document request.
A I did not and would not because that would have happened informally, not in the office.
Q So if she has a different recollection as to what you guys discussed, do you think that that -A That's possible.
She could have been much more specific about a conversation we had and the issues we've been discussing.
Well, I guess in closing I want you to know I stumbled in here before they told me Clark Kent was here.
And thank you for what you -not only for what you're doing now, but for what you've done through the years.
It's really so critical that we learn the facts and your detailed, very careful testimony today, it's just so important, so important for our country, so important.
And it should also not be used by the administration or the Department of State to retaliate against you or anybody else.
I have been very much chagrined over the fact of the way employees at the Department of State have been treated for the past couple of years.
And I think it takes people like you who have not only had commendable records through the years, but who have the guts to come in and speak from the heart.
And what you're doing, sir, is a tremendous accomplishment and tremendously important for the State Department and for the country as a whole.
I know that Chairman Schiff already explained on the record earlier today why any retaliation against you or anybody else would be unlawful and just wrong.
Your service to our country for nearly three decades is commendable and I hope it continues without harassment or undue interference from the Department you have honorably served.
So let me just again thank you as the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, thank you personally, and let you know that I and the Foreign Affairs Committee will hold the Department accountable to treat employees properly and with the respect you deserve.
I believe that's it from the majority, we used 20 minutes in this record.
We still have not received an answer as to 16 what House rule governs any of this process.
So on 4 the July 25th call between President Trump and President 5 Zelenskyy, just to walk through it again, you were not on 6 that call.
It's 19 just that he said that the information obviously was of very 20 sensitive nature and that's why he could not give me the 21 normal readout of the full content that he normally did.
On this particular occasion I grabbed a piece of paper and started writing.
So I would say the last week of July would be the best I could bound it.
I cannot recall the exact content, particularly since I didn't get as much content as I just got a tonal poem.
In the general course of readouts of that nature, I would be the natural person for him to give a readout at the State Department.
What was different was that -his concern that he did not feel at liberty to share all the substantive details of the call.
But the readout, that he was giving me a readout, was the normal procedure.
He made clear his extreme discomfort that there was discussions in the call that were -what he described at the beginning was the majority of the call was very sensitive and he would not be giving me a full readout.
Again, all I can describe is his discomfort in sharing what he shared without -with his disclaimer right up front that he was not going to give me the full normal readout.
I'm not aware of us ever telling Ukraine not to prosecute a corrupt individual or a person believed to have engaged in corruption, no.
The National Agency to Prevent Corruption was set up to review the asset declarations of the initially top 1,000 and then they expanded to even more Ukrainian officials.
One, the reformist head of customs who paid herself an $18 bonus on Women's Day when all the women in her office got it.
And they also had launched an investigation of Serhiy Leschenko, the aforementioned member of parliament and former investigative journalist, who purchased an apartment.
And those were the only two investigations that they did, and they were both reformers who were also critics of people who were not engaged in reform.
And there were dozens of billionaire oligarchs and other individuals, and there were no investigations of people whose reputations were that they had engaged in corruption for years.
As far as I recall, those are the only two individuals or officials of Ukraine that the National Agency to Prevent Corruption went after based on the asset declarations of high ranking officials and members of pariiament.
I was just trying to give a very specific example for a new institution that we initially helped stand up to help contain corruption based on asset declarations.
And instead of using the asset declaration system to identify those who may have used public office to enrich themselves they went after two reformists who were noted critics of the lack of reform in certain parts of the Ukrainian Government.
I believe the NAPC, as it was known, was stood up in 2015, and so this would have been 2015, 2016.
I understand that in a recent round you were answering questions based off of information that you obtained from others related to aid from the United States to Ukraine and the allegation of a quid pro quo.
Q I just wanted to touch upon your -some of the documents that you have been discussing today.
And obviously you had other conversations with Lieutenant Colonel Vindman and Tim Morrison.
I do not -I cannot imagine -or I can not recall any time where I was either in the presence of or heard a reference to Kash Patel.
