KEYWORDS Though regarded as illegitimate by most governments as indiCrimean annexation; cated in a UN General Assembly vote, the Russian government geopolitics; public opinion argued that the transfer was justiﬁed since it reﬂected the survey; Crimean referendum; majority opinion in Crimea.
The examination of attitudes in Ukraine December 2014 through a representative survey in Crimea conﬁrmed the support for territorial transfer and indicated that most residents believed that their well-being would improve as a result.
Most lamented the end of the Soviet Union but strongly trusted President Putin and his policies as a way to improve the local economy.
Nearly everyone had Russian citizenship less than a year after the annexation.
There was little diﬀerence between the biggest demographic groupings, Russians and Ukrainians, in attitudes and beliefs.
Exceptionally, the Tatar minority consistently demonstrated opposition to the annexation, distrust of Putin and supported a return to the circumstances that the peninsula had experienced after 1991.
With the exception of this minority, the annexation continues to garner wide popular approval despite international opprobrium, sanctions against Russia and sustained geopolitical tensions in the Black Sea region.
It is now ﬁve years since Russia’s seizure of the Crimean Peninsula and installation of a pro-Russian local government on 27 February 2014.
The then-existing status quo, namely Crimea as an autonomous republic within Ukraine, was not an option.
The people of Crimea, it seemed, had spoken with a near unanimous voice.
They wanted their peninsula of Crimea to break from Ukraine and to join the Russian Federation.
On that same day, the Crimean Supreme Council declared the peninsula’s independence from Ukraine.
This cleared the way for the Russian Federation to initiate the process of formally admitting Crimea as a republic and the city of Sevastopol as a federal district into the Russian Federation on 18 March 2014.
It goes without saying that the events that led to Crimea becoming part of the Russian Federation are intensely contested.
Russia’s military seizure of the Crimean Peninsula was a disruptive event, shocking to many who assumed such acts were a thing of the past.
It occurred as part of a sequence of escalating events that began with country-wide protests across Ukraine against the Yanukovych government in Kyiv, demonstrations that resulted in his eventual ouster and ignominious ﬂight to Russia.
More alarming still was that Russian military intervention proved to be the prologue for the annexation, the forceful seizure of the territory of one state by another, of the Crimean peninsula by Russia.
Framing Crimean events using this word , of course, is highly contested by Russia.
The government of Crimea, in its account, claims that the peninsula was not “annexed” by Russia.
Rather, for the Simferopol authorities, the people of Crimea exercised their international right to self-determination and freely chose to “reunify” with Russia through a democratic referendum.
As President Vladimir Putin claimed in his historic speech welcoming Crimea’s incorporation into the Russian Federation, Crimea was in fact “coming home,” rejoining its historic motherland.
Any consideration of the conﬂict over Crimea needs to involve an examination of what ordinary Crimeans think about the events of 2014.
Caught between claims and counter-claims originating from Kyiv and Moscow, their perspective and agency is often rendered as an appendage to that emanating from these capitals.
At the same time, however, self-serving scenarios of self-determination, of “the people” claiming agency by rising up against an oppressive status quo, are central to the storylines coming out of both capitals.
Fundamental to Russian justiﬁcations of its actions in Crimea are somewhat contradictory claims about, on the one hand, Russia intervening to rescue Crimeans from a rising fascist threat from Kyiv and, on the other hand, admirable local self-determination and agency in response to crisis.
In the Moscow-centered view, a “fascist coup,” aided and abetted by NATO member countries, overthrew a democratically elected president and Ukraine’s legitimate government.
Further, an agreed plan to diﬀuse the anti-government protests and the resulting legitimacy crisis, negotiated by EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 3 European Union leaders, was abandoned in the face of hostility from a radicalized crowd on the Maidan.
To supporters of the Euromaidan and of Ukraine breaking decisively with Russia, there never was any fascist specter threatening Crimea.
Instead the “Ukrainian people”, protesting on the Maidan in Kyiv and across the country, overthrew a manifestly corrupt government, one shored up by Russian loans and bribes.
Crimeans remain under Russian occupation, and suﬀer signiﬁcant human rights violations.
Beyond the polemical clashing storylines about international law and the agency of the Ukrainian and Crimean “people” in 2014 is, of course, a much more complex reality that is frequently ignored in the heated public debate on Crimea.
We do so by ﬁrst reviewing academic studies of pre-annexation Crimea and polling data on the attitudes of diﬀerent groups of residents to its future territorial status.
These collectively underscore that Crimea was a distinctive region within Ukraine, that its residents had a strongly developed regional identity, and that despite inter-ethnic cleavages, there was no consistently manifest majority openly supportive of union with Russia before March 2014.
We then provide an indepth examination of a public opinion survey we commissioned in Crimea in December 2014, nine months after the referendum that led to Russia absorbing the territory into its state structures.
Though the results of this survey show strong popular support for this action by Russia, they also reveal complexities normally overlooked by those focused solely on one question, that is, summary popular attitudes about uniﬁcation with Russia.
Finally, we conclude by elaborating what we term the “Crimea conundrum”, the distinctive combination of international illegitimacy and local legitimacy that characterizes the Crimean conﬂict in international aﬀairs today.
Yet, with the beneﬁt of hindsight, it is now somewhat surprising that strategic analysts and military planners were so taken aback.
Given its historic symbolic signiﬁcance in Tsarist and Soviet history, its relatively recent transfer from the Russian to the Ukrainian republic in the Soviet Union, its distinctive demography as the only ethnic Russian majority region in Ukraine, and its large population of retired military, Crimea seemed to present enough structural features to make it a permanent potential secessionist region within Ukraine in the post-1991 period.
Yet, it was not viewed as a live secessionist threat for three reasons.
First, Crimea had experienced an active secessionist movement in the mid-1990s.
Separatist sentiment in Crimea was sensitive to a triangular conjuncture of local , state and regional power dynamics.
Generally, rising tensions between Kyiv and Moscow, as occurred after the Ukrainian Orange Revolution of 2005 and the August 2008 war in Georgia, created possible conditions for the Kremlin to increase separatist sentiment in Simferopol.
Having that sentiment become predominant, however, required overcoming existing institutional and cultural dampeners on its emergence and a prior legacy of failure twenty years earlier.
Second, after considerable negotiation and constitutional ﬂux, Crimea secured recognition from Kyiv for its own distinctive character by obtaining Autonomous Republic status within Ukraine.
While Russian was the language of government in Crimea, its oﬃcial status was insecure until the 2012 state language policy law that enabled the local parliament to grant it oﬃcial status within Crimea alongside Ukrainian.
Third, secessionist tendencies were viewed as inherently dangerous to interethnic relations on the peninsula, most particularly relations between ethnic Russians and Ukrainians.
The small number of academic studies of public opinion attitudes in preannexation Crimea pointed to three important features of Crimea.
A distinctive geographic location with a storied past, Crimea has long been a prize for diﬀerent groups and power centers.
This quality certainly made for longstanding tensions between Crimean Tatars and Slavic residents of the region.
As an attractive retirement destination during Soviet times, Crimea had many diﬀerent groups migrating to the peninsula.
Crimea’s mythic sense of place gave its Slavic residents a way of identifying beyond binary contrasts between Ukraine and Russia, Ukrainians and Russians.
Survey research suggested residents tended to do so when asked potentially binary questions about belonging.
For example, in a Ukrainewide survey conducted in 2013, Pop-Eleches and Robertson found that a majority of Crimeans responded to the question “what is your homeland” by naming their region ahead of Ukraine, the Soviet Union or Russia.
Second, like many contested places in potentia but not actively convulsed by conﬂict, the everyday sense of nationhood among Crimeans was variable.
The ﬁrst, what she terms “discriminated Russians,” was composed of those who actively identify as ethnically Russian and anti-Ukrainian.
Distinct from this group were “ethnic Russians”, whose sense of identity was culturally Russian but comfortable with living in Ukraine.
A third category were those who identiﬁed ﬁrst and foremost as Crimeans which they deﬁned as bridging an identity between the binaries of ethnicity and territory.
The fourth category she identiﬁed were “political Ukrainians”, those who embraced a civil nationalist vision of Ukraine as a state of many diﬀerent ethnicities.
Her ﬁnal category of “ethnic Ukrainians” was those that identiﬁed with a more exclusivist sense of Ukraine organized around the Ukrainian language and a strongly anti-Soviet vision of Ukrainian history.
Knott’s study, though, is limited in its number of interviews and it remains unclear how representative or how sizable her categories are.
Further, it does not address the everyday sense of nationhood of Crimean Tatars on the peninsula.
Third, the variable salience of nationhood among Crimeans translated into historically shifting aspirations for its political status.
The history of public opinion on the peninsula since reveals variable levels of support for joining Russia.
Studies from the mid-1990s show majority sentiment for joining Russia among the Slavic population but quite diﬀerent attitudes among Crimean Tatars.
In 2011, he appointed a close associate and former interior minister Anatoly Mogilev as Crimean prime minister.
Mogilev brought in a team of outside political managers, nicknamed the “Macedonians” by locals after their hometowns of Makeevka and Donetsk.
Tension between these “outsiders”, who quickly sought to leverage their positions for accumulation through dispossession locally, and “local” politicians were persistent but not unusual.
Leading proRussian activists like Sergei Aksyonov, and more prominent insiders like Vladimir Konstantinov, chair of the Crimean Supreme Rada since 2010, were players in the local political economy and nurtured further ambitions of their own.
As the Maidan protests of late 2013-early 2014 polarized and radicalized political life in Ukraine, Aksyonov and Konstantinov maneuvered for support from the Kremlin to marginalize the “Macedonians” and make Crimea a bastion of opposition to the Euro-Atlantic aspirations of the Euromaidan movement.
Critics of Russia’s actions often point to public opinion polls before March 2014 as indicating that majority sentiment in Crimea was not secessionist.
Majority sentiment toward the Euromaidan protests in Crimea was overwhelmingly negative and separatist feelings rose as the Euromaidan protests endured and radicalized.
In February 2014, the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology conducted a nation-wide poll in Ukraine that asked respondents about their attitude toward integration with Russia into a single state.
This scenario was supported by only 12% of respondents across Ukraine, a rise of 3% since the Maidan protests began in November 2013.
In Crimea, though, 41% of respondents favored this scenario; this was up from 35.9% a year before.
Critics of the annexation point to this ﬁgure as evidence that majority sentiment in Crimea EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 7 was against joining Russia before Russian intervention.
The number of respondents from Crimea in this survey, however, was small as it was a national, not a Crimea-only survey.
Further, the question did not ask about only Crimea joining Russia which might have elicited a higher ratio than the 41% supporting the integration of all of Ukraine with Russia.
The media surveys carried out by the Gallup organization in Crimea before and after annexation supports this change of media direction.
After the vote, it became known that the Kremlin was attentively monitoring local sentiment about Crimea joining Russia, commissioning a series of private public opinion polls on the peninsula since the start of 2014.
Patrushev wanted data on this possibility and its local support basis to present to Putin.
Some opinion poll data immediately prior to the March referendum were published in Russia.
For example, newspaper headlines on 12 March 2014 announced that up to 83% of Crimean residents were ready to vote for joining Russia in the forthcoming referendum.
Both the reported turnout and the aﬃrmation of 97% in favor of joining Russia exceeded the CB-SAM survey expectations.
The eﬀect of this eﬀort was to increase the ratio of supporters of annexation at the polls.
That the voting was a controlled spectacle designed to simulate self-determination by the people of Crimea does not mean, however, 8 J O’LOUGHLIN AND G TOAL that the outcome did not reﬂect majority opinion on the peninsula.
Russia and its local allies took no chances with the referendum to ensure the outcome they wanted.
That outcome, however, may have reﬂected not unanimous sentiment in Crimea, as reported by the election oﬃcials, but majority or near evenly-divided sentiment.
The poll may have been illegitimate and ﬂawed by established democratic standards but it may nevertheless have been experienced as legitimate by most residents of Crimea.
It was, of course, certainly seen as a foundational legitimation act by the renamed State Council of Crimea and the Russian Federation.
Since KIIS already had interviewers on the ground in Crimea and maintaining their long-established partnership, the Levada center hired them to conduct the survey using KIIS’ usual random sampling approach for door-step in-person surveys.
The selection of households in each sampling point was carried out by means of a random route method.
With a prescribed starting point, the interviewer polled every 17th household from the list of all resident households.
If the respondent refused to take part in the survey, interviewers proceeded to the EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 9 next address in the list of households of this electoral district.
The selection of the respondents in households was made with the consideration of quotas by gender and age.
The survey was completed between the 9th and 22 December 2014, approximately 9 months after the annexation.
Of these completed surveys,184 were re-contacted by the Levada supervisor to check that the surveys were completed as planned and reported by the interviewer.
Levada estimated that the margin of error was 2.5% at the .95 level of conﬁdence.
We have no indication of the socio-demographic characteristics of those who refused to take part in the survey.
In the survey sample, the distribution by nationality indicated that 64% selfidentiﬁed as Russian, 9% as Tatar, 21% as Ukrainian and 6% other or mixed nationality.
These ratios compare to the data of the October 2014 census conducted by the new authorities.
As well as some re-identiﬁcation from Ukrainian to Russian, Crimea saw signiﬁcant out-migration, especially by ethnic Ukrainian residents after March 2014.
Outmigration has deﬁnitely been counter-balanced by in-migration from Russia.
In our analysis, we report weighted results to take account of the discrepancies between the 2014 census ﬁgures and the sample.
Our results on key questions such as support for annexation match others conducted in the period after March 2014, thus increasing conﬁdence in our results.
This survey of 1,659 adults nation-wide found sentiments that were very diﬀerent there than in other regions of Ukraine.
A majority of respondents in Crimea , for example, supported the right of regions to secede from Ukraine.
Almost three-quarters supported both Russian and Ukrainian as the oﬃcial languages in Crimea.
A post annexation survey in February 2015 by the German market analysis company, GfK, indicated general satisfaction with the outcome of the events that resulted in Crimea’s 10 J O’LOUGHLIN AND G TOAL annexation.
In terms of the material status of the Crimean population, the sample reported similar results.
Using the usual post-Soviet question about spending options as a measure of income since direct questions about income are unreliable, the ZOIS data indicated that 2.7% could not aﬀord food , 26.5% could buy necessary things (ours was 22.7%), 57.5% could aﬀord most things except most expensive (our numbers were 55.8%) and only a tiny number in both samples could aﬀord everything.
The ZOIS survey indicated that “the regional identity category krymchanin has gained further in signiﬁcance, where one might have expected a strengthening of the identiﬁcation as ethnic Russians or Russian citizens.
Our question on identity is not directly comparable since we oﬀered “inhabitant of Crimea” as an option and 61.4% chose this identity.
Like our survey, as reported below, many of the ZOIS questions showed signiﬁcant diﬀerences between Crimean Tatars and the rest of the population with clear indications that the Tatars remained skeptical of the republic’s administration and Russian control of the peninsula.
Like all such surveys, respondents are expected to provide answers which are consistent across the multiple dimensions of interest.
Respondents who, for example, trust Vladimir Putin would logically be more supportive of Russian military actions in Crimea and the Donbas.
In order to see the overlap between the measures, we computed Cronbach’s Alpha.
A reliability coeﬃcient of .70 or higher is considered “acceptable” in most social science research settings.
The Cronbach’s Alpha for the 75 attitudinal EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 11 questions in the Crimean survey was .721, a helpful indicator that respondents answered them consistently for a range of local and international topics.
This Cronbach’s value then allows us to select a few key questions for detailed examination as a way to represent the deeper dimensions of beliefs across the peninsula.
We chose this strategy to the alternative, a principal components analysis of the 75 questions, since values and correlates on a single attitude score are easier to interpret than for a component that is derived from dozens of diﬀerent questions.
Respondents can dodge questions by outright refusal to answer or by giving a “don’t know” response.
In many cases, “don’t know” answers can legitimately reﬂect a lack of knowledge on the topic or a diﬃculty in answering a question that is poorly phrased such as a simple question on a multifaceted subject.
Examining the pattern of missing values and if necessary, imputing them, allows both a determination of sensitivity to certain topics and a clariﬁcation about which groups perceive higher risks in providing honest responses.
Surveys in Crimea are apt to be criticized both because of challenges of access and diﬃculties in meeting proper survey protocols.
A consideration of missing values and addressing such cases through imputation methodologies provides both transparency in survey information and proper attention to missing values.
In this Crimean study, the “don’t know” ratios for sensitive questions were typically higher for the Tatar sample than for the other two main groups, selfidentiﬁed Russians and Ukrainians.
For the question on whether the respondent trusted the Russian armed forces, the Tatar “don’t know” ratio was 15.6% compared to 1.9% for Russians and 7.0% for Ukrainians.
For the question on whether their attitude towards Putin had changed in the past year, the Tatar “don’t know” ratio was 9.4% compared to 1.1% for Russians and 3.8% for Ukrainians.
For the question on how the respondent rated the “people in power now in Crimea”, the Tatar “don’t know” ratio was 15.6% with the comparable ratio at 7.7% for Russians and 10.8% for Ukrainians.
For these and other questions, the “don’t know” ratio for Ukrainians occupied a middle ground between the low ﬁgure for Russians and the higher ﬁgure for Tatars.
At the other end of the spectrum, it is also plausible that the data are MNAR where the answers on the questions are aligned with a speciﬁc group.
Little’s test and CDM analysis for the attitudinal questions of interest in the Crimean survey indicated that the data follow a MAR pattern and therefore, imputing missing values (“don’t know” answers and refusals, though this latter ratio is typically under 2%) is appropriate Little’s test (that the “don’t knows” are missing completely at random MCAR) was rejected at the .01 level.
CDM analysis which examines the pattern of missingness according to the key demographic groups certiﬁed that, controlling for other demographic factors, the group most likely to give ’don’t know’ answers were Tatars.
The analysis below focuses on three dimensions of post-annexation attitudes in Crimea; our measures consider political, identity and material perspectives.
The aggregate results in Crimea indicated that 15.3% thought that the end of SU was a right step, 73.3% thought it a wrong step, with 11.2% “don’t know” and 0.3% refusals.
However, the diﬀerence between the Tatar sample and the two other main nationalities was sizable with 48.4% of Tatars rating the end of the Soviet Union a right step, compared to 11.5% of Ukrainian respondents and 11.7% of Russians.
Given the repression and deportation to Central Asia suﬀered by the Tatars during the Soviet period, the reasons behind such attitudes are evident.
Tatars returned in greater numbers to the peninsula in the 1990s and their parliament was re-instituted in 1991 after Ukraine gained its independence.
In practice, most people have layered or multiple identities that combine these elements in complex ways, as was argued by authors who studied pre-annexation views.
In this paper, we examine responses to a key question about whether the respondent consider him/herself to be a Russian citizen.
In our analysis, we focus on the “Russian citizen” question EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 13 since the responses to the other identiﬁcations did not elicit as strong a divide between demographic attributes.
In the December 2014 survey, the choice on the citizenship question almost certainly was aﬀected by the combination of the new geopolitical realities – Crimea now part of the Russian Federation – and the citizenship rules that were put in place to legalize this change of status shortly after the annexation.
In order to exempt oneself from this citizenship rule, therefore, one had only one month to proactively opt out.
Cross-tabulations of the three main nationalities show that 98.1% of Russians, 91% of Ukrainians and 62.5% of Tatars agreed that they are Russian citizens when asked directly about this categorization.
Unlike the variation by nationality on that option, there is near unanimity and agreement across the nationalities that they are “inhabitants of Crimea” with 89.1% of Russians, 86.6% of Ukrainians and 89.1% of Tatars agreeing strongly with this identiﬁcation.
The identiﬁcation – “Soviet person” – also showed the distinction between the Tatar sample and the other two major groups.
While 46.8% of residents agreed with this Soviet characterization , the ratio was only 25% for Tatars which contrasted with the 46.2% for Russians and 46.8% for Ukrainians.
The relatively high ratio for Ukrainians on this option might be related to their retirement status, with 35.7% of Ukrainians in the sample reporting that they are retired, compared to 27.6% of Russians and 12.5% of Tatars.
Older people in surveys across the post-Soviet realm typically identify more strongly with the Soviet tradition than younger cohorts.
While we had over a dozen questions that could be read as responses to the Crimean annexation about nine months before the survey, the question about “trust in Vladimir Putin” was central.
The individual responses on this trust measure showed high correlations with key geopolitical developments and ramiﬁcations throughout all aspects of respondents’ lives.
Putin was seen as the architect of the annexation and as the instigator of Russian geopolitical interests and actions in the region, including the involvement with the conﬂict in the Donbas.
Modeling answers to three key survey questions The modeling that follows uses a logit approach for a binary outcome; in our case, the dependent variables were a) the end of SU was a right or wrong step, b) Russian citizen or not, and c) “strongly trust” Putin or not.
Given the evident problems of endogeneity in picking other attitudinal measures as predictors, 14 J O’LOUGHLIN AND G TOAL we use only demographic measures, nine in all.
To clarify the relative importance of each measure, we calculated average marginal eﬀects to indicate the strength of the individual predictors.
Average marginal eﬀects show the strength of the respective predictor in shifting the outcome variable from 0 to 1 while holding the other predictors constant at their average value.
For a scaled measures such as age, the eﬀects of a change in one year of age independent variable are calculated.
The graphs in the three ﬁgures show the marginal eﬀect estimate with the respective errors of .05.
When the error line does not cross the horizontal zero line, the estimated value of the predictor is signiﬁcant at this level of conﬁdence.
As a typical measure of overall life outlook in post-Soviet surveys, this ratio typically rises and falls with the economic outlook of individual well-being prospects by asking respondents if they expected to be “better oﬀ” in two years.
Of the sample, 79.9% of the sample answered aﬃrmatively to this question with another marked contrast between Tatars and the other two major groups . a) Attitudes to the end of the Soviet Union.
The general evaluation of the legacy of the Soviet Union was made through the question on whether its end was a right or wrong step.
As noted, Tatars showed a signiﬁcant positive relationship with the outcome (“it was a right step”) with the average marginal eﬀect 20% more than non-Tatars in the sample.
In general, those who believe that their post-1991 material and social lives have worsened evinced a nostalgia for the Soviet system.
This is far from unique to Crimea since at the time of our survey, a similar belief about the beneﬁts of the Soviet system was supported by 54% of an all-Russian sample . b) Russian citizenship As explained earlier, in order to avoid holding Russian citizenship in the aftermath of the Crimean annexation, one had to proactively opt out of it.
For Ukrainians, possession of Russian citizenship was also less likely than the comparative group and this eﬀect was marginally signiﬁcant.
Other demographic factors were unimportant in this determination as Russian citizen or not.
Not counting those who already held Russian passports before March 2014, it is unclear whether respondents in the survey considered this question to be a purely legal deﬁnition or something more important in its ramiﬁcations for identity; the procedure that one was required to adopt in order not to be considered a Russian citizen was much more likely to generate an acquiescence to this civic status.
Most Tatars in the sample seemed to be deﬁant to the new geopolitical situation by refusing to take on this citizenship.
We cannot be sure that those Tatars in the sample who said that they did not have Russian citizenship actually went through the legal exemption procedures but we can interpret the fact that they did not consider themselves to have that status as an indication of opposition to the concept.
Average marginal eﬀects for nine demographic predictors of “Russian citizenship”. c) Trust President Putin.
Average marginal eﬀects for nine demographic predictors of “Deﬁnite trust” in Vladimir Putin.
While Ukrainians were also 10% less likely to “deﬁnitely trust” Putin than non-Ukrainians, this eﬀect was only marginally signiﬁcant.
The relationship between age and “deﬁnite trust” in Putin was marginally signiﬁcant with each year of age adding 0.2% more trust in the Russian president.
As noted earlier, “optimists” in the sample generally believed in the personal material beneﬁts that they would accrue as a result of the annexation and thus were more likely to trust the architect of this change in political control from Ukraine to Russian.
Optimists were 26% higher in their support of the annexation at 89% than non-optimists at 63% and consistent with this belief, optimists are 8% more likely to deﬁnitely trust Putin.
The clear message from the models and other indicators of diﬀerences between demographic groups is the signiﬁcant gap between the beliefs of Tatars and the other major groups.
Much of the political commentary in the wake of the annexation has focused on how the political status and overall quality of life for Tatars changed from the years of Ukrainian rule.
Their parliament has been suspended by the Russian authorities since April 2016 on grounds of “ethnic extremism” and many activists have either ﬂed or been arrested.
As a small minority that is under suspicion by the new regime, many Tatars showed themselves in our survey as having strong doubts about the developments after 2014.
By avoiding some particularly sensitive questions, and by responding in signiﬁcantly diﬀerent ways that their Slavic neighbors, this distinctiveness was evident.
The smaller diﬀerences between Ukrainian and Russian respondents is undoubtedly related to the composition of the Ukrainian population on the peninsula, dominated by older cohorts, military retirees and people in ethnically mixed marriages.
In this respect, they diﬀered from Ukrainians in the rest of the country and while many have moved from the peninsula in the past 5 years, those remaining there have not shown the same kind of distinctive and mobilized politics as the smaller Tatar population.
One hundred states in the United Nations General Assembly voted on 27 March 2014 for a resolution aﬃrming the territorial integrity of Ukraine and calling on states, international organizations and specialized agencies not to recognize any change in the status of Crimea or the Black Sea port city of Sevastopol, and to refrain from actions or dealings that might be interpreted as such.
Few states have endorsed Russia’s intervention and subsequent absorption of former Ukrainian territory.
Even longstanding Russian allies like Belarus have sought to avoid taking a stand on the issue.
Instead, most states see Crimea’s annexation as something to be robustly condemned.
In a recent speech before the United Nations Assembly, Ukrainian President Poroshenko explained that “Russia grabbed Crimea, then it turned Donbas into a battleﬁeld, and then it continued its aggression in the Sea of Azov, the Black Sea and the Kerch Strait.
To Poroshenko the circumstances that lead to Crimea’s annexation and occupation were a mockery of self-determination under international law.
Nor was there any self-determination by Crimeans after proxy Russian forces arrived placing Aksyonov in power and rushing through a secessionist referendum without democratic consultation, thus not allowing time for deliberation and fair conditions for debate.
A profound disjuncture between the authorities and the population exists.
The operational assumption in such analysis, which may well be driven by wishful thinking, is that “the Crimean people” are in silent opposition to Russia’s plundering annexation.
This disjuncture of attitudes, and perceptions of legitimacy, is the conundrum Crimea presents in contemporary international aﬀairs.
At present, however, there is no indication that a majority of EURASIAN GEOGRAPHY AND ECONOMICS 19 current residents of the peninsula question or regret the annexation.
Researchers would do well to acknowledge this as an essentially contested issue in international aﬀairs rather than a subject that immediately requires recitation of a standard litany of plots and oﬀences by the opposing sides.
The foundations for contemporary and future peaceful conﬂict resolution can only be built by acknowledging that irrespective of the controversial means by which Crimea became part of Russia, the majority of its residents appear happy about this fact and want it to stay there.
Russia’s annexation of Crimea may not have widespread legitimacy but at this point in time it has it where it counts, within Russia and within Crimea.
Born in the city of Bălți in the then Soviet Socialist Republic of Moldova in 1972, he migrated to Crimea in 1989 to attend college.
Funding This work was supported by the United States National Science Foundation Political Science Program ; References Alikin, A 2017.
Kennan Institute, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars Press.
Otchot o monitoringe sotsial’no-ekonomicheskoy situatsii v kontekste realizatsii Strategii ekonomicheskogo i sotsial’nogo razvitiya AR Krym na 2011–2020 gg.
