Sie dürfen die Dokumente nicht für öffentliche oder kommerzielle You are not to copy documents for public or commercial Zwecke vervielfältigen, öffentlich ausstellen, öffentlich zugänglich purposes, to exhibit the documents publicly, to make them machen, vertreiben oder anderweitig nutzen. publicly available on the internet, or to distribute or otherwise use the documents in public.
The strategy proved to be inefficient due to the fact that Ukraine did not hold the required leverage for this kind of strategy and the consequence was observed in the current instability from the Ukrainian state.
At the same time, these events are the effect of an announced Russia’s change of strategy.
Crimea’s annexation and the violent acts from Donbas put under question mark the security and stability of the entire European continent.
Additionally, Russia was perceived as a revisionist state that did not follow the international rules anymore.
To a certain point the events from Ukraine were viewed as a new type of war in terms of tactics.
The present article aims to analyse the degree to which the events from Ukraine were predictable.
Regarding the methodology, the article will concentrate on document analysis , in order to emphasize the correlation between the different/similar meanings that are displayed within the strategic, official documents and the discourse level, to see if there were some hints regarding the events that were to be developed.
EU; perceptions; predictability; Russia; Ukraine JEL classification: F51 Introduction ""Nothing in politics happens by accident.
If something does happen, it was planned that way."" Franklin Roosevelt.
In August 2008, the demarcation between the East and the West was clearly established.
It was a pivotal moment for the Russian foreign policy towards the West as it highlighted the change of paradigm from cooperation towards competition.
The Georgian war proved both the Russian power and readiness for unilateralism when considered a suitable option, but also its limitations in terms of interdependence between it and the Western powers.
Although Medvedev might have been perceived as a more proWestern leader since his discourse was based on emphasizing the readiness of Moscow to cooperate with the West, the Georgian war proved the contrary.
The program was designed to offer intensives for six Eastern States (Azerbaijan, Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine) in order for them to reach the European standards for economic benefits like the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreements and the Association Agreements , but without the final political advantage, namely the membership perspectives.
In response, using the direct proportionality method, the Russian Federation implemented what was to be called the Eurasian Union project.
Since the Russian frustration against the Eastern states like Moldova and Ukraine pivoting towards the West was evident, Moscow’s behaviour may be seen as predictable.
Using the stick strategy of cutting the energy exports towards these states or increasing the prices per 1000 cubic metres in terms of natural gas, banning their imports of good on the Russian markets, etc. were traditional foreign policy tools for Putin.
However, if we analyse the Russian behaviour and the discourse of Vladimir Putin since he came to power in the 2000s, we may acknowledge the fact that maybe the events from Ukraine were not a surprise and that the Russian authorities may have taken into consideration a war in Ukraine as a viable option.
We may also realise that the EU, especially, should have acted differently, or at least it should have reacted sooner.
The present article aims to analyse the degree to which the events from Ukraine were predictable, in the sense that the West might have expected the Russian reactions given its behaviour since especially the Georgian war, but also the way it defines itself.
Regarding the methodology, the article is part of a larger research regarding the predictability of the Ukrainian events, taking into consideration the strategic documents of the Russian Federation since Putin came into power and his discourses regarding the EU, NATO, United States and Eastern Europe.
The present article will concentrate on the document analysis in order to emphasize the correlation between the different/similar meanings that are displayed within the strategic, official documents and the discourse level, and nevertheless to see if there were some hints regarding the events that were to be developed.
Return to the Russian exceptionalism and competition After the end of the Cold War through the disbandment of USSR, Russia, the official follower, lost its status of a great power that was equal among the group of states that influenced the international relations scene.
From this status of being a previous global power that lost even its regional influence, Russia succeeded in emerging itself as a great power that has the capabilities to defend its international interests and prestige by using its military and economic instruments.
In order to understand the Russian recent unilateral behaviour and the Ukrainian crisis we must firstly analyse the Russian behaviour over the years, in relation with other players, be them great powers or not, thus, the emphasise will be on resuming and highlighting the main Russian behaviour patterns in relation to the West.
Russia was and still is the largest country in the world, with no natural borders.
This lack of natural protection against the outside may give instability in terms of national security, hence over the years the Russian borders expanded and contracted periodically.
This need to find secure frontiers generated in Moscow an expansion need based strategy which can be seen during the First World War in its attempts to seize Dardanelles and Poland and during the Second World War with Eastern Europe.
The Russian desire and perceived need to be a great power remained constant over the years and it can be seen even today with some variations.
Although the disbandment of USSR is seen as “the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the century” in the eyes of Russian leaders, nowadays a return to that status quo is unlikely and even irrational from the costs-benefits point of view.
On the one hand, this permanent perceived need of the authorities to secure the Russian borders by expanding them, has generated a fundamental need to be a regional hegemon with no challenger in its region.
On the other hand, the current need to protect its developed influence beyond the Russian national borders can be explained also by the fact that Moscow has two neighbours with an expanding influence, at the West the EU and NATO and at the East China.
Hence, Russia had and still has the means to be an important player at international level.
In terms of behavioural pattern, I will relate to Andrei Tsygankov’s classification of Russian behaviour throughout history.
Russia proved patterns of defensiveness in its trying to contain the NATO’s expansion after the Cold War and became assertive in the case of the Cold War period, the Georgian War and I will add the current Ukrainian crisis.
Feeling the constant need to protect its borders, and keeping in mind the Russian capabilities and its status over the years, the Russian foreign policy proved itself to be rather constant and did not witness a fundament change over the years.
Taking into consideration these fluctuations, Russia almost obsessively felt the need to demand its right to have an independent policy first from the Holly Roman Empire and nowadays from the West.
Therefore, we can see a country that perceives exceptional in itself, comprising two continents, the largest state in the world that is claiming its right to be independent.
More likely, Putin was in favour of creating a system of great powers that resembled with the Concert of Europe from the nineteenth century, hence a multipolar system in which Russia is part of the group and has its influence, interests and security protected by this balance of power.
In his view, Russia had the right; therefore it had the legitimacy to conduct a foreign policy that was independent, thus distinct from the one of the sole superpower.
Taking this aspect into consideration this policy was different, if not divergent from the others.
For Putin this was the potential that Russia had and he had to regain Russia’s former status.
Referring to the domestic level in the early 2000 before Putin came to power, the lack of external power projection was partly explained by the fact that Russia faced some international changes that needed time in order to produce positive results.
The economic policy of what was called the “shock therapy” had negative outcomes for the Russian society that was already passing through the loss of international prestige once the Cold War ended.
The unemployment rate increased, the national currency depreciated thus decreasing the life quality of the Russian citizens.
All these aspects generated discontent among the Russian voters for Eltin’s reforms and prepared the ground for a more traditional assertive president.
The new elected leader of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, won the elections from 2000s and came to power as a man “from nowhere” in particular, with little known personal history.
Unlike his predecessor, Putin emphasised Russia’s role at international level through cooperation, as it was in the case of war on terror, but at the same time, when referring to Russia’s area of influence he sustained Russia’s natural right to defend it and to imply its own interests upon it, regardless of the fact that it may be in contradiction or in competition with other regional powers.
Moreover, as Russia approached the assertiveness status and saw Europe as a threat in terms of identity it stopped defining itself as being European.
One example in this case is the draft Foundations of the Russian Cultural Policy from spring 2014 developed by the Russian Ministry of Culture, where the statement “Russia is not Europe” was introduced.
Russia’s main competition in its area of influence according to Russia’s perceptions is the European Union’s and NATO’s expansion towards East.
Apart from the elements that pertain to Russia as a great power and thus of its natural area of influence , Ukraine is a quintessential element for the Russian European identity and the Russian language.
At the same time, the Russian logic and philosophy regarding itself generated an assertive behaviour, since Russia felt threatened and needed a defensive response to an expanding West towards Russia’s own backyard.
Therefore, in order to understand Moscow’s behaviour, we must look through Russian lens, thus we must understand how Russia is defining itself.
But in order to develop a glibly analysis over the predictability or unpredictability of the Ukrainian crisis, simultaneously we must analyse the policies that the EU implemented in the Eastern European region since it is perceived as being a challenger to Russia’s regional hegemonic position.
The European Union and its Eastern Neighbourhood After the big bang enlargement, the EU transformed itself from an international organization that had 15 member states mainly Western powers to a 27 members international organization that comprised central and eastern European states.
At the same time, we must take into account the fact that the EU saw itself as a global power , hence, as Russia it had the legitimacy, capabilities and responsibility to act beyond its territory.
As Russia may seem dependent on its own geographical location, the interests the new EU member states were predictably mainly located at the Eastern frontier of the EU, namely, Ukraine in the case of Poland, the Republic of Moldova in the case of Romania, and the Eastern frontier in the case of the Baltic States.
The EU decision makers saw this change since 2004, when the European Neighbourhood Policy was launched.
Although the Russian Federation was invited to be part of the policy’s programs, it denied.
The choice is rather predictable if we think of the Russian aforementioned logic and almost obsessive demand of equality with other international powers.
Being part of the ENP would have meant in the Russian eyes the acknowledgement of the fact that the European soft model was a better model that the Russian one.
Additionally, being put on the same position as Libya for example was not something that would be acceptable for Moscow since as an auto-defined Eurasian power , Russia is not just a neighbour of the EU, it is already a great power.
From a political, security grounded point of view, the ENP can be interpreted as an alternative to the enlargement policy, given the fact that the EU faced the biggest wave of enlargement till present and needed time to adjust to those changes.
Although some countries that are part of the ENP do not want or cannot be part of the EU due to the geographical reasons, not being part of the European continent, the Eastern states like Ukraine and Moldova expressed their choice for membership perspectives and their disapproval of being part of a policy that comprised the EU neighbourhood although they were European states.
Therefore, the ENP’s success was and still is questionable, given the Syrian and Ukrainian current dynamics and the program’s objective of creating a peaceful neighbouring area.
In 2008, facing with major security challenges, the EU needed to respond accordingly especially after the Georgian war erupted.
The middle way offered by the EaP proved to work counterproductively for both the EU and its external partners.
If we correlate the perceived needs of the partners with the activities and the purpose of the program we will see that often they do not converge, being rather a middle way in which the EU was trying to implement an incremental method in order to develop an economic and political relationship with six Eastern European states without giving clear perspectives.
Regardless of the fact that they did not offer the membership perspectives that Ukraine hoped for, in its case they emphasized a rapprochement of Kiev towards the Western model and a balancing action against the Russian one.
This balancing based strategy proved to be counterproductive for the Ukrainian economy and security since it proved to remain blocked in this position, a position that ultimately generated a doubtful status quo at the regional level.
Yanukovych’s refusal to sign the AA generated what was known the Euromaidan and the change of the Ukrainian Prime Minister, Nikolai Azarov and ultimately of the President.
At the regional level, the regional power, the EU, sustained the democratic civil moves and tried intervene and to control the already escalating acts of violence through the Foreign Ministers of Germany, France and Poland.
The other part of the negotiations was the Russian Federation, which perceived the change of Yanukovych as a threat to its interests especially in relation with its military base in Crimea.
The support of the Euromaidan towards the West generated fears in Moscow that Crimea may become a NATO military base , thus losing one of its strategic points in the Black Sea.
Additionally Moscow’s perceptions were that the EU was too divided so it could not have offered Kiev the needed support.
Within this framework Russia offered its financial support and tried to keep Ukraine on its desired path , using the carrot strategy.
The fragmented domestic situation from Ukraine generated centrifugal behaviour patterns at the Eastern part of the state due to the fact that there lived a large part of the Russian minority that preferred the Russian led international structures.
This domestic situation created a vulnerable position for the national security of Ukraine, fact that was present for years in the Ukrainian society.
The following maps for example illustrate the results of the 2010 and 2014 election coupled with the places where the protests erupted adding the map of ethnicity on the Ukrainian territory.
Fisher, 2014 After the protests erupted and the state was divided once again between the East and the West, the Russian pressures increased.
Although not designed to be implemented, Vladimir Putin asked the approval of the Russian Rada to deploy military forces to protect the ethnic Russians from Crimea since the security of the Russian citizens that live abroad is one of the main elements of Russian’s right to act beyond its borders according to the Russian laws.
This was the justification in the case of the Georgian intervention and was used also in the case of Crimea.
This article offered the Russian leaders the legitimacy to act having the legal support and ensured the domestic approval of the Russian voters.
Additionally, this article is in accordance with the Russian philosophy of protecting itself and its people from external threats.
Using this argument the actions of Moscow were not perceived by the domestic level as being assertive, but rather based on defensive grounds and more like a moral responsibility of the Russian state to protect all its citizens, not only those that live within its national borders.
This element from the Russian Constitution can also be interpreted as a declaration of being a regional power that has the right, legitimacy, capability and the moral duty to act beyond its territory.
Thus in Russian perception this kind of action, although defined at international level as being offensive, can and would take the form of a defensive action against an outside threat.
Although it creates the suitable environment for the authorities from Moscow to act in order to protect, the annexation of Crimea can hardly be defined as a defensive act and a democratic result since the Crimean citizens were hardly persecuted and although their rights were limited, they were not vitally threatened.
In terms of available choices, they rather did not exist, since the Constitution from 1992 offered a special status of Crimea.
Therefore, ultimately the return of this peninsula to the previous ante Vilnius status quo was not possible.
Apart from the annexation, the south-eastern part of Ukraine witnessed series of protests and even violent acts between the pro-Russian rebels and the Ukrainian authorities, leaving the Ukrainian state in a situation in which its territorial integrity and its domestic security are questioned by a frozen conflict building scenario.
Seen at the regional level, taking into consideration the competition between the regional players, the events from Ukraine can be explained by the EU’s lack of unity and clear perspectives over Eastern Europe.
At the level of implemented programs, although it created incentives for Moldova, Ukraine, Georgia, etc. to make reforms and to reach the European standards through the EaP, the membership desiderate remained unspoken.
Therefore, the program did not reach from its inception the Eastern countries’ needs and even more importantly, it did not take into consideration Russia’s reactions.
On the other hand, at the level of politics, as already mentioned, the EU defines itself as a global power that sustains its soft power model through it normative character to which other actors can relate.
Thus, from EU’s perspective Ukraine events after the Vilnius Summit were the expression of the Ukrainian people democratic will towards the West and the actions of Russia were aggressive in their nature and represented the Russian unilateral expression of breaking the international norms like the territorial integrity, inviolability of frontiers and the right of a state to conduct its own independent foreign policy.
At the same time, taking into consideration the Russian already implemented actions and following the above-mentioned logic and Russian philosophy over Eastern European region, Putin acted in a defensive manner.
Russia made it clear that it would not allow a further expansion of its two competitors in its own neighbourhood and would not accept a direct border with them if Ukraine would become a part of the Western organizations, transforming it from an orbit of Russia and a space where the Russian Federation expressed its influence, into a contestant of its regional power.
Moreover, Ukraine is not only part of its area of influence, but is a strategic, core interest of Russia since it is defined as being part of the Russian identity.
Although the main threat is represented by NATO and there were no membership perspectives for Ukraine neither in NATO, nor in the EU, the trend was quintessential for Russia since signing an AA with the EU would have been the first step in extracting Ukraine from the Russian orbit.
Moreover, the general pattern is for a state to firstly become part of the EU and afterwards part of NATO and the nature of Russia’s actions were mainly targeting NATO possible expansion, annexing Crimea thus maintaining its influence in the Black Sea and creating the precondition of a frozen conflict in the south eastern part of Ukraine making it impossible for Kiev to comply with the main NATO accession conditions regarding the conflicts with its neighbours and the presence of foreign troops within its national border.
All these elements should have been considered factors of predictability and should have been envisioned by the West.
Moreover, another factor of predictability should have been the neo-realist aspect of the Russian behaviour patterns, elements that years after years the West has denied to be able to explain the international dynamics.
The entire political philosophy of Putin was and is still based on the antithesis towards the West and the right of Russia to be an equal power that has an independent, thus different policy and liberty to develop a different model.
Given the Russian neo-realist behaviour, and the soft power of its neighbour, it developed itself as a military power.
Following the logic of this kind of power, it would try to impose itself as a hegemon rather than a leader with a desirable model to be followed.
Conclusions The Russian Federation proves itself to be rather constant in its behaviour towards the West, especially since after Putin came to power the EU started to be perceived as a threat and NATO redefined itself and developed into a more powerful organization.
After 2000 the expansion of both organizations was seen as a threat by the Russian authorities that already felt the almost obsessive need of parity with the West.
These elements generated the need to protect itself from the outside, need that ultimately proved assertive in Ukraine.
Firstly, in Ukraine the domestic fragmented situation between the voters created huge discrepancies in terms of political choices and ultimately centrifugal behaviours.
Secondly, Ukraine never pursed a constant pro-Western strategy towards the West, being more than once hesitant.
Thirdly, it was and remained dependent on the Russian energy exports although it was a transit state for the European importers.
Taking all these into consideration, we should acknowledge also the West’s responsibility in playing in the Russian backyard and not reacting sooner and in a more constant manner.
