The nephew of a key player in Russian state propaganda has been convicted in Germany for state security offences relating to eastern Ukraine — three years after his uncle unwittingly boasted about his participation in the conflict there.
An officer of Russia's Black Sea fleet and his partner have been imprisoned on charges of spying for Ukraine, Russia's Federal Security Service said on February 28.
A nephew of Dmitry Kiselyov, a Russian state media boss known for fiery anti-Western diatribes, has been sentenced to two years and three months in a German prison on charges of planning to take part in military activities alongside Russia-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine.
Candidates are the biggest flaw in Ukraine’s presidential polls Financial TimesNone of this trio inspires confidence that they would lose habits of overt and veiled government by oligarchy.
This graft scandal may be too much even for Ukraine Published Feb. at 9:59 am Deputy Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council OlehHladkovsky sits at the council's meeting in Kyiv on Feb.
Volker claims 24 sailors captured by Russia need to be returned to Ukraine Published Feb. at 2:32 pm Captured Ukrainian sailors Yury Budzilo, Sergey Chuliba, Yury Bezyazychny and Bogdan Nebylitsa in the courtroom, in Moscow, Feb.
KYIV -Some 13,000 people have been killed, a quarter of them civilians, and as many as 30,000 wounded in the war in eastern Ukraine since it broke out in April 2014, the United Nations says.
Vice prime minister claims Russia blatantly blocks attempts to release Ukrainian POWs till elections Published Feb.
Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Maruv said she did not want her appearance to be ""a political promotion"" Ukraine's entrant for the Eurovision Song Contest, Maruv, has been dropped in a row related to tensions between her country and Russia.
Poroshenko says threat of Russia's full-scale war against Ukraine ""quite real""Poroshenko says preparations for war are under way near the border with Ukraine, namely in Russia's Smolensk, Voronezh, Belgorod, and Rostov regions, as well as in Russian-occupied Crimea.
Russian occupation forces violated ceasefire seven times in the Joint Forces Operation area in eastern Ukraine over the past day.
He doesn't hold rallies, instead traveling around the country selling tickets to gigs at which he parodies many of the politicians he is running against.
Zelensky also regularly communicates with supporters through behind-the-scenes campaign videos he posts on Facebook and YouTube — a fresh approach in Ukraine.
SBU suspects 7 Russian servicemen of attack on Ukrainian sailors Published Feb. at 12:12 pm A Russian coast guard ship rams a Ukrainian vessel on Nov.
View link » On the fifth episode of Russia Rising, we’ll explore the growing information war between Russia and the West.
Whether it’s a chemical weapons attack in Syria, the poisoning of a former Russian spy in England or the war in eastern Ukraine, the Kremlin often promotes a much different version of events from the one being presented by western governments.
The President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko Russia annexed Crimea after the illegal referendum held on the peninsula in March 2014.
Earlier, the Russian military captured all strategic military objects and buildings of the key authoritative bodies.
Russia-occupied Makiyivka shaken by explosion on Feb. morning Published Feb. at 1:30 pm A miner walks across the yard at the Kalinovskaya-Vostochnaya coal mine in the eastern Ukrainian city of Makiyivka near Donetsk on Dec.
Danske Bank, currently at the centre of a $240bn Russian money laundering scandal, laundered money for the Ukrainian arms mafia’s sanctions-busting activities in North Korea and Iran as early as 2009, bne IntelliNews can reveal.
Pop singer Maruv has won Ukraine’s nomination to represent the country in this year’s Eurovision Song Contest.
LUBLIN Lithuania will propose additional sanctions against Russia if the country continues its aggressive policy toward Ukraine, President Dalia Grybauskaite said in Poland on Friday.
An Air Force jet piloted by an Offutt-based crew is flying the first aerial photography flight over Russia in more than a year under the Open Skies Treaty, Pentagon officials confirmed, marking a return to some limited military cooperation between the two nations.
Russian occupation forces violated ceasefire agreements 14 times, using weapons banned under the Minsk agreements eight times, in the Joint Forces Operation area in eastern Ukraine over the past day.
Updated Feb. at 10:16 am Russian President Vladimir Putin and Patriarch Kirill of Moscow and All Russia visit the Saint Panteleimon Monastery on Mount Athos, in Karyes on May 28, 2016.
Grain markets fell this week, but some showed signs of improvement towards the weekend.0,000t of wheat are on their way to Egypt this April.% of this wheat will come from France, while the remaining 50% is divided equally between Russia, Ukraine and Romania.
Russian-led forces' tank, dugout destroyed in Donbas 13:20, 22 February 2019 War 1434 0 Earlier, the video was released showing Ukraine army's crushing strike on enemy positions along the contact line.
