DYNAMICS AND MAIN TRENDS Ruslan Kermach For Ukrainian version, see: Трансформації суспільних настроїв в умовах протидії агресії Росії на Донбасі: регіональний вимір Endlish-language version of the book is expected in fall 2017 One of the important dimensions of bilateral relations is the dynamics of attitudes of citizens of these countries towards one another.
Clearly, one can speak about truly “healthy” inter-state relations only when a mutually positive or, at the very least, a neutral attitude is preserved at the level of public opinion in the respective countries.
The attitudes of Ukrainians to their northeastern neighbor and the attitudes of Russians towards Ukraine and Ukrainians have for quite some time been in the center of attention of sociologists of both countries.
In particular, within the framework of the joint project of the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology and the non-government research organization “Levada-Center” a monitoring of public opinion was regularly conducted in both countries , which studied the attitudes of the population of Ukraine towards Russia and the population of Russia towards Ukraine.
Nearly 6% of Ukrainian citizens on average had a “bad” attitude towards Russia in the period from 2008 to 2010.
Also noteworthy is that the number of Ukrainians undecided in their sympathies or antipathies towards Russia was wery low – on average 3–4% of the citizens polled in Ukraine.
It is worth noting that in this same period the dynamics of public opinion in Russia regarding Ukraine was not characterized by the same permanence and high level of positive attitudes.
Instead, less than one year from the start of monitoring of public opinion in April 2008 and right up to May 2009 the percentage of Russians positively inclined towards Ukrainians sharply fell from 55% to 34%.4 However, already in the second half of 2009 the dynamics similarly began sharply shifting to the opposite and the percentage of Russian citizens positively inclined towards Ukraine reached their peak indicator – – in October 2010.
The acute negative change in public opinion in Russia regarding Ukraine in 2008–2009 could have been dictated, in particular, by a number of significant international political events.
First and foremost, this was the NATO Summit in Bucharest during which, among other things, the issue of the possibility of granting Ukraine the Membership Action Plan was discussed.
In August 2008, the Russian-Georgian war broke out, during the course of which Ukraine came to support of official Tbilisi, which, of course, was negatively perceived in Moscow.
Finally, the third significant event was the unfolding of the so-called “gas war” at the turn of 2008–2009, when the Russian side fully shut off the supply of gas to Ukraine.
Then the Russian mass media (at the time 2 The indicator “good attitude” is the total number of the polled respondents in Ukraine, which have a “very good” and “mainly good” attitude towards Russia.
However, already during the next stages of monitoring in 2012 the indicator of “good attitude” towards Russia among Ukrainian citizens somewhat grew and further fluctuated approximately at this benchmark.
Upon the rise to power of Viktor Yanukovych the pro-Russian vector of the foreign policy of Ukraine was notably activated.
In particular, this was manifested in the signing of the so-called “Kharkiv Accords” regarding prolongation of the term of stationing of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol and securing of the “non-bloc status” of Ukraine in the law “On the Principles of Domestic and Foreign Policy”, which the Verkhovna Rada adopted on July 1, 2010.10 However, such steps did not bring about the expected counter-concessions on the part of Moscow regarding Ukraine.
On the contrary, starting from 2011 the Russian side began to resort to such unfriendly measures as launching “product” and “customs” wars against Ukrainian export products.
While the monitoring of public opinion in 2013 to a certain degree demonstrates the declining trend of positive attitudes towards Russia in general, it does not show very sharp fluctuations in both the Ukraine-wide and regional dimensions.
The number of Ukrainians citizens that have a positive attitude towards Russia continues to make up the majority in each of the major macro-regions and all across Ukraine, in general.
Volynska, Rivnenska, Lvivska, Ivano-Frankivska, Ternopilska, Zakarpatska, Khmelnytska, Chernivetska oblasts; Central macroregion: Vinnytska, Zhytomyrska, Sumska, Chernihivska, Poltavska, Kirovohradska, Cherkaska, Kyivska oblasts, Kyiv; Southern macroregion: Dnipropetrovska, Zaporizhska, Mykolaivska, Khersonska, Odeska oblasts; Eastern macroregion: Donetska, Luhanska, Kharkivska oblasts.
Compared with May 2013, when decline was already fixed at 82%, in February 2014 this indicator had already fallen to 78%.12 Such a change in public opinion in Ukraine regarding the attitudes towards Russia was dictated by the dissatisfaction with the direct intervention of the Kremlin in the political processes in Ukraine.
Monitoring conducted by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology in April-May 2014 showed genuinely stunning changes in public opinion in Ukraine.
The steepest erosion of a good attitude towards Russia was observed in the Western and Central regions of Ukraine – a decline of 40% and 33%, respectively, while in the South and East of Ukraine there was a decline of 21% and 15% respectively.
This happened to a great degree thanks to the regions of the South and the East, where the majority of citizens continued to express a positive attitude towards Russia , even given the annexation of Crimea and the start of siege of administrative buildings in a number of cities in the Donbas by proRussian separatists.
In September 2014, sociologists registered a further decline in the positive attitude of Ukrainian citizens towards Russia.
For the first time over the entire period of monitoring it was less than half of the entire population , while the share of Ukrainians that have a negative attitude towards Russia increased to 41%.17 During the May and September 2014 polls together with the question regarding the attitudes of Ukrainian citizens towards Russia, their attitudes towards residents of the country and the leadership of Russia were studied.
Finally, in the December 2014 KIIS poll a decline in the share of Ukrainian citizens positively oriented towards Russia was fixed as well as a parallel growth in the share of Ukrainians negatively oriented towards Russia .20 Therefore, for the first time over the entire period of monitoring of public opinion in Ukraine the share of Ukrainians negatively oriented towards Russia exceeded the share of those with a positive attitude to their neighboring country.
The dynamic decline in the positive attitudes towards Russia in Ukrainian society in 2014 was clearly a logical consequence of Russian aggression against Ukraine.
Seemingly, such a paradoxical situation could have, among other things, been explained by the covert role of Russia in the hybrid intervention.
In the first half of 2015 the overall declining dynamics of positive attitudes towards Russia were preserved.
Only in September 2015 the trend set at the start of Russian aggression against Ukraine slightly changed.
Monitoring of public opinion in the second half of 2015 fixed a certain improvement in the attitudes towards Russia among Ukrainians – to 34%.22 The next monitoring of public opinion conducted by KIIS also fixed an initial growth in the share of those with a positive attitude towards Russia up to 36% , and later to 42% (in May 2016).23 In the regional dimension the greatest dynamics of the increase in positive attitudes towards Russia in May 2016 was observed in the Western , Central and Southern regions of Ukraine.
However, the results of both polls conducted by KIIS in September and December 2016 once again fixed a decrease in this indicator and its stabilization at the level of 40%.25 But the appearance of this trend after the dynamic decline over 2014–2015 requires additional explanation and research.
One way or another, the improvement in the attitudes towards Russia, as the data of sociological monitoring indicates, is associated with the change in attitudes towards the citizens of Russia, but in no way towards its leadership.
Public opinion in Ukraine in the context of the annexation of Crimea Transformation in the attitudes of Ukrainian citizens towards Russia and Russian citizens logically began immediately after the military aggression of Russia on the territory of Crimea.
In this context it would be expedient to also pay attention to how Ukrainian citizens see the future of Crimea.
For this purpose, in May 2016 the Ilko Kucheriv Democratic Initiatives Foundation jointly with the Razumkov Center’s sociological service conducted a nationwide polling in all regions of Ukraine, with the exception of Crimea and the occupied parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
The results of the polling demonstrate a firm conviction of the absolute majority of Ukrainian citizens in the fact that Crimea should be a part of Ukraine.
Moreover, the absolute majority of respondents in all the major macro-regions of the country with the exception of the South of Ukraine , share this opinion.
On the contrary, in Ukraine the relative majority of respondents are inclined to see in the act of the annexation of Crimea the “growth of adventurism of the Russian authorities, which in this way is trying to distract the Russian population from real social and economic problems, rampant corruption and dissatisfaction of the people in the ruling power in Russia”.30 These diametrically opposed moods testify that the annexation of Crimea by Russia will probably remain a bone of contention in the context of public opinion of Ukraine and Russia for a long time.
And this is notwithstanding the existence in this period of different conflicting situations, “product” and “gas” wars and the openly unfriendly steps taken by the Russian authorities.
In the period from 2008 to 2013 the indicator “good attitude” towards Russia in Ukraine slightly fell only once on the cusp of 2010 and 2011.
Russian military aggression against Ukraine in 2014, initially hybrid and later open, became the determining factor in the collapse of the percentage of Ukrainian citizens who were positively inclined towards Russia.
Herewith, the decline was observed among residents of all regions of Ukraine without exception.
At the same time, this decline was associated with the sharp exacerbation of attitudes first and foremost towards the Russian leadership, while the overwhelming majority of Ukrainian citizens continued to show rather positive than negative attitudes towards Russians, even after the start of Russian aggression.
It is clear that the factor of military aggression of Russia cannot be quickly negated due to the logical transformations in Ukrainian socio-political discourse of the very paradigm of perception of the neighboring country.
The results of monitoring of public opinion in Ukraine and Russia regarding the future Crimea also point to the profound and, as it seems today, unsurpassed contradictions in the interpretation by citizens of both countries of one of the determinant issues for the future of Russian-Ukrainian bilateral relations.
