The French Left and Imperialism The NPA capitulates outright to French Imperialism on Ukraine Lutte Ouvriere hides their revolutionary colours under the flag of syndicalism Videos and pictures were posted by the fascists to celebrate the Odessa Massacre: This picture montage is entitled, Joy of the “Ukrainian patriot”— his arrow points to the victim, a pregnant woman cleaner in the building, the killer at the window (he appeared there to celebrate just after her screams stopped) and the crime scene.
Bottom title is “Glory to Ukraine!”, common nationalist/fascist slogan. lialsiii CoiMiltlec fir HieFoith litenuttnii CLQI tail statufci hiinnl The French Left and Imperialism Where We Stand 1.
The capitalist state consists, in the last analysis, of ruling-class laws within a judicial system and detention centres overseen by the armed bodies of police/army who are under the direction and are controlled in acts of defence of capitalist property rights against the interests of the majority of civil society.
It is a part of the Liaison Committee for the Fourth International with the Liga Comunista, Brazil and the Tendencia Militante Bolchevique, Argentina.
We recognise the necessity for revolutionaries to carry out serious ideological and political struggle as direct participants in the trade unions and in the mass reformist social democratic bourgeois workers’ parties despite their pro-capitalist leaderships when conditions are favourable.
Because we see the trade union bureaucracy and their allies in the Labour party leadership as the most fundamental obstacle to the struggle for power of the working class, outside of the state forces and their direct agencies themselves, we must fight and defeat and replace them with a revolutionary leadership by mobilising the base against the pro-capitalist bureaucratic misleaders to open the way forward for the struggle for workers’ power.
We are fully in support of all mass mobilisations against the onslaught of this reactionary Con-Lib Dem coalition.
However, whilst participating in this struggle we will oppose all policies which subordinate the working class to the political agenda of the petty-bourgeois reformist leaders of the Labour party and trade unions 5.
International finance capital roams the planet in search of profit and imperialist governments disrupts the lives of workers and cause the collapse of whole nations with their direct intervention in the Balkans, Iraq and Afghanistan and their proxy wars in Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, etc.
Workers have the right to sell their labour internationally wherever they get the best price.
Only union membership and pay rates can counter employers who seek to exploit immigrant workers as cheap labour to undermine the gains of past struggles.
Marxists never equate the violence of the oppressor with that of the oppressed, we make no moral judgements on the people who have carried out these attacks and recognise the deaths caused by imperialism in these lands run into the hundreds of thousands, if not the low millions.
Already by May 12, 1996, in response to the question from Lesley Stahl, “We have heard that half a million children have died.
We do not have the right to dictate to the militant representatives of the oppressed how they conduct their struggles, not the IRA or the Palestinians or those fighting imperialism in the Middle East today.
But as Marxists we oppose individual acts of terror like this on the political grounds that it cannot achieve its aims of defeating imperialism by these methods and in fact only ends up doing the opposite; strengthening the hands of the state against them and alienation their only true potential allies, the French and international working class, as we discuss below.
The anarchist prophets of the ‘propaganda of the deed’ can argue all they want about the elevating and stimulating influence of terrorist acts on the masses.
The more ‘effective’ the terrorist acts, the greater their impact, the more they reduce the interest of the masses in self-organisation and selfeducation.
But the smoke from the confusion clears away, the panic disappears, the successor of the murdered minister makes his appearance, life again settles into the old rut, the wheel of capitalist exploitation turns as before; only the police repression grows more savage and brazen.
One is not permitted to shout ‘fire’ in a crowded theatre because although this would appear to fall under the remit of freedom of expression this freedom is curtailed due to social responsibilities.
As such one should not cry ‘scrounger’ at a minority group who suffer disproportionately from unemployment, and it may cause a social stampede and get someone beaten up in the street.
In whipping up popular hatred of Jews, La Libre Parole , published by the infamous Edoard Adolfe Drumont, made highly effective use of cartoons that employed the familiar anti-Semitic devices.
Freedom of expression is not an abstract, free-floating right, but rather should be employed in conjunction with, and properly situated amongst, the social, historical and political context of the day.
In that great bastion of “free speech”, in California, by far the wealthiest and most ‘liberal’ state of the union, a rap artist, Brandon Duncan, also known as Tiny Doo, with no criminal record, faces life in prison for album lyrics.
We’re talking about a CD ... there is a revolver with bullets,” Deputy District Attorney Anthony Campagna said, justifying his unconstitutional prosecution of the musician.
The state of California wants to affirm in law that freedom of speech is a privilege, not a right.
Apparently, prosecutors believe that writing lyrics about crime is a crime itself — and one punishable by a life sentence in prison.
If we are to compare the case of Brandon Duncan and Charlie Hebdo ‘gross hypocrisy’ is the only phrase that springs to mind.
Of course the ‘free speech’ of Charlie Hebdo attacks the ruling class Christians, Jews etc. but that is not used to justify the mass murder of hundreds of thousands.
Freedom of Expression and Racism Charlie Hebdo is a right-wing libertarian magazine which promotes racism, Islamophobia, sexism and homophobia.
Whatever the origins of these journalists in the leftism 1968 and after since the 2001 9/11 attack they have become ever more the mouthpiece of French imperialism.
At the height of war in Ireland anti Irish jokes and racist cartoons were everywhere.
The Evening Standard published one called, ‘The Irish’, byJAK, on 29 October 1982 and Ken Livingstone withdrew all GLC advertising from them.
The cartoon led to protests by the British Irish community and resulted in the GLC led by Ken Livingstone banning advertising in the Standard.
The purpose of the attacks was to portray the Irish as sub human savages and so make the British army killing of them acceptable.
It is truly pathetic that those leftists who supported the stance taken by Livingstone then cannot do so over Charlie Hebdo today.
In 1930s America when white people were burning black people on trees, whites could equally have used the argument that they, like Charlie Hebdo, attack all religions equally.
However, making insulting cartoons about white people who controlled the power structures was not the same as demonizing black peoplea powerless underclass.
Imagery of black people being dumb, violent, lazy thieves who looked like monkeysupheld a political reality, the very imagery re-enforced the prejudices of those in power and subjugated blacks.
Until the 1950s, signs like no dogs, no Negros, no Mexicans were common markers of legally enforced laws of racial segregation in America.
The French law against Muslim women wearing the veil/hi jab is along those same lines.
They showed the most ugly Jews with the most enormous noses clad in either Russian-Bolshevik uniforms or with an “Uncle Sam” Stars and Stripes top hat and called Plutocrats, both apparently dominating the world, or trying to, profiting from exploiting good-looking innocent Germans.
NO DOGS NEGROES MEXICANS REST ROOMS WHITE COLORED COLORED SEATED IN REAR 5 The French Left and Imperialism The Muslims of France and other European countries are suffering that same type of attacks today.
As the Muslims of the Middle East and Afghanistan have been slaughtered in their hundreds of thousands by imperialist armies in the last few decades racism against Muslims justified this mass slaughter.
We identify anti Muslim racism today as gelling with the imperialist slaughter in the Middle East and only superficially like the anti Christian and anti Semitic stuff, repulsive and reactionary as this is.
A poor people with little or no power and these vile cartoons made their lives worse and heightened the racist prejudice against them.
In line with this non-class approach Asghar Bukhari frequently confuses ‘Zionist’ with ‘Jew’ and therefore is open to the charge of anti-Semitism.
And as an educated representative of the oppressed Muslims it really is not acceptable to confuse the two.
The task of Marxists is to forge a programme of action to defend the Muslims of France and of Europe against the state and the far right by forging unity with the working class.
It is equally urgent to build a broad united front against the anti-Muslim chauvinism.
Equally we concur with their condemnation of the French left like the French Communist party whose national chauvinism has led them to support ‘national unity’ in effect that is their own ruling class attacks on Muslims.
At the same time, they fail to mention even in a single word the connection between this event and France’s imperialist wars against Muslim peoples, or its oppression and super-exploitation of migrants.
This collaboration and silence of the left is all the more appalling considering the history of French Imperialism’s exploitation of North Africa and the massacres in both Muslim North Africa and in Paris itself.
Still to this day fourteen African countries are forced to pay colonial tax for the benefits of slavery and colonization.
The crucial confrontations were by De Gaulle with Guinea, Togo and Senegal, the rest were forced to follow suit.
In 1958 the French left Guinea and destroyed all infrastructure when they left, crushing cars and leveling buildings in an orgy of destruction.
The next up was Togo, who were forced to agree to pay an annual debt to France for the so called benefits Togo got from French colonization.
From then on France accepted only an “independence on paper” for his colonies, but signed binding “Cooperation Accords”, detailing the nature of their relations with France, in particular ties to France colonial currency , France educational system, military and commercial preferences.
Many demonstrators died when they were violently herded by police into the River Seine, with some thrown from bridges after being beaten unconscious.
Maurice Papon, who died in 2007, was the only Vichy France official to be convicted for his role in the deportation of Jews during World War Two.
Butchery by cowards “Butchery by cowards” is what one Facebook post called the attack on Charlie Hebdo.
But “Butchery by cowards” is dropping bombs from 20,000 feet on defenceless civilians because you never have to see their faces or look 7 The French Left and Imperialism at what ‘doing your job’ does to built-up areas.
The biggest cowards and butchers sit in the White House, Downing Street, the Elysee Palace and Tel Aviv.
Their outraged victims’ relatives are often not very politically sussed on how to extract revolutionary justice from these mass murderers.
They assassinate and target workers in imperialist countries who have no responsibility for what happened to them.
And the imperialist spy agencies of the CIA, MI5, DGSE, Mossad etc. encourage and foster these methods by ‘false flag’ operations which are calculate to inflame sectarian tensions and strengthen the hand of the state against the oppressed.
Of course a revolutionary government would have to tackle this real problem sensitivity to separate the secondary oppressors from their victims, defend the peasants from the landlords, women from the imposition of the veil etc.
But never, never as an ally of the ‘civilising mission’ of imperialism, never be taken in by that peace and democracy bullshit which only puts double chains on these oppressed people.
That is unforgivable in Ukraine, in Palestine, in the whole of the Middle East and the whole semicolonial world.
Some conflict was and is inevitable if the power of the Mullahs, Khans and fundamentalists is again to be broken in the countries of Soviet Central Asia and in Afghanistan, Iran through to Algeria.
We defy anyone to say the cartoon of the kidnapped Nigerian women is not a vile racist, Islamophobic, sexist piece of French imperialist propaganda.
It has a double meaning which suggests that the young women are ‘finally’ angry because their benefits were removed and they did not mind being kidnapped and repeatedly raped.
And Charlie Hebdo lobbed in the anti Russian stuff on the Ukraine to make sure no one doubted where their true pro-imperialist political loyalties lay.
Coming just a week after the signing of Minsk 2, it is a blow both to the plans of Anglo-American imperialism to force Franco-German imperialism into war with Russia and to the plans of the European imperialist powers in alliance with Russia to force a compromise with Kiev on the Donetsk and Lugansk Peoples’ Republics to save Debaltseve and keep the working class in check.
Minsk 2 is Russia’s attempt to broker a new compromise for itself with global imperialism.
We’ve learned this morning that DPR and LPR have sent quite different people — Pushilin and Deinego.
But we should adhere to the format we have agreed upon,” the official, Dmitry Kuleba, told journalists.
Presumably Kiev, acting as the mouthpiece of United States imperialism, were objecting that the Donbass had sent the wrong leaders.
Either they regarded Deinego and Pushilin as Putin’s supporters and wanted the heads of state Alexander Zakharchenko from the Donetsk and Igor Plotnitsky and/or Prime Minister Hennadiy Tsypkalov from Lugansk Peoples Republic or they wanted representatives of the heads of the militias who were prepared to compromise and who wielded the real power in the Donbass as Shapinov tells us above.
Either way Minsk 2 failed to save Debaltseve; the anti-imperialist struggle and thereby the working class of Ukraine and the global working has been enormously strengthened by this victory.
Despite the renewed ceasefire now taking effect the impetus is with the fighters of the Donbass militias and this will strengthen their self9 The French Left and Imperialism Vladimir Putin, Francois Hollande, Angela Merkel and Petro Poroshenko in Minsk on 11 Feb.15. consciousness as leaders and therefore their class consciousness.
These debates have echoes of the Truce and Treaty debates that led to the Irish Civil War in 1922-3 — see Brokering a sell-out to Kiev in SF19, page 27 for these contradictions within the Donbass.
The central aggressive power is AngloAmerican imperialism Let us now reassert that the central aggressive power here is Anglo-American imperialism and that their central target is the Eurasian capitalist bloc of Russia and China.
The war in the Ukraine, the war against Iraq, Afghanistan, ISIS, Assad and Gaddafi cannot be properly outside of this geopolitical struggle being waged by United States imperialism in the first place to secure global domination and protect and enhance the profits of its great finance houses and global transnational companies.
Russia mobilises its forces to defend the Caspian Sea because of its strategic importance; this region has the second biggest crude oil reserves in the world, also the Caspian region is a boundary between the West and East, the region where “the great game” has been played between great powers for over a century and a half.
But it is now clear that a huge gulf has developed between the United States policy of arming their Kiev puppets to risk WWIII and the far more cautious Merkel and Hollande who know that the USA is only too willing to fight to the last European to defeat Russia.
The real interimperialist power blocs are Anglo-American imperialism and the Franco-German European bloc.
As the global crisis of capitalism deepens these tensions become greater and greater.
In Africa for example French imperialism is being continually undermined and out manoeuvred by United States imperialism; Rwanda was French speaking it now speaks English, or rather American.
Again and again the United States shows its contempt for France (“cheese eating surrender monkeys” on the Iraq invasion by the United States in 2003 and sending no representative to the reactionary Charlie Hebdo photo op march in Paris on 11 January), for the EU (Nuland’s “Fuck the EU”) and for Germany, bugging Merkel’s personal mobile phone, spying on the whole German nation via GCHQ etc. and the latest move where Merkel and Hollande snubbed Obama and Cameron in the Minsk talks provoking a furious reaction from the likes of McCain and Kerry and British Tory politicians.
There Nuland gave instructions 10 The French Left and Imperialism to “fight against the Europeans” on the issue of arming Ukraine to fight Russia.
And the British ruling class itself is far more split than the USA is right now.
The warmongering Timothy Garton Ash on 2 February laughed at the liberal Guardian readership, “America does the cooking but Europe does the washing up” he crowed in a wisdom from the pre-nuclear age.
We insist that by far the best thing for the British and American working-class is defeat of their proxy army in the Ukraine.
Remember the Vietnam Syndrome and the great leftist impulse this gave to the global working class before and after 1975 despite the liberal patriotism of the ‘bring our boys home’ peaceniks.
We must re-establish the revolutionary Marxist understanding that defeat for imperialism in a foreign war opens up revolutionary possibilities for the working class in imperialist countries and we must want it and work for it with all our might.
V* m Krasnyi W Kut J Khrustal'nens'kyi ^ Vd Zhdanivka^^ ....... m ■klm.fl.. mm, Before the battle of Debalseve Sadovo-Khrustal'm Hr above Svitlodars'l Vuhlehirs'k ChoriuAhym Oleksandrrvs'k ’Karlo-Maiksove I Ol'k hovatka Yunokomunarivs'k te J Maloorlrvka 'anteleimon'rvk.
L uhans'ke vethui| — Komisarrvk Debal'tseve^ <4 M Artemrvs'k i.l Zoryrrsjk Yashchykov Maloivanrvka^ Selezi ^ Adrian op if Bairachky^ ^ Tsenral'nyi odyshche 9 Ulkyne Zapoiizhzhya^ kanYyarka f 9 Fashchivka^ Nkishyne M Krasnyi ( Sadovo-Khrustal' % Otlovo-tvanrvka lYirnvcVo 4MW7 i Hr above After the battle on 18 February the red has replaced the blue. lery against the AFDs in Debaltseve.
At the same time in another city, Shirokino, the Nazi paramilitary Azov Battalion, opened fire with artillery and tanks against residential areas.
In both the ADFs the regions are required to respond to coordinated attacks by agents of imperialism.
Putin capitulates to Obama’s diplomatic blackmail negotiated by Germany and France.
Flowever on the day following Putin’s capitulation Merkel followed up with blackmail and announced new sanctions against Russia to be implemented if Putin does not force the popular republics of Donbass to accept the agreed surrender.
The first few days of what should be a cease-fire were marked by the resurgence of Ukrainian artil“The Right Sector will continue to attack the East and the East will be forced to fight back.
Max Shachtman’s Third Camp Labor Action repudiates defence of the USSR during WWII. be charged by the international media with attempting to break the truce just signed.
Simultaneously, the military force of Obama are beginning the deployment of marines in the Pacific against China and in the Middle East they are using the fight against ISIS as justification.
Closing the encirclement via Eastern Europe, Asia-Pacific, the Middle East and Latin America, Venezuela and Brazil, with the right to privatization as a resolution of most of the Brazilian state and mysterious ship sinking platform and simultaneously the scandal makes the murder of Nisman against the Cristina government in Argentina.
This rapid ongoing movement of Russia in the Caspian Sea is an attempt to break this encirclement.
Moscow replaced the leadership of the People’s Republics and put in charge Russian as well as pro-Russian politicians from the Donbass region who had a history of being loyal instruments of Moscow.
In addition, the Putin government deployed thousands of troops in the eastern Ukraine thereby tipping the balance of forces and helping the Donbass republics regain substantial ground.
In early September, Moscow imposed a ceasefire.The August intervention of the Russian imperialist state marked a qualitative turning point, as we have outlined in the RCIT’s analysis of these events.
No doubt that Russia seeks to direct the struggle and that they allowed thousands of VOLUNTEERS to enter the Donbass but to echo John McCain’s propaganda on this is unforgivable as it the political decision to then withdraw unconditional support from 12 The French Left and Imperialism the Donbass whilst it was under such vicious attack for fascist led forces who were slaughtering the civilian population in the cities of the east.
We categorically reject the proposition that this war is one between rival imperialist powers.
Whilst this might seem better than the outright national chauvinist positions taken by the likes of Socialist Resistance , the Alliance for Workers Liberty and the majority leadership of the Labour Representation Committee nonetheless it is profoundly in error.
The only proxy armies in these three conflicts are US/EU proxy armies; the Benghazi rebels, the Free Syrian Army and the jihadists of the Al-Nusra Front and the ISIS and the Kiev regime and its fascist infested army.
Libya, Syria and the Donbass fought or are fighting genuine wars of national liberation against imperialist aggression despite the fact that they are led by reactionary bourgeois nationalist politicians.
They have a right to get arms and assistance from anyone who will supply it, including Russia in the case of Syria and the Donbass.
This is profoundly incorrect, it will not assist the working class in its struggles against United States imperialist aggression.
If taken seriously that position would have dire consequences for the working class of the Donbass and the revolutionary socialists in the region fighting for the leadership of the working class.
It would demoralise them and undermine the position of a working class growing in confidence and class consciousness following their great victory at Debaltseve.
Conclusion The big working class base of the Donbass army desires socialism and harks back to the nationalised property relations that existed in 13 The French Left and Imperialism the days of the USSR, when conditions for the working class were far better and the oligarchs had not seized all the collective wealth of the country with the assistance of Yeltsin and United States imperialism.
Out task here as revolutionary socialist is to offer all the political and practical assistance we can to the fighters of the Donbass.
We do not call for the overthrow of the Donbass leadership in the circumstances of this civil war until they have exposed themselves as anti-working class AND collaborators with imperialism and the class has grown in strength and class consciousness to overthrow them with a revolutionary socialist leadership that can appeal to the working class in western Ukraine, in Russia and the whole region and the world to rally to their cause and the cause of international socialism.
To the revolutionary socialist of the Borotba union we offer all the political and practical assistance we can to assist them in their internationalist task of winning the leadership of the Donbass stmggle for the working class.
Imperialism mainly targets the semioppressed and semi-colonized nations who demonstrate some independence, like Russia and China that the United States can no longer tolerate.
Especially since these countries, with others also, are trying to threaten the supremacy of A Ukraine “patriot” celebrates the dollar.
Trade Union house in Odessa Ukraine as an important step to reach the Russia and Eurasia and the vast resources of this region.
The Svoboda party that has big influence in the Ukrainian government is a direct descendant of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists led by Nazi collaborator Stepan Bandera.
The movement of Maidan was far right oriented, United States sponsored, mostly petty bourgeois and lumpen working class.
It received the open support of the United States to overthrow the corrupt government of Yanukovych.
This coup d’etat caused a wave of opposition to the imperialist coup from the working class in eastern Ukraine.
The East is highly industrialized and many of the inhabitants speak Russian or a mixture of Russian and Ukrainian.
They understood that Svoboda had declared they wanted to exterminate them physically.
Within days, the government tried to ban the use of minority languages.
The working class of the East also understand that the agreements with the IMF and the EU would lead to privatization, dels The French Left and Imperialism industrialization, and reduce the already precarious social services after the “reforms” of other oligarchs governments.
They just had to look at Greece to see the results, they knew they had no choice but to resist, first in Crimea and Odessa, then in Donetsk and Lugansk.
The Kiev government and the oligarchs were quick to establish a “national guard” in the fascist party base to support the military operations of the Ukrainian army.
These fascist gangs, mainly Privy Sektor / Praviy Sector terrorized workers who tried to organize, tortured and murdered socialists of the Borotba organization and revolutionary communists.
They committed the horrible massacre of Odessa in the House of Unions on 2 May, the anniversary of the liquidation of German trade unions by Hitler’s storm troopers in 1933.
There can be no clearer indication of the fascist tendencies that the system uses as a tool of United States financial capital.
The Western media were quick to present the working class resistance as an “aggression” from Russia, especially since Russia was forced to restore Crimea to its territory.
This was a defensive measure and not an action parallel to the annexation of Austria and the Sudetenland by Hitler in 1938.
Russia has a naval base in the Crimea which is of great strategic military importance to it.
Russia acted primarily to prevent threats to its sovereignty and protect the majority Russian population from a violently hostile government of Kiev.
It is the United States and the countries of the North Atlantic bloc who are practicing the type of aggressive expansion similar to the Third Reich and the Axis powers, in fact.
Since the beginning of the 21st century the United States and NATO have caused war and imposed “regime change” on any nation that does not allow the economic and political domination of the interests of United States finance capital.
This has also led to military invasions near Russian territory Russia is the United States' The European Union is Russia’s 20th largest trading partner. largest trading partner.
The United States is Russia's Russia is the European fifth largest third largest trading partner.
The destruction of independent Libya was of course also one of the highlights of this policy, even if it was through their French vassal.
The main representative of the ruling classes of the EU, Angela Merkel, at a meeting in Germany with the dictator oligarch Poroshenko stressed that there should be no abandonment of the sanctions against Russia unless it gives in to Western imperialism.
The United States and NATO now believe they can launch a pre-emptive strike against Russia or China and win; they concentrate thousands of troops in Central and Eastern Europe, they stand ready to fight with nuclear bombers in the Baltic sea and the Balkans; they dominate the seas of the world with their aircraft carriers and nuclear submarines.
World War III is potentially upon us, and the slightest miscalculation could see Europe and probably the world enveloped in the flames of a nuclear war.
However, at this crucial time in history, the current leadership of the working class is betraying us again as in 1914.
We must organize our class to call the leaders of the labour movement to support the resistance to fascism in Ukraine, which means the formation of a united anti-imperialist front with the people of semi oppressed countries under the threat of imperialism, mainly in the current crisis, Syria and Russia.
Ukrainian workers who struggle against fascism and imperialism have the same interest in defeating them that the Russian ruling class and the Russian people have, it is they who suffer the consequences of economic sanctions.
The Russian and world working class must push in the same direction against the same enemy.
We have already seen that Putin is trying to adapt to American and German imperialism, but still he is unable to get any other result than constant demonization of himself and Russia in the Western media.
Against the United States, which is the main enemy of the world working class, the oligarchs and Putin are secondary enemies.
There are many people on the left and in the labour movement who see the United States and Russia as equal enemies of the working class, merging everything and refuse to adopt a policy that advocates the defeat of American imperialism.
The struggle against imperialism and the struggle for socialist revolution requires that the working class forms a temporary alliance 17 The French Left and Imperialism with the forces opposing United States financial capital, which dominates the planet.
We must also recognize the need to form temporary alliances with existing mass workers’ organizations despite their pro-capitalist leaders.
We must rely on the masses and urge them forward, when possible, to attack the base of financial capital that rules over them.
We must champion the independence of the People’s Republics of Donbass as voted by their peoples.
Ultimately, we must denounce the perfidious role of the current leadership of the working class and forge a new revolutionary leadership capable of reversing the global dominant United States capitalism by opposing it with a world party of socialist revolution.
We will try to justify theoretically this in reference to the principles of communism.
References for the communists on the national question and imperialism are the resolutions of the Communist International during its Second Congress and Lenin’s text, “Imperialism the Highest Stage of Capitalism” and his writings before and after the trigger of the First World War.
We emphasize this distinction, unlike bourgeois democracy and the Second International.
In the era of imperialism, it is particularly important for the proletariat and the Communist International to see concrete economic facts and to resolve all colonial and national issues, leaving not abstract concepts, but concrete realities.
The ones who had “forgotten” this have passed to the bourgeois camp This is the essential starting point for any analysis of an international question.
Which is exactly what all supporters of the aggressive policy of United States imperialism seem to forget.
Such a “Russian imperialism” may have its own ambitions; Russian oligarchs may plan to become one, but that is not the situation that exists today, nor is it relevant to Ukraine situation.
Communists do not deal with “ambitions” or “wants” that have no influence on reality.
We seek above all to determine who is the oppressor and the oppressed, or is about to become one of these.
This attack can even take an even more acute form and become a step in the confrontation between the United States and China for world supremacy (another unequal conflict in perspective) and does not affect the question of fundamental principles.
Some will say that Lenin’s theses were referring to semi-colonial and colonized capitalist countries and not just backward and dependent countries like Russia and / or China.
Although the situation has changed, the basic political features of the problem persist (a coordinated imperialist aggression conducted by the US) and we can never, as some do, make and equals sign between the current situation and the conflicting forces during the First and Second World Wars.
It is not the military capacity or rather the nuclear force, which could support such arguments, because the armies of Russia and China, even together, cannot be compared in any way with the military power of the Western bloc.
Even the Russian nuclear force is in a very poor condition and reconstruction has only recently begun.
This situation of imperialist aggression against much weaker countries is accompanied by unprecedented weakness of the international labour movement.
This lack of political presence of the working class and its organizations, including its ideology, not only internationally but also nationally, considering their actual relative weight, is one of root causes of the ease with which imperialist adventures and all kinds of military aggression occur.
They use scandalous pressure, they overturn governments who have sometimes become only slightly divergent from their interests or just because they have begun to covet their natural resources.
All their policy is geared to maintaining this domination but it is decaying by slow degrees with the emergence of new economic powers who can become as a real threat to their hegemony in the future.
This international situation, a hegemonic superpower dominance without shearing, began to be threatened by new capitalist powers in the making, in a situation in which the working class has lost its political presence, where it is plunged into major political and ideological confusion but has grown in number and still continues to fight.
The class desperately needs a strategy and appropriate tactics to stop the race of humanity towards the abyss.
The aggressive plans of United States imperialism to maintain its global dominance are not going to stop.
These plans are essential to continue the operations and financial dominance of the United States to export its systemic crisis and fuel its military-industrial complex which is the centre of its profits from their production.
It can only continue to cause more wars or local or global firefights by a more acute struggle against Russia, China or Iran, or with two or three of them together.
The domi20 The French Left and Imperialism nance of energy sources and the exploitation of Eurasia are among the most important plans of United States imperialism.
They will find strong opposition from Russia, China and Iran, which is not by a “conflict between imperialist”, but an attempt to defend the resources of the major countries of the Third World against the most powerful imperialist coalition in the world.
Faced with this alternative the famous quote from Lenin comes to mind; he said that the Communists should always actively support the wars of the oppressed and exploited countries , whatever the nature of these states or characteristics of their leaders.
He illustrated this with the hypothetical case of a war between “democratic” Britain and feudal India, and he said it was the duty of the Communists to support India, even if Hindus were the initiators of the war, because it was a just national war against an imperialist nation.
We had the proclamation of self-determination first and independence of the Popular Republics later.
All these measures involve the liquidation of Ukrainian industry and the social benefits of the working class.
They seek to transform Ukraine into an arena for NATO exercises against Russia and to impose the dictatorship of international finance.
The fate of Albania beckons for these regions and for the whole Ukraine.
The purported compensation they were to get for all this trouble was their integration into the EU and NATO, but it will not happen, because the French and English imperialists do not want the strengthening of German power in Europe, even less so now.
Policy changes are the “specialty” of the new “diplomacy” of the French imperialists.
In fact they seek to transform Ukraine into an exporter of agricultural products, mineral and other raw materials, without industry and without national independence.
Ukrainian oligarchs would be satisfied with the status of parasites whilst collecting the crumbs from the imperialist table.
A national or regional war to oppose these plans is quite fair and correct.
Especially when the Ukrainian army acts as an aggressor under the command of United States imperialism, which has the nerve to install its “intelligence service” and his mercenaries and agents directly in the Ukrainian land still controlled by the oligarchs and the fascists.
The solution of these contradictions is the world socialist revolution that will pass through intermediate steps because it does not develop in a single pulse, due to the uneven development of world countries.
Some people measure the magnitude of the task and are discouraged in advance, forgetting that the people of Donbass are already struggling.
They see the enormous difficulties of such a struggle and the very real possibility that these fighters for socialism and national independence may be abandoned because of short term geopolitical calculations.
They may lose because a large part of the European and global left have betrayed them objectively.
Others would materially help and some have even gone to fight alongside them.
Others are willing to accept any peaceful solution, any waiver of independence so they can get a minimum peace and stop the attacks against civilians carried by the fascist oligarchy.
The only policy to support these fighters is that of an anti-imperialist united front to fight together against American ledimperialism by all possible means.
This united front of workers and conscious communists must be open to all the forces opposed in fact, to the main aggressor without fear of the political nature of the attacked state, much less the nature and characteristics of their rulers.
Therefore, we propose this type of United Front to all those who are fighting or preparing to fight against imperialist in Ukraine or another country, as Syria, Iraq, Yemen or even Russia or China.
The acceptance of such a united front in turn depends on the degree of importance of the movement of workers around the world who support the Front.
The difficulties are real but it is the only political line accords with communist political principles.
We stand alongside Russia to fight against the main imperialism without making any political concessions to Putin nor the leaders of the People’s Republic of Donbass if these leaders are not on the path of struggle for socialism and the national independence.
As we also know that once finished the fight that requires us to strike together, we will go against the policies of the Russian oligarchs and the Donbass.
Some may say that, given the state of our forces and our influence it is a sword thrust in the water, or a statement of principles empty of all content.
Today the political and consistent ideological defence with all the practice, experience and MarxistLeninist theory, its preservation and dissemination are the seeds that will bear fruit.
The other road is to follow the line of opportunism, ultra-leftism of centrism and betrayal; that is the real impasse facing all Revolutionary Communists.
US-led imperialism’s direct aggressions have been backed by and have and counted in the collaboration of other secondary imperialisms such as Great Britain and France but also of Germany, Spain, Italy and even vassal states or close allies like Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Israel.
Since Yugoslavia wars and through to Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and Syria, according to US imperialism’s obvious geopolitical strategy, they have smashed any country or any neighbouring former ally of the former Soviet Union on one pretext or another but always targeting, as their final goal, Russia and China.
In the state of decay of Yeltsin’s Russia that would have happened without too much opposition but since Russia has recovered a bit of its strength, this is done openly against it now.
Beginning with the fall of the Soviet Union Ukraine has been designated by the United States imperialist strategists as the weakest link to conquer.
They see there the potential to limit and / or break up Russia and keep it in backwardness vassalage, what they had been during the decade under Yeltsin after the fouster of Gorbachev.
Ukraine therefore has been for more than a year a place for the imperialist manoeuvres and aggressions, first by United States imperialism with its dismemberment plans for the political or military liquidation of Russia if necessary.
But also for the rising ambitions of German imperialism that has its own, ancient designs on the “East”e. from the “black lands” of Ukrainian to the Carpathian mountains as in the First and Second World Wars.
The Euromaidan movement melds into this perspective and so the Ukrainian issue is of global importance because of its political consequences.
A victory for United States imperialism and their puppet oligarchs and their Nazi pawns , may have devastating consequences for the struggle of the international working class.
Such international situation, which has gone on since the 2011 Libyan conflict, at least, has divided the international left in three perfectly distinct currents.
This aggression against a small nation by an imperialist coalition, met with the open and/ or the hidden support of countless political movements of 24 The French Left and Imperialism all sorts (Trotskyists, Maoists, Revisionists, in short the whole political movement that poses, rightly or wrongly, on the workers’ side) who have forgotten and/or hidden the yet clear teachings of the Communist International Congress and its leaders, as discussed later.
In France all organizations are located or are in an almost open support of imperialist policy on the right, the centrist “neither-nor” position, such as the so called Trotskyst Lutte Ouvriere and the so called Maoist Voie Ptoletarienne.
These say they cannot support either the imperialist on the one hand nor a dictator on the other, under the pretext that even if the imperialist aggression appears clear, a revolutionary communist party could not support a “bloody dictator”, following the name given to the political leader on site by the imperialist mass media services of disinformation.
In this way they contributed to the imperialist propaganda among the working class in their respective countries and indirectly helped the assault and subsequent destruction of that country.
These currents are found everywhere, and everywhere the same ideological tendencies, Trotskyists, Maoists, Stalinists, Hoxhaists or other revisionists of all colours, are divided in three or at least two of this currents, on the issue.
A political crisis like the one known in 1914 during the first imperialist war exists today.
The Anti Imperialist United Front We defend the principle of the Anti Imperialist United Front in all conflicts between imperialist powers, or their proxies who carry pursue their war aims with their support, and semi-colonial countries like Iraq, Afghanistan, Iran, Venezuela and the Donbass region of the Ukraine, the focus of this article.
We also defend countries of intermediate development, with features of both imperialism and semi-colonies, like Russia, China, Greece, Portugal and some former ‘Iron Curtain’ countries in Eastern Europe, from Imperialist attack.
A United Front has as its first condition that it be led by the industrial working class guided by their revolutionary communist party and each temporary alliance he made should be made strictly in the short and long term interests of the working class.
Similarly in the colonial East at the present time the key slogan to advance is the anti-imperialist united front.
Its expediency follows from the perspective of a long-drawn-out struggle with world imperialism that will demand the mobilisation of all revolutionary elements.
This mobilisation is made all the more necessary by the tendency of the indigenous ruling classes to make compromises with foreign capital directed against the fundamental interests of the mass of the people.
Just as in the West the slogan of the workers’ united front has helped and is still helping to expose the social democrats’ sell-out of proletarian interests, so the slogan of an anti-imperialist united front will help to expose the vacillations of the various bourgeois-nationalist groups.
This may be extremely episodic for a single demonstration or a rally or it may be a military bloc.
Our position is that it is incorrect in non-imperialist countries to exclude the bourgeoisie on principle.
In doing so, they refused stay out of the movement and to identify all the movement with his right-wing component.
The Ukrainian army must act under the control of citizens Of course, the “international brigades” of fascists from Sweden, Poland and elsewhere rushed to Kiev and actual international socialist brigades from Spain gathered to defend the Donbass these fascist monsters.
The silence of the NPA on the Odessa massacre of May 2, 2014 is more eloquent than any of their political degeneration.
It is impossible to imagine that a Marxist International Group, for example, may tacitly approve the massacre of at least 48 anti-fascists by Nazi thugs, saying they did not know who had done this heinous crime by building on the occult by the Ukrainian dominated by the extreme right government and so avoid its responsibilities Socialists.
Their British comrades of the Socialist Resistance brought an equally reactionary contribution to their right skid.
Now the USFI clearly works for Western imperialism, in the same way that Achcar has supported the Western imperialist attack against Libya.
Lutte Ouvriere and Ukraine We will treat the position of Lutte Ouvriere as a typical rightist and centrist tendency which have arisen in France and leave aside the criticism of Voie Proletarienne that has made a copy and paste of these positions with some small variations.
Their positioning is indistinguishable from the one they have taken during the imperialist aggression in Libya and can, with no doubt, be described as centrist.
It has been also called Schatmanite in allusion to a political leader who had the position in 1939 of “neither Moscow nor Washington, for the working class” or as a Kautskite position, similar to the “intermediate” position taken by Kautsky during the First World War, in fact a hypocritical support for their own imperialism.
A fight between “bandits”, that’s their justification for their political line.
As in Libya and Syria they tune their violins to the imperialist propaganda.
It follows the general line of LO articles on international questions as the ‘balanced’ title suggests, the working class are caught between the petty-bourgeoisie, the bureaucracy and West.
The term ‘bureaucracy’ is a very vague term and which particular ‘pettybourgeoisie’ we are referring to is also vague.
However the content of the article itself suggests very strongly that there is not an equal sign between the two contending sides.
Actually the two sides are Western imperialism and the Ukraine oligarchs with Russia supporting a section of the oligarchs in the East.
Indeed, the Russian army did not have to ""invade"" Crimea since it is permanently stationed there.
The article then goes into very useful detail of what happened, who was who and the history of the region.
Although also in this article are found phrases that show how constant is their tendency to position itself as impartial judges of a situation that concerns them little, can manifest.
Against all minimum observation of the manoeuvres of United States imperialism who prepared and set fire to this situation since the beginning, following very clear strategic plans, they write ""Caught off guard, Western governments, which had bet on an output scenario of negotiated crisis and whose foreign ministers were scheduled to meet Yanukovych the following day, made it known on the same mode as the UN secretary general, they considered that ""recourse to such measures by one or the other party is unacceptable.
This type of judgment that it is found all along their few articles they publish on the issue is typical of the difficulties they find to make swallow a political line always located anywhere except in class lines, or as abstracts incantations on a class working completely idealized and inexistent.
To the point that when their last Congress they have found a way to walk around the world ... except in Ukraine.
So there's something for every taste but a condemnation of those truly responsible and a centrist position that helps indirectly US imperialism and its aggressive plans.
The basic question for a communist, who is the oppressor and who the oppressed?, the teachings of Lenin and Trotsky (as they claim to be his followers) slide off them like water on a duck.
And, as far a one can assess from a distance, until midFebruary at least, workers took no real part in the movement.
The “working class” as described here by the LO exists nowhere on the planet and can never exist.
The first and most immediate interests of these workers is to stop themselves being slaughtered by the fascist-led Ukrainian army, as the Odessa Massacre showed just a few months after this article was written, on 2 May.
Given the role that governments have played in triggering and worsening the Ukrainian crisis, threats of sanctions against Russia made by Obama and the European Union have not been less hypocritical than their condemnation of “the Intervention “Russian” This whole line of reasoning of LO corresponds to what is known as Anarchosyndicalism that does not seek allies, much less follow Lenin’s advice to use any contradiction among the enemies of the working class.
Refrain from participation in bourgeois radicalism and arrange forces proletariat outside of it.
The foundations of this organization... are the workshops and the Federation of workDemonstrators protest against the nationalist/fascist regime in Kiev in April 2014 shops... instmments of struggle against the bourgeoisie and their federation, not only national, but international... when the time of revolution sounds, you proclaim the liquidation of the state and of bourgeois society, anarchy, ie the true, honest people’s revolution.
Chavez, Morales, Castro and others, for LO, are expressions of imperialist barbarism.
Similarly LO refused to take a clear antiimperialist position on Charlie Hebdo.
It targeted journalists for what they have drawn and written, as well as those who protected them.
Those who use such methods are not only enemies of freedom of expression and freedom of the press, they are thus enemies of the workers, their freedom to express themselves and organize themselves.
Whatever the ideology they claim, their methods seek to impose the dictatorship to a population or a fraction of a population.
Terrorism, whether employed by states or groups seeking to establish a state power, aims to silence any dissenting expression, and it always strikes especially freedom of the oppressed to struggle against their exploitation.
At the same time, we can only be shocked by the political exploitation which is now made of this event by different political parties and especially by the government of Francois Hollande and Manuel Vails.
In calling for national unity from this event, it seeks to restore credit in the opinion that he has largely lost by all their policy.
He wants especially to justified, by the attack attributed to socalled “jihadists”, the intervention of the French army in Africa and the Middle East.
By doing so, it claims to defend them, the government betrays the memory of murdered journalists themselves.
They were not only irreconcilable enemies of religious ideologies, but also anti-militarists opposed to all military expeditions.
But more, for an operation that is basically symmetrical to that would make the “jihadists”, the government would impose its policy as the only possible one.
But the manoeuvres and military operations of the imperialist powers, conducted in Africa and the Middle East to uphold the interests of large Western companies themselves bear a heavy responsibility in the development of uncontrolled armed bands operating in these countries but also seek to act here.
It is good that LO has refused to participate in the demonstrations on Charlie Hebdo.
But there is not a word of condemnation for the cartoons, vile racist pro-imperialist, produced by Charlie Hebdo (the last one, mocks those Africans who drowned off the coast of Libya, whose deaths are due directly to the imperialist intervention in Libya), there is no call to defend the oppressed Muslims of France, now threatened by the French state, and there is no recognition of origin of this racism in French imperialist barbarity in Vietnam, Algeria and other former colonies in Africa and the Middle East.
Again, we have simply workers as abstract human beings and not pro-imperialist workers in the metropolitan countries, which the revolutionary party must fight their prejudices, or antiimperialist workers living in or originating in countries semisettlements that have suffered oppression and massacres organized by imperialism.
These workers must learn class politics and class solidarity, but they will never learn of those who practice the imperialist prejudices themselves.
LO simply portrayed them as “workers” who must learn their “class interests” outside history and cultural identity.
The historical task of the working class is to free the entire human society of class domination, dictatorship of the imperialist capital31 The French Left and Imperialism ist class.
As the task today is to fight against the main enemy of humanity, United States imperialism with its aggressive policy that, not only leaves behind as such a new Attila in ruins wherever it goes but seriously threatens world peace in its stmggle to maintain its global hegemony against Russia and China.
And this force revolutionary communists to take a stand in defense of the countries attacked by the main imperialism.
This elementary duty has been forgotten by many people and do not predict any good for future of both national as international working class stmggles.
For without defending a truly Leninist and Communist politicy and the reconstruction of organizations that truly orient the working class for its emancipation, the ■XCMISIP CHARB ILLUSTRE SON DERNIER UVRE CHARLIE HEBDO OrtlffANiCBftSaWHE EuroMaidan HQ proudly display the image of the WWII fascist monster Stepan Bandera. proletariat and humanity run to ruin.
It is only the tactics of the United Front anti imperialist, already a century old, the only ones that can unite all who can possible be united to first liquidate United States imperialism and after turn us against other reactionaries for communism.
Such a policy not only is the only correct tactics but it is the only one that preserves the political future of the working class in countries attacked by imperialism because an open support or an indirect on of United States aggression can only divert peoples oppressed from the international working class.
