KYIV -Mikheil Saakashvili, the former Georgian president turned Ukrainian opposition leader, has vowed that he will continue to resist arrest after his supporters dramatically freed him from custody in Kyiv.
Facing a deadline to turn himself in to the authorities later in the day, Saakashvili told supporters at a protest camp near parliament early on December 6 that he would not comply.
Our main goal is to remove a criminal group from power and impeach it,"" Saakashvili said, referring to President Petro Poroshenko's administration.
His remarks came after prosecutors on December 5 issued a 24-hour deadline for Saakashvili to turn himself in to police, and after a predawn clash between National Police officers and protesters camping out near the Verkhovna Rada.
Ukraine's National Police said at least 14 police officers and two civilians were injured in clashes that broke out as authorities began searching tents in an attempt to locate Saakashvili.
The police ""planned to take me out of a tent, but attacked the wrong tent"" and ""severely beat"" activists who had been sleeping, Saakashvili said on Facebook.
That was reference to previous turmoil in Ukraine, including attempted crackdowns on the massive Euromaidan protests that pushed Moscow-friendly President Viktor Yanukovych out in 2014 and brought Poroshenko to power.
Some of Saakashvili's supporters were stockpiling bricks at the protest camp and setting up barricades with tires shortly after dawn on December 6 as heavy snow fell on the Ukrainian capital.
Meanwhile, in Tbilisi, about 3,000 members of the Georgian political party founded by Saakashvili staged a demonstration on December 6 to warn against the former president's extradition from Ukraine.
The demonstrators said their rally was a signal to the authorities that mass protests will be held if Saakashvili is extradited and arrested in Georgia.
The Ukrainian charges are unrelated to those Saakashvili faces in Georgia.
But members of the opposition United National Movement said at the Tbilisi rally that they believe he might be extradited.
The United National Movement was ousted from power in 2012 parliamentary elections.
Saakashvili is wanted in Georgia for alleged involvement in the violent dispersal of protesters and a raid on a private television station during his 2004-13 presidency.
In Kyiv, Prosecutor-General's Office spokesman Andriy Lysenko said the authorities ordered the manhunt following a chaotic scene on December 5 in which security forces stormed Saakashvili's apartment and detained him, but supporters later freed him from a police van.
Larisa Sarhan, a spokeswoman for the prosecutor-general, said on December 6 that Saakashvili now faced three criminal charges -attempting to commit a crime, involvement in premeditated criminal activity by a group of persons, and providing assistance to a criminal organization and concealing their criminal activities.
Sarhan also said criminal investigations had been started against several parliamentary deputies suspected of obstructing Saakashvili's arrest on December 5.
Prosecutors have also informed National Police chief Serhiy Knyazev that Saakashvili is a wanted man.
After he was freed from detention, Saakashvili led hundreds of his supporters in a march to parliament and demanded Poroshenko's resignation, calling him a ""criminal"" and a traitor to Ukraine.
Saakashvili also urged Ukrainians to rally on Maidan Nezalezhnosti, or Independence Square, the epicenter of the Euromaidan protests in 2013-14.
Ukrainian authorities claim that Saakashvili is being backed by Russia or forces there -an assertion that the former Georgian president, who has been hated by the Kremlin since a five-day war between Georgia and Russia in 2008, has dismissed.
Prosecutor-General Yuriy Lutsenko alleged on December 5 that an ""organized crime"" group led by Yanukovych, who is in exile in Russia, has financed protests organized by Saakashvili.
The turmoil in Kyiv comes at a time when Ukraine is fighting Russia-backed separatists in a war that has killed more than 10,000 people in the eastern region known as the Donbas, and with no end in sight to Russia's occupation of Ukraine's Crimea region.
Saakashvili became stateless when Poroshenko issued a presidential decree in July, while he was abroad, that stripped him of his Ukrainian citizenship.
He returned to Ukraine in order to challenge that decree in the Ukrainian courts and has been leading opposition protests against Poroshenko.
Saakashvili rose to power in Tbilisi during Georgia's peaceful Rose Revolution in 2003 and served as Georgia's president from 2004-13.
He conducted major reforms and fought corruption in the former Soviet republic, but was accused of abusing his power.
Authorities in Tbilisi have charged Saakashvili of trying to organize a coup there after leaving office, an allegation he denies.
Poroshenko in 2015 appointed Saakashvili -an acquaintance from university days -as governor of Ukraine's Odesa region in the wake of the Euromaidan protests that brought a pro-Western government to power in Kyiv.
But Saakashvili resigned from the Odesa governor's post and went into opposition in November 2016, saying his reform efforts there were being blocked by Poroshenko's allies.
