Misconception of the Kremlin's goals stipulates the inefficiency of Western policy towards the Donbass 03/16/2018 13:51:06.
The United States strategy towards the ending of conflict in the Donbass is to make Russia understand that the continuation of the conflict in Ukraine is unprofitable for it, as it leads to the opposite goal, the one that Kremlin, according to Washington, wants to achieve.
This is how Kurt Volker, the United States special representative for Ukraine, sees this goal in a recent interview with the Ukrainian media.
Everything that the American envoy listed has actually taken place, but sanctions, military expenses and reputational loss of the Russian Federation have been existing for 4 years.
Nevertheless, according to Kurt Volker himself, Moscow still did not make a decision whether it wants peace in the Donbass.
In order to give Moscow the opportunity to leave the Donbass, saving its face, and create conditions for Ukraine's implementation of the Minsk agreements, beneficial to the Kremlin, the USA offers Putin the idea of introducing the UN peacekeepers into the conflict zone.
By this step, it increases its military expenses, reputational and human losses by its own free will.
The fact that the Kremlin's advantages from these conflicts still outweigh the disadvantages that arise from them.
And the entire policy of the West over three and a half years of the war in Ukraine has had no effect, apparently, because it is built on the basis of misunderstanding of the goal that the Kremlin wants to achieve through the conflict in the Donbass.
Subjection of Kyiv or strengthening the Assad regime are only stages of achieving the goal.
Putin formulated and announced the ultimate goal in Munich in 2007 – it is a bipolar world, return of Russia to the status of the second world leader, the superpower, that she lost with the defeat of the USSR in the Cold War.
This goal can be achieved only when the security and well-being of entire regions depend on you.
And today, the security and well-being of Ukraine, Syria, Moldova, Georgia and the Korean peninsula depend to a great extent on Russia.
In order to achieve its global goal, Russia needs conflicts in which it is supposedly a third party, but the destiny of which entirely depends on it.
And all the last years after Munich-2007, it smugly creates them while the West tries to persuade it to be leaner.
The Kremlin cannot be so naive as to steal Crimea from the Ukrainians, occupy the Donbass, deprive millions of Ukrainians of shelter, organize anti-Ukrainian propaganda hysteria among Russians, and then expect an improvement in the attitude towards itself.
After all this, no Kyiv authorities, even the pro-Russian ones, will be able to return Ukraine to the ""big Slavic family"", if Russia dominates it.
If only because Ukraine itself is not homogeneous, and what, perhaps, will be forgotten in the South, will never be forgotten in the West, which was for the government the main source of the first wave of mobilization.
Russian politicians and political strategists have repeatedly said that they do not consider the western Ukrainian oblasts to be Ukraine.
That is, while the western oblasts are part of Ukraine, it is impossible to return Ukraine to the ""family of fraternal peoples"" even with the annexed Crimea and tens of thousands of victims in the Donbass.
That is, seizing the Crimea and starting its adventure in the Donbass, the Kremlin initially relied not on subordinating Ukraine, but on dismembering it, destroying the statehood that emerged in 1991.
Actually, the idea of ​​creating the so-called ""Novorossia"" out of 8 southeastern oblasts of Ukraine was aimed at it.
Russian political technologist and former ""Prime Minister of the DNR"" Alexander Borodai, close to the FSB, openly spoke about that.
It is now clear that the liquidation of Ukraine without full-scale external military aggression is only possible if serious internal conflict is provoked.
The Minsk agreements are precisely such a provocation since – if implemented – they would lead to the creation of an explosive mixture of co-existence with two regions within one country, both with opposite geopolitical and ideological orientations.
The answer is simple – Russia understands that the internal political situation in Ukraine will not allow the Ukrainian authorities to implement Minsk.
Now that the situation in that country has hit rock bottom both in terms of the economy and domestic policy … expecting the president of Ukraine to take at least a small step towards implementing the Minsk agreements is an exercise in futility.
Putin still keeps a grudge against the West for the fact that the guarantees that the foreign ministers of Poland, France and Germany gave to Yanukovych in his agreement with the Ukrainian opposition in February 2014, were broken three days later by Maidan, as a result of which Yanukovych fled from Kyiv.
Having such an experience, when he had already seen Ukraine in his pocket, paid billions of dollars for it, and suddenly lost it, the Russian leader no longer intends to believe the West.
Or until Ukraine falls under the weight of war, corruption, and internal political strife, which is also Russia’s instrument in a hybrid war.
Then Russia would really introduce its troops, but they will be called peacemakers, as General Gerasimov, the chief of the General Staff of the Russian Federation, wrote.
And then Moscow will really become the second or the third pole of the world, along with the United States and China.
Therefore, while the West is trying to solve the “Ukrainian crisis”, instead of the “Russian” one, neither the peacekeepers nor other initiatives to persuade the aggressor to change its policy will work.
