KOSTYANTYNIVKA/BAKHMUT, Ukraine — When Father Kostyantyn Kuznetsov rang the bells and swung open the doors of the blue-and-gold-domed St.
Stritenskiy Temple in 2015, it marked a small but significant victory in an intensifying dispute that’s shaking the Eastern Orthodox Church, the world’s second-largest Christian denomination.
First planned as a Ukrainian Orthodox church of the Moscow Patriarchate, as the local wing of the Russian Orthodox Church is known, construction of St.
Stritenskiy began in 2014, as Russia-backed separatists swept through Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region and seized city after city.
But parishioners of Kostyantynivka’s other houses of worship under the control of the Russian Orthodox Church “saw armories in their churches, they saw priests calling for separatism and people to join local separatists’ forces,” Father Kostyantyn, a descendant of Russian aristocrats from Foros, in Crimea, who previously spent 11 years as a priest in the Moscow Patriarchate, told RFE/RL in September.
Stritenskiy — the city’s first and only one loyal to the Kyiv-led church — was completed soon thereafter.
Kostyantynivka, an industrial city of roughly 80,000 in Ukraine’s east, sits not only a little more than a rocket shot from the front lines of the simmering war between the Ukrainian Army and Russia-backed separatist forces.
It is also one of many at the center of a politically charged spiritual conflict that is pitting Eastern Orthodox Christians against each other and setting the stage for a religious schism of historic proportions.
The dispute at hand centers around granting the Ukrainian Orthodox Church autocephaly, or the right to be ecclesiastically independent.
If granted, the designation would strike a serious blow to the heart of Russia’s historic claims to Ukraine and deny Moscow religious authority over Ukraine’s roughly 30 million Orthodox believers.
Bartholomew is expected to give Ukraine a so-called “Tomos,” or ordinance, granting it autocephaly at a synod perhaps as early as this month.
Of course, amid flagging poll numbers and growing public disillusionment with his administration, the push could prove critical to Poroshenko’s reelection effort in March.
In recent weeks, billboards have sprung up across the country that the president claims to have paid more than $380,000 for to champion the notion of the Tomos.
Kyiv’s Western backers have also come out in support of independence for the Ukrainian church.
Ukraine regards such statements part of Russia’s “hybrid warfare” — a military strategy said to combine conventional and irregular warfare, propaganda, and cyberattacks — against its much smaller neighbor.
That is why the issue of independence for the Ukrainian church “goes far beyond religion” and is a matter of “national security,” in the words of Poroshenko at an Independence Day military parade in August.
Ukrainian worshipers say they have seen the hand of the Russian church and its local arm, the Moscow Patriarchate, in that hybrid warfare.
They said that Crimea was not Ukraine, that Donbas was not Ukraine,” Father Kostyantyn said.
Local media have reported on priests of the Moscow-led church refusing funerals and last rites for Ukrainian soldiers killed in battle, as well as harboring Russia-backed separatist fighters and blaming Kyiv for starting the war — despite evidence that has since come to light during more than four years of fighting to suggest that Moscow instigated it.
For instance, with no Kyiv Patriarchate church in Bakhmut, a city of roughly 90,000 residents about 25 kilometers east of Kostyantynivka and closer to the front line of the ongoing war, Natasha Zhukova and her husband, Volodymyr Tsaryk, who fought in Ukraine’s 128th Separate Mountain Zakarpattia Brigade, took the unusual step of baptizing their first-born daughter Sofia in the Greek Catholic Church.
Zhukova says they could not bring themselves to christen their child in a church that was “doing propaganda” for Russia and pro-Russian entities in Ukraine, and which had taken the side of the separatists in the war.
On a larger scale, scores of Moscow Patriarchate churches across Ukraine ousted their priests and switched allegiance to the Kyiv Patriarchate — even in predominately Russian-speaking, eastern cities like Kostyantynivka, where the idea of a church of the Kyiv Patriarchate once seemed unattainable.
John the Baptist Temple of the Moscow Patriarchate in Bakhmut, Father Serhiy led Mass for around 40 parishioners.
He has been offended, he says, by accusations that he and fellow priests of the Moscow Patriarchate are working against the country.
As an active supporter of the Ukrainian Army — a stance that earned him a beating by Moscow-backed separatists, resulting in liver damage and sutures in his face, when they briefly controlled Bakhmut in 2014 — he struggles internally with the fact that the church to which he belongs acts like an arm of “the aggressor country,” as he puts it.
But if Ukraine gets its way — and its Tomos — Father Serhiy’s church in Bakhmut might go the way of Father Kostyantyn’s in Kostyantynivka.
