Romain HOUEIX 8 min Russia’s military invasion of Ukraine on February 24 placed the smaller eastern European country at the centre of international concern.
FRANCE 24 traces the chronology of the conflict between Moscow and Kyiv to the Maidan protests in Ukraine’s capital in late 2013.
Advertising Read more .a{fill:none;stroke:#9a9a9a;stroke-width:2px} After years of latent conflict between Russia and Ukraine and escalating tensions in recent months, Russian President Vladimir Putin launched an invasion on Thursday.
November 2013, during Ukraine’s Maidan protest movement, which led to the removal of pro-Russian former president Viktor Yanukovich and the beginning of today's conflict.13: The Maidan protests and the break with RussiaNovember 21: After Ukraine’s long rapprochement with the European Union under president Viktor Yushchenko that began after the country’s Orange Revolution in 2004, Yushchenko’s successor Yanukovich decides to turn away from Europe.
He renounces an association agreement proposed by the EU, which refused to grant him a €20 billion loan.
Ukraine is divided between this European economic integration project and a competing Russian proposal for a customs union.
In Kyiv, protests take place in Independence Square, or “Maidan”, which will give its name to the movement.
Pro-Europeans such as former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko and current Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko, as well as nationalists from the far-right Svoboda party, are among the opposition.
Putin announces the lifting of customs barriers between the two countries, a reduction in the price of gas and a $15 billion loan.
Yanukovich departs, and Donbas and Crimea are at the heart of the crisis February: Clashes between demonstrators and security forces become deadly and Ukraine experiences its bloodiest month of violence.
Nearly 90 people are killed in Kyiv between February 18 and 21, according to authorities.
Proand anti-Russian activists clash in Simferopol, the capital of Crimea, an autonomous republic within Ukraine whose population mostly speaks Russian.
With a naval base in Sevastopol and military airports in Kacha and Simferopol, the peninsula is a strategic territory for Moscow, which deploys troops there.
Putin signs a bill to annex the peninsula and Moscow gains control of Ukrainian military bases.
Pro-Russian separatists declare the independence of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic.
Moscow supports and arms the rebels and many Russians join them, but the Russian Federation is not officially involved in the conflict.
It also deploys militias that are often linked to the far right or even the ultra right, such as Pravy Sektor.
Two independence referendums are held in Donetsk and Luhansk, another area in eastern Ukraine on the Russian border, and “yes” wins massively.
Ukrainians elect Petro Poroshenko as president with 56 percent of the vote in the first round.
Then French president François Hollande, former German chancellor Angela Merkel, Putin and Poroshenko meet in France’s Normandy on the sidelines of the seventieth anniversary of the Allied landings.
It is the first meeting between Putin and his Ukrainian counterpart since the conflict began in eastern Ukraine, and it initiates the occasional “Normandy format” four-way talks between Paris, Berlin, Moscow and Kyiv.
A meeting in the “Normandy format” consisting of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine takes place.
Alexander Zakhartchenko is elected in Donetsk, and Igor Plotniski in Luhansk.
Ukraine denounces a violation of the Minsk accords, while Russia views the polls as respecting the protocol.
Ukraine’s parliament votes in favour of joining NATO, much to Moscow’s displeasure.
Stalemate in the conflictFebruary 2015: As fighting and bombing have resumed in eastern Ukraine since January, the leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France meet again in Belarus to impose a new ceasefire.In addition to the ceasefire, the agreement reached on February 12 includes measures such as the withdrawal of heavy weapons on both sides, the restoration of Ukraine’s borders and the withdrawal of foreign troops.
Plotniski, the leader of the self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic, resigns after taking refuge in Moscow.
Pasetchnik’s counterpart in Donetsk, Alexander Zakhartchenko, is assassinated.
Russian forces board three small Ukrainian navy ships attempting to pass under the Crimean bridge, which Russia inaugurated with great fanfare the same year, and arrest the vessels’ 24 crew members.
Hopes for a détente, and an agreement on gasMay 20: Volodymyr Zelensky triumphs over Poroshenko to become the new president of Ukraine.
Zelensky is an actor and comedian who campaigned against corruption and for a détente with Moscow.
French President Emmanuel Macron meets with Putin at his summer residence at the fort of Brégançon in southern France, following the leaders’ first meeting at Versailles Palace shortly after Macron’s election in 2017.
Russia releases the 24 detained Ukrainian sailors and 10 more Ukrainian citizens, including filmmaker Oleg Sentsov, in a prisoner exchange.
Ukrainian and Russian representatives meeting in Minsk under the aegis of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe reach an agreement on the organisation of elections in the separatist areas of Donbas and on granting them special status.
Putin and Zelensky meet for the first time at a Normandy format summit in Paris.
The parties involved in the conflict in eastern Ukraine agree to implement the ceasefire reached under the Minsk accords before the end of the year, and to exchange prisoners.
Moscow and Kyiv finalise a new five-year agreement on the transit of Russian gas through Ukraine.
The agreement guarantees gas supplies to Europe, which were threatened by a previous crisis in 2009.
From conflict to warJune 12, 2020: NATO grants Ukraine “enhanced opportunities” allowing cooperation between NATO forces and Kyiv’s army.
Zelensky openly declares that joining NATO is the only way to put an end to the war in Donbas.
Western countries fear escalation after Russia conducts another large-scale military exercise near the Ukrainian border in November.
Putin announces security demands including a guarantee that Ukraine will never join NATO and the withdrawal of NATO forces from the former Soviet Union.
NATO refuses to budge on its policy of allowing countries to decide if they want to join, while Moscow continues to demand a guarantee that Ukraine never will.
In a televised evening address, Putin announces recognition for the independence of the separatist self-declared republics in eastern Ukraine and orders Russian “peacekeepers” to enter them.
Russian forces invade Ukrainian territory on several fronts.This article is a translation of the original in French.
