A1 ♦ ShelPs oil spills have contributed to high levels of pollution in a Nigerian community, according to a consultant who helped produce a confidential damage assessment.
B1 ♦ Britain's FCA has reopened a probe into how Barclays persuaded Qatar's sovereign-wealth fund to bail it out during the financial crisis.
B5 ♦ Akzo's largest shareholder became the latest investor to urge the Dutch firm to start talks with PPG over a $24 billion takeover offer.
B3 ♦ Ford said higher rates and a decline in used-car values will hurt affordability.
B3 ♦ The market for sand, an ingredient in fracking, is surging again as United States oil output rebounds, threatening energy-firm profits.
B1 ♦ Apple will soon start assembling iPhones in India, aiding the company's efforts to gain a foothold in the fast-growing market.
B7 World-Wide ♦ ♦ U.K. police identified the suspected Islamist terrorist who carried out Wednesday's deadly rampage outside Parliament as Khalid Masood, a 52-year-old British-born man who had previous convictions.
A1 ♦ Governments are increasingly having to balance tight security with public access to some of their most politically sensitive sites.
A4 ♦ Republicans postponed the planned vote on their health plan, after last-minute talks and lobbying by Trump failed to secure majority support for the bill.
A1 ♦ An ex-Russian lawmaker who fled to Ukraine and received citizenship there was gunned down in Kiev in what Ukraine's president called ""an act of state terrorism"" by the Kremlin.
A3 ♦ The House intelligence committee chairman apologized for not consulting with Democrats before his surprise announcement about information intercepted by United States intelligence agencies.
A5 ♦ The United States Senate's top Democrat will oppose Gorsuch's confirmation to the Supreme Court and urged his Democratic colleagues to block the nomination.
A5 ♦ The U.N.'s air-safety arm is pushing for video recorders to be installed in airliner cockpits to assist investigations of serious incidents.
A3 ♦ Israeli police arrested a teenager suspected of making security-related threats to Jewish institutions in the United States and elsewhere.
Masood was born in Kent, southeast of London, and had most recently been living in the Birmingham area, police said.
He wasn't the subject of any current investigations, and U.K. authorities had no prior intelligence about his intent to mount a terrorist attack.
He had been known to police, however, and had a range of convictions unrelated to terror offenses, police said, the most recent one for the possession of a knife in 2003.
Police say Masood on Wednesday mowed down pedestrians on a crowded bridge before crashing his car near the gates of Parliament and stabbing a policeman, leaving three dead.
He was shot to death, authorities said, and dozens were injured in the most serious act of terror in A minute of silence in Trafalgar Square in London on Thursday, a day after a rampage that killed three and left 29 in the hospital. the U.K. since 2005, when coordinated bombings by Islamist extremists on buses and subway trains claimed 52 lives.
In a speech to Parliament the day after the deadliest act of terror in the U.K. in more than a decade, Mrs.
The source of the roughly 30-page dossier, intercepted by Bulgaria's security service, was a think tank connected to the Kremlin, according to the officials.
It was delivered by a former Russian spy on a United States sanctions list, three of them said.
In November, the Socialists' candidate, Rumen Radev, emerged victorious.
Now, the party— which wants to end European Union sanctions against Russia and limit North Atlantic Treaty Organization operations around the Black Sea— is a front-runner in parliamentary elections to be held Sunday.
House Republicans Postpone Health Vote Republicans postponed the vote on their legislation to overhaul the Affordable Care Act, after last-minute negotiations and personal lobbying By Kristina Peterson, Siobhan Hughes and Louise Radnofsky from President Donald Trump failed to secure majority support for the bill only hours ahead of the planned vote.
House GOP leaders who had planned to put the bill to a floor vote Thursday instead spent tense hours jockeying over possible changes being sought by competing factions in the party, one made of conservatives and the other of centrist Republicans.
Late Thursday, White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders said the vote would now take place Friday morning.
She said she was confident the votes would be there to pass it then, and said the delay was arranged to avoid members voting at 3m. after a lengthy debate.
The delay left the first major legislative effort by House Speaker Paul Ryan and Mr Trump in doubt.
A conservative group, the House Freedom Caucus, sought to rework the bill so it more aggressively upended the ACA, the 2010 health law championed by former President Barack Obama and Democrats.
But they left a White House meeting with Mr Trump on Thursday saying no deal had been struck.
Mark Meadows (R., N.C.), chairman of the group, said after the meeting that the bill still didn't have enough votes to pass, but talks would continue.
At the same time, some centrist Republicans were walking away from the bill.
At the White House, press secretary Sean Spicer was asked if the administration had a backup plan.
Since the first distillers started bottling on the banks of the Ohio River here, Kentucky bourbon has always been considered kosher, in line with Jewish dietary laws about what food and drink can be consumed and in what circumstances.
The bourbon industry has exploded over the last several years, and that growth has brought I new complications for Jews who like American whiskey.
Bourbon still comes out of the barrel as kosher— if not necessarily as healthful— as mountain spring water.
Mr Mindich, who at the age of 27 became the youngest partner in Goldman Sachs Group Inc.'s history, launched his fund in 2004 amid frenzied investor interest.
The firm's $3. billion launch was believed to be the largest in hedge-fund history and was seen as sign of surging interest in the industry.
But the firm has run into troubles recently, with disappointing returns and investor withdrawals resulting in a 50% plunge for the firm's assets from their 2011 peak.
The firm received about $400 million of withdrawal requests from investors for the first quarter, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Executives were concerned the declining assets would make it harder to retain employees, part of why Mr Mindich moved to close the firm, the person said.
Many hedge funds have performed poorly compared Please see FUND page A2 HANNAH MCKAY/REUTERS For personal non-commercial use only.
WORLD NEWS Turkey's Referendum Could Backfire on Erdogan A billboard in Istanbul exhorts a 'yes' vote in the referendum.
Only one campaign is in sight less than a month before the April 16 referendum that would give Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan vast new powers.
On TV networks, government officials brand those opposing this executive presidency plan as traitors or supporters of terrorism.
And yet, despite such a charged environment, a referendum victory for Mr Erdogan looks surprisingly uncertain.
E ven though the referendum campaign unfolds under the state of emergency imposed following July's failed coup attempt against Mr Erdogan, Turkey's voting process makes outright ballot-stuffing difficult.
Yet, the very fact that the outcome is now in doubt has re-energized the opposition to Turkey's leader— just months after his hold on authority, in the wake of the July putsch attempt, seemed beyond any challenge.
If Mr Erdogan loses, that would be his most dramatic setback since coming to power in 2003, shattering his aura of near-magic invincibility.
A referendum defeat could also change the geopolitical trajectory of one of America's most important partners in the Middle East and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance— just as Mr Erdogan is steering Turkey further and further from its traditional bonds with the West.
They see this as a matter of life or death,"" said Sezgin Tanrikulu, a lawmaker for the opposition CHP party.
A referendum defeat, if it occurs, wouldn't force Mr Erdogan, whose mandate runs until 2019, to step down, and wouldn't necessarily prompt new elections in the immediate future.
But it would almost certainly usher a period of new political instability as Mr Erdogan struggles to regain momentum against emboldened foes.
Mr Erdogan's strategy in the past, when faced with challenges to his authority, has been to escalate crises and create new ones, at home and abroad.
That is something that many, in Turkey and Western capitals, fear may happen in coming weeks, and even more so should voters reject his proposals on April 16.
In the summer of 2015, after an election in which AKP failed to secure absolute parliamentary majority for the first time, Mr Erdogan— instead of moving to create a coalition government— unleashed all-out war against Kurdish militants and then called snap elections within months.
In a similar attempt to rally the nationalist vote, he stoked diplomatic confrontations with the Netherlands and Germany in recent weeks. uch an appeal to the Turkish nationalist electorate that traditionally follows the MHP party, one of four represented in Turkey's parliament, is indispensable for Mr Erdogan's referendum plans.
He managed to pass the referendum legislation, which required the support of threefifths of lawmakers, only thanks to a new alliance with the MHP's leadership.
That parliamentary support has yet to translate into backing by actual MHP voters, cautioned former MHP lawmaker Sinan Ogan, who is opposed to the proposals.
The MHP secured 11.9% of votes in Turkey's most recent elections, in November 2015, and represents a critical swing constituency.
FUND Continued from Page One with the stock and bond markets since 2009, a losing streak that has led pension funds, endowments and other institutional investors to pull money.
The Eton Park closure follows a year when 1,057 hedge funds were liquidated, according to the data tracker HFR, the highest number since the 2008 financial crisis.
At the end of 2016, there were 8,326 hedge funds, the lowest since 2013.
Some hedge funds have blamed placid global markets stemming from continued low interest rates for their problems, but investors are starting to lose patience.
Investors yanked $70. billion from funds last year, even accounting for new investments.
Some hedge-fund investors have privately predicted widespread closures given poor returns and investor outflows.
Daniel Loeb of Third Point LLC last year wrote to clients, “There is no doubt that we are in the first innings of a washout"" in the industry, and some managers who lost money last year told clients they believed some losses were attributable to other hedge funds bailing out of positions.
In a letter to his investors Thursday, Mr Mindich said the firm could no longer sustain its approach, which focuses on investing in complex strategies across global markets.
The firm had posted losses and Mr Perry concluded he was out of step with today's market.
At Goldman, he was mentored by Robert Rubin of the firm's famed riskarbitrage trading desk.
The excitement surrounding Eton Park's launch was such that investors agreed to a higherthan-usual minimum investment of $5 million, and to tie up their cash for as long as 4% years or pay a big penalty.
In the years that followed, high-net worth individuals and large institutions poured into hedge funds, viewing them as packed with skilled investors capable of navigating any kind of market.
While hedge funds did better than mutual funds and the overall market, the industry's 19% loss surprised many investors.
The firm lost only 7% in 2008, after soaring 41% in 2007 and managed a peak of $14 billion as recently as 2011.
Over the next four years, Eton Park's annual gains slipped to 13%, 22%, 6% and 6%, respectively, before the more disappointing returns more recently.
The firm's performance figures don't include about $1 billion invested in private equity and other hard-to-trade investments that aren't part of the firm's main portfolio and limit investors' ability to cash out.
It laid off some staffers in its London office, the firm told investors last year, and stopped trading out of London.
In Thursday's letter, the firm said it expected to return 40% of investors' money by the end of April.
They can contaminate the bourbon, Rabbi Litvin said, if the liquors are run through the same pipes or tanks.
So the Litvins, a family of seven orthodox rabbis based in Louisville, have taken it upon themselves to keep bourbon kosher.
He now certifies liquors as kosher along with four sons and two sons-in-law— all of them rabbis with ChabadLubavitch, a movement of orthodox Judaism.
When a couple decides to get married, he said, “we need to certify a kosher caterer.
So he began making sure there was kosher bourbon for them to do it with.
Though Jewish laws about dietary rules can be complex, most spirits that didn't include wine (which must be made according to specific rules) were generally kosher.
Then, about two decades ago, vodka companies began introducing a smorgasbord of different flavors.
For a while, bourbon was immune to all this upheaval, because its production is strictly regulated by the government.
Contrary to popular myth, it doesn't have to be made in Bourbon County, Kentucky.
To be sold as bourbon, though, it can be made only from corn, grain and water, and aged in new oak casks, all of which is kosher.
Bourbon is now encountering kosher issues of its own, as it has expanded to an $8. billion industry in the state.
On a recent afternoon, Chaim Litvin pulled up to Heaven Hill, which has been churning out bourbon since shortly after prohibition and is now one of the largest liquor companies in the world.
The company is owned by a Jewish family, but only a few of the bourbons— Evan Williams, the company's largest brand, and the high-end single-barrel whiskeys— are still guaranteed to be kosher.
The others are run through the same pipes and storage tanks as other products, including untold flavors of vodka, spiced rum and mint whiskey.
Rabbi Litvin, with a sanitary net covering only a portion of his thick beard, checked to make sure that Evan Williams was still on its own dedicated line, in its own dedicated storage tank, _ which it was.
Other times, Rabbi Litvin will oversee specialty runs of bourbon that will be used in, say, a kosher barbecue sauce, which requires heating equipment to sanitize it, according to kosher rules.
The Litvins' Kosher certification, like bourbon, is a booming industry, growing 10% a year. nonprofit organization, Kosher Liquor and Spirits, charges a fee for the kosher certification.
Despite the family's devotion to kosher bourbon, Rabbi Litvin doesn't have much of a taste for it himself, nor does his father.
The National Institutes of Health doesn't fund the creation or destruction of human embryos for research purposes.
Not all Jews— or even all those who are very devoted to keeping kosher— are so exacting about the equipment liquor is produced on.
Kosher certification, like bourbon, is a booming industry, growing by roughly 10% a year since 2005, according to Kosher Network International.
At the Orthodox Union, the country's largest kosher certification company, rabbis said certifying liquor as koseeking to broaden guidelines to address work with embryolike entities incorrectly said that the NIH endorsed research guidelines that limit research on human embryos past 14 days of development.
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act was incorrectly called the Individuals with Education Disabilities Act in a United States News article Thursday about the Supreme Court's ruling that disabled students are entitled to more than a bare-bones education. sher has taken off in recent years, in part because it appeals not only to Jews, but also to many gentiles who see kosher products as more highly scrutinized.
Marni Davis, author of “Jews and Booze,"" said the growing interest in kosher certification for alcohol likely has as much to do with cultural changes as religious practice.
Single-barrel bourbons, she noted, are always kosher, while those siloed in huge vats may not be.
Newsprinters Limited, Great Cambridge Road, Waltham Cross, EN8 8DY Registered as a newspaper at the Post Office.
Trademarks appearing herein are used under license from Dow Jones & Co.
Readers can alert The Wall Street Journal to any errors in news articles by emailing wsjcontact@wsj.com.
Friday Sunday, March 24 26, 2017 | A3 WORLD NEWS ExRussian Lawmaker Slain in Ukraine Ukrainian police work around the body of former Russian lawmaker Denis Voronenkov.
Denis Voronenkov fled to Kiev last fall and had become a strident critic of Vladimir Putin By James Marson MOSCOW— A former Russian lawmaker who fled to Ukraine and received citizenship there was gunned down in central Kiev on Thursday in what Ukraine's president called ""an act of state terrorism"" by the Kremlin.
The slaying of Denis Voronenkov, an ex-policeman and prosecutor who was wanted in Russia on fraud charges, comes amid heightened tensions between the two neighboring countries over Russia's support for a three-year insurgency in Ukraine's east.
The bodyguard was wounded but managed to injure the attacker, and both were taken to the hospital, police said.
Mr Voronenkov's defection to Kiev was a potential embarrassment to Moscow.
A former high-ranking official in Russia's now-defunct Federal Drug Control Service, he had intimate knowledge of corruption schemes of Kremlin-connected elites.
In an interview last month, he said he had retained bodyguards because he feared for his life.
He was a personal acquaintance of security-service veteran Alexander Litvinenko, who was killed in London when British police say undercover Russian agents slipped a fatal dose of radioactive polonium into his tea during a meeting in a restaurant.
The Kremlin ordered his killing, Mr Voronenkov said, because Mr Litvinenko was helping British authorities investigate Russian mafia networks in Spain.
Opponents of the Kremlin say they are targets of Russian security services.
A lawyer representing the family of a dead Russian whistleblower fell from a window late Tuesday under unclear circumstances.
Vladimir Kara-Murza, an opposition activist, says he has been poisoned twice in recent years.
His ally Boris Nemtsov, an opposition leader, was gunned down near the Kremlin in 2015.
Mr Voronenkov, 45 years old, left Russia for Kiev last fall with his wife, an opera singer and former lawmaker.
Russia's Investigative Committee announced fraud charges against Mr Voronenkov in February over the alleged misappropriation of a Moscow building in 2011.
Mr Voronenkov received Ukrainian citizenship and gave evidence to Ukrainian authorities in the treason case against former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, who fled to Russia in February 2014 amid street protests against his rule.
As a member of Russia's parliament, Mr Voronenkov voted for the annexation of Crimea in March 2014 and wrote legislation that restricted foreign ownership of Russian media.
But after moving to Ukraine, he became a strident critic of Mr Putin, calling the annexation of Crimea a mistake and decrying Russia's Federal Security Service, or FSB, as all-powerful.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko called a meeting with his security chiefs over the murder.
Ukrainian General Prosecutor Yuriy Lutsenko told reporters that the attack was a contract killing by a professional.
Mr Voronenkov was hit by two bullets in the neck, one in the face and one in the stomach, he said.
A Kremlin spokesman described the accusations of Russia's involvement as absurd. —Alan Cullison contributed to this article.
By Andy Pasztor The United Nations' airsafety arm is pushing for video recorders to be installed in future airliner cockpits to assist investigations of serious incidents and crashes, in a move that puts safety gains above privacy drawbacks, according to agency documents and people familiar with the details.
Such a step has been opposed by pilots for decades amid concerns that such filming could potentially capture their images during a fatal accident or be used by airlines to monitor crews in nonemergency situations.
The proposal by the International Civil Aviation Organization, the world's leading advocate of air safety and technical standards, aims to allay those concerns by using new technology that would avoid recording the faces or bodies of aviators.
The ICAO envisions systems designed to capture only images of flight instruments and the positions of switches.
The goal is to re-create for investigators precisely what flight crews saw during emergency situations, and to determine whether cockpit displays were consistent with crew commands and actual flight conditions.
An agency spokesman said pilots would be able be able to erase the images at the end of flights.
The ICAO spelled out its proposal, which hasn't been reported before, in letters this year seeking comments from national aviation regulators by April 20.
The agency wants airliners built in the next decade to adopt the technology.
The ICAO is the first major regulatory authority or standard-setting organization to formally call for using such technology to help unravel accidents.
If adopted, the phasing-in of cameras would likely take at least several years.
Accident investigators, including the United States National Transportation Safety Board and the Transportation Safety Board of Canada, have long advocated cockpit -video cameras as important supplements to traditional cockpit -voice recorders and flight-data recorders.
ICAO experts have determined that video images would have provided a significant aid to investigators in various crashes in which terrorism or pilot suicide were suspected.
But national regulatory bodies, industry trade associations and airline managers typically embrace its standards.
International treaty obligations and ICAO's ability to publicly identify countries that balk also give the agency's pronouncements substantial clout.
Mr Quinn said public expectations demand trade-offs between pilot privacy and ""a very clear and overdue need"" to determine precisely what occurred each time a commercial aircraft goes down.
According to an internal ICAO working document prepared by Russian representatives to support the proposal, video images could accelerate future probes ""to determine explicitly causes of the crash and to increase public trust"" in the investigations.
EU Readies Its Brexit Riposte BRUSSELS— Once British Prime Minister Theresa May sets the clock ticking on Wednesday on two years of negotiations over Britain leaving the European Union, it will be London's turn to sit and wait.
After a nine-month delay following June's referendum for the U.K. to formally launch exit BRUSSELS talks, the other BEAT 27 EU governLAURENCE ments will take NORMAN about two months to formulate their response before negotiations can start in earnest.
If the 27 can remain united— something they have managed during the nine months of phony war but can't be taken for granted— their response could give them critical leverage in the talks, helping them define the issues and the order they will be discussed.
W ithin 48 hours of Britain triggering Article 50, the exit clause in the EU's Lisbon Treaty, European Council President Donald Tusk will send draft guidelines to the 27 capitals framing the talks from the EU's side.
Those guidelines should be finally agreed at a Brussels summit of the 27 on April 29.
Then EU governments and the European Commission, which will lead day-to-day negotiations, will take several weeks to set a detailed negotiating mandate for Michel Barnier, the bloc's chief negotiator.
Only then, possibly in late May, will substantive negotiations with Britain begin.
EU officials say the guidelines will set out the principles with which the 27 will approach the talks.
It will signal, for example, that even temporary U.K. participation in the EU's single market of goods and services after Brexit is unlikely unless London accepts the obligations other members do, including further EU budget contributions.
The guidelines are expected to adopt positive language about the options for a close future EU-U.K. partnership.
Discussions on the future will begin only once these legacy issues have been dealt with.
Those principles will be converted into clearer red lines in the detailed negotiating mandate.
But such a demanding approach could also risk undercutting the chances of a deal, an outcome neither side wants.
Take the legally complex issue of a reciprocal deal on future citizens' rights.
The EU could simply instruct Mr Barnier to make an agreement a priority.
More likely, members states will set basic conditions for a settlement, like whether rights should be time-limited.
During the guidelines dis^ cussion, EU officials are con% fident the 27 can hang to£ gether, having broadly kept I to the principle so far of not 2 entering into negotiations ^ with the British until they g trigger Article 50.
Spain, for example, with a large expatriate community of aging Britons, might be happy to agree on strict time limits on future rights of U.K. and EU citizens.
On the other hand, Poland or Romania, with hundreds of thousands of citizens living in the U.K., might not.
For that reason, officials expect the U.K. to do its utmost to challenge it.
WORLDWATCH AFGHANISTAN Taliban Forces Retake Key Helmand District Taliban forces have again retaken the district of Sangin in Afghanistan's Helmand province, officials said, following a surge in fighting that threatens government control over swaths of southern Afghanistan.
The Taliban said a month of sustained attacks on Sangin helped the group dislodge the government there.
Taliban forces have ramped up pressure on the government ahead of their annual summer offensive, attacking district centers in neighboring Kandahar and Uruzgan provinces as well.
The offensive, which usually begins in April, is expected to pose a particularly stiff challenge this year to an Afghan government that is grappling with rampant corruption and high rates of attrition among its forces. —Jessica Donati BRAZIL Corruption Scandal Hurts Meat Exports Meat exports ground to a halt this week amid a corruption scandal while officials worked to stop the bleeding and economists tried to gauge the damage.
Brazil's top meat producers were hit as their main export markets continued to close even as officials rushed to convince buyers that sanitation oversight is sound and the meat is good.
Nineteen countries including China, Brazil's largest meat importer, have issued temporary bans or increased scrutiny on shipments, knocking down exports to $74,000 on Tuesday from a previous daily average of $63 million.
Brazilian officials say they expect Chile to reverse its temporary ban and they continue to talk to Chinese authorities about reopening their market.
Economists fear the crisis could have lasting consequences on a sector that has been a rare bright spot in a troubled economy. —Paulo Trevisani CHINA Soccer Team Upsets South Korean Squad The national soccer team stunned South Korea in a slim but spirited victory, defusing prematch fears of fan unrest spurred by a continuing feud between Beijing and Seoul.
Thursday's match was a must-win for China, with its hopes of reaching the 2018 World Cup at stake.
The 1-0 result against a much-favored South Korean team— China's third-ever victory over its regional rival— prompted jubilant scenes in the heart of the central Chinese city of Changsha, under the watchful eyes of a 10,000-strong security force.
China's relationship with South Korea has frayed over Seoul's deployment of a U.S.-made missiledefense system, which Beijing says undermines its own security.
Many Chinese soccer fans had expressed anger over the issue ahead of the match and authorities put much of Changsha in a state of lockdown to prevent any incidents. —Chun Han Wong CUFF OWEN/ASSOCIATED PRESS For personal non-commercial use only.
TERROR IN LONDON Attack Highlights Big Cities’ Challenge Cities around the world have erected barriers at government and tourist sites By Mike Bird Governments are increasingly having to balance tight security with public access to some of their most politically sensitive sites, arrangements put to the test in Britain this week when a terrorist attempted to storm Parliament.
Khalid Masood's deadly attack on Wednesday at the seat of the U.K. government and one of London's most popular attractions follows assaults on popular sites across Europe.
Cities from Washington to Jerusalem have erected increasingly tight security around government and tourist districts, while working within the constraints of crowded centers that make it difficult to erect things like blast walls and tall fences.
Some governments have proved better than others at protecting such sites, learning lessons from past attacks.
But while experts say security will continue to be tightened, there is only so much that can be done without closing off public access and the often lucrative flow of tourists.
Mr Masood made it onto the grounds of Parliament but he breached just one layer of a sophisticated security system, said Will Geddes, co-founder of ICP Group, a security management company.
That includes concrete barriers, armed police sentries and patrols, airport-style security scanners and cameras.
Former U.K. lawmaker David Mellor remembers his first years in Parliament in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when the public and tourists could walk with ease past the prime minister's residence at Downing Street and into Parliament.
But in 1991 Mr Mellor was in Downing Street when the Irish Republican Army fired mortars at the building, blowing out the windows of the cabinet room where he sat with the prime minister and others.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, fewer police officers in Parliament were armed and those who were likely carried revolvers rather than automatic weapons, according to Richard Walton, former head of the Metropolitan Police's counterterrorist command.
In 2014, Canada's Parliament was stormed by an Islamist-inspired terrorist, who got into the building before he was shot and killed.
There is only so much security that can be imposed without closing public access.
A police review deemed the security apparatus “highly inadequate"" at the time of the attack, with four separate security forces held responsible for safety.
They have now been consolidated into one group and heavily armed police officers are a much more common sight.
Still, Canada's Parliament remains open to the public, with guided tours and visitors still allowed to stroll its grounds, where Ottawa residents still gather for public yoga classes.
Mr Geddes said authorities in Berlin were unprepared for a December 2016 truck attack on a Christmas market in which 12 people died.
The attacks spurred authorities to tighten security at these attractions.
That year, the English city of Birmingham had surrounded its Christmas market with concrete bollards.
Police also have been mobilized in “high-risk areas"" for a faster response to such situations, Mr Rosenfeld added.
After Sept., concrete barriers were erected around the Washington Monument.
In London, Three Victims, Three Stories, Many Tears One was a police officer and dedicated soccer fan, guarding Parliament unarmed.
One was an American music maven celebrating his 25th wedding anniversary in London with his wife.
And one was a school administrator who worked just across the Thames from Big Ben.
By Sarah McFarlane and Denise Roland in London and Zusha Elinson in San Francisco The three people killed in Wednesday's Westminster terrorist attack drew an array of tributes on Thursday from those who knew them, and from those who came to know them only through tragedy.
Police Constable Keith Palmer, 48 years old, was a military veteran and father of one who carried no weapon when he tackled the assailant as he rushed toward the gates of the Parliament.
The attacker, named Thursday afternoon by police as Khalid Masood, mortally stabbed Mr Palmer.
Charlton Athletic Football Club, a minor-league soccer team in south London, said Mr Palmer had been a longtime fan and season-ticket holder.
The club said it has placed a red-and-white team scarf on his seat and would leave it there until the next home game, on April 4.
Liam Morrow, a fellow supporter of the club, wrote on Twitter, “I went to games with him.
Police and members of Parliament held a minute's silence on Thursday to remember Mr Palmer.
The Metropolitan Police Foundation set up a crowdfunding site for the benefit of Mr Palmer's family that had raised more than £211,000 by Thursday evening.
American tourist Kurt W Cochran was killed when the suspected terrorist mowed down pedestrians on Westminster Bridge, a family spokesman confirmed Thursday.
Mr Cochran, 54 years old, had been celebrating his wedding anniversary with his wife, Melissa, who was injured and remains hospitalized.
The Cochrans had been scheduled to return to the United States on Thursday, according to a statement by the Mormon Church.
Melissa's parents are serving as temple missionaries in London, the church said.
Nate Kizerian, a friend and musician, said Mr Cochran pursued his passion for music by building Onion Street Studio with his wife in the small city of West Bountiful, Utah.
The couple scraped together money to build the studio in their basement, eventually quitting their day jobs to run it full-time, said Jim Walton, who recorded two albums of Native American flute music there.
Aysha Frade, a 43-year-old school administrator from the U.K. with close family links to Spain, died when she was run over by a double-decker bus after Masood's rented SUV went into the crowd.
Frade worked as an administrator at DLD College, near the south end of Westminster Bridge.
Frade had close family links to the small town of Betanzos in northwest Spain, where her mother, now living £ in London, was born, an office cial with the Betanzos town ~ council said.
Her two sisters own an English school in Betanzos but live in the nearby town of Sada.
They took a midnight flight to London on Wednesday night, said Ramon Garcia, mayor of Betanzos.
Frade was born in the U.K. and held dual British and Spanish nationality, the town council official said.
Prime Minister Theresa May told Parliament that among the injured were 12 Britons, one American, three French children, two Romanians, four South Koreans, one German, one Pole, one Irish, one Chinese, one Italian and two Greeks. —Jon Sindreu in London contributed to this article.
The group has often claimed responsibility for such attacks but the nature and scope of its involvement— or whether it was involved at all— remains unclear.
A Utah man visiting Europe was killed and his wife was seriously injured in the attack.
Kurt Cochran and his wife, Melissa, were celebrating their 25th wedding anniversary, a family spokesman said.
Police were working to piece together the details of the attack at the heart of Britain's democracy.
As of Thursday evening, police had arrested and detained seven people at several locations in Birmingham and one in East London.
Detectives were searching additional addresses in London, Birmingham and Wales, police said.
Amid heightened security at the Houses of Parliament, a landmark that has endured for centuries, lawmakers were returning to business, vowing to remain strong in the face of terrorist violence.
We are not afraid and our resolve will never waver in the face of terrorism,"" Mrs.
After saying late Wednesday that four people had been killed by the attacker— who rammed a vehicle into pedestrians and stabbed a police officer-police gave a lower death toll Thursday, saying three people had died.
Twenty-nine people were in the hospital, seven of them in critical condition.
May spent 40 minutes speaking with some of the victims and staff at a London hospital, government spokesman James Slack said.
May said that in addition to 12 Britons admitted to the hospital, the victims of the attack included one American, three French children, two Romanians, four South Koreans, one German, one Pole, one Irish, one Chinese, one Italian and two Greeks.
He said hundreds of officers had worked through the night, searching six addresses in London, Birmingham and elsewhere in the U.K., but didn't offer details on those who had been arrested.
Several extremist suspects have in the past been connected with Birmingham, Britain's second-largest city, and the surrounding Midlands region.
The car used in the attack was rented in the Birmingham area, Enterprise Rent-A-Car said.
The company said an employee identified the vehicle based on a license plate from an image of the attack, and the company alerted authorities after running another check.
Witnesses to Wednesday's assault said the attacker drove a sport-utility vehicle into people on Westminster Bridge before hitting a fence surrounding Parliament.
The assailant ran at a police officer guarding the complex and stabbed him, authorities said, before being shot and killed by police.
The police officer who was stabbed to death was identified as Keith Palmer, a 48year-old husband and father, who tackled the attacker as he rushed toward Parliament.
Among the gravely injured was a 29-year-old Romanian architect visiting London to celebrate her boyfriend's birthday.
The threat level in the U.K. remained unchanged at “severe,"" meaning an attack is highly likely.
The highest level, “critical,"" means authorities have specific intelligence that an attack is imminent.
Lawmakers returned to work largely as usual, though it was slower than normal, with only one entrance open and the area still closed off to traffic.
The surrounding area, typically bustling with tourists taking selfies, was quiet.
Nick Thomas -Symonds, a U.K. lawmaker, said it was an important symbol that Parliament was in session as normal.
Around the capital, there was an increased security presence, as police said they had increased hours and canceled leave for officers.
The style of the attack, the third in less than a year in which a vehicle was used as a tool of terrorism, presents a special challenge to security officials.
The U.K. said last year that it was sharply increasing the number of police officers trained to handle firearms.
The vast majority of police officers are unarmed, with only specialist firearms teams permitted to carry submachine guns and pistols capable of killing a hostile suspect.
Defense Secretary Michael Fallon said security would be reviewed to see whether arrangements at Parliament were adequate and whether police at the front gates should be armed. —Zusha Elinson, Christopher Whittall and Joshua Robinson contributed to this article.
Friday Sunday, March 24 26, 2017 | A5 United States NEWS GOP Lawmaker Sorry Over Spying Claim House Intelligence chief Devin Nunes left a meeting on Thursday.
Nunes tells Democrats he should have talked to them on intercepts of Trump's transition By Siobhan Hughes WASHINGTON-House intelligence committee Chairman Devin Nunes apologized to Democrats at a meeting on Thursday for not consulting with them before his surprise announcement a day earlier that United States intelligence agencies intercepted information about people involved in the Trump transition team, lawmakers who attended the meeting said.
Adam Schiff , the senior Democrat of the panel, said that Mr Nunes had shared the information with the media and with Mr Trump before sharing it with other members of the panel.
Mr Schiff also questioned Mr Nunes's judgment in racing to the White House with information that could touch on the same group of people whom the panel may potentially look at as part of a probe into Russian election meddling.
Mr Schiff said Mr Nunes's action cast doubt on his ability to lead the committee investigating the matter, and again called for an independent prosecutor to be appointed.
In an interview Wednesday on MSNBC's ""Meet the Press Daily,"" Mr Schiff said United States intelligence and law-enforcement officials have ""more than circumstantial evidence"" of collusion between the Russian government and associates of Mr Trump's 2016 campaign.
At a meeting of the committee on Thursday, Mr Nunes, a senior adviser to Mr Trump's transition team, offered an apology for not first consulting other members, calling the decision a ""judgment call,"" Democrats said.
Jackie Speier said after a closed-door meeting of members of the panel.
A spokesman for Mr Nunes didn't immediately respond to a request for comment about the apology.
In his Wednesday announcement, Mr Nunes said United States intelligence agencies had ""incidentally"" collected information about people connected to Mr Trump's campaign.
He said the intelligence activities in question weren't related to Russia or to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's continuing probe into possible ties between the Trump campaign and foreign individuals.
Speier said the committee expected to receive on Friday the same information that was shared with Mr Nunes, and that Democrats would make a further assessment at that time.
How Republican Bill Would Change Obamacare House Freedom Caucus Chairman Rep.
Mark Meadows talks to reporters after meeting with President Donald Trump on Thursday.
LAW Continued from Page One Mr Spicer also said the president and Republican leaders had continued to emphasize to members that they had committed to repealing the 2010 health law in past votes that ultimately never made it into law.
The House voted nearly 90 times to repeal the law while Mr Obama was in office.
The bill would dismantle much of the ACA's taxes and subsidies and replace them with tax credits largely tied to age, aimed at helping people afford insurance if they don't get it through employers.
Recent days have been punctuated by tense meetings at which various Republican groups have sought to move the bill in different directions.
The party's most ideologically driven conservatives are calling for a more aggressive rollback of the health law and have pressed for the proposal to include a repeal of an ACA requirement that most insurers provide a raft of specific benefits in health plans.
The White House gave the Freedom Caucus a final offer Thursday to try to gain their support, Mr Spicer said.
But conservatives who huddled with Mr Trump emerged saying what they had heard wasn't enough.
Ted Yoho said his opposition to the bill had hardened since Wednesday night.
The Freedom Caucus has enough votes to block the bill, but its membership appears splintered.
Some support the House leadership's bill, while others on Thursday were seeking additional changes.
In addition to striking down the requirement that insurance plans include a set of prescribed coverage benefits, such as maternity, pediatric and preventive care, they also wanted to repeal a requirement that insurers price coverage equally rather than charging consumers with health problems more.
The hard pitch deepened a rift between the conservative group and moderates, including some who had been wavering but decided Thursday to vote against the bill.
Some have been concerned that older people would face higher costs under the proposal.
Jaime Herrera Beutler said in a statement Thursday explaining why she plans to vote against the bill. —Stephanie Armour and Natalie Andrews contributed to this article.
By Stephanie Armour The House Republican proposal to overhaul the Affordable Care Act would bring big changes to health-care coverage and funding for many Americans.
The Individual Mandate Individuals would no longer have to pay a penalty if they didn't have coverage.
People who go uninsured for more than two months and then buy coverage would be subject to a 30% price boost on their premiums.
That surcharge, collected by insurers, is meant to discourage people from waiting until they become sick to purchase health coverage.
Older Americans Could Pay More Insurers would be allowed to charge their oldest customers more than they do now.
Under current law, they can charge older people up to three times the amount they charge their youngest customers.
New Tax Credits Replace ACA Subsidies People who don't receive insurance through their employer would be able to get refundable tax credits based on their age.
People under 30 would be eligible for a credit of $2,000 a year, increasing on a sliding scale to $4,000 for those over 60.
The size of a tax credit would grow with the size of a family and be capped at $14,000.
Insurance companies are still required to sell health plans to people with pre-existing conditions, and people could still keep their children on their health plans until age 26.
Fewer Coverage Requirements in the Individual Market In a last-ditch change to the legislation, insurers selling plans on the individual and small group markets would no longer be required to cover a suite of 10 ""essential health benefits,"" including coverage areas such as maternity care, mental health treatment and preventive services.
Business Mandate For businesses, many of the ACA taxes and requirements would be eliminated, including a requirement that many larger employers offer health insurance to employees.
Tax Repeal The bill would repeal most of the ACA's taxes, including taxes on high-income earners and levies on medical industries.
Those taxes would be repealed starting in 2017, a year earlier than in the prior version.
A tax on generous employer health plans would begin a year later, in 2026.
Big Changes to Medicaid States that expanded Medicaid would still get federal funding for the program through the end of 2019.
But after that, the higher levels of federal funding for the expansion would begin to diminish and cover only people who were in the program as of that deadline.
Sonny Perdue said during his confirmation hearing that he had ""some concern"" about Mr Trump's proposal to cut the USDA's discretionary budget by about one-fifth to its lowest level since 1988.
But he said Georgia did ""more with less"" when he was the state's governor and that United States taxpayers should expect the USDA and other federal agencies to run efficiently, even while laying out a role for the agency to tackle issues from immigrant workers to rural internet availability and opioid addiction.
The Trump administration last week proposed cutting the USDA's discretionary budget to $17. billion.
The budget proposal raised worries among some in the Farm Belt, a key bloc in propelling Mr Trump to the White House that faces a fourth consecutive year of falling farm incomes.
A series of bumper crops in the United States and overseas has pressured prices for farmers' crops and contributed to supply gluts of commodities ranging from wheat to beef and butter.
United States net farm income is projected to fall this year to about half the record $123 billion farmers earned in 2013.
Mr Perdue said he could manage the USDA on fewer resources, even as he pledged to continue many initiatives.
He said he would maintain existing efforts to combat opioid addiction in rural areas, push to boost broadband internet access in the countryside as part of the Trump administration's planned infrastructure plan and look for ways for the school lunch program to continue to feed some children during summer months.
He also told senators that he would advocate for food exports overseas and within the Trump administration, which has criticized trade pacts backed by many in the farm sector.
By Byron Tau WASHINGTON-The Senate's top Democrat will oppose Judge Neil Gorsuch's confirmation to the Supreme Court and urged his Democratic colleagues to block the nomination.
Mr Schumer urged his Democratic colleagues to block the confirmation by using a procedural maneuver known as a filibuster, which takes 60 votes to overcome.
Mr Schumer's decision sets up a quandary for Republicans in the Senate.
Democrats will insist Judge Gorsuch meet the 60-vote threshold to end the filibuster, in a body where Republicans control only 52 seats.
The party will need either to win eight Democratic votes or change the rules to eliminate the 60-vote threshold.
The Democrats, when they were in the majority in 2013, eliminated the 60-vote requirement on lower court judges and cabinet nominations but preserved it on Supreme Court nominees.
Republicans have enough votes to change the Senate rules, but such an action is considered drastic.
It has drawn concerns from institutionalists in both parties concerned about the comity and working order of the Senate.
Some within the Democratic caucus have discussed cutting a deal with some Senate Republicans to preserve the 60-vote threshold on Supreme Court nominees, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Under the proposal, the Democrats would give Republicans enough votes to confirm Judge Gorsuch in exchange for a commitment to vote against a rules change on future Supreme Court nominees.
Such a deal would take at least eight Democrats and three Republicans and could be cut independently of the Senate leadership of both parties.
Judge Gorsuch's nomination has drawn nearly unanimous support from Republicans in the Senate, who say he is unquestionably qualified.
IN DEPTH SPHERE Continued from Page One ""I'm very worried,” said Rosen Plevneliev, a Kremlin critic who was Mr Radev's predecessor as president.
There is no suggestion Mr Radev was aware of the document, and the president has made no comment on allegations of Russian meddling here.
Russia has long denied doing anything nefarious in Bulgaria and Eastern Europe and says it is pursuing its legitimate interests in nations where it has deep economic and cultural links.
Moscow sees NATO's eastward expansion as a threatening intrusion into an area it considers within its longstanding sphere of influence.
Across broad swaths of central and Eastern Europe, where less than 30 years ago populations rose up against Soviet domination and turned to embrace the West, Russia is regaining influence and undermining the position of the EU and the U.S.-led trans-Atlantic alliance.
Earlier this month, representatives of Poland, Georgia, Ukraine and the Baltic states appeared before a United States Senate panel to seek American help to blunt Russian inroads.
Their plea comes as citizens from Sofia to Budapest and beyond who once had high hopes for Western prescriptions of democracy and market economics have become disillusioned by financial and political crises and a big influx of migrants into Europe from the Middle East and Africa.
Mr Putin is exploiting that dynamic across Europe's poorer eastern flank, deploying an arsenal of weapons old and new— including propaganda and economic leverage, hacking and political subterfuge— to bolster allies and discredit the West, according to regional officials, Western diplomats and analysts.
Authorities in the small Balkan nation of Montenegro have alleged that Russia orchestrated a coup attempt aimed at derailing its NATO membership.
As Moscow stands accused of deploying an array of digital tools in an effort to sway the United States presidential election, and Western European governments warn of Russian meddling as they hold their own polls this year, critics said the Russian model is visible in its most advanced form in countries like Bulgaria, which next year is scheduled to hold the EU's rotating presidency for the first time.
That is prompting alarm that the Kremlin is using these states to establish beachheads inside critical Western institutions.
Below left, Bulgarian President-elect Rumen Radev is congratulated by well wishers during a handover ceremony in January.
The EU's poorest member state, Bulgaria has for centuries shared deep historical and economic ties with Russia, including the Orthodox Christian faith and Slavic culture.
Many in the country's aging population, bruised by economic mismanagement and endemic corruption, feel nostalgic for the communist past.
The high-water mark for Bulgaria's EU embrace was 2009, when a new pro-European party won a landslide victory and initiated market liberalizations and an anticorruption drive that appeared to cement the country's pro-Western orientation.
But years of weak growth and corruption stifled that momentum, creating a vacuum Russia was well-positioned to fill.
Bulgarian security officials have alleged that Moscow bankrolled protests in 2012 and 2013 that helped topple a proWestern government.
Russian hackers have attacked numerous sensitive targets in the country and interfered in the 2015 municipal elections, Bulgaria's former president said in an interview.
The silver-haired Mr Reshetnikov, a fluent Bulgarian speaker and Balkan specialist who once headed the analysis section of the Kremlin's Foreign Intelligence Service, or SVR, had long cultivated connections to the Socialists and other leading Bulgarian politicians.
Mr Reshetnikov attained the rank of lieutenant general in the SVR before retiring in 2009.
Ninova, saying they spoke for 30 minutes and that he was mainly on holiday in Bulgaria.
The precise relationship of Mr Reshetnikov— a self-styled commentator who has long predicted the demise of the West— with the Kremlin is murky.
Some analysts argue he is but one of a handful of political actors competing to spearhead Moscow's regional operations.
In November, Mr Reshetnikov told Russian and Bulgarian media that he and Ms.
Ninova had discussed a possible presidential bid by Mr Radev weeks before he was publicly anointed as the Socialists' candidate.
She later acknowledged meeting Mr Reshetnikov, but said that they didn't discuss Mr Radev.
Mr Reshetnikov's purported hand delivery of the detailed election-campaign game plan from Moscow.
Bulgaria's State Agency for National Security, the country's equivalent of the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation, obtained a copy of the document, people familiar with the matter said.
In keeping with protocol for the most sensitive intelligence matters, the security services allowed only a handful of the country's top officials to read— or receive a briefing on— the document, according to these people.
The document included recommendations to commission weekly surveys that would exaggerate the Socialists' support, according to senior officials who read it.
The document offered advice on how to burnish the candidate's image by planting stories with Moscow-friendly news outlets.
The stories were to be closely coordinated, publishing first in fringe blogs before entering mainstream media en masse to create maximum impact and ultimately become election talking points for the party.
It wasn't possible for The Wall Street Journal to verify to what extent any such proposals were implemented or whether they helped Mr Radev.
A few days after Montenegrin authorities said they had foiled an allegedly Russianbacked coup attempt and plan to assassinate the prime minister in November, Mr Reshetnikov stepped down as head of the Russian institute.
In December, he was sanctioned by the United States government for his role as a board member at Tempbank, a Russian lender that has financed the government of Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad.
Srdjan Darmanovic, foreign minister of Montenegro, which hopes to become part of NATO this year, said Mr Reshetnikov ""has acted as a propaganda fist” in his country.
One of Mr Radev's first stops on the campaign trail last September was a visit to the annual gathering of Bulgaria's National Russophile Movement, an important proMoscow group.
In the weeks before the vote, the number of pro-Russian and anti-Western news items mushroomed, according to media monitors and political analysts.
Hundreds of social-media accounts, often with variations of the same name, amplified the message, posting and retweeting these stories thousands of times.
Vassil Velichkov, a tech entrepreneur and former government adviser who runs a data analytics company called Sensika, said that a media-monitoring algorithm he developed detected a surge in anti-WestLeonid Reshetnikov, right, meeting with Mikhail Fradkov, his successor as head of the Russian Institute for Strategic Studies, and Russian President Vladimir Putin in January.
A Bulgarian polling company, Gallup International, which isn't related to United States pollster Gallup Inc., accurately predicted Mr Radev's victory.
The company, which is being sued by Gallup Inc. for using its name without authorization, also co-published a February poll that said citizens of four NATO members, including Bulgaria, would choose Russia, rather than NATO, to defend them if they were attacked.
Those results were at odds with a similar poll by Gallup Inc., published a few days earlier, showing that most NATO members in Eastern Europe, including Bulgaria, see the alliance as protection.
He has repeatedly argued that sanctions against Russia should be lifted, but he has also reaffirmed Bulgaria's commitment to the EU and NATO, playing down his ties to Moscow.
Two weeks after Mr Radev's victory, outgoing Defense Minister Nikolay Nenchev was charged with violating a contract with Russia because he planned to shift maintenance work on the Bulgarian air force's Russianmade MiG-29 fighters away from Russia to Poland, a fellow NATO member.
Mr Nenchev said he has done nothing wrong and blames his prosecution on ""Russian proxies” in Bulgaria.
In his first interview as president, Mr Radev told national television last week that he expects to welcome Mr Putin in Sofia next March.
Mr Radev said the two presidents could be patrons of Bulgaria's national holiday marking the 140th anniversary since Russian troops helped the country's liberation from Ottoman rule.
Campaigning in the parliamentary elections set for this Sunday, the Socialists have called on the EU to lift international sanctions against Russia over the annexation of Crimea, arguing that they hurt the Bulgarian economy and its trade with Russia and have promised to restart construction of a major Russia-backed gas pipeline.
According to the latest opinion polls, the Socialists and center-right GERB were each poised to capture around 30% of the vote.
IS) 5 —Nathan Hodge in Moscow and Julian E Barnes in Brussels contributed to this article.
Friday Sunday, March 24 26, 2017 | A7 United States NEWS Suspect Held U.S.-lsraeli teen arrested in Israel remains in custody for questioning By Nancy Shekter-Porat And Scott Calvert Israeli police on Thursday arrested a teenager suspected of making dozens of security-related threats to Jewish institutions in the United States and elsewhere that put the communities on edge, officials said.
The 19-year-old man, who is Jewish and holds dual Israeli and American citizenship, was arrested in southern Israel as part of a monthslong investigation that involved the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other security agencies in the United States and Europe, an Israeli police spokesman said.
The suspect will remain in police custody for questioning until March 30, a local judge ruled, according to the police.
The judge asked that the suspect not be identified at this stage, the spokesman added.
The suspect, who is from the city of Ashkelon, suffers from a nonmalignant brain tumor that affects his behavior, said defense attorney Galit Bash.
Israeli police said the suspect's father also was arrested, though it wasn't immediately clear on what charges.
Officials at some United States Jewish organizations greeted news of the arrest with a mix of relief and dismay, after dozens of threats had prompted evacuations of Jewish community centers around the country.
Doron Krakow, president and chief executive of the JCC Association of North America, said the group is gratified by progress in the investigation and thanked law-enforcement officials in in Jewish-Center Threats A 19-year-old covered his face as he was brought to court in Rishon Lezion, Israel, on Thursday. the U.S., Israel and Canada.
The investigation began at the same time in several countries, in which dozens of threatening calls were received at public places, events, synagogues and community buildings, Israeli police said.
The suspect used advanced digital camouflage technologies when contacting other countries, such as Australia and New Zealand, and making the threats, according to Israeli police.
Mr Rosenberg said he worried that some people would use the arrest to question the legitimacy of recent anti-Semitic acts in the U.S., including the desecration of a Jewish cemetery in Philadelphia.
Mr Rosenberg added that it wouldn't make the bomb threats any less serious if the perpetrator were Jewish. —Aruna Viswanatha contributed to this article.
Now a new analysis from the same pair, released on Thursday by the Brookings Institution, paints an even bleaker picture of the nation's largest-population group.
Death rates for white nonHispanics with a high-school education or less now exceed those of blacks overall, the pair said— and they are 30% higher for whites age 50 to 54 than for blacks overall of that age.
Blacks have long had a much higher death rate than whites, but that rate has dropped since the beginning of this century, while the rate for whites has crept up.
Driving the uptick are increases in “deaths of despair''— from drugs, alcoholrelated liver diseases and suicide, as well as a slowdown in progress against death in A Rising Toll New research shows the increasing mortality rate among white Americans spans age groups and is most acute among the less-educated.
The analysis paints a portrait of a gradual “collapse of the white, high-school-educated working class after its heyday in the early 1970s,'' whose health, mental well-being, and attachment to the labor force have become successively worse for people born after 1945, they said.
The opioid epidemic has only heightened a trend that was already under way before those drugs hit the market, they said.
Case and Mr Deaton noted, the mortality rate has continued to decline this century for whites with a college degree, albeit more slowly than before.
The increase in mortality rate for working-class whites can't be explained by declining income prospects alone.
Blacks and Hispanics face many of the same income struggles but have experienced declines in mortality over the same period, the two economists argued, though their findings reveal more recent troubles for blacks, with gains stagnating the past couple of years amid an increase in drug overdoses and stalling progress against heart disease.
Wages aren't rising with age now as much as they once did for high-school-educated white men, Ms.
Case said, suggesting that the composition of jobs available to them has changed and that there is less upward mobility.
Those changes have come along with trends such as a decline in marriage, more temporary relationships and children out of wedlock, and a rise in social isolation that have made life less stable, they said.
United States WATCH CALIFORNIA Lawmaker Faces Probe On Campaign Finance Federal investigators are probing suspected campaign-finance violations by Rep.
Hunter, the House Ethics Committee disclosed Thursday in a statement saying it had been asked by the Justice Department to pause its own handling of the case.
The Office of Congressional Ethics alleges the California Republican spent tens of thousands of dollars of congressional campaign funds on family travel, health care, school uniforms, jewelry, groceries and other personal expenses.
The nonpartisan office has referred the matter to the House Ethics Committee for possible disciplinary action and it said Thursday that it had halted its inquiry in a unanimous vote in response to the Justice Department's request.
The Justice Department generally asks congressional panels to defer action out of concern it could jeopardize their own investigation into the matter.
The Justice Department declined to comment. —Byron Tau ECONOMY New-Home Sales Jump Defies Expectations United States new home sales increased sharply for the second consecutive month in February, an indication that growing demand and a pickup in construction activity could help propel a strong spring selling season for this segment of the market.
Purchases of newly built, single-family houses, which account for a small share of overall United States home sales, jumped 6.1% from January to a seasonally adjusted annual rate 592,000 last month, the Commerce Department said Thursday.
That marked the second-strongest month since the housing-market expansion began in 2012.
Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal expected new home sales to increase by 1.4% to 563,000 sales. —Laura Kusisto UTAH Governor to Approve Strict DUI Limit Utah's governor said he will sign legislation giving the predominantly Mormon state the strictest DUI threshold in the country, a change that restaurant groups and representatives of the ski and snowboard industry say will hurt tourism.
Gary Herbert said he plans to approve the measure lowering the blood alcohol limit for most drivers to 0.05% from 0.08% and that it will save lives.
Opponents had urged him to veto the bill, saying it would punish responsible drinkers and burnish Utah's reputation as a state that is unfriendly to those who drink alcohol. —Associated Press Immigrants Add to Growth Of Large Cities in the United States By Laura Kusisto International immigration is giving a boost to population growth in big urban areas in the United States even as local residents flee for places with lower housing costs, new research suggests.
Mr Kolko's analysis shows the areas that stand to lose the most if immigration decreases.
Miami was followed closely by the San Jose metro area, where the population grew by 0.9% due to immigration.
At the same time, all of these big cities except for Orlando lost more people to domestic migration than they gained.
The Cape Coral-Fort Myers area in Florida got the biggest boost from domestic migration, with a 2.5% bump in 2016 from people moving there from elsewhere in the United States All of the top five beneficiaries of domestic migration were in Florida.
In metro areas across the U.S., population growth had a nearly 70% correlation with home-price growth in 2016, which was the second-strongest correlation over the past 30 years.15 saw the strongest correlation.
The 30-year average correlation is 25%, suggesting the current run up in home prices is on solid ground.
Immigration accounted for 1.1% of population growth in the metropolitan area.
The librarian of Congress currently appoints the position, known officially as the register of copyrights.
But top Republicans and Democrats appear to be coming together quickly on legislation to change the appointment to a presidential nomination with Senate confirmation, as part of a broader effort to modernize the copyright system.
However, new Librarian of Congress Carla Hayden, who took office last year, is intent on moving forward with her own appointment for the job, according to a recent letter, setting up a potential battle of wills with powerful lawmakers.
The struggle is potentially momentous, as technology has made reproduction and distribution of published works far easier and cheaper and has exacerbated tensions over copyright protections.
But those protections are limited by exceptions and can sometimes be hard to enforce.
Lawmakers have been intensifying their focus on the issue in recent months.
A House panel has completed a multiyear review of copyright laws and has started drafting overhaul legislation.
A measure to make the head of the copyright office a presidential appointment is the first in what could be a series of bills.
Hayden and House and Senate committee leaders, lawmakers urged her to hold off on making the appointment, according to a person familiar with the matter.
Hayden wrote to the lawmakers making it clear she was planning to go ahead with her appointment of the copyright chief.
A House Judiciary Committee aide confirmed that Chairman Bob Goodlatte met with Ms.
Other people familiar with the matter have described the meeting as contentious.
Content creators in recent years came to regard the copyright office as an ally in their policy duels with internet companies and want to boost its independence.
Many technology firms want to keep the copyright office in the Library of Congress and focus more on improving its outdated copyright record systems.
BOOKS 'It is our duty, to ourselves and to our children, to see the new world as it is now/ —Yitzhak Rabin The Hawk and the Dove RIVALS Shimon Peres, left, and Yitzhak Rabin in 1975.
Rabin's primary concern throughout his life was Israeli security— and throughout his long career in the military he proved himself capable of carrying out extremely tough action.
Born in Jerusalem in 1922 to parents who had emigrated from the Russian empire, Rabin joined the preindependence Jewish security forces in 1941 after an interview with a young officer named Moshe Dayan.
During the years until Israel's independence in 1948, Rabin rose through the ranks, working first with, and then against, the British who ruled Mandatory Palestine; he was even jailed by them for five months in 1946.
It was Rabin who, as a senior officer in the new Israeli Defense Forces in 1948, gave the order (under instructions from Prime Minister David BenGurion) to fire on the Altalena, a ship carrying arms to the rival militia led by Menachem Begin, in what remains one of the most hotly contested incidents in Israeli history.
It was Rabin who signed an order to expel Arab residents from Lydda in what has become a deeply controversial episode in Israel's war of independence.
Later, it was Rabin who, as minister of defense, put down the First Intifada— the violent Palestinian uprising against Israeli rule in the West Bank— with considerable force.
As a military officer, he lacked charisma and was ""an excellent number two"" and an ""unusually efficient staff officer"" rather than a bold commander.
He was ""unusually shy and introverted, awkward with unfamiliar people,""— hardly the makings of a successful politician.
Rabin had been chief of staff during Israel's smashingly successful Six Day War of 1967.
After serving as ambassador in Washington from 1968 to March 1973, he returned home— and, when Israel was attacked by Egypt and Syria in October of that year, he held no government or military position.
Though Israel recovered from the surprise attack and went on to victory, the shock of the war and very large losses discredited those who had been in power.
Rabin was remembered for the 1967 triumph and ""untarnished by the October setback,"" as Mr Rabinovich puts it.
Under the Accords, Israel recognized the PLO as the sole voice of the Palestinian people, allowed Arafat to return from exile in Tunis and began negotiations on a Palestinian ""entity"" that would eventually become a state.
The mystery of Rabin is why, given his decades of staunch defense of Israeli security, he agreed to the Oslo Accords and, more, why he actively sought a deal with Hafez alAssad to give the Golan Heights back to Syria.
As early as 1977, writes Mr Rabinovich, he had told President Carter that he desired no negotiations with the PLO, no Palestinian state and no negotiations with Syria.
In a 1989 speech, he called for negotiating with local Palestinian leaders rather than the PLO, and reiterated his opposition to the establishment of a Palestinian state between Israel and Jordan.
During his election campaign in 1992, he came out against giving back the Golan.
According to Mr Rabinovich, the pivot point was the outbreak of the First Intifada in 1987.
Mr Rabinovich does not really explain why— nor, more strikingly, did Rabin explain it to Israelis at the time, nor in 1993 during his secret negotiations with Assad (via the U.S.), nor when he permitted his party rival Shimon Peres to open secret talks with the PLO in Oslo.
Rabin, writes Mr Rabinovich, ""remained ambivalent about making a deal with the PLO"" and had actually Rabin wanted a deal with Syria over the Golan Heights, but, faced with the futility of dealing with Assad, he chose to go the Oslo route. ordered Peres in writing to stop the Oslo talks at one point.
But he underestimated both Peres's determination and Arafat's desperation.
By 1993, ""he could make a significant move on one track of the peace process; he preferred it to be the Syrian-Lebanese track,"" Mr Rabinovich says.
But faced with the likely futility of negotiations with Assad, he chose to go the Oslo route.
Mr Rabinovich explains the steps by which the tough military leader came to abandon his promises to Israeli voters, but not his underlying motivation.
Rabin had collapsed in the lead-up to the 1967 war from nervous exhaustion and been out of action for two days.
In 2000 at Camp David, Arafat refused a generous peace offer from Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak, and then encouraged the violence that became known as the Second Intifada— so it is unrealistic indeed to think that he would have been a reliable peace partner for Rabin.
The visible reluctance with which Rabin shook Arafat's hand on the White House lawn in 1993 showed Rabin's doubts about the treaty he had just signed and the new path it appeared to signify.
In the end, even the warm esteem in which he holds Rabin does not prevent Mr Rabinovich— a scholar with an abiding commitment to historical accuracy— from presenting a portrait of his friend in full.
Mr Abrams , a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations , handled Middle East affairs at the National Security Council from 2001 to 2009.
Bourdin's exact motives for this crazy act were unknown; he died after his bomb prematurely exploded.
But the episode inspired Joseph Conrad's novel ""The Secret Agent"" , whose protagonist plans to attack the observatory and prime meridian as the emblem of international cooperation and the power and authority of science.
The story involved scientists and politicians setting aside national, ideological and even religious differences to reach an agreement for the global good.
The prime meridian is a baseline used in the grid system of longitude and latitude by which map makers, mariners, astronomers and the Global Positioning System ""read"" locations on the globe and fix exact time.
Latitude, the north-south position in this grid, has a natural zero point in the equator.
But no such natural zero point exists for longitude, or the eastwest position, so humans have had to take matters into their own hands.
Ptolemy and many other ancient geographers thought an obvious zero point was the Canary Islands, which they regarded as the western end of the world.
Some later geographers hoped that the agonic line— where the North Pole and the magnetic pole line up so that a compass points true north— might do.
But the Canary Islands turned out not to be the world's end, while the agonic line, which passes through parts of North and South America, is not straight and moves over time.
Without a natCandidates for the prime meridian included Paris, the manger at Bethlehem and the Great Pyramid of Giza.
Greenwich won. ural zero point, geographers and astronomers often set the prime meridian at convenient landmarks in their home country.
By the 19th century, however, railway collisions, maritime accidents and growing international collaborations highlighted the need for a common world-wide system to fix precise geographical locations and standardize time.
National scientific academies and observatories linked by telegraphic networks now provided the expertise and technology to make simultaneous time determinations, prompting astronomers, navigators and international merchants to lobby for a common zero longitude point.
The French wanted Paris, the Swedes Uppsala, the British someplace in London— St.
Many politicians wanted to place the prime meridian in the middle of an ocean so as not to divide or favor particular countries.
Strong arguments existed for placing it instead at an observatory, to facilitate time determinations.
Proposals with religious overtones included the manger at Bethlehem and the city of Jerusalem.
One of the wackiest but most passionately advanced candidates was the Great Pyramid of Giza.
This was the favorite of a populist movement in the United States that used over-the-top rhetoric, conspiracy theories, fabricated ""facts,"" xenophobia and assertions of American superiority to promote the Pyramid— which, after all, appears on every United States dollar bill— as the standard for all measurement systems.
Other Americans criticized the ""pomp and vanity"" of insisting on an American prime meridian, pointing to the ""useful pride"" that would be gained by the United States participating in an honest international effort.
It was only a recommendation, but it proved to be the key episode in consolidating a world-wide consensus.
Several colorful protagonists animate Mr Withers's tale, among them the deaf scientist and educator Frederick Barnard, namesake of Barnard College; Charles Daly, president of the American Geographical Society; and Charles Piazzi Smyth, darling of the xenophobic anti-reform movement.
But Mr Withers's telling focuses less on people than on arguments and the text of resolutions.
Its dry and frequently repetitious account is in stylistic contrast to, say, Dava Sobel's much-celebrated ""Longitude"" , about clockmaker John Harrison, whom Ms.
Sobel breathlessly calls a ""lone genius who solved the greatest scientific problem of his time,"" namely, how mariners could calibrate Greenwich time.
The truth, Mr Withers notes, is ""more complicated,"" for the background to that achievement included geographers, scientists, instruments and observatories to set up the problem and draw up an outline of a solution.
The story that unfolds in ""Zero Degrees"" is about more than the scientific development that is its ostensible subject.
It is about how an international community of scientists and politicians managed to set aside differences to reach agreement.
It shows just how slow and difficult this can be in the face of resistance posed by ideologies, shortsighted interests and jingoistic nationalism.
Finally, it shows how international cooperation can harness the power and authority of science to benefit human life all over the globe.
But it is virtually impossible to imagine modern politicians with the integrity and courage to make them, which gives Mr Withers's account its poignancy.
My guests were struck not so much by the parchments themselves as by the sight of a group of Israeli fourth-graders, their noses pressed to the display cases, reading aloud from texts that were two millennia old.
The Eternal Language,” Mr Glinert's biography of Hebrew succeeds in representing the language not just as a vehicle of communication but as a crucible of national cohesion.
Mr Glinert's narrative, related with impressive sweep, begins with the classical Hebrew of biblical literature.
The Bible's sublime idiom is marked by stylistic suppleness and breadth, he says, that could encompass “narrative, prophecy, law, proverbs, philosophy, elegy, romance'' and much else.
The era of biblical Hebrew reaches as far back as the second millennium before the Christian era, and Mr Glinert suggests that the spoken language survived the Jews' exile to Babylon, their return and their struggles under Roman rule.
Spoken Hebrew seems to have died with little fanfare around A.D. 200, more than a century after the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem.
But throughout the diaspora, Jews used written Hebrew to scaffold elaborate edifices of religious and legal interpretation.
Though stateless, Hebrew would flourish as a written medium of cultural continuity.
The first of these edifices, the Mishnah, was compiled in the second and third centuries.
The Babylonian Talmud— another great edifice of interpretation, setting out the authoritative commentary on rabbinic law— expanded Hebrew's expressive possibilities by inflecting Hebrew with Aramaic, the lingua franca of the ancient Near East.
In the ensuing centuries those who standardized Hebrew's grammatical architecture and honed its philological precision saw the language not just as a precious possession in itself but also as a fulcrum of Jewish life.
While Hebrew commingled with Arabic in Islamic Spain, it preserved a separate reservoir of expression in the realms of law and liturgy.
During the golden age of Hebrew literature, roughly the 10th to the 13th centuries, Andalusian poets like Judah Halevi and Solomon ibn Gabirol wielded a Hebrew of astonishing allusive density in order to blur the lines between sacred and sensual.
In a pair of chapters on the neglected story of how Hebrew figured in the Christian imagination, Mr Glinert tells how Christians learned Hebrew both to access “hebraica veritas,'' or Hebrew truth, and to monitor the Jews in their midst “with the goal of mastering the mischief and the falsehoods of the Jews,'' as a 14th-century writer put it.
Martin Luther's call for “sola scriptura,'' or “only the Scriptures,'' led Protestants back to the original texts of the Hebrew Bible.
In the 15th to 17th centuries, Christian Hebraists put Hebrew at the center of Western humanism.
In the 18th century, leaders of the Jewish Enlightenment sought to emancipate Jews from the confines of the ghetto; by making Hebrew an aesthetic equal to European languages, they hoped to open the doors to modernity.
Their efforts, while incomplete, prepared the ground for a small group of secular Eastern European writers in the following century to dig channels through which Hebrew's hidden vitality could course once more.
In its early stages, this revival didn't seem to have much prospect for success.
For pragmatists, resurrecting a bookish tongue that lacked words for tomato, theater, microscope or fun seemed either ridiculous or inconceivable.
Even the father of political Zionism, Theodor Herzl, envisioned a Jewish state of German speakers.
And yet the history-hallowed language returned to its native soil by the sheer will of pioneers like Eliezer BenYehuda , the author of a 16-volume dictionary of Hebrew usage.
When BenYehuda arrived in Jerusalem in 1881, having first left his native Lithuania to study in Paris, he was unwavering in his commitment to the idea of restoring the Jewish language and the Jewish homeland together.
He published a Hebrew newspaper, founded the forerunner of what became the Hebrew Language Academy and advocated Hebrew as the language of instruction in the Jewish schools in Palestine.
In November 1922, the British mandate recognized Hebrew as the official language of the Jews in Palestine.
A month later, BenYehuda succumbed to tuberculosis, having fulfilled his dream of relaunching Hebrew as a spoken language for the first time in nearly two millennia.
In such a way was Hebrew “torn from biblical sleep,'' in the Israeli poet Yehuda Amichai's phrase.
Bialik , the poet who stood at the vanguard of the migration of Hebrew literature from Bialik’s verses were emblazoned on banners, set to music, memorized by schoolchildren.
They were a rousing call to self-defense. mute dormancy in Eastern Europe to articulate maturity in the land of Israel.
By writing in the first-person collective, a mode both inimitably singular and self-consciously national— and by weaving an “intertextual fabric,” as Mr Holtzman writes— Bialik reclaimed old sonorities to achieve an inventiveness never before seen.
When he was 7, after the death of his father, his destitute mother sent him to live with a pious grandfather.
Stealing away from his studies at a prestigious Lithuanian yeshiva, or religious academy, Bialik arrived penniless in Odessa, then a hub of Hebrew culture on the shores of the Black Sea.
In syllables shaped by the collision of tradition and modernity, Bialik poured forth verses in a range of registers— pastoral portraits, martial epics, reveries of childhood, stirring Zionist hymns.
After the Russian regime banned Hebrew literary activity, Bialik fled from Odessa to Germany, before settling in 1924 in Tel Aviv, where he would spend his final decade.
Though his muse waned, his efforts on behalf of Hebrew renewal did not.
He served as president of the academy, founded by BenYehuda, that coined and vetted new words.
He set up publishing houses, edited literary journals and made himself a ubiquitous and beloved presence in Palestine.
His verses were emblazoned on banners, set to music and memorized by schoolchildren.
The poet's 60th birthday, in 1933, was marked as a national holiday, a celebration of his part in fashioning a living vernacular adequate to modern life.
He died the following year, 30 years to the day after the death of Herzl, as Mr Holtzman tellingly notes.
Glinert and Holtzman suggest that, despite millennia of fluctuations, Hebrew escaped extinction with its distinctiveness tenaciously intact and its future auspiciously assured.
To read these books is to appreciate Hebrew as the grammar of a dynamic dialogue between the claims of the ever-changing present and the imperatives of the past.
Mr Balint , a writer in Jerusalem , is the author of “Kafka’s Last Trial/’ forthcoming from Norton.
But the 85 essays defending the new Constitution, as Americans found out after Alexander Hamilton's death in 1804, were in fact written by Hamilton, James Madison and John Jay.
Hamilton wrote the overwhelming majority, as he made sure everyone knew in a note written shortly before his fateful duel with Aaron Burr.
Hamilton claimed credit for 63 essays; he said Jay penned five and Madison wrote 17.
The 1963 breakthrough came when the statisticians realized— after months of work counting words by hand— that Hamilton used “while” but never “whilst” and Madison did the opposite.
Wallace and Mosteller's research became a foundation of what is called stylometry, the study of language based on recurring word patterns, expressions and punctuation.
Such textual analysis has practical applications in law, politics, advertising and, perhaps most powerfully today, search engines.
Every comma is one more tiny piece of Big Data that establishes an online identity as distinct as a fingerprint.
It appears just once. many adverbs are in all the novels written by Ernest Hemingway, Stephen King and Mark Twain.
Datadriven journalism is all the rage, and Mr Blatt's goal is to release the hounds of stylometry into the fiction stacks and see what happens.
He did, as Mr Blatt proves in his fitfully amusing but frequently maddening study.
Mr Blatt is a diligent counter of adverbs and animal similes, but his idea of scientific rigor is to pose a question— Do English writers use “bloke,” “blimey” and “brilliant” more often than American writers?— and attempt to answer it by searching for those words across thousands of books.
Once he comes to a conclusion— yes, “bloke” is used 27 times more often in the British National Corpus than in the Corpus of Contemporary American English — he expands the search to the “Harry Potter” series, then 'Harry Potter” fan fiction, then online erotica, until he runs out of steam.
His readers will have skipped ahead, maybe to the part about how an author's novels become longer as her books become more popular.
Mr Blatt attempts to prove this by running some tests on Hemingway's adverb rate.
Mr Blatt follows up with charts that show that the most acclaimed novels by Hemingway (“The Sun Also Rises” and “A Farewell to Arms”), William Faulkner (“The Sound and the Fury” and “As I Lay Dying”) and John Updike (the Rabbit Angstrom tetralogy) are those with the lowest adverb rates.
He downloads more than 9,000 novel-length fan-fiction stories and concludes that amateur writers use -ly adverbs more than the pros do.
The amateurs are wildly, gracelessly and spectacularly unsuccessful in their excess.
Tolkien uses the word “he” just under 1,900 times in “The Hobbit” and the word “she” only once.
Elmore Leonard used “he” more than “she” in every one of his 45 novels.
Jane Austen is the only one among the unspecified number Mr Blatt surveyed who used “she” more than “he” in every one of her books.
In 2001, Elmore Leonard famously advanced a list of 10 rules for writing.
It included a prohibition on the word “suddenly” and a restriction of two or three exclamation points per 100,000 words of prose.
Mr Blatt tries to catch him breaking his own rules and finds that Leonard used “suddenly” often in his early westerns but not once in the nine novels he wrote after 2001.
For one thing, Mr Pynchon rarely uses the same word to begin two consecutive sentences.
In his novel “Bleeding Edge,” only 1.6% of the more than 10,000 sentences begins with the same word as the previous sentence.
The results of a random set of Mr Blatt's experiments are enlightening— who would have thought that Nabokov's favorite word was “mauve”?— but not always in the way he imagines.
Algorithms are fast and accurate, but it turns out that literature can hold its own against those who try to break it into pie charts and probability graphs.
BOOKS 'May we never confuse honest dissent with disloyal subversion/ —Dwight D Eisenhower The President Fells a Demagogue COMMITTEE MEN Sen.
Joseph McCarthy and his chief counsel, Roy Cohn, during the Army-McCarthy hearings in April 1954.
The complete budget was a miracle of thrift when one considers its efficacy in thwarting Sen.
McCarthy had gained control of the subcommittee— which would soon enough be investigating him— at the beginning of 1953, thanks to the paper-thin majority that Republicans had ridden to on Dwight Eisenhower's coattails.
The chairmanship allowed the Wisconsin senator to hire as the subcommittee's counsel the cunning Roy Cohn, along with G David Schine, the Tab Hunter-ish object of Cohn's affections.
As a fellow Republican, he couldn't openly lambaste Eisenhower, whose detestation of him and his methods was quietly evident.
Nor would Ike ""get down in the gutter"" with him, as the senator wanted; there was party unity to consider and the danger of a challenge from McCarthy for the 1956 presidential nomination.
Eisenhower also had to worry about what McCarthy ""had"" on him, the sort of nothing from which the senator was always serving up a witches' brew.
And so, during 1953, the two men fought a series of ""small skirmishes,"" previews of the following year's showdown.
After failing to derail the president's nomination of Chip Bohlen as ambassador to the Soviet Union, McCarthy went after the Voice of America's supposedly slack anti-communism and sent Cohn and Schine on a sort of honeymoon hunt for subversive literature in U.S.run libraries abroad.
He took almost fetishistic care not to use McCarthy's name, even when having to greet him on a public occasion.
The author's praise for the president's strategy can border on the fulsome, but it is supported by facts and some new source material.
His administration's mobilization against McCarthy was a story that ""most of the era's great reporters"" were unable to see, and Eisenhower continued to throw dust into the eyes of the historians who came after them.
Ralph Zwicker, a hero of D-Day, for not giving him the answers he wanted about the bureaucratic promotion of an Army dentist with onetime leftist affiliations, the senator and Roy Cohn had been risibly at war with the service for months.
David Schine had been drafted in November 1953, and the thought of his golden boy peeling potatoes on KP inspired more fury in Cohn than any pinko with a security clearance.
He repeatedly demanded that the secretary of the Army, Robert Stevens, and its legal counsel, John Adams, secure passes and privileges for Schine.
The eventual investigation of all this, which exploded into the televised hearings, was a great human spectacle, full of pratfalls and tragedy.
Army Secretary Stevens, for one, fell into spells of drink and delusions of heroism.
The deepest personal mystery has always been why McCarthy indulged Cohn.
Mr Nichols's narrative is relentlessly chronological, but he does briefly consider ""the strange hold Cohn had over the senator"" without coming to any conclusions.
On Jan., 1954, White House Chief of Staff Sherman Adams ordered Adams to ""draw up a detailed chronological account"" of the pressures applied to the Army on Schine's behalf.
Eisenhower lied to the press about the report's origins, and he arranged for Stevens to lie about them, too.
In the reporter Tom Wicker's phrasing, Nixon's ""foot-in-the-other-camp status,"" his sterling anticommunist credentials, allowed him to make the approach to the committee almost in the way he would later have political cover in going to China.
The president wanted the ArmyMcCarthy hearings televised and quashed any efforts to cut them short.
Their minutiae— the ""friedchicken lunch,"" the ""shamefully cut-down"" photograph— spawned a core of buffs not dissimilar to those obsessed by the Kennedy assassination or Watergate.
The extravaganza's most quotable utterance— Have you no sense of decency , sir ; at long last?— appeared to have been ad-libbed by Army counsel Joseph Welch, but he had diligently prepared to be outraged at just the right moment.
Six months after the hearings ended, McCarthy was censured (though the word used in this case was ""condemned"") by the Senate.
His body was ceremonially brought into a Senate chamber so profusely packed with flowers that Roger Mudd, then a young reporter, remembers having to duck out for a breath of air.
For all that was commendable in Ike's efforts against McCarthy, he frequently fell short of full courage.
The president and Attorney General Herbert Brownell, for instance, both wobbled on the Fifth Amendment, making the invocation of constitutional privilege before a congressional committee grounds for a federal ema ployee's investigation.
And the broad | language of Executive Order 10450, isg sued in 1953 to get rid of the loyaltyS review boards that had helped spur McCarthy's rise to power, made it possible to fire employees deemed susceptible to blackmail.
Substituting personal peril for political protections, it ended up being brutal toward homosexuals in the government and claimed more victims than McCarthy's investigations ever did.
Cleanly written and consistently judicious, Mr Nichols's book would have gained additional power by deviating from its moment-by-moment timeline to explore the motivating biographies of its important figures or to look at the ironies of how the ""executive privilege"" Eisenhower invoked to keep executive-branch employees from having to testify before McCarthy's committee was welcomed by liberals in the 1950s, but would appear diabolical to them when invoked by Richard Nixon in the 1970s.
It remains for the reader to discern in this book a rough, inverted image of our own time, with the polarity reversed between the White House and the Congress.
Eisenhower's secretary of state, John Foster Dulles, saw European governments fearing ""an American fascism"" that seemed to be rising from the Capitol Hill office of a frantically impulsive crowd-pleaser who dispatched press releases as if they were modern-day tweets.
Perhaps President Trump will soon make the same gift to a half-dozen or so morally troubled Republican senators.
Tall and commanding, with a profile that could have been chiseled Charlton Heston was earnest, hard-working and unfailingly decent. on an Etruscan coin, critics assigned demerits to Heston for his stoicism, lack of humor and insufficient flash at a time when Marlon Brando, Montgomery Clift and James Dean were the rage.
Left to his own devices, or those of an unimaginative director, Heston was a stand-and-deliver actor, with a habit of grinding his teeth to indicate either passion or intent.
Hollywood's Last Icon"" is a welcome event if only because it restores a sense of balance, offering some overdue appreciation to an actor An Actor With Integrity whose belief system mitigated against a full appreciation of his worth.
Heston was married for 64 years to his wife, Lydia, and seems to have been a deeply responsible father to his two children.
Professionally, he approached his characters through voluminous research, which meant he found them intellectually, with emotion trailing behind.
He was born John Charles Carter in 1923 and was raised in the backwoods of Michigan.
His parents divorced when he was 10 years old, and he and his mother eventually moved to Chicago.
Shortly after his mother remarried Chet Heston, she peremptorily told her son that he would now be known as Charlton Heston— the name he used at Northwestern, where he met his future wife, the name he used during his service as a radioman during World War II and the name he used when he became a movie star after the war.
Heston's dignified demeanor and his loping, big cat walk gave him the majestic presence of a bom movie star, but it's possible he was not a born actor.
Conscientious is perhaps the defining adjective for Heston, who had as good a batting average as any movie star of the post-war generation.
Besides ""The Greatest Show on Earth"" and ""The Ten Commandments"" for DeMille, there is ""Touch of Evil"" , ""The Big Country"" , ""El Cid"" , ""55 Days at Peking"" , ""The Agony and the Ecstasy"" , ""Major Dundee"" , ""The War Lord"" , ""Khartoum"" , YOUNG GENT Heston ca.55.
Not all great or even good films, but all united by Heston's determination to tell epic stories.
Not only did Heston suggest that Orson Welles direct ""Touch of Evil,"" he kept insisting on it until Universal capitulated, in spite of Welles's inability to make films to order and the fact that his pictures invariably lost money.
Welles wrote a smashing part for himself as a malignant variation on Falstaff, but didn't bother to do anything equally distinguished for Heston.
Nevertheless, Heston always said Welles was the most talented man he ever worked with.
He also fought alongside Sam Peckinpah for ""Major Dundee,"" even tossing in between $100,000 and $300,000 out of his own salary to enable the director to shoot some additional scenes after the studio cut the production off.
Heston fronted the money for Rod Serling to do a re-write on the script for ""Planet of the Apes"" and then went out and recruited Franklin Schaffner to direct.
He never took a dime for his activities with the NRA because he believed he was fighting for principle.
The blowback within Hollywood over Heston's alliance with the NRA was considerable.
He told the head of the AFI, Jean Firstenberg that if she wanted to take his name off the AFI's masthead, he would understand.
Heston's son Fraser tells Mr Eliot he also thinks it cost his father acting jobs.
I interviewed Heston several times for one book project or another, and he was invariably helpful and forthcoming.
Unlike his son, he didn't think his politics hurt him professionally, and he had penetrating insights about directors.
He also ventured the borderline brilliant idea that William Wyler should have directed El Cid rather than Ben-Hur.
Somewhere in the 1970s, the movies got smaller and so did Heston's ambition.
In 2002, he was driving to Paramount, a studio he had worked at since 1950, when he got lost.
Mr Eyman’s 15th book about the movies , “Hank and Jim/’ is due out in October.
BY LUCETTE LAGNADO A NEW YORK CITY medical school has embarked on a soul-searching campaign of culture change after a 27-year-old student there jumped to her death last summer from her eighth-floor dorm residence.
The school is considering significantly expanding access to mental-health specialists, as well as changing aspects of its grading system.
Several months earlier, a medical resident, also female, committed suicide at the school's West Side campus.
Jordyn Feingold, a first-year medical student, lived next door to the woman who committed suicide in August.
Feingold had arrived at Sinai only 10 days before the tragedy and recalled how she and her peers were racked by ""cognitive dissonance”— excited about starting training but distraught at the tragedy.
Feingold, who is 24 and has a master's in applied positive psychology, joined a task force Dr.
Muller charged with figuring out how to improve Sinai's academic culture and doctors' well-being.
That young doctors and medical students face grueling academic pressures and are experiencing high rates of burnout, depression and psychological strain.
But it isn't because individuals drawn to medicine are necessarily more prone to angst.
It isn't clear what drove Kathryn Stascavage— the student referred to as ""Kathryn” in the New England Journal essay— to suicide, nor what role the pressures of medical school may have played.Through Dr.
Singh, along with about 30 faculty members, medical students, fellows and residents, took part in the task force, and proposed steps to remedy the academic culture.
They were split into three areas— mental health, physician well-being and the learning environment.
Singh's group, which focused on mental health, grappled with making it easier to consult a therapist.
That meant both removing the stigma of psychiatric care, and arranging access to affordable practitioners, since many don't accept insurance.
One proposal calls for making more therapists in the institution available to students.
The school also would like to ask students to have regular mental-health checkups, with an ""opt-out” possibility if they don't wish to have them.
Jonathan Ripp, an internist on the faculty of the Icahn School who co-chaired the working group on well-being, believes young doctors and trainees are suffering because medicine has changed dramatically.
Ripp's group suggests dedicating space on campus to a clearinghouse where young doctors and students could avail themselves of a ""menu of well-being”— such as finding a psychiatrist or signing up for a mindfulness training session.
His group wants ""protected dedicated time” built into the schedules of medical students and trainees, to allow them to take a break, meet with peers, and review stressful incidents such as the death of a patient.
Sinai tackled one source of angst— a high-stakes grading system marked by quotas for thirdand fourth-year students that limited ""honors,” a coveted distinction that helps an individual enter residency programs— to 25% of the class.
After ""honors,” the ""high pass” distinction was limited to 25%, while the remaining half of the class would receive a ""pass” grade.
The school has rejiggered the distribution to allow one-third of students to receive ""honors,” onethird ""high pass” and one-third ""pass,” Dean Muller said, with an eye to creating a system that will drop the limits altogether.
Weather # AccuWeather.com Shown are today's noon positions of weather systems and precipitation.
Previous Puzzle's Solution u S A | c 0 p rWa P E R i L L O bJ |U B R O U s E N O u S E J 0 bBm A N G L E A T T 1 C N M 0 Y B A R P A R A u T R Y m A W U R O M A N N O 1 W 0 E D 1 R E C T o H M Y A V O W s R 1 A ■ u 1 C A Y E T 1 v O L 1 N R E L la O R S E G U A R D \T E E L E A C H R K O D A s ■ u T T E 1 M H 1 T 1 N T O 0|B Y A N O O S E S N O R E a £ E R G ■ R E X H A Y E s i s 1 u In E T i § 5 £ 8 1 I 1 STAY AHEAD OF CYBER THREATS WSJ Pro Cybersecurity is designed to help executives monitor the everchanging landscape of cybersecurity through a business lens.
Our dedicated team of Pro journalists delivers unique, actionable insight on the wide-ranging challenges of cybercrime risk.
WSJ Pro Cybersecurity membership includes a daily curated newsletter, along with regular panel discussions, interviews, webinars and white papers.
START YOUR FREE NEWSLETTER TRIAL TODAY wsj.com/procybersecurity WSJ PRO CYBERSECURITY Exclusive interviews For personal non-commercial use only.
OPINION REVIEW & OUTLOOK Soulless Liberalism Hong Kong’s Unhappy Selection S unday is the day Hong Kong fought over in 2014, when student-led demonstrators massed on downtown streets for 75 days.
Angered by the erosion of Hong Kong's rule of law, media freedom and other liberal institutions, they demanded that China's central government honor its promise to let the semiautonomous former British colony elect its leader democratically.
Beijing refused, so on Sunday a new Chief Executive will be imposed on the city in a precooked exercise sure to inflame local politics.
Despite the televised debates, ads and other trappings of a democratic contest, this is no election.
As in Iran, or villages in mainland China, the government decides who can run and all but determines who will win.
Of 7. million Hong Kong residents, only 1,200 can vote, most of whom are business elites or other worthies loyal to Beijing.
Hong Kong law says Beijing isn't allowed to intervene, but Chinese envoys make no secret of their preference as they pressure electors by phone and in person.
Even some in the pro-Beijing camp complain about how aggressively the “invisible hand"" has favored Ms.
Her chief rival is former Financial Secretary John Tsang, who is hardly a democrat but has a more common touch and sometimes shows independence from Beijing at least symbolically, as when he cheered Hong Kong's soccer team over China's while Mr Leung remained comically neutral.
Losing could be a gift because the role of Hong Kong Chief Executive is increasingly to serve Beijing's will while catching flak from the Hong Kong public.
When the city last had a real election, in September for the semidemocratic local legislature, 2. million voters turned out and some 55% backed the democratic opposition.
More than 20% backed candidates calling for greater self-determination or independence from Beijing.
These views were once marginal but have gained support in recent years amid the crackdowns and illegal abductions of Hong Kongers by Chinese agents.
September's election marked another rollback of Hong Kong's autonomy, as Beijing barred two winning candidates from taking seats in the legislature, ostensibly for refusing to swear allegiance to China in their oaths of office.
Beijing did this even as local courts were set to rule on the case, and without a request from local authorities, an unprecedented intrusion in Hong Kong's legal system.
The effect was to popularize pro-independence feeling even more, especially among young people.
This betrayal of Deng Xiaoping's promise of “one country, two systems"" is a tragedy for Hong Kong and China.
The hope when Britain handed Hong Kong to China two decades ago was that the free and prosperous city would inspire the mainland to follow its political lead.
Instead Beijing has resisted liberalization at home and is gradually turning Hong Kong into another Chinese city.
Denying free elections for Chief Executive and booting duly elected lawmakers from office invites more protest and dysfunction in China's financial center.
Gorsuch’s FreeS enate Democrats have been flailing this week trying to land a punch against Neil Gorsuch, but the United States Supreme Court nominee has had much more success in his role as a legal counterpuncher.
Take the nominee's response to Democratic hectoring over the First Amendment.
Rhode Island limelighter Sheldon Whitehouse on Tuesday took to badgering Judge Gorsuch about some $10 million in “dark money"" that is being spent on advertising to support his confirmation.
Progressives like Mr Whitehouse want to ban anonymous political spending, the better to harass and intimidate opponents from participating in politics.
On the one Speech Lesson hand, Congress has the right to pass legislation requiring more disclosure in political spending.
In recent decades, the High Court, with the honorable exception of Justice Clarence Thomas, has been too willing to tolerate mandated donor disclosure, even as evidence mounts that activists and prosecutors have used it to target and shut down political opponents.
A return to the NAACP standard would be an enormous boon to free speech and political participation.
Mr Whitehouse complained that Judge Gorsuch wouldn't recognize his “simple"" point that money in politics is corruption.
A weather report on the France 2 television channel broke broadcasting records last week.
Some 5. million viewers tuned in to watch Melanie Segard, a 21-year-old woman with Down syndrome, take a turn as guest meteorologist on the network.
Wearing TV makeup and an irrepressible smile, she forecast clouds and rain for most of the country and lots of sunshine for Marseilles.
Segard fulfilled a lifelong dream to show that ""I can do a lot of things,” as she put it on Facebook.
It clashed with a strand of cultural liberalism that treats the existence of people like Ms.
Her appearance was facilitated by a disability-rights group ahead of World Down Syndrome Day on March 21.
It was all the more heartening because previous efforts to bring visibility to people with disabilities in France have run afoul of broadcast regulations that restrict images of happy people with Down syndrome.
Such images are undesirable, regulators argue, since they could give second thoughts to women who have sought abortions.
At its best, liberalism revels in the hubbub of a crowded marketplace of ideas.
But a dour, self-righteous and conformist model has now come to define the liberal idea across much of Europe, one that brooks no dissent from the latest progressive precepts.
Those of us who worry about the fragility of the liberal order and growing populist sentiment would be welladvised to pay more attention to how people on the sharp end of such “liberalism” experience it.
The Council of State, France's highest administrative court, upheld a ban last year on a World Down Syndrome Day TV ad that showed DS young adults, like Ms.
The “Dear Future Mum” ad risked “disturbing the conscience” of women who had aborted DS pregnancies, the Council of State held in a November ruling.
As it is, nine of 10 fetuses diagnosed with Down syndrome in France are aborted.
It is hard to see how any ads about contentious issues would survive the ruling's purely subjective standard.
The French National Assembly last month followed the Council of State ruling with a sweeping new measure targeting online antiabortion advocacy.
Sometimes the overreach violates even the norms set down by cherished liberal institutions.
That's what happened in Sweden's case of Ellinor Grimmark, a midwife who has been denied employment by several hospitals over her refusal to take part in late-term abortion procedures.
This, even though Sweden is facing a severe midwife shortage and such procedures are always planned in advance— meaning there would be no situation in which her refusal to participate would endanger patients.
A dour, self-righteous and conformist version has come to define the liberal idea across much of Europe.
Grimmark's freedom-of-conscience and discrimination suit and ordered her to pay the defendants' court costs.
The case is now before an appellate employment tribunal, and a ruling is expected Wednesday.
The outcome would likely also determine the fate of Linda Steen, a similarly situated midwife.
Both women have been forced to find work in Norway, which welcomes health workers who object to abortion on conscience grounds.
The real danger is that this type of liberalism will cast doubt on the basic fairness of the open society.
The promise of liberalism used to be that you could always have your day in the democratic public square, even if you lost this or that legislative battle.
What they can do is cast votes for the likes of Marine Le Pen and the hard-right Sweden Democrats.
Spinning off air-traffic control from the Federal Aviation Administration.
A new report explains how this could bring innovation and efficiency to airspace that the federal government is struggling to manage.
Mr Trump's budget proposes converting the FAA's air-traffic outfit into “an independent, non-governmental organization,"" as Canada has done, and dozens of other countries have similar models.
House Transportation Chairman Bill Shuster last year introduced a bill to turn airtraffic control over to a nonprofit corporation run by a board with seats for airlines, the pilots union, hobbyist aviators and more, but it stalled without presidential support.
Pilots currently bounce from one radio point to the next, which can result in roundabout routes and wasted fuel.
The Transportation Department's Inspector General airdrops the occasional damning report on FAA's NextGen modernization program, whose “total costs and timelines remain unclear,"" according to the November installment.
FAA may finish the project a decade after the 2025 deadline— or 20 years after its technology is obsolete.
Laws in the 1990s freed the FAA from personnel and procurement rules and introduced performance-based compensation.
According to the IG, the agency's budget increased 95% between 1996 and 2012.
A February report from the Eno Center for Transportation endorsed a governmentchartered or nonprofit corporation, and one chairman of the working group is former Sen.
The Eno report details how Nav Canada and other nations collect user fees, not taxes, which forces management to be more cost-effective.
The United States air-traffic trust fund rakes in money from the domestic-passenger ticket tax ; the commercial-fuel tax ; and other fees.
FAA also receives money from Congress, and so funding is a political football in fights like the 2013 government shutdown, which furloughed controllers.
Fears in Canada that fees would increase without government oversight haven't panned out.
Consumer charges have dropped by onethird compared with the previous tax scheme.
Canada handles 50% more traffic with 30% fewer employees, according to a 2015 Brookings Institution report.
Nav Canada even sells some of its new technology and reinvests the proceeds.
No one credible argues that a corporate airtraffic system would undermine safety; installing GPS in the cockpit and other updates would make flying safer.
A private air-traffic outfit would allow FAA to devote its limited resources to overseeing safety and certification.
This is a strange objection on the right to a plan that would result in 30,000 fewer federal employees.
The Shuster legislation extended current law that prohibits strikes or slowdowns.
Another objection is that the bill would hand too much power to the airline industry, which largely supports change and under the Shuster proposal had four seats on the 13-member board.
But the airlines will have to wrangle for influence with two representatives from the Transportation Department, one from the airline pilots union, one from the air-traffic controllers union and others.
Perhaps the most significant feat will be convincing appropriators in Congress to relinquish their power.
But President Trump has on several occasions noted his intention to make America's roads and bridges “the best in the world,"" and unleashing innovation in airspace is a golden opportunity.
In his March 15 op-ed “On 'Right to Try,' the FDA Should Proceed With Caution,” Henry Miller recognizes that the “slow, dysfunctional agency needs drastic reform of its requirements, procedures and attitudes,” so his hesitance on right-totry, the bipartisan national movement to aid those in greatest need of these reforms, is disappointing.
Miller supports paying healthy volunteers to test medicines that could be fatal to them, but takes issue with allowing dying patients to try medicines that are safe enough for human testing but may have unknown side effects.
The former might have more to lose, but the latter has everything to gain— even in cases where the chances of success are slight.
Right-to-try simply allows all terminally ill patients to try the medicines that the FDA has deemed safe enough for testing on the lucky few who make it into a clinical trial.
Miller's mistaken claim to the contrary, right-to-try requires those patients to be provided with the same information regarding risk— and to give the same informed consent to the treatment— that patients receive and give in clinical trials.
Christina Sandefur Executive Vice President Goldwater Institute Phoenix Dr.
Although society and insurance companies surely have no obligation to pay for unproven medicine, society most certainly does not have a role in telling terminally ill patients that it knows better about analyzing risks and benefits and denying them choice.
I look forward to Scott Gottlieb's tenure at the FDA— he has vowed to reverse this perverse, un-American nonsense.
Current United States policy is that human clinical-trial volunteers receive no care if they have a research-related injury in a clinical trial.
For example, I underwent 11 hours of brain surgery in an National Institutes of Health clinical trial without a safety net.
If I had suffered a stroke during the surgery , I would not have received long-term care or any promise of medical care beyond 30 days in the NIH clinic.
As a person living with an incurable disease, and as a person who has taken part in many studies and trials, I support the notion of rightto-try.
All letters are subject to editing, and unpublished letters can be neither acknowledged nor returned.
We can immediately halt the leftward drift of American social policy while renewing prosperity through market-based, state-driven solutions that empower people instead of bureaucrats.
But it will become reality only if Republicans keep the promises we have made.
It is the boldest and most conservative health-care legislation to come before Congress in decades.
Bold because it dismantles the progressive health-care experiment and replaces it with a dynamic, patient-centered system.
Our bill guts the failing law and enacts conservative reform without pulling the rug out from under anyone.
Conservative because it applies America's founding principles— freedom, free enterprise and federalism— to the problems of the day.
Repeal of ObamaCare must happen, and urgently— not because of any ideology but because American families are already paying the price of the law's collapse.
The average premium for a midlevel ObamaCare policy rose 25% this year.
One out of three counties now have only a single insurance provider to choose from.
Humana has announced it will not offer coverage in the ObamaCare marketplace for 2018.
As the CEO of Aetna said last month, the individual market is in a death spiral.
Instead of imposing arrogant and paternalistic mandates, it would increase choice and competition, creating a vibrant market where every American will have access to quality, affordable coverage.
Use the budget reconciliation process to repeal ObamaCare and replace it with the foundation for a patient-centered system.
Take administrative action through the United States Department of Health and Human Services to further deregulate the market.
And draft additional legislation that we cannot pass through the reconciliation process.
It is modeled on legislation introduced during numerous Congresses by Tom Price, now the secretary of health and human services.
It reflects decades of policy making by conservative scholars and organizations.
The bill effectively guts ObamaCare— all its taxes, mandates and spending.
It initiates a stable transition, without pulling the rug from under anyone.
This is— without question— the biggest entitlement reform in generations.
Far from modernizing the program, ObamaCare threw more money at Medicaid and set it on an unsustainable course of growth.
With all the bureaucracy and strings attached, too many doctors won't take Medicaid patients.
Under our plan, for the first time, Medicaid spending will be capped, and states will have the option to receive a pure block grant.
No two states are the same, and we believe The United States Capitol in Washington. if we let governors tailor benefits to the needs of their most vulnerable constituents, those people will get better care and Medicaid will be put on more stable financial footing.
Second, our bill equips state insurance markets to take care of people with pre-existing conditions without driving up costs for everyone else.
For decades, many states successfully served high-risk populations by segmenting them from the market into ""risk pools"" and directly subsidizing their coverage.
This gave the most vulnerable Americans access to affordable coverage and stabilized markets, but without requiring higher premiums on healthier individuals to offset the costs.
Wisconsin's program, which featured strong consumer protections and relatively low premiums, had the second-highest participation rate in the nation.
Instead the law relied on mandates to cross-subsidize care— with disastrous results.
The bill establishes a stability fund to help states set up their own risk pools and reinsurance mechanisms.
These programs would provide direct support for people with pre-existing conditions, giving states more power to create dynamic markets for consumers.
Ultimately this would lower costs for everyone else, so that more people can purchase a plan that meets their needs.
Third, our legislation expands health savings accounts, which a Republican Congress established during George W Bush's presidency in 2003.
ObamaCare imposes strict limits on how you can spend your healthcare dollars.
This bill nearly doubles the allowable contributions to HSAs, making it easier to pay out-ofpocket costs.
Giving people more purchasing power will create incentives to shop around, look for the best services and demand more transparent prices— all of which helps lower costs.
Fourth, the bill equalizes the tax treatment of health care, addressing an unfairness conservatives have long sought to rectify.
Right now, the tax code discriminates against people who don't get health care from their jobs.
It makes no sense that those who have insurance through work see a tax benefit, while those who don't, get nothing.
Our bill would level the playing field by creating an age-based refundable tax credit.
People who don't get coverage through work or a government program will be able to use this tax credit to buy the coverage they want.
Taken together, these ideas put the patient— not some bureaucrat— at the center of America's healthcare system.
Health insurers ^ and providers compete against each other for customers, instead of jockeying for favoritism in Washington.
This is American free enterprise at its finest, and Congress can put it to work by sending our bill to President Trump's desk.
Republicans have been waiting for this day, and working toward it, for seven years.
In election after election, we promised to repeal and replace ObamaCare.
When I became speaker, we pledged to turn those platitudes into bold ideas.
But a governing party has a responsibility to follow through on the promises it has made.
By passing the American Health Care Act, we will deliver on our promise to repeal and replace ObamaCare.
By applying conservative ideas and principles, we will remake our health-care system for generations.
Only the United States President Can Make a Difference in Ukraine By Anders Fogh Rasmussen P resident Trump is eager to promote his domestic agenda, but lingering questions about his campaign's Russia connections are getting in the way.
To put an end to the speculation and move past this debacle, his administration must articulate a clearer policy on Russia.
The easiest way is by devoting greater effort to solving the Moscow-fueled war in Ukraine.
U.S.-Russia relations may need to get worse before they can get better.
Shifting to a harder line is the only way for Washington to gain leverage on Moscow, change the dynamics in Ukraine, and gain congressional support for the Trump foreign policy.
Even as the Cold War raged, President Ronald Reagan beefed up the United States military presence in Europe.
Today the East-West division is symbolized not by a wall but by the dangerous status quo taking hold in Ukraine.
The Minsk agreements, negotiated in 2014-15, were designed to deliver a cease-fire and alleviate the war in the country's eastern Donbas region.
The blame largely goes to Russia, which continues to foment instability in the Donbas while denying any responsibility.
Before trying to craft a political settlement, Kiev needs to see imReagan demonstrated how a show of strength can reframe the terms of engagement. provements in the security situation in the east.
This must include the withdrawal of Russian troops and proxy forces and a restoration of Ukrainian control over its sovereign border.
The United States can demonstrate Western resolve by ramping up sanctions on Moscow and increase the cost of Russian interference by supplying defensive weapons to Ukraine.
Kiev could then hold elections in the country's east free from the threat of violence that shrouded the referendum on Crimea's status in 2014.
Mr Trump should also consider appointing a special envoy to oversee the sanctions on Russia and help negotiate a settlement in the Donbas.
Some will say it is politically impossible for Mr Trump to stand up to Russia, given everything that went on during the campaign.
But Reagan demonstrated how a show of strength can reframe the terms of engagement.
And the American public-including most members of Congress— would welcome a return to normal U.S.-Russia relations.
It is in everyone's interest to defuse the ticking time bomb in eastern Ukraine and find a new formula for engagement.
For Kiev it could lead to greater security; for Moscow it could mean the end of economic sanctions; and for President Trump it could be the gambit that finally puts his Russia demons to bed and shows him as the Reaganesque leader he longs to be.
He served as prime minister of Denmark from 2001 to 2009 and secretary general of NATO from 2009 to 2014.
Vladimir Putin must be agog in Moscow at how easy it is to make America subvert itself.
But let's walk through the funhouse door and stare at the first mirror, the one reflecting the face of former President Barack Obama.
Earlier, on Jan., the Times also reported that United States Attorney General Loretta Lynch signed rules that let the National Security Agency disseminate ""raw signals intelligence information"" to 16 other intelligence agencies.
In 2011 the Obama White House leaked details of SEAL Team Six's assassination of Osama bin Laden within hours of the operation.
They politicized the SEALs and commoditized leaking, just as they now have politicized and undermined public confidence in United States intelligence agencies.
As well, Mr Trump brought on Paul Manafort and Roger Stone, who've built mansions on the foreign-connections swamp, and former Defense Intelligence Agency director Mike Flynn, who fantastically sat at a table in 2015 with Mr Putin to celebrate RT, Russia's primary external propaganda arm.
That broader subject is almost certainly what the current Russian investigation is about, with the 2016 campaign a subset example.
The FBI investigation is a hall of mirrors that diminishes everyone near it.
But rather than develop countermeasures against the Putin subversion effort, America's politics wallows in the Trump vs.
We've now come to the biggest, most distorting mirror of all— FBI Director James Comey.
Nobama From james Freeman's Best of the Web column , WSJ.com , March 22: If Mr Obama had been watching yesterday, he would have had to suffer the humiliation of watching stocks decline as investors wondered whether President Trump could really deliver on his promises to cut taxes and regulation, starting with the replacement of ObamaCare.
Even a large market correction now— and to be sure stocks are not cheap by historical standards —probably wouldn't allow Mr Obama to claim vindication.
That's because the trigger would likely be a judgment that despite the promise of reform, Mr Trump simply won't be able to dismantle enough of the Obama policy legacy.
Not to Attorney General Jeff Sessions, who, like Loretta Lynch before him, is out of the picture.
Indeed, it is difficult to see how any of the 17 agencies implicated in this Russian investigation are accountable to anyone beyond their nominal chain of command for whatever it is they're doing.
The ""investigation"" Mr Comey identified at the Nunes-Schiff hearing essentially consists of cops walking the beat and knocking on doors for clues.
The 17 agencies set loose in January by the Obama administration are an unfocused perpetual-motion machine.
This uncapped Beltway hydrant likely will do little about the real Putin propaganda threat, but it will gush raw, unverified anecdotes to animate media melodramas about the current presidency and private United States citizens.
The spectacle is damaging public confidence in the credibility of both the intelligence agencies and the United States media.
Staffers from the Senate Intelligence Committee have been to the CIA headquarters to look at what it's got.
Someone with authority and judgment, such as arriving Deputy AG Rosenstein, should scrub through what the Obama NSA distributed, and make a call.
What this Washington Russia House has produced for the American people is an open-ended fiasco.
Instant jumping hour, 240° retrograde minute, small second.-day power reserve. ""tan t For personal non-commercial use only.
Shell admitted liability for two large oil spills from a broken pipeline in 2008 in Bodo, a Niger Delta fishing community that, according to U.K. court claims, was inundated with more than 500,000 barrels of oil— roughly twice the amount spilled when the Exxon Valdez ran aground in Alaska in 1989.
Shell disputed the volume of the spills but reached an outof-court settlement with the community in 2015 for £55 million— or around $80 million at the time— after facing a lawsuit in London.
An environmental damage study was also conducted that year as part of efforts to clean up the area under the Bodo Mediation Initiative, which included Shell's Nigerian subsidiary, civil society groups, and members of the local community and government.
The study found that ""astonishingly high"" levels of pollution remained in Bodo's mangroves and creeks years after the spill, endangering the community, wrote Kay Holtz mann, the former director of the cleanup project, in a Jan.
Please see SHELL page B2 A resident with his oil-soaked fishing net on the polluted shoreline in Bodo, Nigeria, last year.
Markets Won't Stop Changing Their Story STREETWISE JAMES MACKINTOSH Markets love a good story.
A more nuanced tale -, involves a fragile rally increasingly reliant on share buying by private investors, even as Donald Trump's approval ratings fell and sophisticated investors became more concerned about how much hope was priced in to stocks.
A deeper analysis goes to the next level, trying to detect when the story itself is changing.
Last summer, United States stocks flipped from moving in the opposite way of the dollar to moving in the same direction as deflation fears faded.
Mr Trump's election turbocharged the rally because a growth narrative took firm hold, shown by investors who started to like higher inflation-adjusted yields.
This year a subplot of global growth was added, helping United States stocks rise in January even as the dollar weakened.
The most obvious Trump trade, betting against Mexico, went into a stunning reverse as the peso became one of the world's best-performing currencies.
United States stocks have become less sensitive to economic factors as the year has gone on, and the explanatory power of macroeconomic influences fell close to zero at the start of this week, according to Quant Insight.
QI aims to model how the macroeconomic drivers of asset prices shift as market narratives change, using a variation on a statistical tool known as principal component analysis.
It found previously tight links between United States stocks, inflationlinked bond yields and the dollar weakened recently.
Please see STREET page B2 Demand for Fracking Sand Mounts The cost of sand used by shale-oil drillers has rebounded along with the price of oil, putting pressure on energy companies' profits.
By Christopher M Matthews And Erin Ailworth The market for sand— a key ingredient in fracking— is surging once again as United States oil production rebounds, and the rising price of the tiny grains threatens to cut into energy companies' profits.
Now that crude oil is selling for about $50 a barrel, American shale companies have rushed back into the oil patch, and they are using more sand to help supersize their wells.
Sand props open underground fissures, which allows oil and gas to escape to the surface.
But the millions of pounds of sand being poured down wells is pushing up sand prices, eroding some of the profits that energy companies have managed to regain since the oil bust ended.
Some are concerned sand supplies, diminished during a two-year oil-price downturn, could stall the drilling renaissance.
The tightening market has already sent prices marching toward $40 a ton or above, by some estimates, up from $15 to $20 a ton in the second half of 2016.
Increasing sand orders are also raising demand for railcars and trucks to transport it from mines in states like Wisconsin to shale fields in Texas and Oklahoma.
Some predict that demand for sand may outstrip supply by next year, creating a shortage that could linger for most of 2018.
Demand for sand has already returned to pre-bust levels, said George O'Leary, director of oil-field services research at Tudor Pickering, a Houston-based energy investment bank.
Sand accounted for between 5% and 7% of the cost of a well last fall, and Mr O'Leary expects that percentage to rise as exploration and production companies use more of it this year.
He thinks the price of sand could hit $50 a ton before year end, though that is still below the $60 to $70 a ton paid in the third quarter of 2014, before the bust really took hold.
To achieve efficiencies of scale during the two-year Please see SAND page B2 Gulf Carriers Are Buffeted by United States Laptop Ban The United States ban on many carry-on electronics aboard Middle East flights is another powerful headwind for the once-highflying club of Persian Gulf airlines— a group that relies more than many on the laptop-toting business traveler.
By Robert Wall in London and Nicolas Parasie in Dubai Earlier this week, the United States and Britain disclosed tough new restrictions requiring most electronics bigger than a phone to be checked in on direct flights from a handful of Middle East and North African airports.
The United States ban included Dubai, the Middle East business hub and home of Emirates Airline.
It also included the Abu Dhabi hub of Etihad Airways and Qatar Airways' home airport in Doha, Qatar.
The U.K. ban exempted all of those airports from its rules— without explaining why.
France, Germany and the Netherlands aren't enforcing the new rules, however, and their airlines offer plenty of connections from the Middle East's biggest business destinations to the United States and Britain.
Houstonbound passengers from Abu Dhabi can fly Dutch carrier KLM, via Schiphol airport in Amsterdam.
They are longer flights, without some of the business-class creature comforts for which the Gulf carriers are known, but for a business traveler, being able to work on a laptop the whole way is likely an acceptable trade-off.
One popular, and lucrative, route for Emirates has been connecting tech executives traveling between India and the U.S., via Dubai.
That will now require checking in lapSteep Ascent Emirates has grown quickly to become the world's biggest airline by international traffic.
For fiscal years ending March 31 Source: the company the wall street journal. tops and tablets in Dubai, before boarding for the United States Many of those passengers don't even check bags to save time on short visits, Mr Jenks said.
They do need their laptops with them, though, to work during flights that can take half the day.
United Continental Holdings Inc. flies between Newark, N.J., and India's tech hub Mumbai, via New Delhi.
Delta Air Lines Inc. offers travel alternatives through its international partner Air FranceKLM SA, as does India's Jet Airways Ltd.
Most defense companies, which are aggressively courting arms sales to the Middle East, are among firms that ban executives from checking in laptops.
Yet some of those ads have appeared on videos supporting terrorism, prompting brands such as AT&T Inc. and Johnson & Johnson to cancel some of their advertising on Google or its YouTube video platform.
Google says it will increase its use of technology— in addition to thousands of reviewers— to screen content, part of changes it announced this week to strengthen its policies and enforcement to pull ads from controversial sites and videos.
Technology it has used in the past has allowed ads on many controversial videos, removed them from innocuous ones, and mistakenly censored other videos— errors that could multiply as Google more aggressively polices content.
Google, a unit of Alphabet Inc., apologized Monday after the software improperly blocked some popular videos, such as a music video by pop stars Tegan and Sara, from a restricted version of YouTube designed for schools.
The incident sparked an outcry among YouTube video creators who speculated Google was blocking gay and lesbian content in the restricted version of the site.
Google and Facebook Inc. have been reluctant policemen of the internet, preferring to portray themselves as neutral platforms for connecting users and advertisers to content created by others.
But as users spend more time and advertisers spend more money on their platforms, pressure is mounting on the tech giants to confront their gatekeeping role and decide what kind of content is permissible.
INDEX TO BUSINESSES These indexes cite notable references to most parent companies and businesspeople in today's edition.
Bl Saul, Julie W4 Shin, Dong-bin B2 V Voronenkov, Denis A3 w Walton, Richard A1 Wearstler, Kelly W4 West, James Bl Y Yanukovych, Viktor A3 BUSINESS & FINANCE Weighs In on China 'We definitely want to continue our business in China/ says Shin Dong-bin, shown in December.
SHELL Continued from the prior page 26 letter to the Bodo Mediation Initiative, which was seen by The Wall Street Journal.
Mr Holtzmann wrote that the study dictated a need for health screenings and should be widely publicized.
He wrote that Shell has denied him permission to publish the study's results in a scientific journal and has exposed Bodo, an expanse of Niger Delta swamp and mangroves, to dangerous levels of toxins.
Shell said the analysis didn't reveal any information that hadn't been previously established by a United Nations Environment Program report on pollution levels in Ogoniland, the part of the Niger Delta where Bodo is located.
The 2011 report revealed high levels of contamination that could take as long as 30 years to fully clean up.
According to people familiar with the matter, complex disputes between the company and the local community have stalled cleanup efforts in Bodo and attempts to communicate findings from the assessment, though they were shared with local representatives and government agencies.
The environmental damage caused by the 2008 spills has also been compounded by illegal refining in the area, the people said.
The oil-rich Niger Delta has been a center for Shell's oil production for decades, but aging infrastructure and widespread sabotage and theft have resulted in regular oil spills that ravaged the local environment.
Shell maintains that the bulk of the oil spills in the Niger Delta are caused by sabotage, theft and illegal refining.
Efforts to improve the situation in Bodo have been plagued by mistrust, local power struggles, and disputes over how money for the work would be distributed, according to Inemo Samiama, chairman of the Bodo Mediation Initiative.
In late 2015, the camp where contractors were staying was attacked, effectively halting work until now, the people said.
Leigh Day, the law firm that represented the Bodo community, wrote to Shell in January to request clarification after receiving a copy of Mr Holtzmann's letter.
Lotte Chairman bemoans South Korean firm getting swept up in missile-defense dispute By Jonathan Cheng SEOUL— Shin Dong-bin, the chairman of South Korea's Lotte Group, says he loves China.
When the South Korean government identified last year a golf course owned by Lotte as a site for a U.S.-built missile-defense system, it put the company in the crosshairs of one of the world's most fraught geopolitical disputes.
Lotte, South Korea's fifthlargest conglomerate, with interests that include luxury hotels, chemicals, chewing gum and duty-free stores, has become a test case of China's ability to wage economic warfare against its neighbors to further its objectives.
Beijing opposes deployment of a missile-defense shield in South Korea, citing its radar's ability to reach into Chinese territory.
Seoul and Washington say the system— known as Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense, or Thaad— is needed to defend South Korea and the 28,500 United States troops based there from North Korean leader Kim Jong Un's expanding weapons program.
As the missile-defense proposal became reality, winning approval at a Lotte board meeting in late February, Beijing began to ramp up pressure on the conglomerate.
China's official Xinhua News SAND Continued from the prior page downturn, producers drilled megawells, which run underground for more than a mile horizontally, blasting larger quantities of sand down them to unleash more fossil fuels.
The biggest United States shale fields get tracked with about 30% more sand every year, according to Phillip Dunning, a technical adviser at Drillinginfo, which tracks oil-field supply use.
Frack sand use in the Delaware, one of the hottest parts of the Permian Basin in West Texas, has more than tripled since the start of 2012.
By the end of 2016, producers were putting an average 1,919 pounds per foot down wells Agency, in an English-language commentary last month, warned Lotte that it was ""playing with fire” in allowing its golf course in Seongju, in southern South Korea, to host the facility.
Chinese officials began suspending operations at Lotte's retail stores in the country.
They halted construction on new Lotte projects, citing violations of fire and safety codes.
Lotte, whose 94 affiliates earn about $80 billion in annual revenue, said at least 76 of its 99 Lotte Mart hypermarts in China have been temporarily closed.
A confectionery joint venture in Shanghai with Hershey Co. was forced to halt production this month.
Asked early this month about any backlash against Lotte, a spokesman for China's Foreign Ministry said China welcomes foreign companies as long as they follow the law.
In Louisiana, Chesapeake Energy Corp. recently pumped a record 50. million pounds of sand into a horizontal well roughly 1. miles long, piquing the interest of some rivals who are now weighing whether they can do the same.
A handful of oil producers, including Pioneer Natural Resources Co., have purchased their own sand mines to insulate themselves from bottlenecks.
Pioneer, a prolific driller in the Permian Basin, plans to nearly triple its Texas sand production by the end of 2019.
Mr Shin, the Lotte chairman, said he was surprised by the Chinese response.
Lotte has invested some $5 billion in China, where it has 25,000 employees, Mr Shin The expense is compounded by the logistics of moving sand from mines to well sites thousands of miles away.
They prefer fine white silica, much of it found in northern Midwest states.
David Adams, the head of Halliburton Co.'s well completion and production division, said sand costs break down into thirds, equally disaid.
The country accounts for about 10% of the conglomerate's overall sales.
While Lotte had begun diversifying away from China by the time tensions started to rise last year, Mr Shin said it is too important a market to give up.
Lotte isn't the only South Korean business empire whipsawed by the geopolitical dispute.
Amorepacific Corp., a cosmetics giant valued at about $22 billion in July, before the Thaad standoff, has since lost more than a third of its value as the Chinese consumers it relies on steered clear of its products.
A report from the Korea Development Bank on Wednesday said China's economic retaliation over Thaad, if expanded, could cost Korean businesses up to $20 billion, with the tourism industry and duty-free stores bearing the brunt.
In January, Mr Shin planned a trip to China to defuse the rising geopolitical standoff.
But he was forced to cancel when South Korean authorities blocked him from leaving the country, citing his alleged involvement in a corruption scandal that toppled the country's president, Park Geun-hye.
If he had been permitted to visit China in January, Mr Shin said, he is confident he could have lowered the tensions.
Mr Shin admits he doesn't have a plan to solve the quandary, hoping instead that South Korean elections on May 9 will deliver a new president who can help smooth over relations with China and clear the way for Lotte to resume its business operations there. vided into the cost of sand, the cost of rail transport and the cost to truck the sand to the well.
He expects a shortterm bottleneck because during the protracted downturn, sand-mining companies slowed production and some canceled plans to open new mines.
Many sand producers are ramping back up, but expanding operations take time.
United States Silica Holdings Inc., which is fetching 20% more for its sand today than it did in October, plans to double its mining capacity to more than 20 million tons in 2018.
Halliburton is trying to keep costs for its clients down by investing in its own train depots and storage facilities in major shale basins from Colorado to North Dakota.
BAN Continued from the prior page laptops around the world, one senior United States defense executive said.
The airline is ""closely monitoring the business impact of this new security measure, and we will decide on our strategies and interventions accordingly,” he said.
The airline is allowing United States -bound passengers to hold on to their laptop or tablet until just before boarding.
The carriers are already struggling with a big drop in bookings stemming from uncertainty over the Trump administration's attempts to restrict travel by people from a separate group of Muslimmajority countries in the Middle East and North Africa. that have nothing to do with tightened aviation rules or travel bans.
The sharp drop in commodity prices since mid-2014 has hit premium bookings in the oil-rich region hard, as energy and related industries cut back on expensive tickets.
Rapid fleet growth at Emirates and its rivals has also led to a glut of seats for sale in the region, Middle East carriers rely more than others on the laptop -toting business traveler.
When the Trump administration unveiled its first travel ban plan on Jan., bookings at Emirates for United States routes plunged 35% instantaneously, Mr Clark said earlier this month.
The carriers are also being buffeted by other problems Businesses For Sale.
Amid those hurdles, Emirates and Etihad have slowed down taking some new planes.
Both companies have also cut staff, an unusual move after years of eye-popping expansion.
Turbulence for the Gulf carriers also comes amid a long-running standoff with European legacy airlines and the three biggest United States airlines, American Airlines Group Inc., United and Delta.
They accuse the Middle East airlines of benefiting from unfair state subsidies that have helped them grow quickly in Europe and the United States The Middle East carriers deny they benefit from any unfair government support. —Doug Cameron in Chicago contributed to this article.
Even the narrative of disappointment about Republican splits can't explain why it would have suddenly come to a head on Tuesday, given that ructions over health care have been clear for weeks.
Markets can be driven by stories about fundamental factors or by pure supply and demand.
Knowing that the narrative about fundamentals has stopped working is useful for investors, particularly those who spent a lot of time trying to predict the fundamentals to work out what markets will do.
Unfortunately, what the new narrative will focus on can't be predicted from the statistics.
Congressional politics, hard to capture in quant models, is a natural part of the next chapter of the market story, and prospects for the Shifting Markets The link between shares, bond yields and the dollar was strong until late December, but has weakened since.
Alternatively, fights about Trumpcare could be quickly forgotten if the Republicans pull together, allowing investors to return to their favorite bullish story of tax cuts and growth.
It is worth bearing in mind that debt problems in China haven't gone away, and while I suspect Mr Trump and United States politics are likely to dominate the narrative, China and commodities could come back on to the market's reading list at any time.
Whichever story eventually dominates, expect choppy markets until the next narrative emerges.
CJ GUNTHER/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY For personal non-commercial use only.
BUSINESS NEWS Friday Sunday, March 24 26, 2017 | B3 Ford Motor forecast leaner results for the first quarter.
The outlook comes amid a broader view that car sales in the world's two largest markets have peaked after a string of record profits and sales for the United States auto industry.
Ford estimates volumes will fall in the United States and China in 2017 and again in 2018.
The United States market has been buoyed by customer access to cheap leases and long-term loans that come with low interest rates.
The Federal Reserve is pushing interest rates higher, potentially crimping retailers' appetites to dole out the 0% loans that have fueled demand.
A flood of preowned vehicles going on sale— a product of a leasing boom that has accelerated in recent years— is heightening concern.
Leasing has become a popular way to finance vehicle purchases, allowing buyers to borrow a car for two or three years at a subsidized rate and return it at the end of the term— many of which are expiring this year.
As more preowned cars become available, the price of a gently used vehicle is falling.
While that could force auto makers to ramp up sales incentives, it also could make leasing less attractive because leases are often cheaper on vehicles that are expected to have strong resale values.
Rising interest rates and tightening credit will further inflate car prices, and some may find better value in online classifieds or on used-car lots.
A clutch of Ford's rivals, including Toyota Motor Co. and BMW AG, have voiced concern about the impact the used market is having on car prices and the performance of their internal credit arms.
About 25% of Ford Credit's balance sheet, for instance, is made up of leasing assets.
Cheap leases are possible because car makers pay a subsidy that is based on the forecast value of the car at the end of the lease.
Mr Shanks said Thursday the auto maker has had to change those residual-value calculations recently based on data furnished by the National Automobile Dealers Association and other third parties.
Car buyers tend to make buying decisions based on monthly payments instead of sticker price.
Edmunds.com estimates the average monthly car payment for a vehicle purchased in February was $515, up only 6% from the $487 buyers paid in February 2007.
Over the same period, the amount financed by new car buyers has skyrocketed 23%, from $25,003 to $30,753, the firm said.
In addition to subsidized leases, the disparity between car payments and purchase prices over the period has been low borrowing costs.
The average loan was written with a 4.9% interest rate, more than 2 percentage points less than the 2007 loans.
Ford also said Thursday it expects full-year adjusted operating profit of $9 billion this year, a 14% decline over 2016, due to higher costs and continued investment in autonomous cars and other advanced technologies.
The company also guided to firstquarter earnings per share of between 30 cents and 35 cents, lower than the same period a year earlier and far below analysts' expectations of 47 cents.
Higher engineering costs, the strong dollar, rising warranty costs and commodityprice increases are reasons for the weaker performance.
Lower-thananticipated quarterly guidance further confirms Wall Street's view that auto makers are too exposed to cyclical swings in the car business.
Disney CEO to Stay Longer Since taking the helm in 2005, Mr Iger has led Disney through a period of sustained growth.
Robert Iger's contract now runs to mid-2019, as succession issue dogs the media giant By Ben Fritz Walt Disney Co. has given itself an extra year to solve its succession challenge.
With no clear candidate to inherit the helm at the world's largest media company, Robert Iger will stay on at least one additional year as chairman and chief executive, Disney said Thursday.
The board said Mr Iger's new contract runs through July 2, 2019; the previous expiration was June 30, 2018.
Initially set to retire in 2015 and then in 2016, Mr Iger said when his contract was extended to 2018 that “this time I really mean"" to retire.
The Wall Street Journal reported last month that Disney's board was considering extending Mr Iger's contract.
An earlier succession plan was thrown into disarray in March 2016 when the company announced the abrupt departure of a senior executive widely viewed as Mr Iger's heir apparent.
Tom Staggs, a veteran executive who was named chief operating officer in 2015, quit after realizing that the board, including Mr Iger, had lost confidence in him, according to people familiar with the matter.
The company had never publicly said Mr Staggs was on track to succeed Mr Iger, but numerous people close to the company believed that was the case.
However, he will also receive a $5 million bonus if he stays until July 2, 2019.
The extension also calls for Mr Iger to serve as a consultant to Disney for three additional years, earning $2 million for each of the first two years and $1 million for the third.
Since being name CEO in 2005 Mr Iger has led Disney through a period of sustained growth, including acquisitions of Pixar Animation Studios, Marvel Entertainment and Lucasfilm, the studio behind the Star Wars films.
Those deals have helped make Disney's movie studio the most successful in Hollywood, and have also provided material for its theme parks around the world.
Case Targets Patent Venue Shopping By John D McKinnon WASHINGTON — Businesses, particularly those in the tech sector, are closely watching a case to be argued in the Supreme Court next week challenging a system that has led to a concentration of patent cases in plaintifffriendly jurisdictions such as eastern Texas.
The companies, often defendants in a patent-litigation boom of the last decade, are looking to the high court to curb what they say is “pervasive and pernicious forum shopping"" by plaintiffs who claim to own the patents and often seek damages in the millions of dollars.
Dozens of tech firms and groups, including Intel Inc., Dell Inc., Adobe Systems Inc., eBay Inc., Oracle Corp. and Red Hat Inc., have filed friendof-the-court briefs in the case, TC Heartland LLC Kraft Foods Group Brands LLC, urging the Supreme Court to tighten the rules on where patent suits can be brought.
In recent years, the largely rural and sparsely populated Eastern District of Texas has attracted as much as 44% of all new patent-infringement lawsuits in the U.S., aided by its reputation for plaintifffriendly rules and juries, as well as knowledgeable judges and lawyers.
Despite the criticism, the Texas jurisdiction has some defenders, including big firms such as Ericsson Inc., as well as Allergan Inc. and other pharmaceutical companies, Sen.
Jeff Flake has sponsored legislation to tighten rules governing where a patent case can be brought. who argue in friend-of-thecourt briefs that the Eastern District of Texas isn't the renegade that many make it out to be.
Still, current rules have resulted in “an extraordinary concentration of patent cases in a handful of districts, most notably the Eastern District of Texas,"" said Peter Brann, a Maine lawyer who helped write a friend-of-the-court brief filed by numerous internet companies and other businesses and associations in this case.
Suits by these firms, some of which have grown large enough to be publicly traded, represent a disproportionately large share of cases in the Eastern District of Texas.
A coalition of inventors and patent owners said in its own Supreme Court brief that concerns about the Texas district are “greatly overblown,"" and that tightening the rules could be harmful to innovators.
The concentration of patent-infringement cases in the Texas district “is certainly an indication that something is amiss,"" said Sen.
Jeff Flake (R., Ariz.), who has sponsored legislation in the past to tighten patent venue rules governing where a case can be brought.
In the Supreme Court case, TC Heartland— an Indianabased maker of low-calorie sweeteners— was sued for patent infringement by Kraft in Delaware, another popular venue for plaintiffs.
TC Heartland sought unsuccessfully to have the case transferred to Indiana.
Now TC Heartland is asking the Supreme Court to overrule the venue rules used by federal courts since 1990.
TC Heartland wants the high court to reinstate an older, more restrictive standard.
It argues that Congress didn't intend for more recent changes in general venue rules to apply to patent cases, while Kraft argues that the later changes do apply.
But the real concern for most businesses is in the Eastern District of Texas, where the number of new patent-infringement cases has soared from a few hundred annually a decade ago to a peak of more than 2,500 in 2015, by far the highest total for any district, according to data from Lex Machina.
The Texas district became a hotbed for patent litigation after judges adopted procedural rules that were perceived by defendants as friendly to patent-infringement plaintiffs.
The district— comprising smaller cities such as Tyler, Marshall and Beaumont— also was attractive to plaintiffs because of its relatively low caseloads and fast-moving dockets.
Critics contend that the current federal standard for venue in patent litigation also contributed by allowing plaintiffs to seek out friendly districts almost anywhere in the country.
Many lawyers in the area are worried about the potential impacts of the case.
Valeant CEO Pay Disclosed Akzo Nobel Gets Big Push Toward Talks With Suitor By Anne Steele Valeant Pharmaceuticals International Inc.
Chief Executive Joseph Papa took in $62. million in pay last year as he navigated fallout from the company's accounting problems, a near debt default and investigations by Congress.
The drug-industry veteran was tapped to take over the embattled Canadian company in May and sought to rebuild investor confidence and remake the business after a series of missteps.
The bulk of Mr Papa's pay— $42 million— came from stock awards, while $9. million came from bonuses.
Mr Papa received an $8 million signing bonus, and a $1. million “individual performance"" bonus.
Valeant said the financial goals it had established at the beginning of the year— before Mr Papa took the reins— weren't “sufficiently achieved"" in 2016, but the company paid the new CEO half of the additional cash bonus to recognize “the significance and quality of the contributions"" he made.
Under the compensation package Valeant offered, the board could have paid Mr Papa as much as $2.25 million for his performance last year.
Mr Papa's pay was more than five times higher than what he had earned in 2015 at the helm of Perrigo Co., but less than half of the $141. million Valeant's former CEO Michael Pearson was paid at Valeant in 2015.
Valeant's stock, battered 68% over the past 12 months through Wednesday's close, has dropped 96% from its August 2015 peak of $262.52.
Investors have been watching for signs on how Valeant can boost profitability outside of big acquisitions and large price increases for its drugs.
Analysts remain concerned about the company's debt burden and have questioned the strength of its drug pipeline.
During 2016, Valeant lost $2.41 billion, compared with a loss of $292 million the year before.
Under Mr Papa, Valeant has been working to sell off assets to sharpen the company's focus on its key franchises in skin drugs, stomach treatments, eye care and consumer health while paring down roughly $30 billion in debt.
Valeant came close but ultimately failed to seal a deal to sell stomach-drug maker Salix Pharmaceuticals Ltd. to Japan's Takeda Pharmaceutical Co. for $10 billion.
In January, it reached deals to sell $2. billion in assets— three skin-care brands, including its CeraVe line, to French cosmetics giant L’Oreal SA for $1. billion, and its Dendreon cancer business to China's Sanpower for $820 million.
In a February investor presentation, Valeant said all of its announced transactions will generate asset-sale proceeds of about $2.35 billion up front and $350 million in future milestone payments. —Jacquie McNish contributed to this article.
By Ben Dummett Akzo Nobel NV's largest shareholder on Thursday became the latest investor to urge the Dutch paint-andchemicals maker to start negotiations with United States rival PPG Industries Inc. over its $24 billion takeover offer.
On Wednesday, Amsterdambased Akzo rejected a second, sweetened offer by PPG and said it didn't warrant discussions.
But in a letter to Akzo's board, Causeway Capital Management LLC. said that while PPG's latest offer was “inadequate,"" it was high enough for Akzo's management to begin negotiations.
With Akzo's board and management opposing a takeover, investors still see the deal as unlikely.
PPG's second approach came just weeks after Akzo rejected PPG's initial offer of €83 a share.
Akzo shares on Thursday rose 2.9% to €77.94, but remained well below the latest offer price of €88.72.
Causeway's letter added to calls for talks coming from other investors, including United States activist investor Elliott Management Corp.
To achieve that goal, Elliott, which owns 3% of Akzo, said it would need 10% shareholder support.
Causeway is Akzo's largest shareholder with a stake of around 6.8%, according to FactSet.
TECHNOLOGY wsj.»m/T« C h Connected Lights Are Getting Smarter Amazon's Echo with Alexa is a fairly effective way to turn on a connected light.
On movie night, you could peel yourself off the couch to turn off the lights.
The future involves talking to your tech, and the lights in your home are ready to make the leap.
Bulbs and outlets were connected to apps, so you had to fiddle with your phone just to flip on a light.
Amazon changed that with Alexa, the voice assistant in its $180 Echo speaker that is learning to operate a house full of connected appliances.
Last year, Google got into the game with Home, its $130 talking speaker.
Apple upped Siri's domestic competence in domestic affairs with the Home app in the latest iPhones and iPads.
Connected lights can do all kinds of things to make your house more beautiful and useful.
Mine dim with a warmer tone near bedtime, and gently wake me up with cooler light on dark winter mornings.
But there are right ways and wrong ways to attempt smart lighting, and I've lived through both— so I made a plan of attack.
Smart bulbs vs. dumb switches The low-effort, low-commitment way to get started is with smart bulbs.
They are mostly low-power LEDs but come in different flavors— the fanciest can change color to make your house look like the ""Trolls"" movie.
The $15 white variety is all you'll need at first, but many have become inexpensive and dependable.
It's all GOOGLE Continued from pageBl videos, which can cut off their funding, but it also examines whether controversial videos can remain on its YouTube site at all.
For years, advertisers have increased spending with Google, which helped pioneer the automated ad-buying system, called programmatic advertising, that gives marketers the reach and accuracy to target specific audiences on far corners of the internet.
But ad and tech executives say the nature of that system make it hard to police.
The disadvantage is you have access to a million publishers and a billion articles,"" said David Rodnitzky, chief executive of ad agency 3Q Digital.
You screw these bulbs into regular sockets on regular lamps, and they connect to a wireless hub (usually sold in a bundle) or directly to your home's Wi-Fi, so you can turn them on and off using your phone.
You can have the same effect using regular bulbs by plugging lamps into connected outlet adapters, like ones made by Lutron, Belkin and Insteon.
It's like the old clackety Christmas tree timer, only now the timers are in apps, and it's easier to experiment.
Start with accent lamps and ambient lights on bookshelves and in corners.
Don't do this to frequently used lights, or any you're in the habit of turning on and off manually.
If you can help it, don't put smart bulbs in lights operated by a dumb wall switch.
Google software automatically scans YouTube videos' titles, descriptions, images and dozens of other signals for signs that it shouldn't include ads, such as nudity or references to terrorist attacks.
Put a piece of tape over it to remind people not to touch, if you must.
Get Alexa and Siri involved In my house, nobody else would touch a smart light until Alexa came along.
Amazon's Alexa app can automatically find and control bulbs and connected plugs from Philips Hue, Lutron Caseta, Belkin Wemo and others.
You can group them and command Alexa to turn them on and off, or dim them.
You don't have to have an Echo in the same room with the lights you want to control, though it makes life easier.
I could start a Twitter feed for all the hilarious ways she mishears people, or thinks you're calling her name when you aren't.
Still, I find the Echo, which has fancy far-field mithe software can block advertising without human review.
The company has placed ads on many sites peddling fabricated news stories, including a promotion for one of its own products— the new Pixel smartphone— next to a story that falsely claimed Yoko Ono had an affair with Hillary Clinton.
As Google ramps up its crophones, to be the fastest and most accurate way to turn on a light when I'm stumbling to the bathroom in the middle of the night, for instance.
That would be the iPhone and iPad's Siri, which connects to Apple's home-operation software HomeKit.
With the latest iOS update, there's a Home app you can use to program lighting scenes and set automated programs, even with lights and switches from different makers— a skill Alexa has yet to acquire.
Until Apple makes a home speaker of its own, Siri lives on your iPhone, iPad, Apple Watch and Apple TV; the Mac Siri can't do this.
My advice is to invest in lights that work with as many systems as possible, especially in a mixed Amazon, Apple and Google household.
For instance, Google's plan to expand its ad ban on any content that advocates harm to certain groups of people— based on a specific characteristic, such as their religion, gender or race— is likely to force exa and Siri.
Replace your built-in light switches with smart switches that still look and work like regular ones, such as Lutron's $55 Caseta dimmers.
Now my chandelier, porch light, bathroom fixtures and other lights are in on the action, and we use Alexa even more.
To confuse burglars, I can turn lights on and off at random times when I'm away from home.
Installing smart switches meant I could now use all my lights to create scenes.
Google removed ads from several videos by YouTube's top star, Felix Kj ellberg, who goes by PewDiePie, that included anti-Semitic jokes or Nazi imagery.
Mr Kjellberg said reports on those videos by The Wall Street Journal and others took his humor out of context.
India Gears Up For iPhone Production By Rajesh Roy And Newley Purnell NEW DELHI— Apple Inc. will soon start assembling iPhones in India, say government officials familiar with the plan, aiding the company's efforts to gain a foothold in the fast-growing market.
Taiwanese contract manufacturer Wistron Corp. will likely start making iPhone 6 and 6S models in the next four to six weeks at its plant in Bangalore, said an official of the southern state of Karnataka where the tech hub is located.
It will add Apple's cheapest iPhone model, the SE, to its assembly line in about three months, the official said.
Smartphone shipments in India grew 18% last year, compared with 3% globally, according to Counterpoint Research, but the majority of phones sold here cost less than $150.
The iPhone SE, which some online retailers now sell for as little as $330, is still out of reach of most Indian consumers.
Apple is also negotiating with New Delhi for its next level of production in India.
It wants to bring its component manufacturers to India to make parts and export finished phones, said the state official as well as a senior federal government official at the Trade Ministry.
Apple had sought tax concessions on the import of key components but the Indian government hasn't yet ""accepted most of the demands,"" Trade Minister Nirmala Sitharaman told lawmakers in a written submission to Parliament on Wednesday.
The Cupertino, Calif., company has been looking for new ways to build its brand in the South Asian nation, where it has less than a 5% share of the smartphone market.
Apple Chief Executive Tim Cook in a call with analysts last month said the company is also ""in discussions"" to open retail stores in India. —Karan Deep Singh contributed to this article.
How Ads Bought Through Google Get to the Wrong Place Advertisers and the agencies they hire generally want their ads to reach certain types of people.
But they can't control where on the web that target audience spends its time.
Ad exchange YouTube YouTube runs ads alongside a huge number of videos uploaded by users or media companies.
Staff reports V ... even though the sites' viewers match the profile of the advertiser's desired audience.
The average ticket price in 2016 was $8.65, up 22 cents, or 2.6%, from the previous year, according to the National Association of Theatre Owners.
But any sign of trouble overseas overshadows performance in the United States and Canada, because years of rising ticket sales in international markets have become a crutch for studios.
The bailout is the latest example of the global shipbuilding industry's difficulties, as a glut of vessels and low freight rates put many shipyards in financial trouble.
An economic slowdown in China has made things worse for the world's three biggest shipyards, which are all in South Korea.
Korea Development Bank and Export-Import Bank of Korea said they would provide funds to improve Daewoo's cash flow and convert its liabilities into equity to cut debt.
The two state-run banks had already provided a combined 4. trillion won in aid to the cashstrapped shipyard in 2015.
A spokesman for the prosecutor declined to detail the specific allegations against the Daimler employees.
He would say only that the individuals are suspected of committing fraud in connection with the sale of diesel vehicles with false emissions documentation.
The maker of Mercedes-Benz cars dismissed the allegation that it manipulated diesel engines to cheat on emissions tests.
The United States Tax Court ruled Thursday that the IRS made arbitrary determinations and abused its discretion in several instances.
It wasn't immediately clear from the ruling what Amazon's ultimate tax bill would be. —Richard Rubin and Laura Stevens For personal non-commercial use only.
Cut the Rules MF Global and PwC Settle Malpractice Suit Jay Clayton said regulators could help the economy by making it less costly for firms to go public.
By Michael Rapoport Failed brokerage MF Global Holdings Ltd. and accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP said they settled an accounting-malpractice lawsuit in which the brokerage contended bad advice from PwC contributed to its 2011 collapse.
Both sides said the case has been settled to ""the mutual satisfaction of the parties"" and declined to discuss the agreement further.
MF Global contended that PwC had advised it to treat its ""repo-to-maturity"" trades involving European sovereign debt as sales rather than borrowings.
This move enabled MF Global to record $100 million in immediate profit and take $6. billion in securities off its balance sheet, reducing its leverage and making the firm look less risky.
That later led to confusion and concern about MF Global, the brokerage said.
If not for PwC's advice, MF Global said, it wouldn't have bet so heavily on the European debt, which led to ratings downgrades and investor withdrawals that pushed MF Global to seek bankruptcy protection in October 2011.
PwC insisted it had given MF Global the correct accounting advice, and that MF Global collapsed because of its own faulty strategy and bad decision to bet on the risky European debt.
Mr Corzine, who was cooperating with the bankruptcy administrator, testified he had relied on PwC's judgment about the proper accounting for the European-debt trades, but acknowledged he had never been given any reason to think the accounting might be incorrect.
The brokerage was close to resting its case, after which PwC would have presented its case if the settlement hadn't resolved the lawsuit.
PwC previously paid $65 million in 2015 to settle separate litigation from investors in MF Global's securities, who had alleged the firm failed to properly audit MF Global's internal controls.
This is the second time in the past year that PwC has settled a major lawsuit midtrial with the terms kept confidential.
Last August, the accounting firm settled a lawsuit in which the bankruptcy trustee for Taylor Bean & Whitaker Mortgage Corp. alleged PwC was negligent for not detecting a fraud scheme that led to the collapse of Alabama's Colonial Bank, one of the most expensive bank failures in United States history.
The Taylor Bean trustee had sought $5. billion from PwC; the terms of the settlement weren't disclosed.
MF Global's allegations against PwC were unrelated to a $1. billion shortfall in the brokerage's customer funds when it collapsed.
Prosecutors investigated Mr Corzine and other MF Global executives but didn't bring any criminal charges.
Nominee for chairman testifies in Senate, questions value of corporate penalties By Dave Michaels and Andrew Ackerman WASHINGTONJay Clayton, President Donald Trump's choice to lead the Securities and Exchange Commission, called for scaling back regulations to encourage more public companies and expressed doubts about the usefulness of large corporate penalties.
At his confirmation hearing before the Senate Banking Committee on Thursday, Mr Clayton also said his past work as a Wall Street lawyer at Sullivan & Cromwell LLP ""is a strength,"" and he promised any conflicts of interest wouldn't harm his ability to be the nation's top markets regulator.
In an ethics agreement with the SEC, Mr Clayton wrote that he couldn't vote for one year on matters that directly affect his former clients or involve Sullivan & Cromwell.
Probed about his potential policy priorities, Mr Clayton said United States stock markets have become a less attractive place for companies to raise money.
Regulators could help spur economic growth by making it less costly for companies to go public, he said.
In prepared testimony, Mr Clayton lamented the drop in the number of initial public offerings in recent years, an era when investment funds have showered private companies with cash.
Buyout firms and consolidation have also reduced the number of public firms.
Mr Clayton didn't detail how he might seek to pare back the rules that govern public stock offerings.
But he praised a 2012 law, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act, that made it easier for companies with less than $1 billion in annual revenue to go public.
Mr Clayton has a long history advising banks and companies on stock offerings and mergers and acquisitions.
He has worked on key cases, including the cataclysmic failure of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. in 2008 and the 2014 initial public offering of Alibaba Group Holding Ltd.— the biggest IPO ever in United States markets.
At the SEC, Mr Clayton would succeed Mary Jo White, who led the regulator for nearly four years during the Obama administration.
The agency is currently being managed by an acting chairman, Republican Michael Piwowar, who would resume being a commissioner if Mr Clayton is confirmed.
Turning to his philosophy on the SEC's civil powers to police markets, Mr Clayton suggested that, as chairman, he could pare back the commission's enforcement arm by moderating the size of financial penalties that it seeks.
Mr Clayton said regulators could achieve more by suing individuals rather than pressuring companies to cough up more money for fines.
Though President Trump has called for dismantling the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul, Mr Clayton said he has ""no specific plans for attack"" against the law.
But he said he is willing to review existing rules to determine their effectiveness.
Reopens a Probe Into Barclays’s Qatari Deal in ’08 Barclays was bailed out by Qatar's wealth fund in the financial crisis.
In 2013, the FCA fined Barclays £50 million (about $79. million at the time) over advisory services agreements it struck with Qatar Holding LLC as it pumped money into the bank in 2008.
Barclays didn't fully disclose to shareholders at the time that it agreed to pay the Qatari group £322 million over five years, potentially breaking disclosure rules.
The FCA also alleged the primary purpose of the £322 million payment was to get Qatar to buy Barclays shares.
The Financial Times reported Thursday that the FCA had reopened its case.
The head of the SFO, David Green, told The Wall Street Journal on Tuesday that it would decide soon whether to REGULATION ECB's Nouy Argues Against Rollback Rolling back postcrisis international banking regulation is the last thing the global financial system needs, the European Central Bank's top supervisor said.
The long-running review picked up speed last year when Barclays released thousands of emails and documents that it previously had said were protected by attorney-client confidentiality.
Several former Barclays executives have been questioned by the SFO, according to people familiar with the matter.
The fraud office must now decide whether to press charges against the individuals involved, the bank or both.
The United States Department of Justice and Securities and Exchange Commission also are investigating the agreements, Barclays has disclosed in regulatory filings.
While other U.K. banks including Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC and Lloyds Banking Group PLC tapped taxpayers to the supervisor's annual report.
Any public sanction could shine further light on how Barclays executives got Middle Eastern investors to prop it up during a period of intense market turbulence.
All of the executives and board members at the bank during this capital-raising have since left.
The suit alleges the advisory agreements Barclays struck with Qatar Holding were a sham and gave the wealth fund more favorable treatment than Abu Dhabi investors who also invested and whom Ms.
In February, a U.K. judge ordered Barclays to hand over emails related to the capital raising.
Bats said it plans to petition the commission to take up the matter, which had been delegated to its staff.
The Bats letter was dated March 17 but not posted publicly until this week.
An SEC spokeswoman had no comment. —Andrew Ackerman By Gregory Zuckerman Returns are cooling in one of the hottest pockets of private equity.
Private-equity funds raised in 2008, 2010 and 2011 to lend money to small and midsize companies have scored annual returns of 14%, 10% and 12%, respectively, according to data tracker Preqin.
The impressive results are part of the reason many pension funds, endowments and other institutions have increased allocations to private equity in recent years, as they shifted away from hedge funds.
But profit from direct lending, as the business is called, is declining, partly because more funds are chasing the strategy, industry executives said.
Funds launched in 2012, 2013 and 2014 have seen annual returns of 9.9%, 7.8% and 8.2%, respectively.
While the performance remains respectable, the slowdown raises questions about future returns, some investors said.
It is too soon to judge results from funds raised more recently, analysts said, because it often takes some time to invest all the money raised for a fund.
Big-name private-equity funds have focused on the corporate-lending market in the years following the credit crisis, when newly cautious banks pulled back from some lending.
Over $117 billion was raised for these lending funds in the four years ended in 2016, up from $22 billion in the previous four years, according to Preqin.
Some of these funds borrow money to amplify the size of their funds, suggesting that the pool of available cash likely is even greater.
Last year, Bain Capital LP, Angelo Gordon & Co. and Neuberger Berman Group LLC Trickling Down Funds that do direct lending to businesses have posted solid, but declining, returns.
Preqin the wall street journal. raised funds to do this kind of direct lending.
KKR & Co., Carlyle Group LP, Apollo Global Management LLC and Blackstone Group LP's GSO credit unit are also in the business.
Although commercial loans increased at double-digit-percentage annual rates after the crisis, according to the Federal Reserve, many banks became more reluctant to lend to some midsize and smaller companies, partly as regulators pressured them to reduce riskier kinds of lending.
Now, though, some firms are adjusting to deal with mounting competition.
Now, borrowers can get ""covenant-lite"" financing at rates below 10%, or financing without those safeguards, said Maria Boyazny, the firm's founder.
Lately, companies with about $25 million in earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, are getting loans at rates equivalent to about 5 percentage points above the London interbank offered rate, down from 7 points a few years ago, bankers said.
Bain Capital is increasingly active in lending to middlemarket companies in Europe and Australia and has opened an office in Dublin, where executives see more limited new lending from banks and rival funds, a spokesman said.
Funds shown aren't registered with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission and aren't available for sale to United States citizens and/or residents except as noted.
All performance figures are calculated using the most recent prices available.
Freda Fung tel: +852 2831 2504; email: freda.fung(8wsj.com FINANCE WATCH CHIP SOMODEVILLA/GETTY IMAGES For personal non-commercial use only.
All_time h| 9 h 38915.87 12/29/89 STOXX600 Index 377.20 A3.17, or 0.85% High, low, open and close for each trading day of the past three months.
South Africa Johannesburg All Share 52027.98 -68.73 -0.131 48935.90 • 54704.22 2.
Asia-Pacific DJ Asia-Pacific TSM 1553.64 2.71 10.17 1308.52 • 1570.38 9.
SIX Financial Information; WSJ Market Data Group Currencies Yen, euro vs. dollar; dollar vs. major United States trading partners 20 % 2016 Country/currency US$ vs, Thu YTDchg inUS$ perllSS Country/currency 2017 US$ vs, Thu YTDchg inUS$ perUS$ Americas Argentina peso-a Brazil real Canada dollar Chile peso Colombia peso Ecuador United States dollar-f Mexico peso-a Peru sol Uruguay peso-e Venezuela bolivar Asia-Pacific Australia dollar China yuan 0.0640 0.3190 0.7500 0.001510 0.0003427 1 0.0527 0.3079 0.0355 0.100150 15.6199 -1.
Hong Kong dollar India rupee Indonesia rupiah Japan yen Kazakhstan tenge Macau pataca Malaysia ringgit-c New Zealand dollar Pakistan rupee Philippines peso Singapore dollar South Korea won Sri Lanka rupee Taiwan dollar Thailand baht 0.1287 0.0153 0.0000751 0.008990 0.003166 0.1249 0.2258 0.7040 0.0096 0.0199 0.7144 0.0008938 0.0065815 0.03284 0.02889 7.7672 0.
T ullett Prebon, WSJ Market Data Group Global government bonds Latest, month-ago and year-ago yields and spreads over or under United States T reasurys on benchmark two-year and 10-year government bonds around the world.
ET Coupon Country/ Maturity, in years Yield Latest Spread OverTreasurys, in basis points Previous Month Ago Year ago Previous Yield Month ago Year ago 5.250 Australia 2 1.777 52.
Price-to-earnings ratios are for trailing 12 months Sources: WSJ Market Data Group; Birinyi Associates For personal non-commercial use only.
Friday Sunday, March 24 26, 2017 | B7 FINANCE & MARKETS Markets More Resilient to Attacks Markets have become increasingly sanguine about terror events.
Stocks, bonds and the pound showed little impact from terrorism Wednesday in London By Riva Gold Financial markets barely budged following Wednesday's deadly attack in London, underscoring investors' increasing conviction that such 8 tragedies are unlikely to shake “ the businesses and economies | of affected regions.
S In the past, terror attacks | on Western targets have § spurred investors to dump stocks and regional currencies while rushing into haven investments such as government bonds.
But such reactions have decreased as the incidents have become more regular.
The British pound, battered this year by uncertainty surrounding Brexit, continued to strengthen Thursday, driven largely by economic data.
There also was no discernible impact on U.K. and global stocks, government bonds or gold.
Following prior terror attacks, investors have sold local shares and currencies on the assumption such attacks could hurt tourism and damage consumer confidence.
Investors jumped into haven assets such as government debt and gold, with that metal gaining by 6.5% its first postattack trading day.
But more recent attacks have demonstrated that over time, investors have become increasingly sanguine about the impact of such events on financial markets, even as their human and political toll has lived on.
To be sure, European airline shares, traditionally the most sensitive to terror attacks, have continued to see setbacks in the immediate aftermath of such attacks.
But the bulk of Wednesday's declines came ahead the attack and were largely attributed to a regulatory debate around the airline industry.
There could be other factors influencing investors' muted response to this week's London attacks.
While the assault on Britain's Parliament was dramatic and brutal, there were fewer fatalities than many recent terror incidents.
There are also technical factors involved in sterling and the euro's resilience to recent shock events.
Both are highly liquid, haven currencies that tend to do well in times of uncertainty, said ING's Mr Patel, while U.K. government bonds are typically held in global portfolios as a stable asset.
London appeared to be operating as usual despite the attack, limiting the perceived impact on U.K. businesses. —Mike Bird , Robert Wall and Jon Sindreu contributed to this article.
The charges, if filed, would target alleged Chinese middlemen who prosecutors believe helped North Korea orchestrate the theft, the people said.
The current cases being pursued may not include charges against North Koreans, but would likely implicate North Korea, people close to the process said.
Richard Ledgett, the deputy director of the National Security Agency, said he was “optimistic about the truth of that,"" when asked about reports of a connection between the two cybercrimes.
That is a big deal; it's different,"" he said on Tuesday during a panel discussion at the Aspen Institute.
Federal investigators are focusing on Chinese individuals or businesses, according to the people familiar with the matter.
Treasury authorities are considering sanctions against the alleged middlemen, these people said, an approach the government is using to go after suspected lawbreakers who are unlikely to land in United States custody.
The United States attorney's offices and FBI field offices in Los Angeles and Manhattan had both been investigating the Bangladesh theft, but Los Angeles took the leading role in the past year, according to people familiar with the matter.
That shift occurred because government investigators linked the code used to perpetrate the cyberheist with the Sony hack, which authorities in Los Angeles had been investigating.
In 2014, the FBI blamed North Korea for the Sony breach, which exposed embarrassing emails and led the studio to pull from theaters a comedy that involved a plot to kill North Korean leader Kim Jong Un.
Prosecutors haven't publicly filed any charges stemming from the Sony hack.
There remains a minority view among some federal officials that evidence doesn't prove that North Korea was behind the Bangladesh theft, according to people familiar with the discussions.
Some officials believe the hackers who carried out the theft may have appropriated, tweaked or repurposed the malicious code that the United States government made public after the Sony hack— which wouldn't necessarily indicate they are linked to North Korea— the people familiar with the discussions said.
If middlemen in the Bangladesh theft are prosecuted, the approach is expected to be similar to that used in September against a Chinese businesswoman, Ma Xiaohong, some of these people said.
Ma and her trading company were also accused of helping North Korea, and targeted by parallel Treasury Department sanctions.
They were accused of helping blacklisted North Korean companies evade United States sanctions, move hundreds of millions of dollars and procure raw materials, potentially for use in Pyongyang's nuclear-weapons program.
Federal prosecutors in Manhattan continue to investigate breaches of overseas financial institutions that are potentially related to the Bangladesh heist and may have been carried out by the same hackers, people familiar with the matter said.
Swift, the moneytransfer network, disclosed another against a bank in Vietnam.
The defendants aren't in United States custody and the case hasn't progressed, but United States officials have said China pulled back from some of its cyberespionage activities in the wake of the charges.
Last week, the Justice Department announced an indictment against four men, including two Russian government spies, accusing them of being behind Yahoo Inc.'s 2014 security breach and stealing information about more than a half billion online accounts.
Prosecutors alleged the hackers sought information for intelligence purposes and for criminal schemes to steal money.
The audacity and size of the theft, conducted through odd orders seeking millions of dollars for vague consulting fees and expenses, sent shock waves through the global money-transfer system.
The thieves also transferred $20 million to the account of a nonprofit in Sri Lanka, but that transfer was halted after a bank executive in Colombo noticed that the name of the beneficiary had been misspelled.
Philippine authorities returned $15 million of the $81 million in November, after a Chinese casino operator there turned over the money to authorities.
Nearly $60 million was paid to two other casinos and another gambling junket operator in Manila, but the Anti-Money Laundering Council of the Philippines said it was unable to trace it further. —Robert McMillan and Katy Bume contributed to this article.
United States Stocks Fall as Vote On Bill Is Postponed By Akane Otani United States stocks turned lower after House Republicans postponed Thursday's planned vote on a health-care bill that many investors say could test the viability of the Trump administration's agenda.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed down 4.72 points, or less THURSDAY'S than 0.1%, to MARKETS 20656.58, its sixth consecutive decline.
In the U.S., major indexes were higher through most of the session, then erased their gains in the afternoon as prospects of Republicans passing a plan to dismantle the Affordable Care Act appeared to dim.
Many investors and analysts have said the vote will be a key test of whether President Donald Trump will be able to push through potential policy changes like tax cuts, fiscal stimulus and deregulation-hopes for which have helped stocks rally since the election.
As of Thursday afternoon, Republican lawmakers remained short of the votes needed to pass their health plan in the House of Representatives.
Industrial stocks, which investors have bet would benefit from Mr Trump's plans to boost infrastructure spending, fell 0.3% by late afternoon.
Financial stocks, another popular postelection trade, were near unchanged after rallying earlier in the session.
Government bonds weakened, with the yield on the 10year United States Treasury note rising to 2.418%, according to Tradeweb, from 2.398% Wednesday.
The dollar stabilized after falling to its lowest level since November on Wednesday.
Some see the health vote as a key test of Mr Trump’s ability to pass his agenda.
Some analysts and investors cautioned that the risks of profit-taking over the next few weeks are heightened.
Stock valuations are at historically high levels and major indexes remain close to records.
Japan's Nikkei Stock Average rose 0.2%, snapping a three-session losing streak.
Lenders Fill Up on ECB Loans as Program Is Retired By Tom Fairless FRANKFURT— Lenders in the eurozone snapped up €233. billion in four-year loans from the European Central Bank on Thursday, seizing upon their last chance to lock in cheap funds as the lending program is retired.
The borrowing by banks was the highest since June of last year and roughly double the amount economists had anticipated.
The expiration of the fouryear loan offering underlines the ECB's rising confidence in the region's economic recovery.
Inflation in the 19-nation eurozone jumped to 2% last month from about zero a year ago, when the ECB announced the long-term loans as part of an aggressive stimulus package.
In another sign of confidence in the economy, the ECB is set to reduce its monthly bond purchases to €60 billion a month from €80 billion starting next week.
He said that decision reflected policy makers' rosier perception of the economic outlook.
Still, the European Central Bank left most of its stimulus intact this month, and the bank's top officials have stressed that they haven't reached a turning point in the policy cycle.
Crucially, underlying inflation in the eurozone— excluding volatile energy and food prices— has been stuck at or below 1% for three years.
MARKETS Rate Rise Puts Squeeze on 0% Financing A go-to sweetener for many retailers and manufacturers gets more difficult to offer By Serena Ng And Vipal Monga General Motors has long provided 0% financing on many new models, and expects to keep doing so.
Don't tell that to people who have become accustomed to buying everything at 0% financing.
Years of rock-bottom interest rates have led to a proliferation of no-interest financing offers for people looking to buy everything from cars to lawn mowers, jewelry and furg niture.
Manufacturers and re^ tailers have come to lean S heavily on these deals, which 1 are an inducement for shop§ pers considering large or dis§ cretionary purchases.
Most retailers will likely absorb the higher costs to stay competitive because customers may turn elsewhere if they are asked to pony up interest charges.
The cost of providing 0% financing varies from company to company, but generally retailers pay a middleman— usually a bank or finance company— a few percentage points of a product's purchase price upfront.
The practice is known as ""buying down the rate to zero"" because retailers are in effect footing the financing costs for their customers.
For a shopper buying a $10,000 hot tub with 0% financing over three years, that may translate into the retailer paying a bank or finance company around $1,000 upfront, or around 10% of the purchase price.
The upfront fees retailers pay are often tied to a shortterm London interbank offered rate, which tends to rise in tandem with the Fed-guided federal-funds rate.
The sixmonth Libor has risen to 1.43% from 0.9% a year ago, according to Bankrate.com, as the fed-funds rate has risen by half a percentage point.
The 0% deals will get more expensive, says Mike Rittler, head of retail card services at TD Bank, which provides nointerest financing to customers of 25 United States retailers, including sellers of furniture and tractors.
Retailers could limit their costs by providing no-interest financing for shorter terms, he notes.
Companies in many cases say they don't plan to ditch the offers, which have become a cornerstone of their marketing efforts since the financial crisis.
But if profit margins get compressed, analysts say companies may be forced to act.
In general, the longer the no-interest payment term, the higher the cost to the seller.
After all, interest rates, and most companies' funding costs, remain relatively low.
General Motors Co., which has long provided 0% financing for up to 72 months on many new car and truck models, expects to continue the deals.
In 2002, GM and other auto makers did away with 0% financing deals and moved to other types of sales incentives to woo customers.
Roughly a year later, they brought back the deals to counter sluggish sales.
Television shopping network QVC last year started selling a $399 Dyson highspeed hair dryer that many people purchased using a sixBehind Zero Rates How 0% interest financing works for a hot-tub purchase Retailer offers 0% financing A customer who qualifies on purchases, backed by gets a credit card and uses it to a credit-card company. purchase the $10,000 hot tub.
For a 36-month no-interest financing arrangement, the retailer pays the card company 10% of the price of the hot tub at the time of the sale.
The customer pays the credit-card company in monthly installments over three years.
The retailer has no plans to change its offers for no-interest financing.
Richard & Son, close to one-third of shoppers' purchases are made with store-branded credit cards that automatically let customers pay in interest-free installments, says Chief Financial Officer Tom Pohmer.
Shoppers can get 12 to 60 months' financing on expensive items such as $2,000 mattresses.
Although they acknowledge that rising interest rates will increase their costs, many retailers are hoping the Fed's rate increase is a sign of an improving economy, which should help their sales grow.
Consumers, meanwhile, can be very sensitive to changes in interest rates.
Patrick Williams, senior director of marketing at Jacuzzi Group Worldwide, a Chino Hills, Calif., maker of hot tubs and other bath products, says his company has in the past experimented with 1.99% and 2.99% financing offers, with mixed results.
In recent years, credit-card issuers also have aggressively used 0% offers to persuade people to transfer their card balances over from rivals.
But a proposal for a continentwide bad bank seems unlikely to be the solution.
Europe's banks still hold almost €1 trillion ($1.08 trillion) of bad debts, which leaves investors wary of putting money into banks and hampers the spread of new loans to companies with growth potential.
The ECB launched this week new guidelines on bad loans, saying banks need to come up with ambitious plans and management incentives to work them out, write them down or sell them.
Daniele Nouy, head of the ECB's single banking regulator, was asked about the badbank idea in the European Parliament on Thursday.
She said every option could be useful, but she couldn't agree with its plan to buy bad loans at above-market values.
One reason for the low values is Europe's market for selling bad loans is very thin.
The EU-wide bad-bank proposal Restoring Credit UniCredit shares overtook other banks' after it announced a recapitalization plan in December. 40 % drawn up by the European Banking Authority, a standardsetting body, is meant to get around this by adding a big buyer to the market.
It is an echo of the original strategy of the U.S.'s financial crisis Troubled Asset Relief Program, which was later abandoned as unworkable.
It would be set up with equity from national governments whose banks were going to use it and funding from bonds sold to investors.
It would then buy loans at a so-called real economic value rather than the prevailing market price, making the sale less painful for the lender.
The idea is that it could resell the loans when market prices had risen.
If this isn't possible, there are protections involved to ensure one country doesn't end up wearing losses from another country's banks.
The trouble with this plan is the steps required to improve bad-loan prices look really hard.
They would have to include dramatic improvements in bankruptcy laws in some countries.
Italy for one has already had a recent shot at doing this and failed at the last minute to make changes that would make it quicker and easier to deal with existing bad debts.
Also, there are many bad loans to small businesses where there is little of value to seize and the business might not survive without the owner.
Banks must work out problems more quickly where they can, and take the hit where they can't.
Italy's UniCredit has shown that a bank with a cleaned slate and a business plan can raise funds.
Banks that drag their feet will likely face higher capital charges through supervisory add-ons.
As the sun starts to come out, it is time for banks to make repairs on their own. —Paul J Davies OVERHEARD Whether or not it is one in the White House's good graces, owning a cable-news network is good business these days.
Major United States cable-news networks finished 2016 at record viewership levels, despite pay-TV subscriber losses.
The three networks accounted for about 10% of prime-time cable viewership in the fourth quarter, up from 6.9% during the fourth quarter of 2012.
Using a multiple of nine times estimates for 2017 earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, CNN and MSNBC would be valued at $9. billion and $7. billion, respectively, Evercore ISI says.
The Pork Giant That May Win From Brazilian Beef Ban A major meat scandal in Brazil could open up opportunities for United States producers to feed China, the world's most populous country.
The Brazilian meat industry, which is the globe's biggest exporter of beef and poultry, has ground to a halt following a police investigation dubbed ""Weak Flesh"" into allegations that meatpackers bribed inspectors to give health certificates to rotten meat.
The meat producers and the government deny the charge, but the damage is done.
Brazil's meat exports were Pigs Can Fly United States pork exports to China and Hong Kong $10 billion 0.
United States Meat Export Federation THE WALL STREET JOURNAL. worth a mere $74,000 on Tuesday, compared with $60. million on Monday, as 17 countries have imposed restrictions on Brazilian meat imports.
These countries include China, which together with the semiautonomous territory of Hong Kong is the biggest buyer of meat from Brazil.
That could be positive news for United States meat producers Tyson Foods and Cargill.
The companies are waiting to sell more meat to China, which lifted a 13 -year ban on United States beef in 2016, imposed due to fears over madcow disease.
The beef trade has yet to resume, due to administrative issues, but the Brazilian incident could speed things up.
Though a big chunk of United States beef has likely already crossed the border through gray channels into China from Hong Kong, which is the fifth-biggest importer of United States beef, the establishment of an official channel would likely boost demand.
Eat more pork, which is way more popular than beef in the country anyway.
Brazil also exports pork, though not as much as it does beef and poultry.
Meanwhile, China's WH Group, which bought America's Smithfield Foods in 2013, stands to be a beneficiary.
The whole rationale of the Smithfield purchase was to take advantage of lower hog prices in the United States and higher pork prices in China.
WH reported better-thanexpected earnings on Wednesday for 2016, as operating profit for its United States fresh pork business nearly tripled, partly due to more exports.
The company's Hong Kong-listed stock advanced 10% on Thursday— in a reaction to the results rather than the developments out of Brazil.
It is time for the competition to feast on Brazil's ""weak flesh."" —Jacky Wong Nike’s Best Defense Is a Good Offense Nike wants to maintain its status as most valuable player.
Investors shouldn't underestimate the importance of its size in that feat.
The sportswear company's fiscal third-quarter sales fell short of analysts' expectations when it reported late Tuesday.
Nike said futures orders, which many investors consider an indicator of coming sales results, were down 4% year over year or 1% after adjusting for currency fluctuations.
The company said it is limiting supply amid surprisingly strong promotional activity from competitors and that it is expecting gross margins to contract in the fourth quarter.
But Nike hasn't stopped playing offense, and its investment should allow it to win back market share.
Its sales growth has suffered amid a comeback by competitor Adidas in North America, but Nike has the advantage of scale.
That allows it to outspend competitors on marketing and research and development, two of the biggest factors driving sales.
Given that, to believe Nike can't retake the share lost to Adidas is to believe its longterm competitive advantage has disappeared.
Investors may continue to point to negative futures as a sign that things have changed, but futures have become less reliable.
Actual results have been closer to management's guidance than to reported futures in all but two quarters since the beginning of fiscal 2015, according to Instinet.
Small, idiosyncratic pleasure boats are the new ticket BY CHRISTIAN L WRIGHT MY FATHER AND I weren’t due aboard our ship until the next afternoon, so we settled in at a table on our Venice hotel's terrace, overlooking the Grand Canal, to watch the pageant of waterborne traffic: the commuter vaporetti, the gondolas and the water taxis with young Italian cowboys at the helm.
Then, from behind Santa Maria della Salute, the bow of a mega-cruise ship pierced the painterly scene and slowly cast its enormous shadow over the lagoon.
More than 25 million people will take a cruise in 2017, and ships just keep bloating to accommodate them.
Royal Caribbean's Oasis-class ships, for instance, each carry more than 5,400 passengers and weigh some 225,200 tons.
At this size, the ship's the destination; where it's going matters less.
While many tourists relish these floating cities— crammed with restaurants and waterslides— others prefer their vessels more modestly proportioned.
Though my father, a retired United States Navy officer, has made many Please turn to page W2 RYO TAKEMASA For personal non-commercial use only.
OFF DOTY IN SEARCH OF FRIENDLIER SHIPS Continued from page W1 cruises in watercraft of varying shapes and sizes, he's now among the anti-megaship contingent.
So last spring, he booked a nine-day cruise from Venice to Athens aboard a smallish ship (6 decks, 10,700 tons) and announced that Pd have to go with him.
The itinerary, ""Odyssey of Ancient Civilizations,"" was organized by National Trust Tours, a division of the National Trust for Historic Preservation.
A bit cruisephobic myself, I gritted my teeth as we donned our nametags and ascended the gangplank.
There were no hordes, no mad dash to claim a deck chair, no sharp elbows in the queue for crab cakes, no boozy pool parties.
The only time I stood in line was to wait for the oysters on the half shell at the buffet.
Instead of Broadway medleys and napkin-folding classes, the onboard diversions were mostly limited to daily lectures and evening piano serenades.
My father and I agreed that the star of our cruise was retired fourstar United States Navy Admiral James Stavridis— the 16th Supreme Allied Commander of NATO, now the dean of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts— who enlightened the passengers on 21st-century security challenges.
He got the kind of applause that even Yo-Yo Ma or LeBron James might envy.
Though our cruise was atypical, it's hardly the only such sea excursion these days.
You can also ply the Amazon in a posh riverboat or the Aegean in a traditional Turkish sailboat, island-hop in the Caribbean on a catamaran or venture into the Arctic aboard expedition ships stocked with French wine.
Viking Cruises, marking its 20th anniversary this year, was the game-changer, said Ms.
The largest purveyor of European river cruises launched its first ocean cruise in 2015.
Viking's ships also tend to spend more time in port than those of many bigger cruise lines, so passengers can take advantage of local culture, and shore programs— say, tea at home with a family in Santorini— emphasize intimacy over hype.
Expedition cruises, where passengers sail off to farflung corners to kayak around icebergs and gawk at blue-footed boobies, are gaining favor too.
Even a few luxury lines, such as Crystal Cruises and Silversea Cruises, are getting in on the action.
Expedition-style cruises ""will explode in '18 and '19,"" said Sven Lindblad, CEO and founder of Lindblad Expeditions, whose father, Lars-Eric Lindblad, more or less invented the idea in the A VESSEL FOR EVERY VOYAGER Eight of the most intriguingly alternative cruise options FLOE BOAT You needn't invest much time or money in a voyage on the icebreaker Sampo— the four-hour trip through Finland's Gulf of Bothnia costs less than $400— but it does give hearty souls a chance to swim [or perhaps flail about) in the frigid Baltic Sea, after the 7-million pound beast of steel has broken ice.
For the fainter of heart [and deeper of wallet), there's M/Y Legend, a 1974 Cold War icebreaker that's been retrofitted into a 26-passenger superyacht available for charter— and the thrill of blasting through frozen waters to get to the untouched reaches of Norway and Antarctica.
SNUG TUG The MV Parry is a 1941 wooden tugboat that travels with up to 14 passengers along the Inside Passage into the wilds of British Columbia.
Accommodations are modest and space is tight, but in springtime, you might see pods of humpback whales or a grizzly bear with cubs, and the onboard chef will prep the fish you catch along the way.
From $5,795 per person for a week's trip, tugboatcruise.com. m SUPERIOR SAIL Several gussied-up phinisis, traditional sailboats, glide around Indonesia's thousands of islands but few rival Alila Purnama, a luxury version of the Bugis ships that sailed those waters in the 17th century.
From $14,500 per person for a 6-night trip, ultimate-indonesianyachts.com.
POLYNESIAN PASSAGE Launched in 2015, the Aranui 5 is a working freighter that delivers cargo to the remote, rarely visited Marquesas Islands, north of Tahiti.
After watching the crew unload everything from food to appliances on land, passengers can set off to explore unspoiled landscapes where horses roam wild and Paul Gauguin is buried.
From $6,827 per person for a 14-day trip, freigh tercruises. com/ cruise_aranui.php.
Legacy is an 88-passenger vessel with the feel of an old coastal steamer.
You'll find early American period details in the public rooms [an antler chandelier in the Pesky Barnacle Saloon, for starters) and, if you're on one of the Lewis & Clarkthemed cruises, the crew may turn up in historic costume.
Wine-themed journeys include stops at Washington and Oregon wineries and plenty of tastings on land and water.
MAST APPEAL The Brooklyn-based Sailing Collective brings an urban boho vibe to the sea.
Cabins tend to be simple and passengers might be asked to help trim the sail or crank a winch.
Weeklong group and private charters accommodate up to eight passengers per sailboat.
Destinations range from classic [Maine and Greece) to surprising [Madagascar and Haiti) and crew use local intel to plan land excursions, like hikes to hot springs and ancient fortresses.
Thanks to the family-style meals and sunset Dark 'n' Stormys, you're likely to get very chummy with your fellow passengers.
The sailboat used for the Adventure Flow cruises in Alaska; Alila Purnama in Indonesia's Raja Ampat; a cabin on Alilia Purnama; the MV Parry tugboat.
On sixto eight-day itineraries Captain Louis Hoock [real name) shows passengers the nooks and crannies of Glacial Bay National Park aboard a 54-foot sailboat.
Excursions might include stand-up paddle boarding past glaciers, kayaking tidal bores and hiking to waterfalls.
Your guides, who double as chefs, can arrange onboard activities like yoga on the bow or a latenight dance party below deck, complete with costumes.
From $2,000 per person for a six-day trip, adventureflow.us. —Christian L Wright and Jen Murphy A Sailing Collective trip in Maine. 1960s, when he took tourists to the Galapagos and Antarctica, where only scientists had gone before.
To some degree, ""unconventional"" means expensive and can also mean exclusive.
Windstar Cruises' fleet of just six ships— three sailboats and three yachts— sail the globe from New England to Tahiti.
But that kind of access comes at a price— an 11-day cruise to Alaska runs about $9,000 per person, as opposed to about $1,500 on some of the larger ships.
Like Windstar's fleet, all of Ponant's vessels are nimble enough to veer off the beaten path.
At the end of the cruise I took with my father, a tugboat flying a Greek flag arrived to take Le Lyrial through the Corinth Canal, a short cut from the Adriatic to the Aegean Sea through a breathtakingly narrow gorge.
The canal is just 70-feet wide at its narrowest point, precluding the passage of megaships and most other tourist boats.
When all of us gathered on the port side started snapping pictures of a herder and his goats as he stood at the edge of the gorge, he opened his flip phone and snapped back.
ADVENTURE FLOW; ULTIMATE INDONESIAN YACHTS ; SAILING COLLECTIVE; UNCRUISE ADVENTURE; OLIVIER BLAUD/P0NANT; WINDSTAR CRUISES; WESTWIND TUGBOAT ADVENTURES For personal non-commercial use only.
Ready to Come Out of Hiding THE DOURO VALLEY in Portugal is home to one of the most famous wines in the world: Port.
And while this great fortified wine has put the region on the map, its vintners also turn out first-rate dry reds and whites— to the seeming indifference of the wine-drinking world.
I had tasted some very good wines during my trip and was looking forward to drinking them at home.
Yet in every wine shop I visited, even in the heavily Portuguese Ironbound section of Newark, N.J., I found only a few of the bottles I had tasted.
Another reason may be that the best Douro dry reds and whites have only been around for a short time.
While Port has a long, illustrious history dating back centuries, quality dry wines in the Douro are a much more recent endeavor.
In fact, it was only a couple of decades ago that a sizable number of producers began making dry wines alongside their Ports.
These wines didn't even have an official government designation until 1982.
By contrast, Douro received its official classification for Port in 1756.
The first dry Douro wine to win wide acclaim was Fernando Nicolau de Almeida's 1952 Casa Ferreirinha Barca Velha.
His son, the visionary Joao Nicolau de Almeida, followed in his footsteps, creating Duas Quintas in 1990 at Ramos Pinto.
Today, Barca Velha is as elusive as it is expensive ; it has been produced fewer than 20 times since that inaugural vintage.
While I didn't get to taste the mythical wine during my visit, I did sample quite a few other dry wines from notable producers, including Quinta do Crasto.
Two decades later, winemaker Mr Lobo de Vasconcellos produces both red and white wines.
His 2015 whites were fresh and vibrant, made from a blend of several varieties.
The vast majority of Douro wines are field blends of different grapes, often from vineyards so old no one knows which varieties were originally planted.
The 2013 Xisto, produced in ""exceptional years"" in conjunction with Chateau Lynch-Bages of Bordeaux, was perhaps my least favorite.
But, according to Mr Lobo de Vasconcellos, it has been a great success.
Rupert Symington, joint managing director of Symington Family Estates, has a Bordeaux connection of his own.
He teamed up with Bruno Prats, the former owner of Chateau Cos d'Estournel in Bordeaux, to produce Chryseia, a supple, elegant red.
The wine, which costs $85 a bottle, is one of many dry Douro reds produced by the Symington family, which has some of the largest Port holdings in the region, including Warre's, Cockburn's, Graham's and Dow's.
Their dry wines are produced under the labels Altano, Quinta do Vesuvio and Prats & Symington.
Although Mr Symington had only a few hours to spare before leaving for vacation, he offered me an extensive tasting of his wines, including those from his newest estate, Quinta do Ataide.
He said he thought his best opportunity to expand the market was in the $15-$20 range.
Bottles at these prices aren't considered value wines, he said, but rather ""interesting"" ones.
Even Jorge Rosas, general manager of the famed Ramos Pinto estate, talked about the difficulty of selling Douro wines in the States.
I did not know Douro was an obscure region,"" he recalled with a laugh, as we tasted Duas Quintas wines with his winemaker Teresa Ameztoy in the dining room of the estate.
For our tasting, Mr Rosas included current vintages of Ramos Pinto reds and whites, as well as bottles of the 1994 and 1997 Reserva.
While the 1994 was showing its age, the 1997 was still impressively youthful and vibrant.
Beautifully concentrated and vibrant, the wine would be bottled in the spring, said Ms.
The current vintage, the opulent 2014 Duas Quintas Reserva, was truly impressive— and, at $30 a bottle, a remarkable buy.
On a more recent trip to the U.S., Mr Rosas said he found Portuguese and Spanish wines grouped together in a store, which he regarded as a positive development.
And hopefully that shelf will contain the full gamut of treasures to be found in the Douro right now.
It's similarly refreshing and light-to-medium-bodied with good acidity and pretty red-fruit aromas.
Styled to be drunk fairly young, it's produced at the Quinta de Roriz estate in the Douro.
The 2015, made from a blend of indigenous varieties, is a medium-to-full-bodied wine with a lush texture and a firm mineral note.
SLOW FOOD FAST SATISFYING AND SEASONAL FOOD IN ABOUT 30 MINUTES Spiced Meatballs With Polenta and Parmesan Brodo The Chef Edouardo Jordan His Restaurant Salare, in Seattle, Wash.
What He Is Known For Big-hearted Italian cooking, classical French rigor and Southern hospitality CREAMY POLENTA, succulent meatballs, a splash of Parmesan broth.
Look closer at the recipe, the first Slow Food Fast contribution from Edouardo Jordan, and you'll see traces of the chef's impressive resume.
At Bar Sajor he found his way to the epicenter of Seattle's dining renaissance.
By the time he opened Salare in Seattle, almost two years ago, he'd been plotting the menu for years.
This dish debuted on the regular menu, but with so many children snatching bites from their parents' plates, it soon found its way onto the kids' menu, too.
In a medium pot, combine Parmesan rinds, 1 cup grated Parmesan, bay leaves, shallot halves, 2 cups water, 2 tablespoons oil and a pinch each of salt and pepper.
Reduce heat to medium and simmer until reduced by half, about 15 minutes.
Set pot over a low flame and keep brodo at a low simmer until ready to serve.
Meanwhile, in a large bowl mix ground beef with soy sauce, chopped parsley, egg and spices until well combined.
Cook polenta, stirring often, until tender and creamy, about 10 minutes.
Stir in 4 tablespoons butter, remaining grated Parmesan and season to taste with salt.
WASTE NOT Cooking Parmesan rinds along with the grated cheese gives the rich broth poured over this dish a deep umami flavor.
CHRISTOPHER TESTANI FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL, FOOD STYLING BY JAMIE KIMM, PROP STYLING BY CARLA GONZALEZ-HART For personal non-commercial use only.
OFF DUTY ANATOMY LESSON From Nothing to Special On Manhattan's Lower East Side, a designer invests a previously unremarkable apartment with quiet panache.
Like the brass tables, their weathered silver combines shine with the tarnish of time.
Pair of Silver Neoclassical Revival Candlesticks from High Style Deco, $7,245, lstdibs.com Play with the Palette ""Color-wise, I like mixing in a tiny bit of a surprise in a room like this,"" Mr Campbell said of the embroidered-cashmere and wool throw pillows.
The towering, noble pair of cabinets allows the living room to look taller and bigger than it is, he said, much as a purposefully tailored suit alters the perception of the wearer's body.
Indeed, like a beautifully cut tux, the decor exudes handsome glamour, using white walls and pale, contemplative artwork to ground a palette of moody blues, warm gold tones and sparks of red; substituting imposing scale for excess ornamentation; and adding authoritatively aged finishes to temper showiness with substance.
Here, a few of the elements that create a dramatic living room minus the flash.
De-Lux the Sofa ""I started with the sofa, but if I'd stopped there the room would still feel perfectly full,"" said Mr Campbell of the capacious Chesterfield sofa by Soane Britain, whose stuffy tufted-leather opulence is knocked back by its plucky sapphire color.
Simplified Bear Sofa, from about $9,672, soane.com Tone Down the Gold Unlacquered brass cubes, which Mr Campbell designed himself because of an aversion to traditional coffee tables, have a mutable patina.
They change color depending on how the sunlight strikes them over time.
Greta Grossman Grasshopper Floor Lamp by Gubi, $899, dwr.com Erect Towers As in fashion, scale and bold lines create a strong, self-assured allure.
Here, two cornflower blue custom cabinets with crisscross wire screens stand on longlegged brass frames, completely at ease.
Graydon Shagreen Double-Door Cabinet, from $2,995, rh.com Gall in the Hounds The two chairs combine imposing scale and relaxed attitude.
Mr Campbell reupholstered a reclined 1960s armchair in a smart blue houndstooth wool blend.
Its deep-blue figuring picks up on those hues in the rest of the room, and its gold connects with the brass finishes.
Vintage Turkish Oushak, about 6 feet by 9 feet , $6,750, woven. is FRESH PICKS THE THROW Stare-worthy Blankets The persistent chilliness of March meets its match with artist-designed throws from Los Angeles's Slowdown Studio.
Graphic designer Marc Hendrick, who helms the year-old home wares company, teams up with contemporary artists from all over the world— including French illustrators Atelier Bingo and Berlin-based illustrator Milena Bucholz [her Otis Throw is shown left], but his penchant for playfulness unifies the line.
Mr Hendrick prudently executes the ""quirky, weird designs that you never see on a blanket"" in a palette restrained enough to suit a range of decor schemes.
At 54 by 70 inches of 100% cotton, the woven throws give a satisfyingly non-scratchy cover for legs bared by anticipatory shorts, not to mention providing a punchy pattern for the arm of a sofa.
Ziperstein cuts out slabs of sun-dried clay to meticulously assemble the vessels, which rise to 15 to 21 inches tall.
Post-firing effects include a silvery finish , for which she applies a blue-tinted white glaze to a red terra cotta body.
Famously choosy designer Kelly Wearstler recently bought a number of gray iterations with deliberate drips for the new Hollywood Proper Residences rooftop lounge.
Glazed Terracotta Small Hex Planter, $7,200, bzippyandcompany.com — Mimi Faucett MARTIN RAMIN/THE WALL STREET JOURNAL, STYLING BY ANNE CARDENAS RYAN MESINA/THE WALL STREET JOURNAL ; COURTESY JULIE SAUL GALLERY, NEW YORK ; F MARTIN RAMIN/THE WALL STREET JOURNAL, STYLING BY ANNE CARDENAS For personal non-commercial use only.
Lace on a pair of Clarks Wallabees, the gumsoled, suede shoes popularized by male style icons from David Bowie to Wes Anderson, and stroll through the women's shoe section at a luxury department store in Beverly Hills.
As a woman wearing the most sensible of sensible shoes, you couldn't get their attention unless you burst spontaneously into flames.
Originally made by Lance Clark in Kilkenny, Ireland, the moccasinstyle shoe made its debut in the 1960s.
The brand's ethos was rooted in the Clark family's egalitarian philosophy and religious beliefs.
Streetwear label Supreme recast the shoe's vamp in woven suede and offered it in navy and pink.
John F Kennedy Jr. and Walter White on ""Breaking Bad"" both wore Wallabees.
But in the brand's massive archive, one of the largest in the world for a shoe company, information about women who have worn Wallabees remains scarce, said Mr Beckley.
Small and fierce, the devoted army of female Wallabee lovers likely bewilders many, I suppose, including our peers tottering around HARD TO TRANSLATE // MORE PIECES THAT SKEW 'GUY' 1.
Patagonia jackets Rugged on apple-cheeked men; a sign of resignation on apple-cheeked ladies.
Birkenstocks The ungainly sandals do not excel at emphasizing the delicacy of feet.
Baseball caps Sporty and spiffy on men, they typically telegraph dirty hair on the fairer sex.
Whenever I notice a woman wearing them, like Los Angeles-based artist Karen Kimmel or film producer Naomi Scott, I know I've met a kindred soul.
The 1997 cover photo was shot at an angle that magnified and glorified lead singer Richard Ashcroft's Wallabee-clad feet.
My obsession with Wallabees began well before that, in the late '70s, in Shawnee, Kan.
I begged my mother for a pair of knockoffs, the closest approximation I could find, sold at a chain store called Kinney Shoes.
Maybe I'd seen them on President Jimmy Carter, a man of distinction and a Wallabee loyalist, but an unlikely style icon for a 9-year-old girl.
I fetishized accessories that I saw as emblems of a more legitimate, buttoned-up New England experience.
Wallabees were on the approved footwear list of Eastern schools with strict uniform guidelines, and aligned with my tomboyish tastes more than anything sold at the Limited.
Bean backpack, I was in Gainesville, Fla., adrift in a sea of Reef flipflops.
I'd had the backpack shipped from Maine, but inside, I carried a Frisbee.
Though I worked at fashion magazines, where it was practically a job requirement to blow your meager income on at least I had always fetishized emblems of a more legitimate, buttoned-up, New England experience. one pair of Manolo Blahnik pumps, I always felt like an impostor in precious footwear.
I remember getting my first invitation into the fashion closet at Harper's Bazaar, where they were giving away leftovers from shoots.
Among the rows of covetable heels, all in my size, one pair of Wallabees slumped, forlorn.
My fashion heroines— from Katharine Hepburn to Lauren Hutton— borrowed their best moves from the boys, and I craved the self-assurance they telegraphed with their mannish, casual clothes.
Plus, the men I wanted to be around didn't want women to be uncomfortable or objectified.
Mr Beckley, who arrived two years ago, said the company is ""genderagnostic,"" thinking of most styles as neither strictly men's or women's.
Meanwhile, I'm going to use the invisibility cloak of that soft sole to keep a low profile as I shop.
Writer Christine Lennon, here at her home in Los Angeles, pairs Wallabees with everything from washed denim to floaty dresses.
MARTIN RAMIN/THE WALL STREET JOURNAL ; KATRINA DICKSON For personal non-commercial use only.
The Strong, Silent Type THE TRUMP administration's effort to soften future fuel-economy regulations is a fairly straight-up exchange of regulatory relief for the promise of job repatriation in the domestic automotive sector.
And whether or not those jobs ever show up, it's sort of thrilling to watch the United States embrace Beijing-style central planning.
They always claim new technology will drive prices up and jobs out— catalytic converters, airbags, anti-lock brakes, stability control.
But the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, the industry's lobbying arm, wants more.
The ultimate deliverable is what the Auto Alliance calls the One National Standard.
Which is to say, they want the Environmental Protection Agency to end California's power to regulate vehicle emissions within its borders.
It is the auto makers' job to make advanced-technology vehicles desirable.
These figures do not include the on-paper fuel-cost savings of $2,500 over five years nor even the available $7,500 federal tax credit, which is quite a thumb on the scales.
Mind you, this is an electric-enhanced premium-content minivan with a V6 engine, tipping the scales at 2. tons, with five-star everything, that hits mileage and emission standards as yet undreamt— far beyond what I consider the useless incrementalism of the current federal Corporate Average Fuel Economy requirements.
The Pacifica Hybrid reminds me of what General Patton said after he overran Trier, exceeding his orders from Eisenhower.
These vehicles are engineered to run in EV mode first and foremost, as long as the battery charge holds out; then if needed, transparently to the occupants, switch over to gasoline power for extended-range driving.
The Pacifica Hybrid cannot leave you walking for want of battery charge.
It has a gas engine, a big one, too— a naturally aspirated 3.6-liter V6 with stepless variable transmission.
But it also has two high-torque electric motors sandwiched in the transmission; and a 16-kWh lithium-ion battery pack in the floor, under the mid-row passengers' feet.
This Pacifica glides around town, delivering luxury levels of cabin quiet.
The small charger port, located under a flap by the left A pillar, and some graphic flourish in the vehicle's grille, are the only indications that the Pacifica Hybrid is a plug-in vehicle.
That range is significant because it exceeds the average American's daily driving miles, Chrysler says.
For many consumers the Pacifica Hybrid could virtually zero out the household gas allowance.
As a group, the first-gen PHEV's scant EV range was hardly worth the added mass, cost and technical lift.
The other challenge for PHEVs is that once the battery is depleted, the vehicle's overall efficiency plummets due to the dead weight of the idle electrics.
But even if the battery is depleted, the Pacifica still gets a remarkable 32 mpg combined, operating very much like a gigantic Toyota Prius.
Our test vehicle was optioned with the company's latest suite of driver aids (parking assistance, 360degree cameras, active collisionavoidance braking and lane-keeping), plus the dual-screen rearentertainment system, panoramic sunroof and up to six USB ports.
Moreover, within its magic 33 miles, the Pacifica Hybrid interacts like an allelectric vehicle, enjoying in full an EV's advantages in performance and refinement, a Tesla Model X with side doors that aren't crazy.
The high-res instrument graphics swirl into view, but you don't hear anything except the climate fans, if they are on.
Foot on the brake, rotate the gear selector to D and step on the go pedal.
What's not there is a lot of highfrequency electrical noises, the howl and hum from motors and power electronics.
Chrysler's tech notes invoke ""active noise cancellation"" in the cabin as one of the features, and while I had assumed this was to deal with road noise, it certainly seems to have put an extra-thick sock in the electrics.
Quietly, fluidly, the Pacifica glides around town, almost incidentally delivering luxurypremium levels of cabin quiet.
In the same month the auto makers were asserting, in effect, it couldn't be done, I was driving a vehicle that demonstrated it already had.
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles would certainly not have built it had they not first been obliged to by the state of California.
But having been obliged, the engineers and designers have built something remarkable, which is usually what happens when you give engineers a challenge.
A MORE VIRTUOUS VAN T>jl Chrysler Pacifica Hybridr'fne first plug-in hybrid electric jninivan, can actually cost less than its gas-powered twin.
These clever womens jackets can be liberating IF YOU'RE looking for true disruption in the workplace, look no further than the smartphone's disastrous effect on the otherwise trim and tailored look of women's professional attire.
Worse, these shallow pockets can easily allow ever thinner and slicker devices to slip out, sending them crashing to the floor.
Thankfully, a few designers are adapting their garments to the new reality.
The Argent Double-Breasted blazer C$328, argentwork.com ) has a zipped compartment on the inside for stashing a phone.
This pocket is placed low on the garment to minimize the risk that the device's weight will compromise the way the blazer hangs.
A semitransparent touch-screenfriendly mesh lets you quickly see who's calling and swipe away notifications, while a small slit just above provides a handy route for your headphone cable.
Traditional tailoring techniques can ensure equally effective camouflage.
The exterior pockets of Rag & Bone's Howson Blazer [$650, ragbone.com'] are pleated to give them more volume— so nobody will notice the iPhone or small tablet you've slipped inside.
The bold, British-inspired striped pattern further blinds the eye to the tech inside.
You also get an interior breast pocket that's positioned a few inches higher than usual [not shown) so any phone bulge will be masked by the jacket's more generous cut up top.
Uniqlo's lightweight-down quilted bomber jacket C$70, uniglo.com] is equipped with two interior pockets large enough to accommodate an iPad Mini.
MARTIN RAMIN/THE WALL STREET JOURNAL, STYLING BY ANNE CARDENAS For personal non-commercial use only.
On a 20-block stretch just off Manhattan's Central Park, where some of the world's richest industry titans, business scions and hedge-fund moguls live, paying millions for one of the world's most expensive homes doesn't always ensure security and quiet.
Four buildings along this corridor have homeowners whose collective net worth could finance a NASA shuttle mission.
Some have seen record-breaking sales, while others have seen prices cut by millions of dollars in hopes of a sale.
Last year, the number of signed contracts on apartments priced above $4 million fell 20% compared with 2015, according to a report by Olshan Realty.
Signed contracts on properties priced at $4 million and above are up 41% so far this year, Olshan Realty reports.
Many of the purchases were made under limited-liability companies, which mask the identity of the owners.
Please turn to page W8 YOUR RIDE TO THE TOP OF THE WORLD Lighter components, motion monitors and other technological advances in elevators ensure a faster trip to greater heights with a smoother ride.
BY EMILY NONKO SCENIC RIDE Kone Corp. elevators in Dubai's Al Fattan Marine Towers have glass fronts that offer panoramic views.
Technological advances in the industry are providing faster, smoother rides to building residents— and adding a little glitz to their trip.
Elevators are of top concern to architects, engineers and developers in the early stages of building design.
This core essentially decides how the building will be constructed and the floorplans of the surrounding apartments.
For a faster trip, high-rise residential towers have recently taken cues from elevator technology pioneered in office towers.
With “destination dispatch"" systems, residents at a bank of elevators first select their desired floor, and are then directed to the elevator that will get them to there in the shortest time.
Such elevators can also reach speeds upward of 1,600 feet per minute, according to Steve Gonzalez, director of the major projects unit, Americas, for Finnish elevator-manufacturer Kone Corp.
United Technologies Corp.'s Otis unit and Switzerland's Schindler Group have also deployed destination dispatch.
Super-tall towers are designed to safely sway in strong winds, but this can cause unintended movement for the elevator cars.
According to public records, Mr Schwarzman, CEO of private-equity firm Blackstone Group, purchased the unit from insurance mogul Saul Steinberg, who bought the unit for $285,000 in 1971 from the estate of John D Rockefeller Jr.'s second wife, Mary.
In 2012, Howard Marks co-founder of global asset-management firm Oaktree Capital, paid $52 million for a 22,000-square-foot duplex.
Two years later, billionaire hedgefund manager Israel Englander set another record when he paid $71. million for an apartment there, records show.
Once the childhood home of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, it's owned by hedgefund manager David Ganek, whose Level Global Investors was raided in 2010 by the Federal Bureau of Investigation looking into allegations of insider trading.
Mr Ganek was never charged with any crime, and he is currently suing the United States attorney's office and FBI agents involved in the investigation.
A spokeswoman for Brown Harris Stevens, which manages the building, declined to comment.
In April, a fire that started in the sauna of the sixth-floor apartment owned by hedge-fund manager J Ezra Merkin caused extensive water damage in the unit below, owned by philanthropist and political activist David Koch, according to news reports.
Construction started in early 2012 and was supposed to have been finished by September 2014 but was still going strong as of June 2016, causing ""irreplaceable artwork"" to fall off the walls and Mrs.
Tang to be ""abruptly woken almost every morning before 9 a.m. by the sound of heavy machinery banging crashing, hammering and drilling,"" the lawsuit contends.
The judge ordered that work must comply with ""structural alterations"" rules.
One Beacon Court, a 2005 development, is also known as Bloomberg Tower because its first 25 floors are taken up by the media company.
Condo residents in this renovated department store get valet parking and a separate menu for en suite dining from Le Cirque.
It has a private motor court and an underground elevator from the garage, but neither of these kept the paparazzi from surrounding the property in 2008 when Beyonce, a resident at the time, announced her marriage to Jay Z One Beacon Court is where Marc Dreier, an attorney found guilty of securities fraud, lived briefly in 2009 under house arrest.
Mr Dreier's apartment sold to Ajit Jain, often referred to as Warren Buffett's successor at Berkshire Hathaway, for $8. million in 2009, according to public records.
Former attorney Scott Rothstein lived there in 2009 when he was charged with running a Ponzi scheme.
According to real-estate broker Victoria Shtainer, who lives in the building, one tenant was arrested and escorted out of the building; he was found guilty of selling faulty bulletproof vests to the military.
Currently the building is home to both former General Electric CEO Jack Welch and current CEO Jeff Immelt, according to public records, as well as several Renaissance Technologies hedge-fund executives.
Since 2014, 10 units have sold at One Beacon Court with a median price of $7. million, according to PropertyShark.
One exception was in 2015, when Tracey Hejailan-Amon accused her ex-husband, Maurice Alain Amon, of taking artwork, including Andy Warhol's 1966 ""SelfPortrait,"" out of the apartment while she was away.
The 1931 building currently holds the record for Manhattan's priciest co-op sale.
Currently on the market is a 20room, 12,000-square-foot duplex asking $96 million.
Since 2014, 10 units in the building have sold with a median price of $30. million, according to PropertyShark.
It opened just last year, and the sale of an $87. million penthouse holds the record for the most expensive condo sale in 2016.
Currently there are 18 apartments for sale, ranging from $6. million to $82 million.
It's this building where owners might feel the greatest impact of a new law that took effect in Manhattan last year.
It requires purchases of $3 million or more made through limited-liability companies to disclose the identity of the buyer to government regulators.
Many of the priciest sales here have come from foreign buyers, and many of the transactions have taken place under LLCs.
BRUCKNER ARCHITEKTEN; AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY IMAGES For personal non-commercial use only.
Friday Sunday, March 24 26, 2017 | W9 HIGH-RISE LIVING ,4 THE ELBPHILHARMONIE The new concert hall, above.
A rendering, left, of a unit's prefabricated interior, planned by Bruckner Architekten.
Build the interior off-site and assemble it afterward in the apartment's shell.
The construction ban was meant to prevent noise, as well as any dust and debris, from entering the Elbphilharmonie, a landmark building by Swiss architects Herzog & de Meuron, built on the remnants of a 1960s redbrick warehouse.
The hall officially opened in January— more than $500 million over budget and six years behind schedule.
Now, at least one concert is performed on most days, demanding a certain level of respectful silence.
Its floor-to-ceiling walls offer a panoramic view of Europe's third-busiest commercial port and the Elbe river.
When completed— sometime in autumn— the 2,475-square-foot unit also will be one of the city's most expensive.
The shell alone was marketed for about $8. million, or $3,457 per square foot, an unusually high price in the market even for a turnkey property.
The buyer, who wishes to remain anonymous, commissioned architects Susanne and Laurent Bruckner of Munich-based Bruckner Architekten to design a cavelike room, avoiding straight edges or sharp corners.
One large room, a bright amorphous space, will fill most of the penthouse.
Its rounded shapes will create a continuum of ceilings and walls without seams or edges.
A staircase will lead to the sleeping area on the gallery and to the bathroom, which also features curved forms.
The Bruckner firm teamed up with interior architects Schotten & Hansen, based in Peiting in Bavaria state, to make the interior from lightweight, aerated concrete.
Schotten & Hansen Co-Chief Executive Torben Hansen said technological advances in robotics and laser scanning allow him to prefabricate custom interiors with great complexity, yet with precision down to the millimeter.
In all, some 1,000 separate modules— all white— will be cut small enough to travel up the Elbphilharmonie's elevators, to be fitted in the penthouse over a wooden substructure with completed utilities.
Once they are assembled in the penthouse, the pieces will be coated in a fine-grain plaster to give all surfaces a homogenous appearance.
Mr Bruckner said he doesn't know the owner's plans for the interior's final color scheme or furniture.
Despite its long gestation, largely caused by disputes between the city administration and construction company Hochtief over costs, the concert hall has received overwhelmingly positive reviews, for its acoustics and for the aesthetics of its ethereal crystal top on the rugged brick pedestal.
The building is located at the western tip of HafenCity, a modern development on the grounds of Hamburg's former city-center harbor.
Many historic warehouses have been preserved and now sit alongside buildings designed by luminaries such as David Chipperfield and Hadi Teherani.
Wasaga Beach, Ontario, Canada Elegant custom built gated home listed for $2,695,000 CAD is luxury ot its finest.
Miami Beach, FL Rare 10BR/1 1 BA/2HBA mansion on prestigious Pine Tree Dr., 125' of waterfront, no fixed bridges, 21,156 sq ft lot, tennis ct, pool pavilion.
Sea Island, GA Cottage 75 is truly a rare opportunity; 3+ acres with approx. ft oceanfront, can be subdivided.
Mantoloking, NJ Quality & design comes together with the finest moteriols in this Boy Front Estote.
Custom designer kitchen, 9' ceiling, 6 BD with bolconies, 2 fireplaces, elevotor.
Wasaga Beach, Ontario, Canada 80 ocre development site surrounded by residential development.
Greot potentiol for low to medium density residential, seniors housing or leosed-lond housing.
Chicago, IL Absolutely breathtaking Loke Michigan ond city views from very rorely ovoiloble, beautifully renovated half floor residence.
Cold Spring, NY One level living ot its finest, on estote-like property complete with woterfoll & pool, just minutes to the village of Cold Spring.
Robert A McCaffrey Realty, Bill Hussung, 845.265.41 1 3, bhussung@mccaffreyrealty.com.
Bad Gastein, Austria Luxurious opartments with hotel service, a phenomenul view of the Gostein Valley and skiing slopes ond o golf course ot the doorstep.
Charles Willerding, Johnston & Daniel Division, Royal LePage R.E.S Ltd., 416.904.6644, cwillerdingl@gmail.com.
Tamarin, Mauritius This impressive 'Villa 74' is locoted on the beautiful, luxurious Tamarina Golf resort, one of the most prominent spots on the islond.
Chicago, IL Unobstructed panoramic views in all directions of loke, city, pork ond skyline.
Spectoculor condominium recently completely finished from row spoce.55 North Astor #35 West.
Holladay, UT One of America's truly magnificent estates nestled in privacy on nearly 4 acres in the heart of Salt Lake City.
Adjala-Tosorontio, Ontario, Canada This $1,200,000 CAD, custom, 4 BD, 4 BA home on 1.23 ocre lot offers 3,300 sq ft of gorgeous upgrades.
Toronto, Ontario, Canada Stately executive home, rovine setting 150' wide lot, grond entertoining spaces, conservotory, mahogany library, 5 bedroom, home theatre, circular drive hidden double goroge.
New Smyrna Beach, FL 180' oceonfront, 5 BD/4BA, 2 half BA home & guesthouse.
Spectoculor 8 bedroom, 7. both on nearly on ocre.-story Georgian, well over 10,000 square feet of living spoce.
Salt Lake City, UT Award-winning, architecturally brilliant custom designed 13,717 sq ft Estote nestled on over 50 secluded ocres with sweeping views of the entire Solt Loke Valley.
Creemore, Ontario, Canada Under 1 hour from Toronto oirport stunning 6 bed contemporary log home with guest house.-acre estote offers privacy, proximity ond mojestic 50-mile views.
Toronto, Ontario, Canada Stunning contemporory design architectural showpiece staircase of gloss & steel encompass a 3-storey atrium, mossive wolls for art, 5 bedroom, infinity pool on rovine.
Beachfront 4BR/4.5BA, incredible bench & city views, design & finishes.
Cape Cod, MA Spectoculor 3,348 sq ft residence in Harwich with ponoromic oceon views, sondy bench, luxurious en suite master & lorge deck for summer entertoining.
Woterfront homes ond estates on the Chesopeoke Boy or Atlontic Oceon from $250,000.
Squash court, fabulous conservotory ond wine cellar, topiory garden, river trails.
An important midcentury modern meticulously reimagined by Toshiko Mori, olong with the owners, to odhere to Breuer's design integrity.
Barnardsville, NJ Goted Bernordsville Mountain Estote on 5+/ocres with 4 BD, 5.
HIGH-RISE LIVING A RIDE TO THE TOP OF THE WORLD Continued from page W7 elevators have built-in mechanisms to monitor the building's movement so that in high winds, the elevator speed is automatically reduced.
At Trump International Hotel & Tower Chicago, for example, Kone set up a so-called sway detector to constantly monitor the steel cables, also called ropes, that carry elevator cars up and down the 1,388-foot tall building.
The company has also developed what it calls ""ultrarope"" with a higher tensile strength than conventional steel cables.
Ultrarope has a super-light carbon-fiber core, allowing the elevators to move faster, using less energy than those with steel cables, the company said.
When the Dubai tower Burj Khalifa opened in 2010, it boasted the tallest elevator in the world, reaching 1,600 feet on a conventional steel rope system.
Using ultrarope, Saudi Arabia's Jeddah Tower will hold double deck elevators that reach a record height of 2,165 feet when the building is completed in 2018.
Also on the horizon is Mumbai's World One tower, which is scheduled to open this year.
At 1,450 feet, World One will have 25 elevators made by Switzerland's Schindler Group that will lift residents to their floors at speeds up to 1,560 feet per minute.
Newer models now have technology that uses mobile-phone networks to connect a resident's phone to the elevators' operating system.
When a resident enters the building, the technology alerts the elevator system, sending an elevator to pick residents up and deliver them to their desired floor.
Two buildings currently under construction— Grand Tower in Frankfurt and One Palm in Dubai— will have Kone's phone-alert system.
PRIVATE RIDE When it opens next year, the Four Seasons Residences One Dalton Street, Boston, shown in a rendering, will have no more than six apartments per floor, and residents will never have more than two units sharing an elevator bank.
Lower floors will have no more than three apartments per elevator bank, so cars will open into hallways that are ""exclusive and private,"" said Izak Senbahar, the LATERAL MOVE A rendering of the Thyssenkrupp ropeless elevator system, in which cars would travel vertically and horizontally. building's developer.
German elevator manufacturer Thyssenkrupp is banking on increasing global demand for taller buildings and more efficient elevator systems.
NEW HEIGHTS When the Dubai tower Burj Khalifa opened in 2010, it boasted the tallest elevator in the world, reaching 1,600 feet on a conventional steel rope system.
In a typical elevator system, the ropes limit the number of cars that can operate in an elevator shaft.
Thyssenkrupp is developing a ropeless elevator system driven by motors, allowing cars to travel both vertically and horizontally.
With the ability to move up, down and sideways, 30 or more elevator cars can service a building in a loop, Mr Schollkopf said.
PRIVATE PROPERTIES | CANDACE TAYLOR Ellen DeGeneres Asks $45 Million in Montecito At one point, television talk show host and serial home flipper Ellen DeGeneres said her Tuscan-style villa in Montecito, Calif., might prove the exception to her history of buying, fixing up and selling high-end properties.
The 59-year-old host of ""The Ellen DeGeneres Show"" and her wife, actress Portia de Rossi, are putting their Montecito home on the market for $45 million, according to listing agent Suzanne Perkins of Sotheby's International Realty.
Located on a hilltop with views of the ocean, the nearly 17-acre property contains a roughly 10,500-square-foot, six-bedroom stone house the couple renovated.
With a barrel-tiled roof and 18th-century Italian tiles, the 1930s twostory house has nine woodburning fireplaces, a media room, and multiple libraries and reading areas.
The couple used stone excavated on the property to build an indoor-outdoor entertaining pavilion with a sun room, a dining room and an outdoor kitchen with a pizza oven.
The grounds also include two swimming pools, a sunken tennis court and badminton court, as well as eucalyptus and olive trees, gardens and fountains.
The couple bought the property in 2013 for $26. million, according to public records.
They expanded the estate to its current size by buying two adjacent properties, Ms.
Perkins said, noting that they live primarily in Los Angeles and used this property as a weekend home.
DeGeneres and Ms. de Rossi are selling, but she noted their history of lucrative home flips.
DeGeneres and Ms. de Rossi sold a Los Angeles home for $49. million to Napster co-founder Sean Parker after purchasing it for just under $40 million, according to public records.
DeGeneres and Ms. de Rossi directed inquiries to a Sotheby's spokesperson, who said the couple is selling because they don't spend as much time in Santa Barbara as they would like.
BILL ABRAN0WICZ; JIM BARTSCH CLOCKWISE FROM TOP: WILLIAMS NEW YORK; ILLUSTRATION BY PAUL DOTEY; THYSSENKRUPP For personal non-commercial use only.
Friday Sunday, March 24 26, 2017 | Wll ADVERTISEMENT KIAWAH ISLAND, SOUTH CAROLINA GREAT LIFESTYLE IN NAPLES, FLORIDA 15 Ocean Course offers unparalleled views of the world famous Ocean Course and Atlantic Ocean.
Luxe home with heated pool and spa, spectacular outdoor living spaces, and fine furnishings and finishes boasts a private second floor master, four guest suites, handsome library, two living rooms, gourmet kitchen.
Amazing six-acre recreation area with 13,000 sq. ft. clubhouse, resort pool, fitness, tennis, indoor sports court and much more all included in low HOA fees.
From the $400’s to the $700’s www.glhomes.com Incredible opportunity at Seven Bridges brand new homes in a highly amenitized non-golf community in the Boca Raton / Delray Beach area.
Generous features include impact glass, marble countertops, gourmet kitchens and 30,000 sq. ft. club.
TwinEagles boasts not just one championship course awarded “Best New Private Course in America” by Golf Magazine, but two 1 8-hole, tour-quality courses and a spectacular 47,000 sq. ft. country club lavished with every imaginable amenity.
Best of all, golf membership initiation fee is included with every Minto new home purchase.
BA, 4000 SF residence blissfully enjoying unobstructed water views, parks & a walking neighborhood of top schools, restaurants and shops thru 1 1 ’ floorto-ceiling glass walls.
Details include huge terraces, private enclosed twin garage, concierges, spa, rooftop pools, the worksoffered decorator ready. $6,500,000 rexhamilton.com Located where the “tropics begin” sits one of the most renowned & established coastal communities with 3 miles of pristine beaches, 3 championship golf courses, 17 Har-tru tennis courts, squash & Beach Club.
This beautifully renovated 5BR retreat offers custom finishes, 6,466± GSF, gourmet kitchen, saltwater pool & new luxurious 1st floor master suite.
Elegant estate with 1 2-ft ceilings, maple and oak floors, granite counters, designer kitchen with butler’s pantry, and seven en suite bedrooms.
Each home includes an indoor/outdoor living room, and a private pool and spa designed to soak in the majestic mountain views.
Experience world-class golf, tennis, shopping, dining, culture and entertainment in this exquisite desert oasis.
Petersburg. blocks from the water, artfully designed townhomes now under construction on a private, gated lane.
Totaling 2,335 sq. ft., 3 bedrooms, 3 Vz baths, 2 car garage, private elevator, and amazing rooftop terrace.
Walking distance to world-class restaurants, museums, shopping, parks, marina, and Tampa Bay.
Price Upon Request robertdvorin.elliman.com Douglas Elliman Real Estate Robert Dvorin, Lie.
This exquisitely crafted 17,000+ sq ft residence situated on over 12 acres is a self contained oasis, secluded and secure.
Amenities include a one acre lake with falls, carriage house, indoor and outdoor pools, stable, riding ring, tennis court, two screening rooms, wine cellar, wine cave and beautiful gardens with space for a vineyard.
Watch out for wind BY KATY MCLAUGHLIN CHRIS CASE, a Los Angeles comedy writer, recently rented a new place with a grassy, 1-acre yard where he can play catch and Frisbee with his two sons.
His home is a two-bedroom apartment in a high rise where rents range from $9,000 to $25,000 a month.
Developers say their parks are part of an effort to chip away at resistance to living in dense urban areas with little greenery.
Parks also provide a natural meeting space— a salve for people who fear high-rise living might be too isolating.
For Brendan Heath, a 36-yearold academic adviser, a %-acre park on the third floor and community gardens on the 10th helped convince him to buy in inner-city Toronto.
When the weather allows, he grows heirloom tomatoes, pickling cucumbers and basil on his 10thfloor garden plot, he said.
He paid about $220,000 for his one bedroom, in which he lives with his wife, Lisha Lo, and their 21-monthold son Lochlan.
On nice days in the summer, the third-floor park can be packed, said Mr Heath, though in the winter, these areas are fairly deserted.
The urban-gardening concept helped One Cole to sell out quickly, so the developer has included it in a total of eight new Regent Park buildings.
The park, which will be divided into areas for residents and hotel guests, has plans to include a basketball court, several pools, two dog runs (one for little dogs and one for big), a large lawn and dozens of trees, which have just been purchased and will be grown for two years before planting, according to Greg Mowbray, vice president of construction.
Units will go on sale next year— Mr Feng didn't disclose pricing— and will be completed in 2019, he said.
In London, Manhattan Loft Gardens, slated for completion next year, will have a 10,000-squarefoot garden on the seventh floor; nearly 4,000 square feet on the 25th floor and 5,000 square feet on the 36th floor.
The 1950s saw the dawn of modern green roofs, which help absorb water, regulate building temperatures and offset the high heat in urban centers, said Steven Peck, founder and president of Green Roofs for Healthy Cities, a Toronto-based trade group for the North American green-roof industry.
Parklike plaza decks at the entry level to buildings became popular at the same time.
In the past decade or so, builders have sought to combine the two concepts by putting parks on higher floors, Mr Peck said.
Oceanwide's park will be rimmed by a ""very expensive,"" 42-inchhigh glass railing to help block wind, Mr Mowbray said.
A lot of dirt goes into building these parks— Ten Thousand's includes about 58,000 cubic feet of soil and foam, said Roman Speron, vice president of Crescent Heights, the developer.
Mr Morrison was hired to create a %-acre park on a 46-year-old, 43-story building on West 64th Street last summer.
Mr Morrison had to find plants that would do well even though sun in the summer is blocked until about 1m., he said.
The budget for Mr Morrison's project was roughly $3 million, he said, which included building access stairways for residents and commercial tenants to get to the garden.
Oceanwide Plaza gives a rough estimate of $10 million for the construction of its eighth-floor park.
PRIVATE PROPERTIES | CANDACE TAYLOR Sean ‘Biddy’ Combs Sells Manhattan Condo for Less After four years and several L price cuts, music mogul Sean ""Diddy"" Combs has \ sold his one-bedroom condo at Manhattan's ■ Park Imperial for $5.
H 7 million in cash, accordpjf ing to people with jv knowledge of the trans^ action.
The Harlem-born rapper, producer and entrepreneur first listed the Midtown condo in late 2012 for $8. million, then reduced the price several times.
Whitney Didier of Douglas Elliman Real Estate took over the listing from another agent in June, pricing it at $6. million.
The 66th floor apartment measures about 2,300 square feet, according to the listing.
Mr Combs bought the 56th Street apartment in 2005 for $3.82 million, according to public records.
He converted the three-bedroom to a one-bedroom with large entertaining spaces.
In 2014 he paid $39 million for a mansion in Los Angeles, according to public records.
