Canada was the first nation to recognize Ukraine’s independence after 92 percent voted in their 1991 referendum to declare independence from Russia.
Approximately 1.36 million Canadians self-identified as Ukrainian in our 2016 census; they have since the 1890s played important roles across Canada.
The 2013–14 Euromaidan “Revolution of Dignity” included 90 percent of the Kyivans and much of the population of Ukraine.
Its success caused the deeply kleptocratic President Viktor Yanukovych to flee to Russia after seeking to block Ukraine’s integration with the European Union and to steer it towards a Moscow-dominated Eurasian sphere of influence.
Enraged by the loss of Russian influence in Ukraine, Vladimir Putin launched an undeclared war on it in February 2014.
More than 10,000 persons died, 25,000 were wounded, and almost two million internally displaced.
His tactics have included cyberattacks on electricity grids, targeted assassinations, defaming the father of Canada’s foreign affairs minister Chrystia Freeland, and seizing about seven percent of Ukraine’s territory.
The infrastructure of Ukraine’s Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts has been destroyed.
Regular Russian army units comprise 8,500 to 10,000 of the estimated 36,000 Russian and separatist fighters continuing to terrorize Eastern Ukraine, facing about 34,000 Ukrainian troops.
About 70 percent of Ukrainian casualties are thought to be from MLRS and artillery strikes.
Ukraine seized or dismembered could prove to be a domino in central-east Europe, illustrating again that unless rogue despots are confronted forcefully they become much worse.
A viable NATO strategy for deterrence and, if necessary, an overwhelming response to aggression is needed now.
Europe’s borders have been violated by military force since Ukrainians were persuaded that their country’s territorial integrity and political sovereignty were inviolable, secured by the pledges of the United States, U.K. and, ironically, the Russian Federation.
Ukraine alone managed to check the forces Putin was prepared to risk for the sake of foreign adventurism.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko last summer called for 1,240 Javelins, the exact number of nuclear warheads Ukraine surrendered in exchange for guarantees of its sovereignty, which was violated by Russia’s annexation of Crimea and invasion of eastern Ukraine.
The Javelins should decrease further Putin’s aggression against Ukraine by sending him a clear message that the West is no longer turning a blind eye to misbehavior.
The lethal damage Javelins can inflict on armored vehicles and their personnel might give him pause.
The world knows by now that he respects only those who operate from positions of strength.
Arming Ukraine defensively might significantly help to secure the peace of Europe.
