The sanctions are having a more serious impact than President Vladimir Putin anticipated, but have yet to induce Russia to engage in more cooperative behavior.
An Unexpected Invasion that impose travel bans and asset freezes on individual Vladimir Putin’s decision to annex the Crimea in March members of the elite.
Rustem, and since 1991 the Russian Federation (like the sia retaliated against the Magnitsky Act with the “Dima Soviet Union before) had been an ardent defender of Yakovlev” law banning United States adoptions, and a list of 18 these principles.
Americans sanctioned for involvement in the GuantaRussia was incensed by the Western recognition of namo Bay detention center and the arrest of Russian the independence of Kosovo in February 2008, and arms dealer Viktor Bout.
The Magnitsky Act was a precresponded by granting recognition to South Ossetia and edent for the sanctions that were introduced on Russia Abkhazia in August 2008.
Still, Crimea was assumed to in the wake of the annexation of Crimea. be immune to irredentist claims from Russia, not least because Russia had signed the 1994 Budapest MemoThe West Responds to Russian Aggression randum guaranteeing the territorial integrity of Ukraine, Less than a week after President Viktor Yanukovich fled in return for the latter giving up its nuclear weapons.
Ukraine on February 22, unidentified pro-Russian gunPutin’s action demanded a response.
Separatist tary action by the West was off the table, given Rusrallies took place in many cities of eastern Ukraine; Russia’s nuclear arsenal, economic sanctions were the tool sian troops were deployed to the Ukrainian border; and of choice.
They are most effective the United States and EU imposed asset freezes and travel bans when they are multi-lateral, and they succeed about one on 21 individuals deemed to be directly involved in the third of the time—though skeptics question whether the occupation of Crimea.
Nevertheless on March 18 Putin desired changes in government behavior can be attribsigned into law a bill adding Crimea to Russia, and uted to sanctions alone.
Sanctions helped bring about delivered a remarkable speech in which he embraced the the end of apartheid in South Africa, but have failed to rhetoric of Russian ethno-nationalism, including omihalt the nuclear ambitions of North Korea or Iran.
Sometimes they trigger an aggressive response istration official described as “Putin’s cronies, his money by the offending country, deepening the crisis.
Critics people,” such as Gennady Timchenko, Yuri Kovalchuk, argue that sanctions are a demonstrative act that allows and Arkady and Boris Rotenberg.
The theory was, in leaders to make a moral statement, without actually influencing developments on the ground.
The first individually targeted sanctions were common people and not the leaders making the deciagainst Haiti in 1993. sions.
On March 24, announced counter-sanctions in the form of a one-year meeting on the sidelines of a nuclear security summit in ban on imports of fruits and vegetables, dairy products The Hague, leaders of the G7 group of advanced econoand meat from countries that had imposed sanctions on mies announced that it was suspending Russia’s memRussia.
In 2013 Rusin Sochi in June 2014. sia imported $16 billion of food from the EU and $1.6 Fighting broke out in eastern Ukraine in April, culbillion from the U.S.11 minating in a May 11 referendum in which Donetsk Meanwhile, many Western companies with longand Lugansk allegedly voted for independence.
Unlike term commitments in Russia assumed the sanctions in Crimea, Russia did not act on the results of these refwould soon blow over.
Fighting intensified as the summer progressed, Rosneft in the exploration of the Arctic shelf, under though Russia seemed to be signaling that it was intera 2011 partnership agreement.
In defiance of pressure ested in a compromise solution. from the United States government, they started drilling with On April 28 the United States added seven more individuals their West Alpha rig on August 9.12 and 17 related companies to the sanctions list.
But with During August intensified attacks by Ukrainian the EU economy stagnating, the powerful Ostauschuss forces were closing in on the rebel-held cities of Donetsk group of German industrialists doing business with Rusand Lugansk, but increased action by Russian milisia urged Chancellor Angela Merkel not to bow to United States tary units (whose presence Moscow either denied or pressure to introduce broader sanctions.
On July 16 described as “volunteers”) forced the Ukrainian governthe United States moved beyond “smart” sanctions on individument to sign a cease-fire on September 5.
The cease-fire als to introduce “sectoral” sanctions on strategic corpobrought an end to major military operations but sporations.
Two energy firms and radic fighting continued, with the death toll climbing two banks were to some 4,700 by the end of the year. barred from all but short-term borrowing (more than On September 12, 2014, the United States and EU imposed 30 days) on United States markets, and eight Russian arms firms additional penalties.
This atrocity, and Russia’s for Transneft, Gazpromneft, Novatek and Rosneft the seeming unwillingness to help bring those responsible limit was 90 days.
Russian companies will have to to justice, caused a groundswell of support for tougher refinance about $130 billion of debt by the end of 2015, action, particularly in the Netherlands and Germany. and the sanctions will make this a more costly proposiOn July 25, the EU expanded its sanctions to an addition.
The EU sanctions also targeted bank credits and tional 15 top Russian government officials and 18 entities weapons manufacturers, and issued an updated list of 24 sanctioned individuals.
Russian share prices pluming system , meted, the ruble fell, interest rates rose and capital flight was not adopted. accelerated, reaching $130 billion by December (more Other countries joined the sanctions regime at varthan double the typical annual outflow). ious points over the spring and summer—including Germany is Russia’s largest trading partner after Australia, Canada, Japan, Norway, Switzerland and China.
However, Turkey, Greece and Cyprus refused 26 percent down on August 2013 (a yearly decline of over to embargo Russia—and as a result they experienced $6 billion).17 Although Russia only accounts for 3. pera surge in exports and Russian tourists. cent of total German exports, the impact was felt in the The E.U. sanctions will stay in place for a calendar engineering and auto industries, where Russia is the 4th year, until July 2015.
On December 13, 2014 1 percent of United States exports, so the impact was confined to the United States Congress passed a bill authorizing $350 million a small number of companies active in Russia includof military aid for Ukraine and adding more Russian ing Boeing, GE (which sold $1. billion of turbines and companies to the sanctions list.
It also opened the door other equipment in Russia in 2012),18 and Morgan Stanto third-party sanctions on foreign companies doing ley, which had to cancel the planned sale of its oil tradbusiness with Russian companies under the embargo. ing division to Rosneft.
The sanctions tit-for-tat was a strange kind of limThe impact of sanctions on Russia’s banking secited economic warfare.
Each side imposed real costs on tor was buffered in the short term by the state’s large each other—and on themselves.
Even after spending $50 billion to slow away from the elephant in the room—the flow of oil the pace of ruble depreciation, which slid 25 percent and gas from Russia to Europe.
With Russia providing between January and October, Russia still had $445 39 percent of Europe’s natural gas in 2013, and with billion in reserves.
However, the second half of the oil and gas covering 50 percent of the Russian budyear saw the global oil price plummet from $115 a barget, it would have been severely disruptive to interrupt rel in June to $60 in December, due to weak demand that trade.
In June Russia did suspend gas deliveries from China and the refusal of Saudi Arabia to cut supto Ukraine pending resolution of $3 billion in unpaid ply to keep up the price.
This was not an urgent problem since it was sumical goals in mind—wanting to increase the pressure on mer and demand was low, and Ukraine had ample gas the Iranian and Russian governments and force them reserves in storage.
After protracted negotiations over the next retain market share, and to deter further expansion of three months, a deal was struck in Brussels on October tight oil and tar sands in North America (which become 29, under which the EU and IMF will lend Ukraine the uneconomic when the oil price falls below $75 a barrel). money to cover its $3 billion debt to Gazprom and preThe falling oil price combined with the Western sancpay $1. billion for supplies during the coming winter. tions to put further downward pressure on the ruble.
The depreciation accelerated in December, especially The Economic Impact of the Sanctions after a December 12 report that the Central Bank had On November 24, Finance Minister Anatolii Siluanov accepted $11 billion in loans to Rosneft as collateral. estimated that the sanctions would cost the Russian By December 16 the ruble had lost a further 20 percent economy $40 billion over the course of a year—and the of its value, despite the Central Bank hiking the base falling oil price another $100 billion.
In the course of the year damaging than the sanctions themselves was the general the ruble had lost 58 percent of its value, falling from atmosphere of uncertainty created by Putin’s seemingly 33 to 70 rubles to the dollar. reckless actions in Ukraine, and his reaction to Western sanctions.
The market response to the annexation 17 Jeevan Vasagar, “German exports to Russia tumble,” Financial of Crimea was swift, and more immediately damaging Times, October 30, 2014.
Ukraine agreed to a price of $378 19 Ol’ga Kuzminova, “Valyutnye rezervy TsB” (The Central Bank’s through December 2014 and $365 from January to March 2015. currency reserves), Vedomosti, October 24, 2014.
The ruble fell 16 Aleksei Kisilev, “Otsenit’ ushcherb or sanktsii i snizhenie tsen from 33/$ to 41/$. na neft’ dostachno slozhno” (It is hard to estimate the impact of 20 Anders Aslund, “The only cure for what plagues Russia,” Finansanctions and the oil price fall,” Kommersant, November 24, 2014. cial Times, December 17, 2014.
Conservatives argued that the depreciation of the dependent on certain foreign technologies for deep offruble would help to cut imports and made Russian goods shore and fracking operations.
The currency crisis of December was ners not subject to the sanctions regime, Rosneft bought blamed on mismanagement by Central Bank head Elvira the Swiss-based oil services company Weatherford for Nabiullina—one of the few remaining liberals in the $400 million in June, and the next month signed a $4.2 Putin administration.
As Aleksei Kudrin noted “There billion contract for six rigs with Norway’s North Atlanare forces in the country who have long wanted isolation, tic Drilling.
In September Putin announced plans to cremaybe a certain self-sufficiency.
Aeroflot’s For example, Russia is making some serious steps low-cost subsidiary Dobrolyot was hit by EU sanctions to try to build institutions independent of global finanbecause it flies to Crimea; it suspended operations after cial markets.
In March when Visa and MasterCard suslosing leases for its Boeing and Airbus aircraft.
The fear pended processing payments at Russia’s SMP and Rosthat Russia could close its airspace to European and United States siya banks, it was decided to move ahead with creating carriers flying to Asia dented airline stock prices. a National Card Payment System under Russian control.
Food prices were up has the institutional capacity, or the deep pockets, to 13 percent by the end of the year.
Smuggling of Eurosteer the nation’s economic development while disengagpean food through Belarus led the Russian government ing from ties with Europe and the United States The sanctions to ban meat imports from Belarus in December, imposcame at a time when the Russian economy was already ing strains on the Eurasian Economic Union (since neifacing severe structural weaknesses.
The needs to increase investment to overcome decades of arrest of billionaire Vladimir Yevtushenkov in Septemunder-spending on infrastructure and new technology. ber and the reversal of his purchase of the Bashneft oil For example, they need a 50 percent, $6 billion increase company was in exploratory drilling to maintain current oil output another reminder of the vulnerability of Russian busilevels. nesses to the whims of the Kremlin.
The latter had planned to sion—notably, fear of getting bogged down in a probreak-even in 2014 and 2015 with oil at $97 and $100 tracted guerrilla war, which would have been deeply a barrel respectively; but as of December it was tradunpopular with the Russian public. ing at $60.32 Every $1 fall in the oil price cuts federal Some Russians believe that the real purpose of the tax revenue by about $1. billion.
Maksim Oreshkin, sanctions is to bring about regime change in Russia— a department head at the finance ministry, estimated arguing that the United States has given up on trying to find that the fall in the price of oil will cost Russia 2 percent a modus vivendi with Putin, and is bent on orchestratof GDP over the next year, and the sanctions another 2 ing a color revolution in Moscow.
On December 15, the Central Bank forecast fetched, it is true that many United States policy makers are a GDP decline of 4. percent in 2015 if oil prices remain looking forward to dealing with a Russia without Putin. at $60 per barrel.
DepThe Western sanctions inadvertently played into the uty economic development minister Sergei Belyakov was anti-Western, conservative nationalist narrative which fired after criticizing the decision on Facebook. the Russian president embraced in the wake of the antiPutin protests in the winter of 2011–12.39 Putin can The Political Impact of the Sanctions point to the sanctions as evidence of the Western desire As Clifford Gaddy and Barry Ickes note,35 even though to punish and weaken Russia.
He told the Valdai Club the sanctions may inflict pain on the Russian economy, in October, referring to “Our American friends,” that they are unlikely to bring about a change in Putin’s “They are trying to hurt us through these sanctions, block political course.
Putin’s grip on power is not so fragour development and push us into political, economic ile for us to expect the Russian president to buckle any and cultural isolation, force us into backwardness in time soon.
But let me stress that Russia is not going test movement of shifting from “tightening the screws” to get all worked up, get offended or come begging at on the opposition to “tightening the belts” of the Rusanyone’s door.”40 sian people seems to have struck a popular chord.
After The sanctions were also taken as proof of the wisthe Western reprisals, Putin’s approval rating soared to dom of Putin’s policy of “nationalizing” the elite by barnew heights, reaching 88 percent in October—up from ring senior officials from holding foreign bank accounts. 69 percent in February 2014, before the crisis began.
Russian politicians took pride in being included on the It is hard to image any circumstances under which sanctions list.
For example, Putin’s Chief of Staff Sergei Putin would revoke the annexation of Crimea.
In that Ivanov told the head of Gazprombank Andrei Akimov sense, the initial Western sanctions were primarily aimed that “until your name is on the sanctions list you canat deterring future aggression.
It is possible that the sancemigrating to Europe, and makes them more dependent tions did help deter Putin from annexing Donestk and 37 Peter Rutland, “How much longer can Putin’s system last?,” Mos32 Carol Matlack, “Will cheap oil choke the Russian economy?,” cow Times, October 27, 2014.
Perhaps the main beneficiary of the sanctions regime But if the Western leaders assumed that Putin would is China.
After more than a decade of are likely to insist on a full restoration of the sovereignty negotiations, on May 21 China signed a $400 billion, of the Ukrainian government over Donestk and Lugansk 30-year deal to buy natural gas from Russia.
The price as a minimum condition for the lifting of sanctions, is not yet known, but was widely assumed to be unfaand it is not clear that Putin is willing to accept such vorable to Russia.
The United States may even hold out fuel to Russian strategists who warn against increasfor renunciation of the annexation of Crimea—someing dependency on China.
In the same survey, howa very difficult year. ever, 66 percent said they thought it was time for Russia to repair its relations with the West.
Import substitution from domestic producers and other countries will lessen the impact on Russian consumers.
Originally, in no. that stated that Russia would take special April 2014 some nationalist Russian politicians called for economic measures to protect its national security. all outlets in the country to be closed after McDonald’s The decree banned importation of food from Western closed its restaurants in Crimea following the annexation nations that had imposed sanctions on Russia. a day by Russia in March.
In addition, Rossel’khoznadzor questioned try, fish, cheese, milk and dairy products from the the stated nutritional value of McDonald’s shakes and European Union, United States, Australia, Canada ice cream.
On 19 August, the Ministry of Agricultised energy value of cheeseburgers, fish sandwiches, and ture submitted modifications to the list of prohibited chicken burgers.
McDonald’s responded by saying that products, exempting certain products from the banned it had not received any complaints and uses methodollist.
Among the items were seed for potatoes, peas, ogies approved by Rossel’khoznadzor.
On 26 August hybrid corn, onion, protein and protein mixture cona Moscow court ordered that the McDonald’s located centrates, food additives and lactose-free dairy prodon Manezh square—at the foot of the Kremlin—be ucts, and young salmon or trout less than two years closed for 90 days due to sanitary violations.
In mid-Octotember, McDonald’s announced the temporary closure ber the ban was expanded to include various kinds of of 22 restaurants in Russia for modernization, and also animal fat and meat byproducts. removed two salads from its menu.
In early October, The import ban is to be in effect for one year, although Russian prosecutors announced that they were openPrime Minister Medvedev held out the possibility of ending an investigation into the Ronald McDonald House ing the embargo if sanctions are lifted.
Under the radar Charities on suspicion of money laundering. is the fact that Russia was already limiting food imports Russia’s food trade war is also directed at Ukraine. from certain countries even before the August ban was Putin’s vision to create a free trade zone with Ukraine as announced . a partner in the new Eurasian Economic Union is gone.
Instead, there is a clear intent to punish Ukraine Russia’s Food Trade War by banning the importation of certain food products In a politicized move that struck at an iconic symbol of into Russia.
On 25 July, Rossel’khoznadzor banned the American culture, in July 2014 McDonald’s came into importation of milk from Ukraine, effective 28 July.
The same day, Ukraine banned the importation of pork and 1 “Ukaz o primenenii otdel’nykh spetsial’nykh ekonomicheskikh pork products from Russia.
The list includes milk, meat, eggs, and government.ru>. canned meat and milk.
Responses to the Food Embargo In October, all exports of plant products from Ukraine During the past 20 years Russia has developed its own into Russia were banned. food industry.
Moldova has a pro-Russian to Russian consumers to be imports are actually made separatist breakaway region, Trans-Dniester.
The food ban will benefit Russian food comation is complicated by the fact that the country faces panies by limiting alternative choices and by familelections in November that will determine whether it iarizing the Russian consumer with domestic brand stays on its pro-Western course or pursue a course that names.
In early July, meat exports from cial support for agricultural producers by R87 billion Moldova into Russia were restricted, and in October in 2014 to spur domestic production and to help them meat exports from Moldova were banned.
Moldova depends Nikolai Fedorov also suggested that production subheavily on its trade with Russia.
Fruit is its largest export, sidies for poultry meat and pork be extended to 2018, and 90 percent of its apples were sold to Russia before instead of ending in 2015 as originally planned.
The lost revenue from apples alone is expected August, Prime Minister Medvedev instructed the Minto reach $50 million.
The average monthly salary is only $300 development of agriculture,” so that Russia can end its and 30 percent of its GDP comes from remitdependence on imports.
In the case of the agricultural bank, the purpose is to ensure adeRussian Food Imports quate capital reserves and sufficient funds for lending Although the Western press reports that Russia imports to food producers.
In early October Medvedev signed 40 percent of its food, this is a misleading statistic instructions to work out a “road map” for substitutbecause Russia is basically self-sufficient in basic food ing imports with domestic production.
In 2013, program to support agriculture prioritizes animal husRussia imported $17. billion of food from the counbandry and private farming. tries targeted by the ban, of which $9. billion was in the There are some banned imports that Russian agriaffected categories. culture cannot easily replace.
Russia cannot, for examRoughly 10 percent of EU agricultural exports go ple, simply plant apple trees to replace Polish apples in to Russia, worth around 11 billion euros one year.
The same is true for beef and dairy cattle, both per year according to the European Commission.
Rusof which continue to have depressed livestock numbers sia is also a major purchaser of American poultry meat, compared to the early 1990s.
The food ban is affected by the food ban are high-end edibles that cater expected to cost EU farmers as much as 6 billion euro. to the upper-middle class and above, products such as In the wake of the food ban, the European Commission Norwegian smoked salmon, French, cheese, or Italian met to discuss the impact on small farmers in the EU. processed meats.
For basic food commodities, replaceSome European leaders criticized the sanctions as crements are relatively easy. a number of countries have ating too great a cost for their countries.
Poland asked indicated a willingness to increase food exports to Rusthe United States to buy its apples that no longer can be sold to sia in order to compensate for banned products from Russia.
Specifically, Argentina and Brazil have EU will be affected by the ban. indicated a willingness to supply beef, and the day after Overall, Russia imported food valued at more Putin’s decree Rossel’khoznadzor approved the export of than $43 billion in 2013 , a statistic that beef from 90 meat processing plants in Brazil.
Chile is only includes food that passed through customs, but ready to sell more salmon to Russia, replacing the losses does not include food that was carried into Rusfrom Norway.
Ecuador is ready to sell more shellfish to sia for personal consumption.
Belarus said it is willing to increase the export August does not forbid Russians to travel abroad of cheese, milk, and other dairy products; and has said and bring back foreign food for personal consumpit can replace Polish apples and Dutch potatoes.
Cention, a threshold that was not defined and led to tral Asian nations are ready to provide fruits and vegesome people testing the upward limit in the early tables.
China, which does not support US-backed rose after the Central Bank raised rates in early August. sanctions against Russia, indicated a readiness to “fully” These factors will reduce purchasing power and disposmeet Russian demand for fruits and vegetables.
The cohort that wise, Armenia expressed an interest to increase its food will be most severely affected are the 16 million Russians exports as well. who live below the poverty line; 28 percent of whom Embargoes and bans typically give rise to an underare children aged 15 or less. ground economy.
There are reports of an emerging black In mid-August, the government announced the formarket whereby banned products from the West are mation of a commission to monitor retail food prices. being transported into Russia from Belarus or KazakhThe government produced a list of 40 food categories stan.
Russian officials have promised to be vigilant, but including meat, dairy products, bread, fruits and vegexporters have indicated that for small quantities it is etables.
Retailers have to report the quantity and price easy to change the country of origin in the paperwork of these goods on a daily basis.
Compared to developed nations, food costs are sumers to find stores with the cheapest prices.
For all September, Putin called on governors to monitor food households nationwide, about one-third of the family prices in their regions. budget goes toward the purchase of food.
Families with There has also been some discussion of introducing children under 16 spend a little less.
In 2007 on food, however, varies greatly depending on houseand 2008 the government negotiated price ceilings with hold income.
Urban housethe following months, price rises for the targeted cateholds spend a much smaller percentage on food than gories outstripped overall food price inflation.
Toward the Middle class Russian consumers may be squeezed end of September Prime Minister Medvedev said that in several ways.
Following the introduction of the third total price controls are not being contemplated. round of sanctions, the ruble fell against the dollar and Food trade wars seldom generate many winners.
The euro, thereby making foreign travel and the purchase main costs to Russian consumers are a bump in inflation of foreign foodstuffs more expensive for Russians who and more limited choice for high-end products.
Dollar Value of Russia’s Food Imports and Exports, 2000–2013 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Expenditure on food imports ($ 7.4 9.
As this piece will show, though, Russia’s influence in the near abroad includes many other instruments, all of which must be considered to gain a true sense of Moscow’s expanding reach in the region.
This economic power is rooted in the Soviet period, but has been carefully expanded under President Vladimir Putin.
This article will outline some of the types of economic linkage Russia employs and give examples of their effects.
Yet these sanctions and incentives have played a key role in expanding Russia’s reach around its borders.
All Roads Lead to Moscow it was bankrupt, and access to its weak import market Russia’s economic influence in what it considers the seemed a small incentive.
Finally, and perhaps most “near abroad” is rooted in the region’s shared Soviet herimportantly, under Gorbachev and Yeltsin what the Rusitage.
Since Russia was the largest unit of the USSR, sians call the “power vertical” had broken down.
The smaller the economy was privatized, and the new owners naturepublics needed Russia far more than Russia needed rally put profit ahead of state interests.
This dynamic still helps Russia to dominate the ing state-owned firms, like Gazprom, seemed to act like regional economy today. private firms.
This was the “era of the oligarchs,” and For example, Russia had a central place in the USSR’s the Kremlin seemed powerless to control the economy. energy network.
It supplied most of the oil and natural In the Putin era, all of these conditions have changed gas used by the other republics, as well as some of their dramatically, and Russia’s economic power in the “near electricity.
Dramatic growth has given Rusonly ship their products into Russia, not to foreign marsia the ability to offer loans and has made access to its kets.
In industry, other republics often produced only market a lucrative incentive.
With its new wealth has part of a complex product, depending on Russian faccome the ability to casually impose sanctions, even if tories to supply most components.
Oil and gas prices have was located in a smaller republic, the ultimate purchaser surged, which allows Moscow to cut off a few troublewould likely be in Russia.
Similarly, in agriculture Russome customers and still reap revenue far higher than sia was central; for example, republics might specialize in the Yeltsin years.
Most of their production was, again, desKremlin to enforce sanctions much more easily.
There tined for Russia—and of little interest to foreign counhas been some renationalization, notably in the oil and tries.
However, just as importantly, the private secEven in the Tsarist period workers from the Caucasus tor has been cowed to accept state priorities, even at the and Central Asia moved to Russia to find work.
Defiant companies may now face such continued in the Soviet era. measures as tax investigations, claims of environmenIn the 1990s, though, this dependence fell greatly. tal damage and food safety inspections, any of which The newly independent republics tried to build ties to can shut a firm down as effectively as outright confiscathe outside world, and thought they could defy Mostion.
There were several reasons for this. lin imposes costly sanctions—or offers costly economic First, with the Russian economy in free fall, Moscow incentives—in the “near abroad.” found it hard to credibly threaten economic sanctions.
If Russia cut trade ties with a recalcitrant partner, it would lose income—and any income was crucial in the lean 1 There is a huge gap between Russia’s economy and those of its smaller neighbors.
In the lenient Yeltsin years they were sometimes Both policy analysts and scholars quickly noted that allowed to use Russian pipelines for a modest transit energy has become the Kremlin’s strongest economic fee; for example, in the 1990s Ukraine could purchase lever.
Natural gas is an especially powerful weapon; cut-rate Turkmen gas to supplement imports from Rusunlike oil, it can generally be delivered only through sia.
Naturally, this Under President Putin, Russia’s gas power has been gave the Kremlin great influence.
Many of the former Soviet repubhave tried to find other outlets, often over Russian prolics—including the Baltic states, Belarus, Ukraine and tests.
Azerbaijian, for example, now has a pipeline to Armenia—are totally dependent on Russian gas.
The the West via Turkey and Georgia, while Turkmen gas current Ukrainian crisis has been a particularly dramatic can flow east to China. example, with Kiev facing a total gas boycott since June Moscow’s energy measures have often been camou2014.
Anti-Russian states are hit with ply blown up, an action which the Kremlin attributed to increases which are vastly higher than those imposed Chechen rebels—although most observers suspected the on “normal” customers.
However, Russia has discovered currently demands far more from Ukraine than from that more refined methods can be just as effective.
Subsidized states, notably, Russia has practiced a careful system of politimeanwhile, are granted absurdly low prices—and other cal pricing of gas.
Belarus, Armenia, Ukraine under pipelines into the tiny, poor enclave of South Ossetia to the pro-Russian Presidents Kuchma and Yanukovych, support rebel groups there.
This investment makes no and the Kremlin’s client quasi-states of South Ossetia, economic sense, but has clear political logic.
Sometimes these are nakedly linked to a Trade Leverage specific political concession.
For example, when YanuWhile Russia’s energy leverage has generated large headkovych took office in 2010 and agreed to extend Ruslines, non-specialists have sometimes failed to note the sia’s lease on naval bases in the Crimea, he was rewarded Kremlin’s extensive trade leverage.
At the same a powerful source of both economic sticks and carrots. time, customers seen as anti-Russian—such as GeorAs with energy, Russia’s client states are rewarded gia, the Baltic states, Moldova, and Ukraine under Preswith generous trade deals.
Their uncompetitive products idents Yushchenko and Poroshenko—face punitive price are bought by Russia, giving them access to a lucrative increases.
This method has been practiced by hegemonic Kuchma’s reign, Ukraine paid roughly $50 per thoustates for many years.
In 2014 the Kremlin sic study of Nazi economic policy, for example, in the demanded almost $500 per TCM—a ten-fold increase 1930s Hitler’s Germany cemented its ties to states such in ten years.
Furthermore, Russia has discovered it can as Romania and Hungary through generous, long-term also impose political debt arrangements.
Russia has followed the same states are allowed to buy gas with generous credit terms— model.
For example, in periods of amity between Russia low interest, delayed payments, even debt forgiveness in and Ukraine, Moscow happily bought outmoded locosome cases.
Opponents, on the other hand, must pay motives from Luhansk and elderly Antonov transport debts quickly, with high interest rates, and are even planes made in Kiev, just as it continues to buy tractors asked for cash payment in advance—as is now being from Minsk and cotton from Central Asia.
The beauty of these methods is chases not only provide immediate economic incentives; that, in contrast to gas embargoes, they are vastly profthey foster longer-term dependency, keeping alive outitable for Russia.
Thus the Kremlin can simultaneously dated Soviet-era economic ties and creating powerful weaken opponents and strengthen itself. constituencies supporting continued bonds with Russia.
Even the former Soviet republics which produce gas and oil have felt Russian pressure.
National Power and the Structure of no other outlet for their production than through RusForeign Trade.
Shell held a large stake in an offwhere a major motivation of the rebels was to maintain shore project near Sakhalin Island; it was harassed with jobs by keeping Russian-linked enterprises in business. “environmental complaints” and other legal hurdles until Naturally, these trade ties are also easily used for negit sold to a Russian concern—at which time the obstaative linkage.
Similarly, BP was harassed for easily be punished through temporary “transportation years until it agreed to sell its 50 percent stake in the BP/ delays” or “food safety issues” which cost the target state TNK joint venture.
For example, when Lithuania hosted the NovemRussia over the Ukrainian crisis, several McDonald’s ber 2013 summit at which Ukraine, Georgia and Molrestaurants were suddenly closed for “food safety” readova were to sign EU Association Agreements, Moscow sons.
And if a stronger signal is called for, foreign assets began a boycott of Lithuanian dairy products.
Ukrainian President Poroshenko, a frequent critic of the Kremlin, was soon told its fruit known as the “chocolate king,” saw his candy factory was unwanted—an embargo eventually extended to in Russia suddenly shuttered.
Georgia had experienced similar treatDuma has been considering a law which would allow ment since 2004, when its then-president Mikhail Saathe government to seize some assets from any country kashvili began a series of disputes with Moscow.
Georwhich sanctions Russians as “compensation.” gia had long shipped most of its mineral water and wine to Moscow.
Now, though, it was told its products were Migration Control contaminated with chemicals and could not be sold.
Yet another area which has often escaped notice from This embargo lasted until Saakashvili left office in 2013, commentators is Russia’s potential to control migration and since then has been carefully ratcheted up or down from ex-Soviet republics.
States has now discovered, perishable food products are a parwhich favor Moscow see their nationals permitted to ticularly good area for sudden Russian embargoes, since enter Russia easily, work there with few obstacles, and it is almost impossible to find alternate markets for Norsend money home without problems.
Yet when politics wegian seafood or Greek fruit before they rot. intervenes, migrants suddenly face hurdles.
For example, Ukraine has historically had millions of its citizens Finance and Investments working in Russia.
One weapon that Moscow reportUnder Putin, Russia was able to pay off its heavy debts edly used to induce President Yanukovych to refuse to to outside lenders and amass a large war chest from oil sign an EU Association Agreement was the threat of and gas sales.
For examof harassment of its workers in Russia when President ple, after Ukrainian President Yanukovych backed away Saakashvili began to defy the Kremlin.
Some Georgians from the EU, he was quickly rewarded by the Kremlin were simply rounded up, thrown onto military planes, with the promise of $15 billion in loans.
Many more faced threats at the first $3 billion tranche was paid out before he was workplaces, threats to expel their children from school, overthrown.
In addition to outright government largesse, threats to deny visas, and threats to cut off remittances Moscow can also rely on a host of state-owned corporaback to Georgia.
Since payments from migrants in Rustions to step forward with generous investment checks sia make up a major portion of Georgia’s GNP—as is in friendly countries.
In many cases such investments the case for many poor states in the near abroad—such also create platforms for further Russian influence.
This would clearly allow Russia to increase its Overall, it is clear that Moscow’s economic grip in already large energy leverage. the “near abroad” has become much stronger in recent As in the other areas discussed here, such economic years—culminating in the current project for a Eurasian incentives can swiftly become sanctions if a country Union.
Its influence reaches across many spheres of ecoturns against the Kremlin.
Yet here too, as in other areas, Russian offican be seen as the economic equivalent of the “masked cials have become more refined.
For example, they have warfare” strategy which Russia has pursued in Crimea worked for years to effectively nationalize Western oil and the Donbass.
Escaping to Safety could stay 90 days and after 90 days should leave the terUkraine’s civilians are being forced to move out of the ritory of the Russian Federation.
Obtaining a labor permit for work activities. tion Service , in the period from April 1 through The last option—buying a labor permit—does not enjoy August 30, 2014, about 820,000 citizens of Ukraine popularity among Ukrainians who were forced to leave moved into Russia.
Second, • about 130,000 Ukrainian citizens applied for temlabor activities are restricted mainly to entrepreneurporary asylum or refugee status; ship and working in a private household.
The applications are reviewed on their less person to stay temporarily on the territory of the merits within 3–6 months after the day when the appliRussian federation in accordance with Article 12 of cant receives the confirmation that his/her refugee stathe Law on Refugees.
The refugee status is the Russian Government adopted the Provisional Simgranted for a period of up to three years, which can be plified Rules for Granting Temporary Asylum in Rusextended if circumstances under which the applicant has sia to Ukrainian Citizens.
The applicant is issued applicant and members of his family submit their applia refugee identification document.
Russian passports cation for temporary asylum to the local office of the are not issued to persons who are granted refugee status.
Rubles; The decision on granting temporary asylum is made 6. an authorization for placement in the temporary by the FMS’s territorial office where the application accommodation center for refugees from the local was submitted within 3 days after the submission of government agency in charge of migration control; the application.
When the decision to grant tempo7. healthcare services and medication; rary asylum is made, the FMS territorial office in the 8. job placement assistance at a professional training area where the applicant actually stays issues to him, establishment; within 24 hours, the temporary asylum authorization.
However, the FMS’s terriAccording to Federal Migration Service data, torial office often issued the asylum authorization withfewer than 7% of applicants receive refugee status. out required medical clearance procedure.
Temporary asylum is granted for a period of up to Temporary Asylum one year, which can be extended for one more year an Temporary Asylum on the territory of the Russian Fedindefinite number of times pursuant to the decision of eration is an opportunity for a foreign citizen or state8 The Provisional Simplified Rules for Granting Temporary Asy6 Art.
Federal Law Nr 4528-1 On Refugees of February 19, 1993. lum in Russia to Ukrainian Citizens dated August 1, 2014.
When Ukraine also assists residents of Eastern Ukraine forced a Ukrainian citizen is granted temporary asylum, he to move from the occupied areas and areas of the antiremains a Ukrainian citizen.
The state agencies in charge are relinquish the status granted, receive the national passchallenged by the complexities of calculating the costs port of Ukraine and re-gain the status of a person temof the tasks and organizing and coordinating the assisporary staying in Russia.
Although there is one strong tance to the internally displaced persons because disadvantage—a person without the temporary asylum there is no central registration system. status may not be employed on the territory of Russia.
In October 2014, the Ukrainian Parliament passed Law on the Rights and Freedoms of Internally Displaced The Current Situation in Some Regions of Person to protect people displaced by the conflict.
This the Russian Federation law gives IDPs a specific set of rights—protection against Russia’s areas bordering Ukraine carry most of the burdiscrimination, forcible return and assistance in volunden from the influx of humanitarian migrants.
It also simplifies access to different social ever, neither the regional authorities nor the official staand economic services, especially residence registration tistical bureaus could provide complete, uniform and (which is a requirement for accessing banking services demographically based information on newcomers from and registering a business) and unemployment benefits.
It seems that a large number of Ukrainians Furthermore, the law obliges the government to start coming to Russia are women and children.
According the this law, the IDPs The regions accepting humanitarian migration from include persons who lived in Crimea and the city of Ukraine bear significant costs associated with the financSevastopol prior to March 18, 2014 or in the areas of ing mandated by the federal government.
The expenses will be partially compensated by the federal status of involuntary migrant may be granted upon center.
Regions accepting fewer choose an area where to move and stay within the terrirefugees received less support.
When they are unable to freely choose migration is a burden on regions’ budgets, because an area in the Ukraine where they would live, IMs may regions had to spend money that had been budgeted for. stay in provisional accommodation centers for IMs and receive medical, social and other services in these centers as provided for by the law.
On September 2, 2014 the UNHCR estimated that approximately 260,000 people were displaced inter9 Official web-page of the Ministry of Health of the Russian nally on the territory of Ukraine.
The most difficult situation in the Donetsk region However, nobody has clear and sufficient data on the ; the city of Kiev , Zaporoamount of humanitarian migrants and their demozhye ; the city of Dnipropetrovsk (20,186 graphic characteristics; nobody can explain their motiIDPs); the city of Kharkov ; the city of vations in choosing a destination in the search of greater Luhansk ; the city of Odessa , safety.
The smallest amount ities comes against the background of a serious skeptiof IDPs settled in the city of Ternopil , Volyn cism toward official statistics.
Besides, the absence of , Rivne and the Transcarpathian Ukraine IDP registration in Ukraine and the lack of data seri.
In Volyn Oblast, 17,213 Ukrainian citizens were ously complicate counting the IDPs within Ukraine and relocated from the Republic of Crimea and the city of beyond its territory and providing assistance to them.
The regional state offices in control the situation. charge of IDPs together with other government agenAbout the Author Olga Gulina is founder of the Russian Institute on Migration Policy based in Berlin, Germany.
She is a frequent commentator on Russian and European Union migration law and its implementation.
The Digest draws on contributions to the German-language Russland-Analysen (<www.laenderanalysen.de/russland>), the CSS analytical network on Russia and Eurasia , and the Russian Regional Report.
The Russian Analytical Digest covers political, economic, and social developments in Russia and its regions, and looks at Russia’s role in international relations.
The major focus is on the role of dissent, opposition and civil society in their historic, political, sociological and cultural dimensions.
With a unique archive on dissident culture under socialism and with an extensive collection of publications on Central and Eastern Europe, the Research Centre regularly hosts visiting scholars from all over the world.
One of the core missions of the institute is the dissemination of academic knowledge to the interested public.
This includes regular e-mail newsletters covering current developments in Central and Eastern Europe.
The Center for Security Studies at ETH Zurich The Center for Security Studies at ETH Zurich is a Swiss academic center of competence that specializes in research, teaching, and information services in the fields of international and Swiss security studies.
The CSS also acts as a consultant to various political bodies and the general public.
The CSS is engaged in research projects with a number of Swiss and international partners.
The Center‘s research focus is on new risks, European and transatlantic security, strategy and doctrine, area studies, state failure and state building, and Swiss foreign and security policy.
The program is tailored to the needs of experienced senior executives and managers from the private and public sectors, the policy community, and the armed forces.
The CSS runs the International Relations and Security Network , and in cooperation with partner institutes manages the Crisis and Risk Network , the Parallel History Project on Cooperative Security , the Swiss Foreign and Security Policy Network , and the Russian and Eurasian Security Network.
With some 24,000 students and 1,900 graduates every year, Zurich is also Switzerland’s largest university.
Research and teaching relate to the period from late antiquity to contemporary history.
The Institute offers its 2,600 students a Bachelor’s and Master’s Degree in general history and various specialized subjects, including a comprehensive Master’s Program in Eastern European History.
We do this through collaborating on the publication of electronic newsletters, articles, books and public presentations.
Any opinions expressed in Russian Analytical Digest are exclusively those of the authors.
