The precedence of Russian military intervention illustrates the porosity and potential for conﬂicts in other post-Soviet border regions.
The Estonian borderland city of Narva, populated predominantly by Russian-speakers, is one such potential site of tension.
Based on preliminary ﬁndings and data collected in Narva in 2013, this article provides an overview of citizenship, identity, and geographic afﬁliation issues among Narva’s Russian-speaking community in an effort to generate insights as to how any Russian overtures and potential intervention might be received in Narva.
Narva; Estonia; Russia; Russian-speakers; identity; citizenship Introduction On 26 February 2015, in honor of its Independence Day, Estonia hosted a military parade and invited troops from fellow North Atlantic Treaty Organization countries to participate in the celebration.
Estonia and its Baltic neighbors, Latvia and Lithuania, have all been members of both the European Union and NATO since 2004, but Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014, still internationally recognized as part of Ukraine, raised concern in states adjoining Russia that Russian expansion may threaten other border areas, including along Estonia’s northeastern borderland, where the City of Narva is located.
Narva shares many paralleled similarities with Crimea and the Donbas region.
Russia has, in fact, been militarily active in several of its border areas.
In late March 2015, the Russian military conducted large-scale “sudden” exercises on several fronts.
Russia has also been upgrading military equipment and capacity in the Stavropol region of the North Caucasus.
Russia’s increased militarization has intensiﬁed NATO and the United States military activities in the Baltics, exacerbating tensions and diplomatic woes.
Given recent history with Crimea and the presence of ethnic Russian irredenta in easternmost Estonia, a closer examination of Narva’s population in an attempt to gauge its sense of citizenship, identity, and spatial afﬁliation is warranted.
Narva was also the home of the Estonian Workers’ Commune , which provided a short-lived Bolshevik foothold in Estonia and partial legitimation to Soviet occupation.
Although the city had long been associated with Estonian territory, Narva was part of the St.
Following the Estonian War of Independence and 1920 Treaty of Tartu, Narva and its twin-town of Ivangorod (which had been administratively merged for centuries) became part of the interwar, independent Republic of Estonia.
During Soviet occupation, Narva’s territorial afﬁliation and its associated border also changed.
This Estonian–Russian border discrepancy is not unusual, particularly within the context of the former Soviet Union ; however, unlike other violent territorial disputes , after decades the discrepancy was peacefully resolved in 2014 , with the Soviet-era border emerging as the agreed-upon de jure border.
Narva’s population also changed in tandem with broader geopolitical and territorial shifts.
These settlement trends interspersed a Russian-speaking population throughout the Estonian SSR; however, Narva became the largest Russian-speaking city in Estonia built for and by a Soviet Russian citizenry disconnected to the city’s Estonian past and population.
During the late 1980s, the Estonian and other Baltic republics non-violently organized for independence from the Soviet Union.
This policy had the effect of rendering stateless all Soviet era migrants and their descendants, most of whom were ethnic Russians who did not possess pre-Soviet Estonian citizenship.
Narva’s post-Soviet changes reﬂect and mirror broader socioeconomic shifts impacting other predominantly Russian-speaking communities in Estonia.
While the, “Baltic is not the Balkans,” , the heightened regional tensions coupled with their ethnicization highlight Narva’s prickly geopolitical position and the necessity to better understand Narva’s Russianspeakers.
Narvan perceptions and potential reactions to Russian activities Within this dynamic geopolitical and regional context, one of the authors of this piece conducted ﬁeldwork to examine Narva’s Russian-speaking community to understand the community’s citizenship practices, perceptions, and identities.
Much can be gleaned from the project’s preliminary ﬁndings to speculate how Narvans might react to Russian military activities and regional overtures.
The lead author conducted ﬁeldwork in the autumn of 2013 as part of an ongoing doctoral project, just weeks prior to the onset of the “Euromaidan” uprising in Ukraine.
Trimbach Narvans and citizenship Although the Estonian state has made recent reforms to its contentious citizenship policy , Narvans’ formal citizenship statuses and perceptions of such policies remains complex.
When it comes to the perceived importance of citizenship, Narvans are as varied as their statuses.
When asked to deﬁne how citizenship should be determined in Estonia, a slight majority responded that citizenship should be based on birthplace , challenging the primary legal principle of jus sanguinis currently used in Estonian policy.
When asked to address whether or not an Estonian language exam should be a citizenship requirement, a majority of Narvans stated that it should be a requirement ; however, during interviews most Narvans argued that the current language requirements were unrealistic and a major obstacle to naturalization.
From these data trends, it may appear that Russian-speaking Narvans might be expected to feel antagonism towards the Estonian state, but the coalesced data suggest that there is not a homogeneous Narvan citizenship group or associated identity seeking to separate from Estonia.
Rather, Narvan Russian-speakers comprise a variety of citizenship status groups and citizenship understandings that often challenge Estonian state policy, but do not oppose the Estonian state.
Narvans and politics When it comes to politics in Estonia, Narva’s Russian-speaking community remains politically disengaged and fractured.
Based on survey responses, Narvans stated that they are “not very interested” or “not at all interested” in politics.
Narvans also tend to be split when it comes to perceptions of political and state accessibility and representation at all political scales in Estonia, Russia, and the EU, with the local being perceived as the most open and reﬂecting their interests.
As one Narva resident noted, “Every political party tries to protect their own interests.
The preliminary results also reﬂect the particularities of Estonian policies related to citizenship as practice.
Such policies highlight underlying inequitable political relations, which impact the civic and political life of Russian-speakers.
From these data, it appears that Russian-speaking Narvans are politically fractured, disengaged, and unincorporated.
Narva’s Russian-speakers also seem to be wary of Estonian party politics and non-local political institutions, which are perceived as out of reach or unrepresentative of their varied political interests.
Narvans, like other Russian-speaking communities outside of the Russian Federation, maintain plural and hybrid identities , which are not deﬁned solely by the territorial state.
When various citizenship status groups were asked to deﬁne their spatial identities, Estonian citizens and Russian citizens alike were more inclined to deﬁne themselves, respectively, with Estonia and Russia.
At ﬁrst glance, these spatial identity ﬁndings imply a strong relationship between formal national citizenship and spatial identity.
Narvans overall tend to maintain a strong local identity, and most residents geographically imagine Narva as unique within Estonia.
These different associations with spaces and identity with homeland reﬂects the plural and hybrid identities of Narva residents.
Anecdotally, many residents recognize the spaces outside of Narva’s municipal borders as “Estonia,” while Narva remains solely characterized as “Narva” and distinct from Estonia altogether.
For many Narvans, spaces outside of Narva are almost foreign or distinctly Estonian.
Hybrid and complex spatial identities were revealed and reinforced through interviews.
I am like half Estonian and half Russian and I am really lucky and I really like it… And it is hard.
The preliminary data suggest that Narva’s Russian-speakers embody an array of plural and hybrid spatial identities, with an emphasis on the local.
Complex spatial identities have consequences and political entanglements.
From the data, it seems that spatial identities problematize how Russian-speakers identify and engage with political and territorial spaces, while also reifying the importance of localisms and local community afﬁliations.
Discussion and implications Narvans are not a monolithic community and should not be as assumed to be a homogenous group associated solely with Russia or Russian-ness.
Narva’s Russianspeakers and ethnic Russians comprise an array of political perceptions, citizenship statuses, and spatial identities.
Such variations coupled with the prospect of hybrid warfare or cyberwar, already a major threat to Estonia’s e-state system , make any accurate geopolitical or security analyses difﬁcult.
Although Narvans maintain plural and hybrid spatial identities and citizenship practices and perceptions, they emphasize the local spaces and communities in which they are embedded and engaged.
Narvans perceive their hometown and community as distinct even when compared to other Estonian Russian communities, like those in Tallinn.
Such strong local attachments, coupled with a lack of social integration and political incorporation also pose serious challenges to Estonian, EU, and NATO activities to counter Russian overtures and nationalist discourse.
Narva’s political and citizenship landscape remains fractured, and Narvans themselves tend to be politically disengaged.
While Narvans have pursued local autonomy in the past and maintain strong localisms, politically they are weak and uninterested.
Although Narvans do participate in political and civic life, particularly at the local/city level, they tend to perceive the Estonian, Russian, and EU political systems as out of reach.
Citizenship continues to be problematic for Russian-speakers and the Estonian state.
Narvans with Russian citizenship and stateless residency view Estonian citizenship as inaccessible without additional worthwhile beneﬁts and remain resentful for the loss of citizenship and political opportunities following independence.
Stateless and Russian citizens in Narva also tend to share similar views of Russian citizenship and politics, while maintaining trust and strong political engagement at the local rather than national scales.
While Narvan Russian-speakers remain resentful of the Estonian state, they also are wary of Russian overtures for fear of instability and lower living standards.
Narva’s strong local attachments and Russian linkages by no means equate to affable responses to any future Russian interventions or potential annexation.
Narva’s proximity to its Russian twin-town of Ivangorod just across the Russian border and Narvan cross-border experiences problematize Russian engagement in the region because of the stark economic, social, and political differences illustrated between the two entwined communities.
Ivangorod and Narva have historic ties (at various times the municipalities merged), innumerable familial cross-border bonds, and shared economic interests.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the cities’ ties were severed because of border re-demarcation, and Ivangorod suffered steep economic and living standard declines, compared to Narva.
Current waves of Russian nationalism may have dampened Ivangorod’s regionalist aspirations and Narvans’ strong local afﬁliations; however, Narvans, cognizant of Ivangorod’s troubled situation, maintain their strong localisms while remaining cautiously bound to Estonia and Europe.
Narva’s precariousness and Narvans’ strong local attachment illustrate the necessity for scaled-down research and more critical approaches to the current geopolitical dilemma.
As media and diplomatic storm clouds gather over Narva and other potential sites of tension, it is imperative to keep in mind local speciﬁcities and community dynamics.
The current pace of militarization and security-driven discourse is subject to essentialist and broad assumptions.
Population by Citizenship, Sex, Age Group and Place of Residence, 31 December 2011.
VjOMg6TNPEI Freeman, Colin, Tom Parﬁtt, Prince Rosa, Chan Szu Ping, and Dominiczak Peter.15.
