The aim of the paper is to scrutinize the process of politicization Kosovo; legitimacy; of contested international norms (in particular, territorial sovereignty precedent; narratives; Russia; and the right to self-determination) in the case of Russia’s legitimacy Serbia; Ukraine claims in Ukraine.
Introduction On 16 March 2014, the legislature of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the local government, Sevastopol held a referendum on the status of the Ukrainian peninsula.
During the referendum, the people of Crimea were asked whether they wanted to join Russia as a federal subject, or preferred to restore the 1992 Crimean constitution that implied a larger autonomy for Crimea within Ukraine.
According to the organizers of the referendum, 97% of valid votes were in favour of unification with Russia, a fact that occurred several days after.
Both the cases of Kosovo and Crimea have triggered contradictory narratives, either supporting the change of borders based on the principle of self-determination or contesting it as an evident breach of international law.
Those narratives have been used by politicians to influence public opinion and legitimize their decisions to the international community.
Based on those premises, the present article focuses on the main legitimization discourse (understood as the rhetorical means used for justifying the annexation of Crimea) from the perspective of various actors with contrasting opinions.
ROTARU AND M TRONCOTĂ instrumentalizing Balkan’s precedents and Western intervention in connection with the contested international norms concerning self-determination, secession, independence and their various interpretations, outside the strict legal framework.
The theoretical approach that we chose for this analysis focused on the uses of policy narratives for legitimization in foreign policy.
The empirical part of the analysis thus tried to assess the instrumentality of the Kosovo precedent in Russian foreign policy discourse since the beginning of the Ukrainian crisis.
By examining the elites’ policy narratives referring to the Kosovo–Crimea parallel after 2014, this paper tries to contribute to the existing research, by tackling the complex interplay between politics and international law for the legitimization of foreign policy decisions.
Within this context, we assumed a constructivist approach to show that in this particular case differences in legitimacy claims may derive from power-political sources rather than international law.
We argue that the difficult task of Russia’s intense legitimization efforts was faced with several inconsistencies.
In our view, those inconsistencies show that the Kosovo–Crimea parallel represents a form of instrumentalization of Balkans’ recent past in a way that favours Russia only.
We started by scrutinizing a selection of recent theoretical contributions on the importance of legitimacy in international interactions and reviewing several recent analyses on Russia’s foreign policy behaviour.
Then, we focused on analysing the main policy narratives, which occurred after the annexation of Crimea in the countries directly involved in this territorial dispute – Russia and Ukraine.
Finally, together with several methodological remarks about the way we have structured the empirical research, we analysed the findings and drew several conclusions pointing towards Russia’s strategy of legitimization for domestic and foreign audiences.
Critical approaches tried to problematize the ways norms are defined, renegotiated and contested.
They showed that the ways in which states adjust their foreign policies to international norms depend on the various understandings of what constitutes ‘appropriate behaviour’ in a given issue area.
Wiener showed that cultural and organizational practices contribute to the interpretation of meanings that are entailed in fundamental norms which are, in turn, constitutive of democratic governance beyond the state.
For example, compliance theorists in both law and political science assess the effectiveness of norms with reference to implementation as well as processes of transposition, internalization, social learning, constitutionalization and legalization.
Thus, it is important to highlight that there are contrasting theoretical positions between IR specialists and international lawyers regarding legality and legitimacy claimed by countries when they take actions beyond their borders.
The recent ‘narrative turn’ in IR has improved our understanding of how narratives influence state policy choices.
Subotic provided an interesting approach to foreign policy analysis especially in the case study of Serbia’s change in foreign policy behaviour regarding the disputed status of Kosovo.
She argues that state narratives can and do guide and influence contemporary policy decisions, showing how myths are often mixed with objective facts in order to legitimate a certain view on international politics.
This ‘meaning-making’ process reduces political space or debate and conflict into an area, which can be fully controlled by the state apparatus that invokes the legitimating mechanism.
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russia has often invoked both the domestic and international law for explaining its positioning towards the post-Soviet countries.
In the literature, scholars have identified several main sources of legitimization in Russia’s foreign policy.
As such, it was argued that one of the main goals of Moscow’s foreign policy has been the construction of its role as the defender of the compatriots abroad and the guarantor of their rights.
It is important to note here that this view assumes the existence, from a Russian perspective, of a serious threat to its security, defined as a direct threat to the life and physical well-being of Russian-speaking people that would legitimate its own military intervention.
Another source of Russia’s legitimization strategy of its military interventions, both at home and abroad, was to take Western actions as a point of reference (e.g.
The literature on the topic refers to three main situations when Russia elaborated legitimacy claims for its foreign policy decisions – the war in Chechnya, the war with Georgia and, most recently, the military intervention in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.
ROTARU AND M TRONCOTĂ war in Chechnya, for instance, was described as a counterterrorist operation since its beginning , and the character of ‘fight against terrorism’ was highlighted after the 9/11 attacks, directly connected with the US’ anti-terrorism campaign.
The 2008 invasion of Georgia was presented as a peacekeeping operation meant to defend the lives of Russian citizens and peacekeepers from South Ossetia, who supposedly were attacked by Georgian troops.
Then, as the war in Georgia developed, Moscow even accused Tbilisi of genocide against the local population.
And finally, the annexation of Crimea was framed by Russia as a democratic expression of the right to self-determination.
In contrast to the previous cases, Russian military intervention was a cover operation and was later described as a necessary means to secure the framework for local population to democratically express their will.
Tsygankov argues that even if Russia’s foreign policy has been formulated in response to various international contexts, it has, however, displayed a remarkable degree of historical continuity.
The scholar identified three persistent patterns in Moscow’s foreign policy thinking and behaviour that have been developed and determined over time by the established images of the country and the outside world – Westernist, Statist, and Civilizationist.
The Westernizers highlight the similarity of Russia with the West and perceive the West as the most viable and progressive civilization in the world.
The Civilizationists argue that Russian values are different from those of the West and seek to spread them abroad, outside the West, with predilection in the former Soviet space.
They have sought to challenge the Western system of values insisting on Russian cultural superiority.
The Neo-Eurasianists are today the most prominent exponents of the Civilizationists.
In Tsygankov’s view, the most influential school of Russia’s foreign policy thinking is that of Statists.
They are explicit in choosing values of power, stability and sovereignty over those of freedom and security.
The Statists are not inherently anti-western, however, they argue that liberal values should be established to strengthen not weaken the state.
After the annexation of Crimea, Tsygankov argued that Russia’s recent actions in Ukraine demonstrate both change and continuity in its foreign policy.
The scholar considers that the assertiveness of Vladimir Putin’s foreign policy is meant to signal that the Kremlin views revolutions in the former Soviet space, as West’s attempts to undermine Moscow’s role and status in Eurasia and insists on Russia being treated as an equal partner in relations with the United States and the European Union.
In contrast, Lo considers that even if the control over Ukraine is integral to Moscow’s understanding of national security (the risk of ‘losing’ Ukraine after Euromaidan being perceived as compromising the safety of the Russian Federation itself), the annexation of Crimea was, first of all, determined by President Putin’s feeling of personal humiliation.
This view offers an instrumental explanation to the choices elites make when deciding to present history in a particular way.
Elements of this rhetoric were also used in the case of Russia’s intervention in Crimea, and this implied a reinterpretation of the past, building on controversial claims about the history of Ukraine from a Russian perspective.
Those extralegal claims of legitimization are the types of arguments used in elite policy narratives that we consider relevant for unpacking Russia’s current justification strategy and for explaining the use of Kosovo precedent in particular.
The starting point of our analysis was the observation that, in the context of the Ukrainian crisis, Russian political representatives had advocated for Russia’s right to take similar actions as those of the West in Kosovo.
Since the beginning of 2014, the parallel between Kosovo and Crimea has been widely used in the public space based on both legal and extralegal arguments.
As the validity of this parallel has already been thoroughly discussed in the field of international law (see more in German Law Journal 2015; Grant 2015), we decided to focus mostly on the ways dominant narratives on Crimea have been constructed and performed in the field of foreign policy, with a focus on the extralegal claims of legitimacy.
We believe that a thorough investigation into these extralegal claims of legitimacy made by Russia in the particular case of Crimea is needed.
The main case study of the analysis is thus the politicization of the so-called ‘Kosovo precedent’ for legitimization purposes.
Based on the aforementioned theoretical contributions, we would place Russia’s legitimization foreign policy narratives in Crimea at the interstice of these main arguments.
As such, we will not focus on the discussion whether the annexation of Crimea is breaching the international law, but rather on the political instrumentalization of this issue in Russia’s foreign policy.
This implies focusing on elite discourses, as they have the role to produce and reproduce legitimacy claims based on specific elements that would trigger the support of targeted audiences.
From the interpretative discourse analysis perspective, legitimization is understood as a hermeneutic process in which certain meanings are selected and attributed by elites in their foreign policy narratives in order to convince the public on the ‘rightfulness’ of a certain action on the territory of another state.
This particular definition of legitimization goes beyond the issue of legality and the two do not overlap.
The purpose is to show how the Kosovo case was constructed as a precedent in the annexation of Crimea.
Thus, the focus of the article will be on those particular arguments which have been selected and ‘performed’ by the main elites which have referred to the Kosovo–Crimea parallel in their public policy narratives.
In the context of our case study, we believe that policy narratives centred on the Kosovo–Crimea parallel are relevant indicators for Russia’s legitimization strategy in foreign policy.
As Subotic argues, policy narratives are powerful tools of influencing state decisions because they redefine how certain events are represented in public discourse and fix their meaning in place.
After, a number of policy narratives based on similar arguments they presented were selected, and in the last phase we conducted field research in which we interviewed experts from Russia and Ukraine on the identified patterns during the desk research.
From the methodological perspective, the main challenge was to select the most relevant legitimization discourses, and to identify the most relevant actors performing them.
Following this analytic model, in the first stage we identified a different set of actors from the countries directly involved in the debate – Ukraine and Russia; and focused on gathering major public statements referring to the situation in Crimea with a direct or indirect reference to Kosovo.
We mainly followed speeches/statements of state representatives, such as the President, the Prime Minister and the Minister of Foreign Affairs and, in some cases, other relevant political figures.
Beyond public statements of politicians, we have included as relevant texts that consolidated the dominant policy narrative the prominent experts’ op-eds and think tanks’ online analyses.
The main criteria we used for the selection of these sources were the Internet or expert relevant rating points (e.g.
Global Go to Think Tank Index Report 2015), experts’ previous experience in the region and regularity in commenting foreign policy events in the analysed region (e.g.
We decided to focus the narrative analysis around the whole year 2014 – both before the concrete date of the annexation and its follow up in order to identify the main legitimization discursive patterns.
We calibrated our interpretative analysis based on Putin’s 18 March 2014 address, representing the first official position of the Kremlin announcing the annexation of Crimea.
We took this speech as the main reference point, which has guided our subsequent policy narratives analysis for the following stages of the research.
Then, we revisited these initially formulated patterns, and based on them we structured the main questions, which guided our research interviews conducted in Ukraine and Russia, between April and May 2016.
Constructing and deconstructing ‘The Precedent’ in policymakers’ narratives The main features of the Kremlin’s Crimea legitimization narrative were presented during the 18 March 2014 address of President Putin to State Duma deputies, Federation Council members, heads of Russian regions and civil society representatives in the Kremlin and have been developed in the subsequent speeches and discourses of Russian political elites.
From the beginning, the legitimization arguments have targeted simultaneously both domestic and foreign audiences.
Vladimir Putin tried to warn Russia’s elites and ordinary citizens for the upcoming negative consequences due to international pressure and future economic sanctions.
Vladimir Putin mentioned Russia’s support for the reunification of Germany and the importance of freedom for the United States citizens.
One of the most striking features of the Kremlin’s discourse is the frequent reliance of revisiting history.
A guiding feature in the Kremlin’s legitimization narrative has been the use of extralegal claims as arguments connected with international law.
These references to extralegal elements have been a constant in Russia’s foreign policy discourse regarding Crimea; however, they have been integrated in a narrative focused on the respect for the international law.
The other important feature we have identified in Russia’s discourse is the frequent invocation of the West’s reinterpretation of the international law.
Yet, despite this first impulse, Russian leaders have been then constructing a humanitarian argument in case of Crimea as well.
Thus, Russia’s rationale behind the humanitarian argument has been constructed around counterfactual security threats to the lives of local population rather than facts.
In other words, the Kremlin took actions based on presumptions that in Crimea there ‘could have occurred’ violent clashes, without any validated evidence (as it was in the case of Kosovo – where the UN attested the real threat of ethnic cleansing).3 Furthermore, Moscow has emphasized that after the ‘coup’ in Kiev, Crimea was in particular in danger ‘because it was more densely populated by Russians and Russian-speaking than other parts of Ukraine’ and that the Kremlin was ‘very concerned about any possible ethnic cleansing’ there.
Kiev’s reaction to the annexation of Crimea came shortly and was predictable.
Ukraine has maintained since then this conflictual position denying Russia’s legitimization claims.
The majority of Western experts have dismissed the comparisons between Crimea and all the countless secessions, coups and undemocratic regime changes around the world.
Trying to deconstruct the ‘forced similarities’, Drezner argues that the ethnic Albanians living in Kosovo feared Serbian repression, just as Russians living in Crimea feared the newly empowered Ukrainian nationalists that had assumed power in Kiev.
He states that those fears may be valid, but their exploitation and their consequences make one claim of self-determination more legitimate than the other.
The expert stresses also that the guiding principles between the two processes were completely different – Russia acted unilaterally in Crimea, whereas Kosovo’s independence was a matter of diplomacy and ‘giving a chance to negotiations’ in which all parties were involved.
By seizing control of the peninsula, Russia gave up on any chance for multilateral diplomacy, and developed a policy of ‘occupy first and negotiate later’ , which is evidently not in line with the international law.
Wesley Clark, the former Supreme Allied Commander in Europe for NATO during Kosovo crisis, totally dismantled Russia’s argument based on Kosovo–Crimea similarities.
Compared to the above views, many Russian experts have been in line with the Kremlin’s contradictory narratives in relation to the West.
Lukyanov reminded that it was the West that did not rest until Yugoslavia, a large, prosperous and independent country was transformed into a bunch of small, deprived of their own ambitions states.
Karaganov accused also the West for misusing the chance for a normal relationship with Russia after the cold war when bombed Yugoslavia.
Then the expansion of the West’s area of its own military, political and economic control and influence pushed Russia towards the ‘Weimar syndrome’, a condition that once led a humiliated Germany to Nazism, and that made Russia to look for revenge.
According to Karaganov, this syndrome had to be cured by Russia by fighting in Chechnya and Georgia, and later by taking over Crimea.
Putin’s justification for occupying part of Ukraine, and threatening to invade the entire country, has been to save the Russians there from the fascists.
Besides Russian experts, we have identified also Western commentators that expressed similar narratives to Russian official Crimea legitimization discourse.
Other critical perspectives showed that in assessing the two cases on the basis of the legality of their secessions or the influences of surrounding powers, the two situations are not as different as they may originally seem.
This regional disparity, with ethnic and cultural tensions that entail substantive difference from each nation’s main population, makes them conducive to secessionist movements.
Experts’ narratives have reproduced the same dividing lines of arguments between the Russian–Ukrainian perceptions of the comparison.
We identified in many of those online expert debates similar elements with the ones from official narratives and the uses of extralegal claims in assessing the legality of the annexation when compared to the case of Kosovo.
This supports our initial assumption that one of the main goals of Russia’s legitimization strategy is to promote a dominating narrative of the events in Crimea in the international public sphere.
We argue that this transfer of narratives from officials to experts is part of the symbolic ‘meaning making’ process of constructing the Kosovo precedent as a legitimization mechanism for the annexation of Crimea.
The ‘Uncomfortable Comparison’ and its Impact in the views of local experts’ narratives 3.4.1.
Reinterpreting the western actions in the Kosovo war One of the most recurring patterns from the policy narratives that has been confirmed in the elite interviews was the use of Western actions as a source of legitimacy for Russia.
They explained that as the United States has been allowed to intervene in other states, Russians should be allowed to do the same.
For Russians what Americans and other Western countries have done on international arena is a precedent to be used.
These experts consider that Russians appeal to the international law and reinterpret it as do the Americans.
For each stage there are documents, even if the way these documents were obtained can be discussed.
For Russia it is important to create a façade of legality of its actions, ‘to present all its actions as responding to the international law’ because Russia wants to be part of the Western democratic community and is looking at the West for examples of behaviour, for cases which it can reinterpret and use for justification.
The dividing symbols attached to a territory The invocation of the history of Crimea in the aftermath of its annexation has been considered generally by both Ukrainian and Russian experts as targeting, first of all, the Russian domestic public.
Yet, the Russian experts acknowledged that Moscow omits to remind the population that Russian Empire conquered Crimea from the Ottoman Empire or that the Tatar Khanate had a longer history in Crimea than Russia.
Nikitina considers that the historic arguments used by the Kremlin after the annexation of Crimea are part of a post-factum rationalization, more than real justification for the events.
This perspective points, thus, to a strategic use of history in Russia’s foreign policy, based on a politicized selection of past events to be promoted in public discourse.
Zadorozhnyi considers that the historic arguments are part of a ‘psychological war’ and are not legally substantiated.
He highlights that the moment of transferring of Crimea to the Soviet Ukraine, in 1954, should not be brought into discussion by the Kremlin, as the Russian Federation does not have the right to question an act of a different state.
Furthermore, in 1954 besides Crimea, parts of the Ukrainian SSR, the Rostov region, were transferred to the Russian SFSR as well, and the surfaces of the two regions were comparable.
Then, as long as the former Soviet republics recognized their borders of 1991 at Belavezha Pucha, Moscow’s questioning of the administrative act of 1954 is not legitimate.
This position was expressed also by other experts that stressed the dangers of reinterpretation of history for relativization of borders, which could lead to a domino effect and a climate of insecurity.
The risks of instrumentalization of history in foreign policy reside in the clash between subjective interpretations of the same events by different sides, deepening the dividing lines between Ukraine and Russia on one side and Kosovo and Serbia on the other.
For instance, Ukrainian experts consider that the role of Crimea in Russian history was embellished and that the allegedly large role that Crimea played for the Russian nation (e.g. the place where prince Vladimir was baptized) and the references to the peninsula as the land of Russian glory are exaggerations.
Respondents have drawn attention to the need for moderation and caution in the politicized views of contemporary politicians and have confirmed that those subjective interpretations of history are one of the strongest extralegal elements to be found in the Kosovo–Crimea parallel.
The Ukrainian experts insisted also on the procedural shortcomings highlighting that Kosovo took 10 years to become independent, while in Crimea the events occurred in only three weeks and the date of referendum was changed thrice, each time shortening the preparatory stage.
Marga argued that this fact shows a clear misconduct in organizing Crimea’s referendum pointing to an already pre-established result.
And even if the Ukrainian was the only official language, the documents and the advertisements were written in Ukrainian and the foreign movies were dubbed in Ukrainian, this was considered as creating some discomfort not oppression , as Russian and Ukrainian languages are mutually understandable.
On the other side, it was underlined that Russian has always been used as a second language not only in Crimea but in the whole Ukraine.
In everyday life and even in state institutions Russian has been largely used, and in real practice one being able to choose which language to speak.
This aspect regarding the use of Russian language serves as a counterargument to the narrative of Russia’s claim for a humanitarian intervention in Crimea.
All the interviewed Ukrainian and part of Russian experts agreed also that there were no physical threats for the Russian population in Crimea, after the Euromaidan and that there were no ethnic conflicts, no open clashes, no vivid separatism and no real pro-independence party.
In other words, based on their status of ‘new-comers’ the Russians from Crimea had no valid reasons to have been subjected to a humanitarian intervention.
Thus, from these perspectives, the humanitarian argument is based on cultural and ethnic grounds rather than facts.
In support of this idea, Umland stressed that the invocation of Russia’s rights in Crimea based on ethnic factor reminds the argument that Hitler used when Sudeten territory was annexed.
Compared to the above-mentioned opinions, Evseev and Oznobishchev stroke a discordant note.
The two experts consider that Russia’s humanitarian intervention was based on valued arguments of real danger for the local population.
Evseev considers also that even if it would have been more legal for Russia only to recognize the independence of Crimea not to annex it, the presence of Ukrainian military bases in the peninsula would have raised the risk of military clashes.
That is why Russia had no choice but to accept Crimea to join Russia The interviewed experts showed that their perception of the Kosovo–Crimea parallel was very much influenced by Russian official narrative.
And those ‘reactivated’ legitimacy claims channelled experts’ perceptions on the subject.
From a constructivist understanding, the principles of territorial sovereignty and self-determination are open to contestation and raise controversies in international relations because of lack of unanimous consensus over the application of those norms.
They are rather the result of context-based interpretations enacted by actors who in a certain situation manage to impose their narrative.
From an international law perspective, an external intervention on foreign territory can be judged only as complying or not complying to a previously agreed norm.
This assumes a fact-based assessment and a clear distinction between right and wrong/true or false.
In other words, legitimacy is constructed not around facts but rather on versions of the facts that are more appealing to certain audiences.
Our focus on extralegal legitimacy claims on the annexation of Crimea tried to point to the distinction between the legality and legitimacy.
Many analyses in Russian media mix the two elements in their narratives of justification for the annexation and go even further by motivating the Crimea as a ‘precedent’ in itself for other territorial annexations (e.g.
As our foreign policy narrative analysis shows, for the domestic audience, as well as the possible audience in the Balkans the uses of historical arguments and the ‘ethnicization’ of territory were the most powerful legitimating elements.
We argued that those very different legitimization claims used for the same situation show the inconsistencies of Russia’s foreign policy towards Ukraine and the ambiguous way it tries to positions itself towards the West.
We argued that those very different legitimization claims used for the same political action show the inconsistencies of Russia’s foreign policy towards Ukraine and the ambiguous way it tries to position itself towards the West, by taking them as the man reference point for legitimisation and always displaying its actions as ‘reactions’ to the West.
Conclusions Russia’s actions in Crimea posed both a conceptual and an empirical challenge to the field of international relations by problematizing and politicizing the issue of legality, by contesting international norms and reinterpreting the principle of self-determination in order to legitimize external intervention.
The purpose of the article was to analyse the conflict of narratives regarding the secession/annexation of Crimea, focusing on extralegal arguments.
Aiming to assess continuity and change in Russia’s legitimization strategy, we followed the main policy narratives over time.
After interpreting different types of legitimising narratives , we concluded that extralegal arguments have been instrumental in constructing the Kosovo precedent for Russian foreign policy.
Our interpretative policy narrative analysis followed the transfer of a series of discursive patterns from the official statements by state representatives to elites who reproduced the dominant narratives.
We explored various sites where these ‘clashes of narratives’ on Kosovo–Crimea parallel have occurred, but we focused mainly on dominant narratives, most relevant for our case study, as they are enacted by the frequent iteration by the selected elites.
We reflected also on the political rationale behind choosing the Kosovo precedent in connection to Crimea.
We have concluded that the comparison of these two cases allowed the Russian political elite to promote in the international public sphere a series of extra-legal elements that can easily trigger norm contestation.
This includes sensitive topics for the Western Balkans like the connection between ethnicity and territory, and the instrumentalization of the recent past with the aim to change borders, destabilize and challenge the international law.
The strategy of selecting and then using one version of the past which fits short-term political purposes, or the reinterpretation of the international law have become common practices for Russia’s legitimization of certain decisions.
The article showed that in designing and performing foreign policy narratives, Russia refers extensively to legal norms and international law instrumentalizing them as legitimacy mechanism.
The extralegal legitimacy claims referring to the annexation of Crimea are an illustration of how Russia’s foreign policy narratives influence not only diplomatic practice, but also experts’ perceptions on the subject, deepening the politicization of international law.
We believe that those policy narratives are relevant for understanding Russia’s positioning towards the Western powers in the conflict in Ukraine.
The way states use their foreign policy narratives to frame an action which challenges the international order deserves more attention, especially in a situation of conflict.
Even if Russia’s actions in Crimea have been questioned primarily from the point of view of legality, Moscow has used a series of extralegal arguments to claim legitimacy for its external intervention on the territory of Ukraine.
However, beyond any type of extralegal arguments, we argue that the way in which the Kosovo precedent was used in the case of Crimea is an example of a particular dominant policy narrative that fixes the meaning of a certain event and limits the opportunity for further political contestation of Russia’s actions in Ukraine.
Its final status is, however, still contested by several countries inside and outside Europe, Russia included.
The independence of Kosovo is not recognized by 5 EU Member States –Spain, Greece, Slovakia, Romania, Cyprus.
In 2010 Serbia called on the International Court of Justice to rule on the declaration of Kosovo’s secession, on whether the declaration was in breach of international law.
The name Kosovo is used in the whole article without prejudice to position on status, and is in line with UN Security Council Resolution 1244/99 and the International Court of Justice Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence.
Serbia deemed Kosovo’s decision unconstitutional and keeps considering Kosovo as part of its territory.
She held research fellowships in Berlin and Ljubljana, and conducted field research in Sarajevo and Prishtina.
EU Enlargement policy, Europeanization, Democratization in the Western Balkans, Post conflict societies, post Yugoslav space.
Russian normative justifications in Georgia and Ukraine and their implications for global norms.
Speech by the Russian foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, and his answers to questions from deputies during the plenary session of the State Duma of the Russian Federation.
Foreign minister Sergey Lavrov’s interview with an evening with Vladimir Solovyov programme on Russiya-1 TV Channel.
Foreign minister Sergey Lavrov delivers a speech and answers questions during debates at the 51st Munich Security Conference.
Speech by permanent representative of the Russian Federation to the OSCE Alexander Lukashevich at the meeting of the OSCE Permanent Council on Crimea, developments in Ukraine and the need to fulfil the Minsk agreements.
The formation of a conceptual framework for Russian dominance in the post-Soviet area.
Putin, V 2014 Vladimir Putin’s interview with Radio Europe 1 and TF1 TV channel.
Why the Kosovo “precedent” does not justify Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
The Quality of Norms is What Actors Make of It Critical Constructivist Research on Norms.
Research interviews Nr Name Position & organization Date & location Ukraine 1.
Haran Olexiy Head of research, Ilko Kucheriv Democratic Initiatives Foundation 13.04.2016, Kiev 3.
Mahda Yevhen Coordinator, Hybrid Warfare Resistance Bureau 12.04.2016, Kiev 4.
Myroshnychenko Vasyl Expert, Ukraine Crisis Media Center 15.04.2016, Kiev 5.
Smelyanski Yurii Economic expert, Maidan of Foreign Affairs 12.04.2016, Kiev 6.
Umland Andreas Senior research fellow, Institute for Euro-Atlantic Cooperation 13.04.2016, Kiev 7.
Baunov Alexander Editor-in-Chief Carnegie Moscow Center 12.05.2016, Moscow 9.
Kolesnikov Andrei Senior Associate, Carnegie Moscow Center 17.05.2016, Moscow 11.
Makarkin Aleksey Expert, Center for Political Technologies 11.05.2016, Moscow 12.
Nikitina, Yulia Associate Professor, Moscow State Institute of International Relations 17.05.2016, Moscow 14.
