IAMAESOM, Pu, MESTORAAN HOW THE IRISH WON THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION THE FORGOTTEN HEROES OF AMERICA’S WAR OF INDEPENDENCE S-PHILLIP THOMAS TUCKER, PHD hen the Continental Congress decided to declare independence from the British empire in 1776, 10% of the population of the fledgling country was from Ireland.
They were very active in the American Revolution, both on the battlefields and off, and yet their stories are not well known.
The important contributions of the Irish on military, political and economic levels have been long overlooked and ignored by generations of historians.
However, new evidence has revealed that Washington’s Continental Army consisted of a far larger percentage of Irish soldiers than previously thought—between 40% and 50%—who fought and swayed some of the most important battles of the American Revolution.
Romanticized versions of this historical period tend to focus on the upper class figures that had the biggest roles in America’s struggle for liberty.
But these adaptations neglect the impact of European and Irish ideals as well as citizens on the formation of the Revolution.
Irish contributors such as John Barry, the colonies’ foremost naval officer; Henry Knox, an artillery officer and future secretary of war; Richard Montgomery, America’s first war hero and martyr; and Charles Thomson, a radical organizer and secretary to the Continental Congress were all instrumental in carrying out the vision for a free country.
Without their timely and disproportionate assistance, America almost certainly would have lost the desperate fight for its existence.
Outside the U.S.email Sales@BarnesReview.org for best international rates.
Point of Origin Gobekli Tepe and the Spiritual Matrix for the World’s Cosmologtes eveals Gobekli Tepe as a center of civilizing knowledge for the ancient world.
Revealing the existence of a long-forgotten primal culture and the world’s first center of higher learning, Laird Scranton shows how the sophisticated complex at Gobekli Tepe in Turkey is the point of origin from which all the great civilizations of the past inherited their cosmology, esoteric teachings, and civilizing skills, such as agriculture, metallurgy, and masonry, fully developed.
Scranton explains how the po oo i carved images on Gobekli Tepe’s pillars were the precursors to LAIRD SCRANTON the sacred symbols of the Dogon, Egyptians, Tibetans, and Chinese as well as the matriarchal Sakti cult of ancient Iran and India.
MASS MURDER AT KATY The only complete English translation of the 1943 “Official Material on the Mass Murder of Katyn;’ compiled on behalf of the German Foreign Office based on documentary evidence.
Translated and introduced by Arthur Kemp. ere is the first-ever full English translation of the complete forensic report by the German government detailing the mass murder of Polish officers and officials by the Soviet Union's secret police in the Katyn Forest, originally published in 1943.
Dismissed as “propaganda” and ignored for nearly 50 years, this report was completely accurate, and, if anything, an understatement of the murderous nature of Soviet Bolshevism.
The meticulous report starts with an overview of the basic facts surrounding the discovery of the mass graves and then produces a series of eyewitnesses accounts of the Poles being moved to the execution area.
Next, the reader is given a thorough account of the environment and its effect upon buried bodies—this establishes the time of death beyond question—before providing a series of postmortem studies on the bodies.
These postmortem reports—carried out by an unbiased international team of doctors, overseen by the Red Cross and Allied prisoners of war brought in to observe proceedings—revealed that the victims had all been executed by single shots to the back of the head—a merciless and brutal way to individually execute the thousands of victims discovered in the mass graves.
It also provides a full copy of the major exchanges between the International Red Cross and other parties on the matter, while the next section details the Allied response to the revelations, which in summary consisted of a pretence that the murders had not taken place, or, if they had, that they had been committed by the Germans.
The Communist atrocity at Katyn— downplayed and often ignored by the media—was a turning point in the propaganda war of not only World War II, but also of all post-war propaganda—because it was the Soviet Union’s desire for revenge over National Socialist Germany’s exposure of the Katyn massacre which led to the first “mass genocide” allegations against the Nazis following the capture of the German concentration camps in Poland.
This report has only ever been partially translated into English before.
This firstever full translation contains the complete original text, and all 83 original photographs.
It also includes 18 new footnotes, in addition to the document’s original footnotes, explaining events and details to the present-day reader.
In addition, it contains a brand-new introduction which, drawing upon post-war documentation and evidence, provides a complete background to the events at Katyn, including the full extent of the murders which was not available to the Germans in 1943.
JEWISH AUSTRIA his is the abridged 1942 edition—completely re-set and illustrated—by Léon de Poncins of Francois Trocase’s remarkable 1899 study of the end of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Jewish Austria provides a crucial insight into the role played by one alien group in the collapse of this venerable Catholic empire at the heart of Europe.
More focused than Edouard Drumont’s extensive historic survey La France Juive , Trocase’s work presents an objective and detailed analysis of the economic and social conditions of the Austrian Empire in its last days.
Poncins’ readable edition of Trocase’s thorough investigation of the modus operandi of Jewry continues to have an urgent relevance to the socio-economic and political conditions of contemporary Western states.
Use the form below and return it in the TBR reply envelope enclosed within 30 days.
Phone Call 1-877-773-9077 toll free Mon.-Thu.-4:30 ET to charge or PROVIDE EMAIL IF YOU WANT FREE ACCESS TO TBR'S ONLINE mail this form in the return envelope supplied.
No one else in modern politics has anywhere near the power and influence of George Soros, both domestically and internationally.
Backed by the tens of billions of dollars he’s accumulated throughout his career, Soros has his hand in influencing the media, activist groups, colleges, presidential elections, global elections, local United States politics, and much more.
Soros has earned himself a reputation as a “boogeyman” character on the right, and nowhere else will you find such an extensive documentation of his influence as in this book.
Millions of readers have come to rely on investigator Matt Palumbo for the most important information on what is going on in the world.
If you know nothing about George Soros, aside from the fact he is a billionaire, you will learn so much more.
The power this man actually wields should scare every American—Republican and Democrat alike—and the people of the world.
Soros sees himself as a God, on a global crusade for equity among nations.
Soros has even stated as such and his true desire is to control everything happening in America and the rest of the THE MAN BEHIND THE CURTAIN world.
While that may be hyperbole, the sentiment is shared by many thousands of people across the world who have been victims of his highly effective and incredibly well-funded meddling.
In The Man Behind the Curtain, the author has done a meticulous job researching all Soros has done and is doing to destroy American principles of democracy.
He funds many candidates and initiatives that are anti-free speech and who aim to defund the police and who don’t care about property and personal safety as well as due process of the law.
It makes sense that he doesn’t truly appreciate the American ideal of a fair opportunity for all and the right to be rewarded for your hard work.
After all, he made most of his money through arbitrage and market manipulation—rarely creating anything but anarchy.
He started his work in Europe and we will end up like them if we don’t watch out.
Pharma-funded mainstream media as convinced millions of Americans that Dr.
As director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , Dr.
Anthony Fauci dispenses $6. billion in annual taxpayer-provided funding for scientific research, allowing him to dictate the subject, content, and outcome of scientific health research across the globe.
Fauci uses the financial clout at his disposal to wield extraordinary influence over hospitals, universities, journals, and thousands of influential doctors and scientists—whose careers and institutions he has the power to ruin, advance, or reward.
During more than a year of painstaking and meticulous research, Robert F Kennedy Jr. unearthed a shocking story that obliterates media spin on Dr.
Fauci . . . and that will alarm every American—Democrat or Republican— who cares about democracy, our Constitution, and the future of our children’s health.
Fauci orchestrated fraudulent studies, and then pressured United States Food and Drug Administration The Real Anthony Fauci Bill Gates, Big Pharma, and the Global War on Democracy and Public Health Robert F Kennedy Jr.
Fauci repeatedly violated federal laws to allow his Big Pharma partners to use impoverished and dark-skinned children as lab rats in deadly experiments with toxic AIDS and cancer chemotherapies.
In early 2000, Fauci shook hands with Bill Gates in the library of Gates’s $147 million Seattle mansion, cementing a partnership that would aim to control an increasingly profitable $60 billion global vaccine enterprise with unlimited growth potential.
Through funding leverage and carefully cultivated personal relationships with heads of state and leading media and social media institutions, the Pharma-Fauci-Gates alliance exercises dominion over global health policy.
The Real Anthony Fauci details how Fauci, Gates and their cohorts use their control of media outlets, scientific journals, key government and quasi-governmental agencies, global intelligence agencies, and influential scientists and physicians to flood the public with fearful propaganda about Covid-19 virulence and pathogenesis, and to muzzle debate and ruthlessly censor dissent.
MEMORIES FROM THE FRONT IMAGES FROM THE FRONT 4 Images from ftlemories™ in ' the Front from the front af Ye) #flemories V9 tr These books are compiled from the actual writings and photos of the German troops who participated in World War Il.
This is the real history of the war, directly from the guys in the trenches, on the ships and in the air.
Now you can read their eyewitness accounts and see the rare photos they took in combat as well as relaxing, playing soccer and enjoying life.
In this article, Kemp discusses the highlights of that report, which had never before been seen in its entirety in English.
NEUTRAL SOURCES EXPLAIN Why HITLER INVADED POLAND By JOHN WEAR, J.D. i Mainstream historians insist Adolf Hitler launched a war of aggression against Poland in September 1939 to subdue the “inferior” nation, expand German territory and dominate Eastern Europe, entirely ignoring Poland’s abuse of ethnic Germans as well as Germany's repeated attempts to peacefully resolve the conflict.
John Wear explains Hitler’s decision to invade by relying solely on neutral sources.
HITLER JUSTIFIES POLISH INVASION By ADOoLF HITLER 2 Af reasons and rationale for many of the decisions made by German Chancellor Adolf Hitler are regularly overlooked, entirely ignored or completely dismissed by most mainstream historians.
Here is the speech Hitler delivered on September 1, 1939 outlining his reasoning and justification for the Third Reich's invasion of Poland.
A SYNOPSIS OF PEACE OFFERS By KarL HAEMERS 3 The fact that Adolf Hitler’s National Socialist regime made numerous and repeated peace offers leading up to and during WWIL is censored in the West.
Politically motivated Court Historians have whitewashed Hitler’s tireless efforts to establish and ensure peace in Europe, efforts that TBR’s Karl Haemers outlines in this important piece.
PUTIN JUSTIFIES UKRAINE INVASION By VLADIMIR PUTIN A Russian President Vladimir Putin—one of the most demonized international political figures in the world—laid out his reasoning for initiating his invasion of Ukraine on February 24, 2022.
We will let readers judge for themselves whether the invasion was, in fact, necessary.
THE WAR IN THE DONBASS By MATTHEW RAPHAEL JOHNSON, Px.D. 5 a pro-Russian separatist movement in the Donbass region of eastern Ukraine has sparked a broader war between Russia and Ukraine, as well as a major disruption to the current America-centric international political order, as Dr.
NIXON’S FATEFUL DECISION By ANTONIUS J PATRICK 6 Richard Nixon’s controversial 1971 decision to close the “gold window”’—the conversion of United States dollars to gold by foreign nations holding dollars—meant the end of one of the key pillars of the post-WWII Brenton Woods economic agreements.
THE BATTLE AT ROSEBUD CREEK By THOMAS GOODRICH fs United States Army leaders tasked with taming and battling the Indians on the High Plains had their work cut out for them.
Personal from the Editor—2 TBR Editorial: Yellow Journalism—3 Stalin and the Katyn massacre—5 Why die for Stalin?—29 A list of Hitler's peace offers—35 History You May Have Missed—40 We need an American Putin—42 What happened to Ukraine?—52 Ethnic Russians in Eastern Europe—59 Salazar and Duplessis—69 Trouble brewing on the Plains—75 Letters to the Editor—78-79 2 THE BARNES REVIEW EXECUTIVE EpitTor: PAUL ANGEL ASSISTANT EDITOR: JOHN FRIEND FOUNDER: WILLIS A Carro TBR BOARD OF CONTRIBUTING EDITORS JOAQUIN BOCHACA Micac A HoreMan II RONALD L Ray Barcelona.
RICHARD LANDWEHR DEANNA SPINGOLA Atlanta, Georgia Brookings, Oregon Woodridge, Illinois JAMES EDWARDS Dr.
EpGar LUCIDI REMI TREMBLAY Memphis, Tennessee Corona del Mar, California Quebec, Canada THOMAS GOODRICH CarLo MATTOGNO Upo WALENDY Tampa, Florida Palestrina, Rome, Italy Vlotho, Germany Prok.
Periodical rate postage paid at Dulles, VA 20101 and additional mailing offices.
All rights reserved except that copies or reprints may be made without permission so long as proper credit and contact info are given for TBR and no changes are made.
All manuscripts submitted must be typewritten (double spaced) or in electronic format.
Send your old, incorrect mailing label and your new, correct address neatly printed or typed 30 days before you move to ensure delivery.
There is still a war raging in Ukraine with heavy fighting in the Donbass region.
Most Americans had never even heard about this region before the Russian invasion, yet it nearly—and could still—bring us to the brink of a shooting war in Eastern Europe.
Learn more about the complex history of the Donbass in an article from Dr.
We also hear in the news that Putin is a modern-day Adolf Hitler, both of them standing accused of wantonly invading a “peaceful” neighbor.
So as to give you an unbiased take on that event, researcher John Wear has compiled an article quoting heavily from non-German sources.
Hitler himself explains why he invaded Poland on page 24 if you prefer the reasoning from the horse’s mouth.
And, to give both men a fair shake, Vladimir Putin tells us why he invaded Ukraine in a transcript we've included for your edification.
Here, the Russian leader paints a different picture of Ukraine than we get from the Western press.
We include it here because we believe a physical, print reproduction of Putin's justification for the invasion of Ukraine is an important addition to the permanent, written historical record.
We lay at least one of those myths to rest in an article by Karl Haemers starting on page 32 that discusses Hitler’s many viable peace offers.
More than 75 years after the end of WWII, allegations are again being made that mass atrocities—brutal war crimes perpetrated against Ukrainian civilians—are being carried out in Europe.
TBR readers know, more than most Americans, that atrocities are committed in war.
War is itself an atrocity, one that has plagued Mankind since we first emerged from our Paleolithic caves.
But you also know that exaggerated atrocity tales and accusations of genocide are two of the most effective ways to rile up the public to support the atrocity of war.
The Soviets effectively blamed the mass execution of Polish military and police officers on the Nazis and used it in their agitprop.
Yet, for years, the truth remained hidden, even though the Germans, with the help of the Poles, had conducted a thorough forensics examination in 1943 proving the Soviets were the culprits.
Western intelligence knew this, as well, but kept silent, as fictional tales of Nazi atrocities played well in their own incessant “evil German” propaganda play.
In this issue we offer a closer look at the rare German report on Katyn, translated by historian Arthur Kemp into English for the first time ever.
Please don’t miss our articles on Maurice Duplessis, Nixon’s golden mistake and a fateful encounter on America’s High Plains plus John Amery.
Prior to publishing the Journal, Hearst managed The San Francisco Examiner.
Both men helped revolutionize journalism and news reporting, but in ways that weren’t necessarily beneficial to the public.
Pulitzer and Hearst would go down as icons in the history of journalism in America, known for their innovation in the industry and mastery of what would become known as yellow journalism, a concept coined in 1896 that described the sort of sensational, emotionally charged reporting championed by both Pulitzer and Hearst in their daily newspapers.
Facts and objective reporting were of lesser importance to the practitioners of yellow journalism than circulation.
This approach to reporting the news has come to dominate the reporting produced by virtually every mainstream mass media organ in existence in the modern Western world today.
At that time, however, both men were competing for readers and thus used sensational, over-the-top headlines and imagery, largely in the form of cartoons, to attract eyeballs to their respective papers.
In 1898, the pinnacle of yellow journalism at the time was reached, as both Pulitzer and Hearst played leading roles in the escalation of the conflict between the United States and Spain, that ultimately led to a global war.
In February 1898, the USS Maine, a Navy ship sent to Cuba as a display of United States power and a clear provocation against Spain, which then ruled Cuba, was sunk in Havana Harbor.
Pulitzer and Hearst quickly launched their popular newspapers into overdrive, churning out endless stories demonizing the Spanish, demanding revenge and insisting on an escalation between the two powers, despite Spain’s insistence it had nothing to do with the sinking of the ship.
Suddenly, United States papers were also filled with stories of mass atrocities committed by the Spanish against the natives of Cuba and the Philippines.
Though the claims were false, readers had no way of checking the facts, as we can today with instantaneous global communications technology.
Nearly all of what Pulitzer and Hearst published had little to do with the facts on the ground or the complex geopolitical realities in contention.
This sort of mindset, and the irresponsible, reprehensible perversion of journalism it has produced, has proven to be disastrous to humanity and to the cause of truth and justice in the world.
Western media outlets obediently parrot and amplify entirely unverified and extremely dubious narratives and reports coming out of Ukraine, without even attempting to fact check or confirm the allegations.
No doubt it will continue unabated for weeks to come as long as this NATO-instigated conflict continues.
Both work handin-hand in their promotion of blatant falsehoods and deceitful narratives to advance the interests of the New World Order and their own kleptocracy.
Both are equally as guilty in their irresponsible and mendacious rhetoric, their loathing of Russia and their promotion and amplification of outright war propaganda.
As real students of history know full well, this sort of brazen dishonesty has been a mainstay of the fake news media establishment and the political elite in America and the wider Western world for far too long.
Russia and their budding coterie of allies, including China, India, Brazil and others, are tired of living under Uncle Sam’s boot.
WARTIME ATROCITIES bas“ Mass Murder at Katyn More facts about the execution of Polish intelligentsia, army officers, policemen during WWII continue to emerge ATROCITY PROPAGANDA ABOUNDS TODAY as it did during and after WWII, when National Socialist Germany was accused of committing the worst atrocities imaginable.
Arare translation of the German investigation is conclusively debunking many of these fictional tales, including the commonly accepted narrative about who was committing the mass murder of helpless prisoners in Katyn Forest in Eastern Europe and why.
The full German report on the events, first published in 1943, has never before been completely translated into English.
English language portions of it—mostly the medical conclusions—have seen the light of day, but the complete document has remained in the shadows, available only to those with deep pockets, prepared to lay out thousands of dollars for original copies.
HOSTILITIES MOUNT The saga of the Katyn Forest murders started with the origins of World War II and the build-up of hostilities between Germany and Poland that dated back to the Versailles Treaty.
At the end of World War I (1914— 1918), Poland was recreated as an 4 + THE BARNES REVIEW > MAY/JUNE 2022 «+ Above, a sculpture by Tadeusz Tchorzewski in Wroclow (Breslau), Poland adorns a portion of that city’s Katyn Memorial.
Katyn memorials are found in many cities across the world with Polish populations.
However, after siding with Napoleon Bonaparte during the Napoleonic Wars, the Polish people were punished by being divided up and ruled over by the Austro-Hungarian, German and Russian empires.
When recreated as an independent republic in 1919, the new Polish state was given huge slices of land from Germany, specifically the regions of West Prussia, the province of Posen and East Upper Silesia.
While most of these regions had a mixed Germanand Polish-speaking population, and both sides had nearly equal historical claims to the territory, it was the Germans who had done the most to increase the wealth and prestige of the regions in question.
In addition, the major German coastal and port city of Danzig was established as a “Free City” run by the League of Nations to serve as a major port for Polish trade.
Cpeqw 3aqeptaunyux nepesexuvKon wu KapyruTesef rocThe Killing Order Soviet leader Josef Stalin, above, approved NKVD chief Lavrentiy Beria’s recommended plan to execute Polish prisoners of war considered enemies of the Soviet regime.
The first page of Beria’s four-page letter, written on official NKVD letterhead and addressed to Stalin himself, is shown to the left, along with official signatures of approval from Stalin and five other two separate geographical regions.
Contrary to postwar propaganda, the leadership of Nazi Germany did try to resolve the matter peacefully, even offering to renounce all territorial claims in return for road and train overland access to Danzig and the return of that city to German rule.
Spurred on by Britain and France, the Polish government refused to accede to these reasonable requests.
At the same time, some Polish nationalists—acting without orders from the Polish government—began persecuting Germans within the Danzig Corridor, and a number of murders and attacks took place upon German civilians.
The ongoing harassment and tension had in fact convinced Adolf Hitler that there could only be a military solution to the crisis.
He gave orders to the Wehrmacht to prepare an invasion of Poland—but, first, the German chancellor had to take care of the potential international diplomatic fallout.
The British and the French had started talks with the Soviet Union in the summer of 1939 with the aim of forming an anti-German alliance.
When senior Soviet officials. the talks broke down, Hitler seized his opportunity.
To everyone’s shock—including Hitler’s own followers, for whom the Soviet Bolsheviks had always been the main enemy, and whose Jewish roots had played such an important role in Nazi propaganda—Ribbentrop and his Soviet counterpart, Vyacheslav Molotov, signed a non-aggression pact on August 23, 1939.
These numbers do not suggest that Germany had planned and prepared a great war that they started in 1939.
Directly as a result of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, Britain and Poland signed a formal military alliance on August 25, 1939.
On August 29, the British ambassador to Berlin, Sir Nevile Henderson, met with Hitler and was presented with a list of minimum conditions to settle the dispute, including the request for Danzig and its “corridor” to be returned to Germany.
At the same time, Hitler also directly requested the Polish government to send a senior representative to Berlin to discuss these requests.
At the urging of the British and the French, the Polish government refused to even respond to Hitler’s request for talks.
The two Allied powers assured the Poles that they would come to their aid should Germany invade, and the situation became deadlocked.
The French government issued an ultimatum to Germany on September 2, demanding an end to the invasion, and giving 6 + THE BARNES REVIEW > MAY/JUNE 2022 + the German government until 5m. the following day to respond.
The British government delivered a similar ultimatum to the German government on September 3, with an expiry time of 11:00m. that day.
France also declared war the same day, shortly after the expiry of the 5m. deadline.
USSR INVADES POLAND On September 17, the Soviet army invaded Poland from the east, and rapidly advanced through the already largely defeated Polish forces.
Even Polish government officials refused to even respond to Hitler's request for talks. though the Soviet Union had precisely duplicated Nazi Germany’s behavior, there was no reaction at all from Britain or France.
In fact, the military alliance signed between Poland and Britain on August 25 specifically limited the British obligation to protect Poland from “aggression” from Germany and nowhere else.
This minor legal issue aside, there has never been any publicly provided reason for the Allied powers to have engaged in such duplicity.
By October 6, the Polish armies had been utterly defeated, and the campaign came to an official end the following day, even though Poland never formally surrendered.
The Soviet Union incorporated eastern Poland into the Byelorussian and Ukrainian Soviet republics.
The remainder of Poland was then organized under Polish civilian rule, directed by a German governor-general, and renamed as the General Government.
FATE OF POLISH POWS About 200,000 Polish soldiers were taken prisoner by the Germans, and another 200,000 by the Russians.
The Germans quickly released the vast majority of their prisoners of war back into the General Government, but the fate of the Poles captured by the Soviets came to be tied up with the events at Katyn.
The Soviet Union began with an extensive project to Sovietize that portion of Poland under its control.
To this end, captured Polish officers, police officers and other law enforcement officials—all regarded as the intelligentsia by the Soviets—were sent to concentration camps at Ostashkov, Jukhnov, Kozelsk, Putivl, Starobelsk, Kozelshin, Yuzh and Oranki.
There, they were repeatedly interviewed, and their views on a wide range of topics recorded.
The purpose of these informants was, it would appear, to serve as a means of checking what the interviewed Polish intelligentsia were 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE saying back in their barracks, as opposed to what they might be telling their questioners.
This process had taken several months and, by February 1940, the Soviet secret police—the People’s Commissariat of Internal Affairs —had compiled a list of 25,000 mostly Polish origin “enemies” being held by that organization in camps in what was then the Ukraine and western Belarus.
PLANS FOR MASS MURDER On March 5, 1940, NKVD chief Lavrentiy Beria sent a letter on official NKVD letterhead to Stalin (addressed to “Comrade Stalin”) in which he stated that the Polish prisoners of war kept at camps and prisons in western Belarus and Ukraine were implacable enemies of the Soviet Union.
The first page of the four-page letter shows, in his own handwriting, the word “Za” scrawled by Stalin in person.
After World War II, Kaganovich became deputy head of the Soviet government.
All of these senior figures were therefore informed beforehand and actively endorsed the mass murders at Katyn.
They are all sworn enemies of Soviet power, filled with hatred for the Soviet system of government.
Prisoner of war officers and police in the camps are attempting to continue their c-r work and are conducting anti-Soviet agitation.
Each one of them is just waiting to be released in order to be able to enter actively into the battle against Soviet power.
The NKVD organs in the western oblasts’ of Ukraine and Belorussia have exposed several c-r insurgent organizations.
In all these c-r organizations, an active guiding role is played by former officers of the former Polish army and former police and gendarmes.
The Katyn massacre of 22,000 Polish prisoners of war is a crime to which there are no witnesses.
Committed in utmost secrecy in April-May 1940 by the NKVD on the direct orders of Josef Stalin, for nearly 50 years the Soviet regime succeeded in maintaining the fiction that Katyn was a Nazi atrocity, their story unchallenged by Western governments fearful of upsetting a powerful wartime ally and Cold War adversary.
Surviving Katyn explores the decades-long search for answers, focusing on the experience of those individuals with the most at stake—the few survivors of the massacre and the Polish wartime forensic investigators— whose quest for the truth in the face of an inscrutable, unknowable and ruthless enemy came at great personal cost.
Call 1-877-773-9077 toll free to charge, Mon.-Thu.-4:30 ET or visit www.
The prisoner of war camps are holding a total (not counting the soldiers and the NCOs) of 14,736 former officers, officials, landowners, police, gendarmes, prison guards, settlers,’ and intelligence agents, who are more than 97% Polish by nationality.
Assign the examination of cases and the carrying out of decisions to a troika consisting of Comrades Beria, Merkulov, Kobulov and Bashtakov.
BERIA In accordance with this order, sanctioned at the very highest levels of the Soviet Union, the killings started in earnest on April 3, 1940, and continued until May 1940.
Executing the large number of prisoners took careful planning, but the NKVD was well versed in the procedure.
As revealed in the German report, the Katyn Forest had been used as a communist execution spot from the time of the 1917 Revolution, and the first and oldest mass graves on the site were of dissident Russians executed by the NKVD and its predecessors.
Prisoners invariably had their hands bound behind their backs before being shot once in the back of the head.
Other prisoners had garments placed over their heads, and a noose-type rope placed around their necks.
This noose was then connected to their bound hands, meaning that, if they struggled at all, they would effectively strangle themselves.
The immobilized prisoners would then have been held by the arms on both sides by two NKVD men, while a third—the most practiced of all—fired the execution shot.
Depending upon the place of execution, the body was either thrown directly into a pit or put on a truck and transported to the pits for burial.
DETAILS EMERGE AFTER 1990 The details of the executions were only revealed after the fall of the Soviet Union in 1990, when the topsecret records and archives were finally opened.
The newly post-communist Polish Institute of National Remembrance launched its own investigation into Katyn.
Other documents revealed that the executioners and other participants had provided statements of their work to the NKVD for internal control purposes, and a summary of these statements finally appeared in the May 2020 issue of The Warsaw Institute Review, the official journal of the Polish NGO think tank, the Warsaw Institute.
In that report, drawn up after a thorough review of all the available documentation supplied from the NKVD archives, a fuller picture of the mechanics of the mass murder finally emerged.
The prisoners were brought to the building's cellar, where their identities were checked.
Once their hands were bound behind their backs, they would be executed with a single shot to the back of the head.
A Nagant revolver was initially used to carry out the executions, but soon the executioners began using a German Walther 7.65.
The above propaganda poster, released in 1943 by the Germans, depicts two crazed Soviet NKVD operatives on the verge of executing a Polish officer, with a dead officer at their feet, murdered in typical fashion with a gunshot to the back of the head.
The NKVD executed nearly 22,000 Polish officers and officials in the months of April and May 1940 in one of the most horrific mass murder operations in history.
NKVD leaders, including its chief, Lavrentiy Beria, advised that any Polish POW deemed to be hostile to the Soviet occupation should be executed in a systematic campaign to eliminate any opposition to communist rule in Poland and other parts of Eastern Europe. and the USSR in the late 1920s and early 1930s.
The Walther pistols used as execution weapons were never found, but would most likely have been acquired in the same manner as the ammunition.
A description of the killing of the inmates from Ostashkov was provided by, among others, the head of the board of the district NKVD in the Kalinin/Tver region in 1940, Maj.
After a few minutes, Blokhin'* put on his special clothing: a brown leather cap, a long leather brown apron, brown leather gloves with cuffs above the elbows.
After being dragged to the cell, the victim was immediately killed by a shot in the back of the head.
The shootings ended at dawn and, in the morning, the corpses were transported by trucks to the forested area where they were buried.
Later, work crews were brought in with orders to plant trees and vegetation over the burial sites.
Drawing upon the evidence provided at the other scenes, it is, however, likely that a similar procedure was followed—except that, in Katyn’s case, it seems that most of the executions were carried out at the burial site, and not elsewhere.
What is known is that before the victims were sent to the execution site, they were directed to a NKVD villa, mentioned in the German report.
The NKVD villa was destroyed by the Germans once the excavated bodies had been reburied.
TOTAL NUMBER OF VICTIMS The total number of victims executed in all these massacres appears to have been around 22,000.
There is no reason to question this number. 3,739 prisoners were murdered in the basement of the NKVD's headquarters It is one of the great ironies of the Katyn massacre that the victims also included, at the very least, several dozen—if not a few hundred—Polish Jews.
This fact was noted upon by the Germans in their report and is obvious from the list of names contained in that document, where a handful of the identified bodies have obviously Jewish names.
GERMANS BLAMED, EXECUTED From the very beginning, right up to 1990, the Soviet Union insisted that the Germans were to blame for the massacre.
This was, of course, a cold and calculated lie, but it served the Soviet Union’s purposes and, in the wave of the hysterical and obviously exaggerated propaganda which has subsequently engulfed Nazi Germany as the epitome of “mass murder,” the claim was readily believed.
BARNESREVIEW.COM -* In Poland, however, the Poles never quite accepted it.
In the spring of 1945, even the communist-controlled “provisional government of Poland” launched its own inquiry.
This was quickly shut down in 1946 when Roman Rudenko, the chief prosecutor for the USSR at the Nuremberg Trials, formally filed a case against the Nazi leadership for the murder of the Polish officers at Katyn.
The attempt to bring Germans to trial at Nuremberg failed when the British and Americans refused to support Rudenko’s efforts.
This refusal showed clearly that the British and Americans both knew—or, at the very least, strongly suspected—that the Soviets had committed the mass murders.
This shows, without any shadow of a doubt, that the British and Americans were quite prepared to overlook obvious Soviet crimes against humanity in their quest to see Germans punished.
This moral and legal corruption serves as an indictment upon the entire Nuremberg process.
In fact, the Soviets had already prosecuted Germans for the Katyn massacre.
The officer, Duere, describing in detail how Russian women, children and old men were murdered by retreating German troops, said that, in the Katyn Forest, 15,000 to 20,000 persons, including Polish officers and Jews, were shot and buried.
The reburial and memorial sites erected by the Germans and the Polish Red Cross in Katyn in 1943 were torn down and replaced by memorials 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE blaming the Nazis.
All Iron Curtain schools were taught the official history that the Germans were to blame.
Dissenters were silenced, and at least one of the doctors from the international medical team (Dr.
CIA KNEW WHO DID IT In 1951, a United States congressional committee held a formal investigation into the Katyn issue.
The committee’s conclusion was that the Soviets were responsible and recommended that the USSR be held accountable.
Nothing happened to this recommendation and the story was largely buried by the media.
The establishment’s version of events—that the Germans had been responsible—was still largely accepted and propagated, precisely because it was known and understood that it affected the credibility of the entire Nuremberg legal process.
However, behind the scenes, it was becoming increasingly clear as to whom was responsible.
Poirier, looked for the first time at captured German air reconnaissance photographs of the Katyn woods.
In the archives, Poirier found that the Germans had flown 17 photographic sorties over the site between July 9, 1941 and June 10, 1944.
The most striking conclusion contained in the report was the revelation that the vegetation and terrain in the Katyn Forest displayed changes that predated the German arrival.
This irrefutably disproved any claim that the Nazis were responsible for the massacres.
Smolensk was the primary target; Katyn, though identifiable, is imaged on an extreme oblique photo of poor scale and marginal quality.
As far as can be determined, however, there are no noticeable differences between Katyn on July 9, 1941 and September 2, 1942.
The imagery taken on September 2, 1942 permits a detailed examination of the site and its surroundings.
The most striking features on the imagery are the growth differences in vegetation over the location of the reported mass graves and the nearby woods—anomalies which appear to result from extensive ground disruption and a natural or intentional renewal of vegetation.
The growth over the suspected grave sites was neither as tall nor as dense as in the woods.
The presence of a building complex, referred to in written sources as the dacha, is verifiable.
Furthermore, Poirier discovered, when the Red Army retook the area from the Germans in September 1943, they immediately launched a major effort to obliterate evidence at the scene—all captured by the aerial reconnaissance photographs.
Mechanical earthmoving equipment was brought in, the area plowed up and bodies removed.
The obvious search for new graves, when combined with backfilling of the grave sites found earlier by the Germans and the security measures in place on June 10, 1944— TWO NAZI GENERALS HANGED BY RUSSIANS LONDON, Dec.
Martin Adolf Lemler were hanged in Bryansk four hours after a military tribunal had convicted them as German war criminals.
Karl T Stein was sentenced to twenty years in prison, the broadcast said.
MOSCOW, Dec. —A German officer in a group facing trial in Leningrad for “nightmare deeds” during the war has admitted Nazi guilt for the massacre of Katyn, in the Smolensk region, where mass graves of about 10,000 persons were found, a Tass dispatch said tonight.
The Germans had alleged that Poles had been murdered by Soviet political police and buried in Katyn in 1939.
A German news agency in April, 1943, asserted German troops had discovered the Katyn graves and blamed the Russians for the atrocity.
The Polish Cabinet in London announced four days later that the International Red Cross had been asked to send a delegation to investigate on the spot.
On A December 30, 1945 report by Reuters news agency announced that a captured German officer “has admitted Nazi guilt for the massacre of Katyn” during a Soviet military trial in Leningrad.
The Germans had long accused the Soviets of having murdered thousands of Polish officers and officials, but that narrative was entirely flipped on its head as proSoviet, anti-German propagandists initiated a campaign to pin the blame on the Germans, which was largely successful until the early 1990s.
Polish and German military men are shocked by the scale of the NKVD mass murder. suggests a calculated effort to obliterate evidence of gross misdeeds.
The explosive nature of the revelations resulted in Poirier’s article being put into the “classified” section of the Studies in Intelligence journal.
Armed with the evidence, Stefan Sniezko, Poland’s deputy general prosecutor, made a presentation to the media in May 1991, and the world learned then, for the first time, of the existence of aerial photographs proving the German version of events at Katyn.
The Soviet Union’s last leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, was forced to publicly admit that the NKVD had been responsible for the mass murders.
He ordered that, for the first time since the war, further on-site investigations be conducted at Katyn.
Exhumations carried out from 1991 to 1995 found mass graves of prisoners from the Starobielsk camp in Piatichatki, and from the Ostashkov camp in Mednoye.
In 2011, excavations in that region found the identified remains of many other victims who had not been buried in Katyn, but who had been held at WWW.BARNESREVIEW.COM »+ the Katyn feeder camps.
In June 2000, the first proper and factually accurate modern memorial to the Polish citizens murdered and then buried in mass graves in Katyn was opened in Kharkiv-Piatichatki.
That same year, new memorials were built at Katyn and Mednoye and, in 2012, amemorial and cemetery were opened in Kiev.
It is still unknown if any documentation was destroyed, and if that which survived is only what was missed.
First and foremostly, the horror of the victims and their families must have been beyond imagination.
As detailed in the German report, many of the victims had bayonet stab wounds at the Katyn site, indicating that they must have seen what was happening and had to be tortured to step to the very edge of the execution pit.
To have looked down upon the bodies of one’s comrades, thrown into an earth pit like animal carcasses, must have been a harrowing last sight.
Then the torture to which the families were subjected, not knowing what had happened to their loved ones for years, holding on to false hopes and the lies strung out by the Soviet Union, must have been psychological torture.
Given the nature of the war, it is entirely possible that many families would not have believed the Germans, dismissing it perhaps as propaganda.
Added to this was the reality that the Germans only excavated a small portion of the Katyn site, and never even knew of the other mass shootings, a fact that meant that only a handful of the victims were ever named in their report.
This meant that well over 17,000 victims were unnamed, once again most likely providing false hope to the families who would have diligently checked the list of names provided in the German report.
Even then, the psychological torture would not have ended, as the communists took control of Eastern Europe at the end of the war.
The official communist line was that all the Polish prisoners had been murdered by the Germans, and anyone who dissented faced imprisonment or worse themselves.
In the spring of 1943, German troops discovered mass graves in the Katyn Forest, resulting in the establishment of an internationally staffed medical commission organized by the German government to excavate and investigate the graves, shown in the above photograph.
It was determined that the mass murders occurred in 1940, well before the Germans had control of the territory, and, thus, the crime could only have been committed by the Soviet Union.
When the Soviets re-captured the territory in the fall of 1943, they set up their own commission.
The Katyn massacre, or rather its exposure by the Germans, was, therefore, a decisive motivation for the origin of the USSR’s desire for revenge and the subsequent manufacture of atrocity propaganda against Germany.
That propaganda effort started by the communist juggernaut has since become so successful that it now dominates any establishment discussion of World War II or National Socialist Germany.
That, in itself, reiterates the importance of making new generations aware of the events at Katyn, of the true mass-murdering nature of the Soviet Union—and the motivations of those who started the smear campaign against National Socialist Germany.
The evidence for this claim is a single statement made by an SS officer, Alfred Naujocks, at the legally flawed Nuremberg Trials in 1946.
Even though there is no other evidence apart from Naujocks’s single statement, establishment historians have taken Naujocks’s claim as the literal truth for decades, and the Gleiwitz “false-flag” theory has firmly taken root in the anti-Nazi liturgy.
It was only in 2009 that German-British historian Jak P Mallmann Showell finally revealed that Naujocks’s claims were a fabrication designed in a pleabargain with the Allied prosecutors to avoid a personal prison sentence.
Naujocks had, in fact, deserted to the Allies in 1944 and, as a senior SS man, faced possible prosecution as a war criminal.
In exchange for his “evidence,” he walked away from Nuremberg a free man.
Showell also revealed that the attack on the Gleiwitz tower had in fact been carried out by Polish special forces as part of an attempt to seize a German Enigma code machine.
The Soviet copy was finally only declassified in 1992 and published for the first time in 1993.
On November 30, 1939, the Soviet Union invaded Finland, a neutral non-belligerent state, and waged a three-month war— with little success—against that nation.
The League of Nations deemed the attack illegal and expelled the Soviet Union from its ranks.
In June 1940, the USSR annexed the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
All these aggressive moves were met with silence from the Allied powers who had been so quick to declare war on Germany for invading Poland.
Even then, the order to cancel the inquiry was kept secret and only revealed much later.
At the same time, the Russian authorities officially classed the Katyn massacre as a “common crime,” and therefore subject to a statute of limitations.
A History of the White Race, one of the most important books ever written.
Kemp is also the owner of Ostara Publications, a publisher of hundreds of books about White history from all periods in time.
Translated and introduced by Arthur Kemp. ere is the first-ever full English translation of the complete forensic report by the German government detailing the mass murder and burial of Polish officers and officials by the USSR’s secret police in the Katyn Forest, originally published in 1943.
The meticulous report starts with an overview of the basic facts surrounding the discovery of the mass graves and then produces a series of eyewitness accounts of the Poles being moved to the execution area.
The report then provides a full list of the names of victims the postmortem investigations were able to identify and ends with a complete photographic record of the mass graves, the postmortems and the items recovered from the scene.
Also includes 18 new footnotes, in addition to the document’s original footnotes, explaining events and details to the present-day reader.
The Daring Missions of Otto Skorzeny and the Nazi Special Forces Written by Otto Skorzeny.
It was Skorzeny who successfully led the daring glider rescue of Benito Mussolini.
A few months later, he took a critical role in the Ardennes offensive with a controversial plan to raise a brigade disguised as Americans with captured United States tanks.
The author gives us fascinating details about his many famous missions between 1943 and the end of the war and he offers a fair appraisal of the war situation in Germany, as well as any tactical and military mistakes.
Ifyou are interested in the operations of Otto Skorzeny, this is a great book for anyone who wants to learn about them.
Deals with foreign policy, internal policy, property, usury, economics, race, religion, culture, agriculture, citizenship, the military, and much more—this far-reaching document provides a sweeping and comprehensive look into the dramatic worldview of National Socialism.
Defying liberal democracy, Adolf Hitler transformed Germany into an authoritarian state advocating sovereignty of nations, advancement of labor, preservation of the Germanic race, and commerce based on exchange of wares to replace the international gold standard.
Included are vivid and unique descriptions of Hitler at school, his World War I battlefield experiences, early politics, the November 9 Putsch, Hitler in prison, and the struggle to power from 1926 to 1933.
It ends just after the Austrian Anschluss and the end of the Czech/Sudeten crisis.
This work is vital for anyone interested in understanding how Hitler turned around a destitute nation in just a few short years.
The author formed part of Hitler’s inner circle and campaign staff during this period—which included six elections in 2. years—and later went on to become the chancellor’s press officer.
Leon Degrelle’s autobiographical account of his daring escape from war-ravaged Germany in 1945 and his adventures after the war.
Sentenced to death by the Belgian government after the Axis surrender, Degrelle escaped by flying from Norway and crash-landing in Spain.
The great Belgian Waffen-SS officer also recounts his experiences as a rising nationalist politician, the political situation in Europe before WWII, his battle against the Bolsheviks, the last days of the Reich and his escape.
Within these pages the reader will find the philosophical principles that underwrote German domestic and foreign policy, and predictions by Hitler.
Germany, Japan and the Harvest of Hate Here is the truth about WWII in graphic detail.
We shot prisoners in cold blood, wiped out hospitals, strafed lifeboats, killed enemy civilians, killed enemy wounded, tossed the dying into holes with the dead, boiled the flesh off enemy skulls to make table ornaments or carved their bones into letter openers and committed mass rape.
We topped off our saturation bombing of enemy civilians by dropping A-bombs on two defenseless cities.
The Death of Nazi Germany, 1944-1947 Throughout this book readers will see what Allied airmen saw as they rained down death on German cities; or the reader will experience what those below felt as they trembled in their bomb shelters.
The reader will view the horrors of the Eastern Front during the last months of fighting, through the mud, blood and madness.
Readers will witness for themselves the fate of German women as the rampaging Red Army raped and murdered its way across Europe.
Learn about the criminal sinking of German ships loaded with innocent refugees, the greatest mass migration known to man and the fate of those wretched victims in postwar death camps.
Memoirs Here are the memoirs of the Third Reich’s leading ideologue, Alfred Rosenberg.
These memoirs contain a no-holds-barred overview of Rosenberg’s political life and give us some astonishing revelations about the communist revolution in Munich, the relationship between Christianity and National Socialism, his prediction of race violence in America, the Strasser brothers, the Alpine revolt, Himmler’s Ahnenerbe, why Rosenberg was omitted from Hitler’s first cabinet, what Rosenberg thought about euthanasia, his views on the Jews and more inside info on the Reich.
The illegalities of war crimes proceedings include the admissibility of oral and written hearsay; the introduction of the concept of conspiracy into international law ; the total lack of any pre-trial inquest or forensic evidence; and trial before a court itself composed of actual war criminals.
The issues surrounding the war crimes trials are numerous and complex, but what can be agreed is that fair trials before impartial courts almost never happen in war crimes trials.
To charge, please call 1-877-773-9077 toll free, Mon.-Thu.-4:30 ET or visit our online store at www.BarnesReview.com.
Streicher was convinced the dangers were very real, and his articles gave a blunt and direct account of them.
The cover of every issue, and several interior pages, displayed cartoons depicting various alleged Jewish dangers, in a most striking and graphic form.
His cartoons became the signature feature of the newspaper, and grew to represent the broader German struggle against Jewry.
With the demise of National Socialist Germany, Der Stiirmer and Fips’s cartoons were largely buried and forgotten.
The victorious nations certainly did not want old Nazi images floating around, raising difficult questions about why the Nazis were so critical of Jews.
Recently, though, a skilled digital artist named Robert Penman rediscovered the forgotten images.
Organized into six chapters chronologically, Fips’s cartoons clearly demonstrate a progression of views over the period of 20 years, from before the Nazis assumed power until the very end of the war.
GERMANY’S INVASION OF POLAND Why Hitler Invaded Poland ... from Neutral Sources Polish brutality and English machinations were prime factors that led to Nazi Germany’s invasion of Poland in 1939 By John Wear ost historians state that Germany’s invasion of Poland was an unprovoked act of aggression designed to create Lebensraum, living space for the growing German nation, and eventually take control of all of Europe.
The Polish Corridor, which had been intended by the framers of the Versailles Treaty of 1919 to cut off East Prussia from the rest of Germany, had long been presented as a casus belli by the Nazis, as had the ethnically German Baltic port of Danzig, but, as Hitler had told a conference of generals in May 1939, “Danzig is not the real issue.
But, by 1939, it had become a serious obstacle to the eastward expansion of the Third Reich.
It therefore had to be wiped from the map, and ruthlessly exploited to finance preparations for the coming war in the west.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND Polish Foreign Minister Jézef Beck accepted an offer from Great Britain on March 30, 1939, that gave an unconditional unilateral guarantee of Poland’s independence.
The British Empire agreed to go to war as an ally of Poland if the Poles decided that war was necessary.
I now have to inform the House... that, in the event of any action which clearly threatened Polish independence and which the Polish government accordingly considered it vital to resist with their national forces, His Majesty's government would feel themselves bound at once to lend the Polish government all support in their power.
Four Cities German Wounded To Gleiwitz Headlines in Western newspapers, including this headline published by The Baltimore Sun announcing the German invasion of Poland, often left out key details explaining the background and circumstances leading up to Hitler’s decision to attack Poland.
Following WWI and the implementation of the Treaty of Versailles, Poland controlled key historic German territories, including the strategic German port city of Danzig as well as West Prussia, among others.
Additionally, ethnic Germans living in Poland were regularly mistreated, abused and discriminated against. increasing violence against the German minority in Poland.
The guarantee of assistance given Poland by the British government was the agent which lent impetus to Britain’s policy of encirclement.
It was designed to exploit the problem of Danzig and the Corridor to begin a war, desired and long-prepared by England, for the annihilation of Greater Germany.
In Warsaw, moderation was no longer considered necessary, and the opinion held was that matters could be safely brought to a head.
England was backing this diabolical game, having guaranteed the “integrity” of the Polish state.
The British assurance of assistance meant that Poland was to be the battering ram of Germany’s enemies.
Had it not been for the encouragement of the English war clique, which was stiffening Poland's attitude toward the Reich and whose promises led Warsaw to feel safe, the Polish government would hardly have let matters develop to the point where Polish soldiers and civilians would eventually interpret the slogan to extirpate all German influence as an incitement to the murder and bestial mutilation of human beings.
However, as we will see in this article, the violence against Poland’s ethnic Germans that led to Hitler’s invasion of Poland has been well-documented by numerous non-German sources.
More than 1 million ethnic Germans resided in Poland, and these Germans were the principal victims of the German-Polish crisis in the coming weeks.
The Germans in Poland were subjected to increasing doses of violence from the dominant Poles.
Ultimately, many thousands of Germans in Poland paid for this crisis with their lives.
They were among the first victims of Britain’s war policy against Germany.
The Poles then proceeded to close and confiscate the remaining German businesses, clubs and welfare installations.
The arrested Germans were forced to march toward the interior of Poland in prisoner columns.
The various German groups in Poland were frantic by this time, and they feared that the Poles would attempt the total extermination of the German minority in the event of war.
Thousands of Germans were seeking to escape arrest by crossing the border into Germany.
William Lindsay White, an American journalist, recalled that there was no doubt among well-informed people that, by August 1939, horrible atrocities were being inflicted every day on the ethnic German minority of Poland.
White said that a letter from the Polish government claiming that no persecution of the Germans in Poland was taking place had about as much validity as the civil liberties guaranteed by the 1936 constitution of the Soviet Union.
Mass arrests and long marches along roads toward the interior of Poland.
Ihave been questioning people all my life, and I think I know how to make deductions from the exaggerated stories told by people who have passed through harrowing personal experiences.
Hoggan argued that the leaders of the German minority in Poland repeatedly appealed to the Polish government for mercy during this period, but to no avail.
More than 80,000 German refugees had been forced to leave Poland by August 20, 1939, and virtually all other ethnic Germans in Poland were clamoring to leave to escape Polish atrocities.
British Ambassador Nevile Henderson in Berlin was concentrating on obtaining recognition from Halifax of the cruel fate of the German minority in Poland.
Henderson emphatically warned Halifax on August 24, 1939 that German complaints about the treatment of the German minority in Poland were fully supported by the facts.
Henderson pleaded with Halifax that it would be contrary to Polish interests to attempt a full military occupation of Danzig, and he added a scathingly effective denunciation of Polish policy.
What Henderson failed to realize is that Halifax was pursuing war for its own sake as an instrument of policy.
On August 25, 1939, Ambassador Henderson reported to Halifax the latest Polish atrocity at Bielitz, Upper Silesia.
Henderson never relied on official German statements concerning these incidents, but instead based his reports on information he had received from neutral sources.
The Poles continued to forcibly deport the Germans of that area and compelled them to march into the interior of Poland.
Eight Germans were murdered and many more were injured during one of these actions.
If Hitler did nothing, the Germans of Poland and Danzig would be abandoned to the cruelty and violence of a hostile Poland.
If Hitler took offensive action against the Poles, the British and French might declare war against Germany.
Henderson feared that the Bielitz atrocity would be the final straw to prompt Hitler to invade Poland.
Henderson, who strongly desired peace with Germany, continued to implore the British government to convince the Polish authorities to stop the violence but to no avail.
The primary responsibility for the outbreak of the German-Polish War was that of Poland and Britain, while for the transformation of the German-Polish conflict into a European War, Britain, guided by Halifax, was almost exclusively responsible.
Hitler’s responsibility in 1939 was far less than that of Beck in Poland, Halifax in England or even Daladier in France.
OTHER SOURCES Dutch historian Louis de Jong wrote that, on March 25, 1939, windows were smashed in the houses of many ethnic Germans in Posen and Krakow, and in those of the German embassy in Warsaw.
German agricultural cooperatives in Poland were later dissolved and many German schools were closed, while ethnic Germans who were active in the cultural sphere were taken into custody.
Around the middle of May 1939, in one small town where 3,000 ethnic Germans lived, many household effects in homes and shops were smashed to bits.
German printing shops and trade union offices were closed, and numerous houseto-house searches took place.
On August 7, 1939, the Polish censors permitted the newspaper Illustrowany Kuryer Codzienny in Krakow to feature an article of unprecedented recklessness.
The article stated that Polish units were constantly crossing the German frontier to destroy German military installations, and to carry confiscated German military equipment into Poland.
Russell Grenfell was highly critical of Britain’s unilateral and unconditional guarantee of Poland’s independence.
He said that, in general, special territorial guarantees were a means by which a great power could turn its challengers into world criminals.
Grenfell was also critical of Britain’s guarantee of Poland’s independence because a guarantee is itself a challenge.
This is exactly what happened in the case of Britain’s guarantee of Poland’s independence.
AFTERMATH OF INVASION The Germans in Poland continued to experience an atmosphere of terror in the early part of September 1939.
These massacres brought a tragic end to the long suffering of many ethnic Germans.
This catastrophe had been anticipated by the Germans before the outbreak of war, as reflected by the flight, or attempted escape, of large numbers of Germans from Poland.
The first victims of the war were Volksdeutsche, ethnic German civilians.
SS Saaz The first victims of the war were Volksdeutsche, ethnic German civilians, resident in and citizens of Poland.
Using lists prepared years earlier, in part by lower administrative offices, Poland immediately deported 15,000 Germans to eastern Poland.
German “spies” were seen everywhere, suspected of forming a fifth column.
More than 5,000 German civilians were murdered in the first days of the war.
Gruesome scenes were played out in Bromberg on September 3, as well as in several other places throughout the province of Posen, in Pommerellen, wherever German minorities resided.
German Minister of Foreign Affairs Joachim von Ribbentrop informed Soviet leaders Josef Stalin and Vyacheslav Molotov of Hitler’s intention in a note on September 15, 1939.
Stalin and Molotov, however, sought to stifle any action that might bring Germany and the Allies to the conference table.
They told Ribbentrop that they did not approve of the resurrection of the Polish state.
CONCLUSION Hitler’s invasion of Poland was forced by the Polish government’s intolerable treatment of its German population.
Germany did not invade Poland for Lebensraum or any other malicious reason.
British Ambassador Nevile Henderson, for example, said that the entire responsibility for starting the war was on Hitler.
If Hitler wanted peace, he knew how to ensure it; if he wanted war, he knew equally well what would bring it about.
On September 17, 1939, roughly two weeks following the German invasion of Poland—which prompted declarations of war against Germany by both Great Britain and France—the Soviet Union invaded Poland from the east.
Demonstrating their hypocrisy and duplicity, the Western powers aligned with Poland did not declare war against the Soviet Union, underscoring the hidden fact that the so-called capitalist and democratic West was in league with the communists in the Soviet Union in an unholy alliance to annihilate Hitler’s Germany.
France and Great Britain did not protest the Soviet annexation of large parts of eastern Poland into the Soviet Union either.
The Soviet annexation and occupation of Poland resulted in countless tragedies and horrific crimes, including the Katyn massacre.
When Peaceful Revision Failed, Costa Mesa, CA: Institute for Historical Review, 1989, 419.
Mastermind of the Third Reich, London: Focal Point Publications, 1996, 304.
His most recent employment was from 1994 to 2008 with Lacerte Software.
HITLER JUSTIFIES THE POLISH INVASION oa ae -~ Hitler Explains His Rationale for the Invasion of Poland Fuhrer blames warmongers, merchants of death, attacks on ethnic Germans as reasons for offensive September 1, 1939 By Adolf Hitler or months we have been suffering under the torture of a problem that the Versailles Diktat created—a problem that has deteriorated until it has become intolerable for us.
Both these territories owe their cultural development exclusively to the German people.
As in other German territories of the East, all German minorities living there have been ill-treated in the most distressing manner.
More than 1 million people of German blood had to leave their homeland in the years 1919-1920.
As always, I attempted to bring about, by the peaceful method of making proposals, an alteration of this intolerable position.
It is a lie when the outside world says that we only tried to carry through our revisions by pressure.
On my own initiative I have, not once but several times, made proposals for the reversal of intolerable conditions.
You know the proposals that I have made to restore German sovereignty over German territories.
You know the endless attempts I made for a peaceful clarification and understanding of the problem of Austria and, later, of the problem of the Sudetenland, Bohemia, and Moravia.
It is impossible to demand that an impossible position should be cleared up by peaceful revision and, at the same time, constantly reject peaceful offers.
It is also impossible to say that he who undertakes to carry out these revisions for himself transgresses a law, since the Versailles Diktat is not law to us.
A signature was forced out of us with pistols at our heads and with the threat of starvation for millions of people.
And then, this document, with our signature, obtained by force, was proclaimed as a solemn law.
In the same way, I have also tried to solve the problem of Danzig, the Corridor etc by proposing peaceful discussions.
It is quite understandable to us that the time when the problem was to be solved 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE Si eR Adolf Hitler salutes as he oversees troops during the Third Reich’s invasion and occupation of Poland.
The troops are crossing a wooden bridge, hastily constructed by the Germans across the San River, near Jarolaw, Poland, September 1939. had little interest to the Western powers.
Moreover, it was not and could not be a matter of indifference to those who are suffering the most.
I then naturally formulated at last the German proposals, and I must once more repeat that there is nothing more modest or loyal than these proposals.
I alone was in the position to make such proposals, for I know very well that in doing so I brought myself into opposition to millions of Germans.
THE BARNES REVIEW * Not only were they answered first with mobilization, but with increased terror and pressure against our German compatriots and with a slow strangling of the Free City of Danzig —economically, politically and, in recent weeks, by military means.
Moreover, Poland was not prepared to settle the Corridor question in a reasonable way that would be equitable to both parties, and she did not think of keeping her obligations to minorities.
No Frenchman can stand up and say HULTON ARCHIVE/GETTY IMAGES that any Frenchman living in the Saar territory is oppressed, tortured or deprived of his rights.
For four months I have calmly watched developments, although I never ceased to give warnings.
I informed the Polish ambassador three weeks ago that if Poland continued to send notes in the form of ultimata to Danzig and if, on the Polish side, an end was not put to customs measures destined to ruin Danzig’s trade, then the Reich could not remain complacent.
I left no doubt that people who wanted to compare the Germany of today with the former Germany would be deceiving themselves.
I do not know what these provocations on the part of women and children consist of, if they themselves are maltreated, in some cases killed.
No great power can, with honor, long stand by passively and watch such events unfold.
I made one more final effort to accept a proposal for mediation on the part of the British government.
They proposed not that they themselves should carry on the negotiations, but rather that Poland and Germany should come into direct contact and once more pursue negotiations.
I must declare that I accepted this proposal, and I worked out a basis for these negotiations that is known to you.
For two whole days I sat in my chair and waited to see whether it was convenient for the Polish government to send a plenipotentiary or not.
Last night they did not send us a plenipotentiary but, instead, informed us through their ambassador that they were still considering whether and to what extent they were in a position to discuss the British proposals.
The Polish government also said that they would inform Britain of their decision.
Deputies, if the German government and its leader patiently endured such treatment, Germany would deserve to disappear from the political stage.
But I am wrongly judged if my love of peace and my patience are mistaken for weakness or even cowardice.
I, therefore, decided last night—and informed the British government—that, under these circumstances, I can no longer find any willingness on the part of the Polish government to conduct serious negotiations with us.
I have, therefore, resolved to speak to Poland in the same language that Poland for months past has used toward us.
I should like here, above all, to thank Italy, which, throughout, has supported us, but you will understand that for the carrying on of this struggle we do not intend to appeal for foreign help.
We will carry out this task ourNo great power can, with honor, long stand by passively & watch such events. selves.
The neutral states have assured us of their neutrality, just as we had already guaranteed it to them.
When statesmen in the West declare that this affects their interests, I can only regret such a declaration.
I have solemnly assured them, and I repeat it, that we ask nothing of those Western states and never will ask anything.
I have declared that the frontier between France and Germany is a final one.
I have repeatedly offered friendship and, if necessary, the closest cooperation with Britain, but this cannot be offered from one side only.
Germany has no interests in the west, and our western wall is for all time the frontier of the Reich on the west.
With BARNESREVIEW.COM + this assurance we are in solemn earnest and, as long as others do not violate their neutrality, we will likewise take every care to respect it.
You know that Russia and Germany are governed by two different doctrines.
Given the fact that Soviet Russia has no intention of exporting its doctrine to Germany, I no longer see any reason why we should still oppose each other.
We have, therefore, resolved to conclude a pact that rules out forever any use of violence between us.
It imposes the obligation on us to consult together in certain European issues.
It makes possible for us economic cooperation and, above all, it assures that the efforts of both these powerful states are not wasted against each other.
At the same time, I should like now to declare that this political decision means a tremendous departure for the future, and that it is a final one.
I can only endorse word for word the speech of Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs Molotov.
In this I am resolved to continue to fight until either the present Polish government is willing to continue to bring about this change or until another Polish government is ready 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE Polish citizens dig trenches and other defensive reinforcements in Warsaw to protect the capital against a German invasion.
Leading up to WWII, the Polish government was manipulated by the leading Western powers, particularly Great Britain and, to a lesser extent, France and the United States, in an overall strategy to undermine Germany.
Poland was quickly defeated, first by the German army in the west and, later, by the Red army in the east. to do so.
I am resolved to remove from the German frontiers the element of uncertainty, the everlasting atmosphere of civil war conditions.
I will see to it that, in the east, there is, on the frontier, a peace exactly like that on our other frontiers.
In this I will take the necessary measures to see that they do not contradict the proposals I have already made known in the Reichstag itself to the rest of the world.
I have ordered my air force to restrict itself to attacks on military objectives.
If, however, the enemy thinks he can do whatever he likes carte blanche on his side— to fight by other methods—he will receive an answer that will deprive him of hearing and sight.
This night, for the first time, Polish regular soldiers fired on our territory.
Since 5:45m., we have been returning the fire and, from now on, bombs will be met by bombs.
Whoever departs from the rules of humane warfare can only expect that we shall do the same.
I will continue this struggle, no matter against whom, until the safety of the Reich and its rights are secured.
Over 90 million marks have in that time been spent on the building up of these defense forces.
They are now the best equipped and are above all comparison with what they were in 1914.
When I called up these forces and when I now ask sacrifices of the German people and, if necessary, every sacrifice, then Ihave a right to do so, for I also am today absolutely ready, just as we were formerly, to make every necessary sacrifice.
I am asking of no German man more than I myself was ready throughout four years at any time to do.
In the photo above, Soviet and German troops have a laugh following both country’s successful invasion of Poland.
The two European superpowers would soon be at war with one another, resulting in the deaths of millions, civilian and military alike. guarantee that there will be no hardships for average Germans that I will not submit to myself.
I have once more put on that coat that was the most sacred and dear to me.
I will not take it off again until victory is secured or I do not survive the battle.
You would then be under obligation to give to them the same complete loyalty and obedience as you would to me as Fiihrer.
My whole life has been nothing but one long struggle for my people, for its re storation and for Germany.
If, however, anyone thinks that we are facing tough times, I should ask him to remember that Prussian king who, with a ridiculously small state, opposed a more powerful coalition and, in three wars, finally emerged victorious because that state had the stout heart that we need in these times.
I would, therefore, like to assure all the world that a “November 1918” will never be repeated in German history.
Just as I myself am ready at any time to stake my life—anyone can take it for my people and for Germany—so I ask the same of all others.
It is quite unimportant whether we ourselves live, but it is essential that our people shall live, that Germany shall live.
The sacrifice that is demanded of us is not greater than the sacrifice that many generations of our people have made.
If we form a community closely bound together by sacred vows, ready for anything, resolved never to surrender, then our will shall overcome every hardship and difficulty.
And I would like to close with the declaration that I once made when I began the struggle for power in the Reich.
An Appeal for Peace from a British Nationalist JOHN AMERY, a British-born nationalist and fascist who helped organize the British Free Corps, a division of the all-volunteer Waffen-SS, dedicated his life to rallying the British people against the communist menace.
During WWII, he broadcast from Germany seeking to end hostilities between his native Britain and Germany.
He also produced leaflets, including the one reproduced here, specifically for a British audience, hoping to convince them, as he believed, that the true enemy was the communist Soviet Union and international Jewry, not Germany.
For his public anti-Semitic and anti-war activities, Amery was tried for treason and hanged in Wandsworth Prison on December 19, 1945.
We started the war to make the world safe for democracy and, to achieve that, we allied ourselves to a country where, from Brest-Litovsk to Vladivostok, nobody has ever heard of such a thing.
We signed an Atlantic Charter to guarantee the small nations of Europe.
We have handed over Finland, Romania, Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland to Stalin and to Communism.
We started a war invoking the blessing of the Almighty on the justice of our cause, and we allied ourselves with the atheist murderers of over a million priests, against Germany, where the state subsidizes religion, against Catholic Italy, Catholic Hungary, Catholic Romania, Orthodox Bulgaria and Protestant Finland, to say nothing of little Slovakia, whose president is a Catholic bishop.
Not one of the reasons for war invoked is true or holds good five years later.
It is for Stalin and for Jewry that our boys are dying on the Guarigliano, in the swamps of Burma, on the Seven Seas and here in our England.
It is for Stalin and the Jews that you to get something to eat, when there can be an abundance of everything.
It is for Stalin and the Jews that you no longer get a living salary when before you were relatively well paid, and articles of prime necessity could be found on the market.
It is because of Stalin and the Jews that you cannot have a suit with more than so many pockets without going to the black market.
It is by order of Stalin and the Jews that the exchanged prisoners from Germany were never allowed to write or discuss their impressions of wartime Germany or say how they had been treated over there.
It is by order of Stalin and the Jews that whole populations have been forcibly evacuated from the south coast.
It is by order of Stalin and the Jews that the best blood of our country goes forward to the inevitable massacre of a second front ... with an American commander-in-chief.
It is thanks to Stalin and the Jews that we have lost Hong Kong, Singapore, the Straits Settlements, Burma and the rest to the Japanese who used to be our allies.
It is thanks to Stalin and the Jews that thousands of our fellow countrymen here have languished in the jails of the Isle of Mann. ... impartial Red Cross of Geneva has given the figure at 152,674.
Hitler has said in his book Mein Kampf that he had no quarrel with England.
Hitler offered us peace after the collapse of France on the basis of the status quo ante.
Hitler has declared 1,000 times that National Socialism is not for export.
APOTHEOSIS VOLUME 1: THE TRIUMPHANT YEARS WWI BISTORY FROM THE AXIS SIDE An Auschwitz Doctor’s Eyewitness Account: Subtitle: The Bestselling Tall Tales of Dr.
Josef Mengele is said to have done comes from Miklés Nyiszli, a forensic physician who claims to have been Mengele’s assistant.
The book has become one of the mainstays of the orthodox Auschwitz narrative.
As important as Nyiszli writings are deemed, shockingly, they had never endured critical scrutiny before.
A classic treatise not only on the WWII “holocaust” of the Jews, but also an inside look at how constant torture destroys a man from within and without.
This narrative is based on a wide range of evidence, the most important of which was presented during two trials whose findings form the foundation of our present image of Auschwitz.
But, when we dig deeper into the rulings of these trials and the actual evidence they are based upon, the story looks quite different.
Judge Wilhelm Staglich, a German, has so far been the only legal expert to critically analyze the foundations of the Auschwitz war crimes trials.
His research, presented here, leave the reader at times breathless as it concludes there is no real proof of mass murder.
Most copies were distributed to camp libraries in Englishspeaking POW camps and became known as the “Stalag” edition because they all carried a camp rubber stamp on the title page.
The Secret Decisions, Forgotten Blunders and Cover-Ups That Really Determined Its Outcome.
Here’s an alternative history of WWII covering the obscure men, bizarre weapons and forgotten blunders that really determined the outcome.
Lothrop Stoddard was sent to report on wartime conditions in Nazi Germany—at a time before the United States became involved.
Due to his work in racial history in America, he was granted access to the National Socialist government and interviewed Hitler, Goebbels, Himmler, Ley, Frick, Darré, Fischer, Lenz, Giinther, and more Nazi leaders.
It contains his thoughts on Italian politics and also includes the text of some of his most inspirational speeches.
Time of the Carrot & Stick This is Benito Mussolini’s autobiographical account, written in the third person, of the dramatic events—as he experienced them—from the time of the battles of El Alamein until his rescue and reinstatement as leader of German-occupied Italy.
The Guilt Question of the Second World War The mainstream historical establishment insists that WWI and WWII were started by Germany.
In this book, the myth of Germany’s guilt for fomenting war is refuted by famed historian Udo Walendy.
Covers the allegations that Germany instigated the war, debunks long-held fallacies about German atrocities, the true nature of Hitler and more.
Germany’s Madagascar Resettlement Plan Hitler’s final solution offered Zionist leaders the island of Madagascar, the untouched, mineral-rich, barely populated, large and secluded island off the coast of east Africa.
This new Madagascar was to be governed by a joint German-French board with representation granted to any government cooperating.
Ralph Grandinetti tells us what the Madagascar plan was and why it failed.
This volume provides a picture of the mortal dangers posed to every German soldier by the Red Army’s bestial conduct of partisan warfare in violation of international law.
Translated, annotated and introduced by Arthur Kemp, this is the official German account of the destruction of the Warsaw Ghetto in 1943, prepared by SS Brigade Leader Juergen Stroop.
The report contains a number of fascinating insights into the brief and brutal conflict.
Today, historians either do not know or prefer to suppress the facts about the uprising.
This book contains two recently discovered war diaries— one by a member of a Panzer Division in Russia, and the other by a member of Rommel’s AfrikaKorps.
The stories are told as events occurred, and without postwar reflection.
That conclusion originated with Allied propagandists determined to boost Western morale.
The Duce was constantly ridiculed, his successes pointedly demeaned or ignored.
Mainstream historians love to say that Italy’s navy, air and land forces were nothing more than a bungling bunch of clowns.
But a closer examination by historian Frank Joseph of often neglected, recently disclosed materials presents a different picture.
Volume 2—Apotheosis The ongoing caricature of Mussolini’s servicemen as laughable buffoons is laid to rest by this book.
It views Italy’s participation within the context of its industrial disadvantage.
For example, her total production for the entire war amounted to approximately 3,500 tanks, less than all those used by the German Army in its 1940’s invasion of France.
When Mussolini declared war on the Western Allies in June 1940, his country produced 4. megatons of coal to Britain’s 224. megatons; 1. megatons of iron ore against Britain’s 17. megatons; and 2. megatons of steel for Britain’s 21. megatons.
Given such fundamental disadvantages, the numerical superiority possessed in virtually all engagements by the Allies and their eventual cracking of Axis military codes, that Fascist Italy was able to sustain five years of unremitting combat and score significant victories against overwhelming enemy forces testifies to her terrific fighting spirit and human resilience.
This diary covers from April 1942 to March 1943 and details the German victory at Kharkoy, the advance to the Caucasus and, finally, the brutal winter of 1942-43.
It starts with the beginning of the war and ends shortly after the occupation.
To charge, please call TBR toll free at 1-877-773-9077, Mon.-Thu.-4:30 ET or visit our online store at www.BarnesReview.com.
HITLER’S MANY PEACE OFFERS Hitler’s Olive Branches A run-down of Germany’s attempts to make peace Reviewing the numerous genuine peace offers Hitler made toward France, Poland and Great Britain debunks the stereotypical, politically correct characterization of Adolf Hitler as a fanatical warmonger.
By Karl Haemers ost people in North America, Europe and large swaths of the rest of the world conceive of Adolf Hitler, chancellor of Germany from 1933 until his death in 1945, as a psychopathic warmonger, flinging his military might in every direction in a sadistic orgy of violence and blood, seeking domination of every corner of the world.
To help answer these questions, we will look primarily at a slim but dense book compiled by Dr.
SUGGESTS ARMS REDUCTIONS Just three-and-a-half months after he took office on January 30, 1933, Chancellor Adolf Hitler gave a speech to the Reichstag German parliament on May 17, 1933.
In this speech the new chancellor addressed his resolve to establish arms reduction terms with “neighboring countries,” “armed 32 * THE BARNES REVIEW > MAY/JUNE 2022 + While the West portrays him as a fanatical psychopath, many average Germans saw Hitler as their “only hope,” as this propaganda poster says.
Germany is at all times prepared to renounce aggressive weapons if the rest of the world does the same.
Germany is prepared to agree to any solemn pact of non-aggression because she does not think of attacking anybody, but only of acquiring security.
This speech proposed a total elimination of all military capacity, which might be considered a strategic move on Germany’s part, since Germany was limited by the Treaty of Versailles to no air force and an army of only 100,000 men devoted only to domestic activities.
Hitler was prepared to expand the German military beyond the limits of Versailles, but was willing to accept total disarmament.
This headline published by the San Francisco Chronicle notes how the British rejected Germany's peace offers, preferring war instead.
Hitler’s political career prior to WWII was dedicated to avoiding yet another fratricidal European war through diplomacy and rebuilding and revitalizing the German nation. civilian targets.
Some countries, such as Britain and France, continued to increase their munitions manufacturing capabilities and troop strength.
By this time, Germany had already complied with the Versailles diktat for 24 years.
Five months later, on October 14, 1933, Hitler withdrew Germany THE BARNES REVIEW * from the League of Nations.
A BALANCE OF POWER On December 18, Hitler offered his second proposal for peace and disarmament in Europe.
It contained six points, the first of which granted Germany “full equality of rights,” a provision Hitler considered necessary to ensure peace.
A balance of military powers would deter aggression, while a weak Germany would encourage it.
The second point imposed a freeze on all arms increases, and the third granted Germany freedom to restore a balance in her arms with neighbors.
The fourth required “conducting war on humane principles” and again called for elimination of weapons that could harm civilians.
Soon after, Hitler requested approval to increase the German army to 300,000 men in order to conduct aminimum defense according to the length of its perimeter (which featured few natural defenses such as mountains, ice sheets, deserts, wide rivers or oceans) and the strength of her neighbors’ armies.
SAFEGUARDING CIVILIANS By March 16, 1935, Hitler felt the need to bring back conscription in Germany.
He referred to the Geneva Red Cross Convention and proposed expanding it to eliminate aerial bombing altogether.
THE RESPONSE France signed an alliance with the Soviet Union, furthering the encirclement policy of aggressor nations surrounding Germany.
Far too much history assessing Germany and its chancellor fails to mention this causal chain of provocation, focusing exclusively on Germany’s action, as if they occurred in the isolation of mindless warmongering mania.
Hitler’s orders to reoccupy the Rhineland lying between Germany and France, and occupied by French forces at times since Versailles, was a direct result of France’s rejection of Hitler's proposals, and France’s alliance with the Soviets.
The Rhineland was a key corridor of attack for invading French armies into Germany, and Hitler knew he had to take back this region that had traditionally belonged to Germany.
In 34 + THE BARNES REVIEW > MAY/JUNE 2022 + fact, the Rhineland had contained a majority of ethnic German people for centuries.
The Wehrmacht crossed into the Rhineland with no opposition—and with joyous citizen approval—on March 3, 1936.
This peace plan was the most extensive yet, with a number of its 19 points addressing the presence of German troops in the Rhineland in an attempt to reassure France.
It By March 31, Hitler was offering his fourth peace plan in the course of three years.
Sees called for a commission presided over by Britain and Italy to oversee peace terms among Germany, France and Belgium, and also invited the Netherlands to participate.
A 25-year “non-aggression or security pact” between France, Belgium and Germany was proposed.
In order to stamp this peace pact ... as the reconciliatory conclusion of a centuries-old dispute, Germany and France pledge themselves to take steps to see that, in the education of the young, as well as in the press and publications of both nations, everything shall be avoided that might be calculated to poison the relationship between the two peoples, whether it be a derogatory or contemptuous attitude, or improper interference in the internal affairs of the other country.
Chancellor Hitler, his NSDAP party and most of the German people saw confiscation of German colonies given to other European nations as a gross injustice, more so since Germany lacked key resources as it increased its industrial output.
They viewed the League of Nations as an enforcement structure for limitations on Germany through the appalling strictures of Versailles.
Hitler said he would allow Germany to rejoin the league if it “cleared up” these injustices.
Point 19 proposed establishing an “International Court of Arbitration” to ensure compliance with the peace plan.
Once again, Hitler proposed arms reduction treaties, prohibiting gas and incendiary bombs, bombing of civilian towns or villages, and abolishing heavy tank and large artillery production.
The German government believes that, if even a first step is made on the road to disarmament, this will be of enormous importance to the relationship between the nations and to the recovery of confidence, trade and prosperity.
In accordance with the general desire for the restoration of favorable economic conditions, the German government is prepared ... to enter into an exchange of opinions on economic problems ... to do all in its power to improve the economic situation in Europe, and the world.
The German government believes that ... it has made its contribution to the reconstruction of a new Europe on the basis of reciprocal respect and confidence between sovereign states.
Many 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE opportunities for such a pacification of Europe, for which Germany has so often in the last few years made her proposals, have been neglected.
PEACE PACTS WITH NEIGHBORS War propaganda against National Socialist Germany to this day maintains that Germany’s economy boomed at the time exclusively from arms production, but repeatedly we see within these peace proposals of Hitler the view that peaceful economic cooperation between the nations of Europe generates prosperity.
It is commonly said that the United States economy did not revive from the Great Depression until war production increased.
In addition, immense Soviet war production (long before its entry into World War II) destroyed living conditions for the Russian people.
Between Hitler’s arms reduction proposal of May 1935 and France’s alliance with the Soviet Union, Hitler signed a naval agreement with Great Britain on June 18, 1935.
Hitler knew Germany’s naval strength, particularly its U-boat fleet, was a reason for the outbreak of World War I with Great Britain and sought to soothe any British concerns by limiting Germany’s naval fleet to 35% of the British fleet.
After Pilsudski’s death in May 1935, Polish attitudes toward Germany worsened.
Demonstrating their provocative attitudes toward Germany, Britain and then France offered Poland an unconditional guarantee of protection against any outside aggression.
The GermanPolish conflict could have remained local, as Hitler stated, if not for the guarantee Britain and France offered Poland—and which Poland accepted.
Still another peace agreement Hitler participated in was the Munich Agreement of September 28, 1938, at which Britain, France, Italy and Germany agreed to the peaceful dissolution of the artificial state of Czechoslovakia and the return of the Sudetenland, which held millions of ethnic Germans, back to Germany.
Hitler’s “Appeal for Peace and Sanity” speech, made before the Reichstag on July 19, 1940, following the fall of France.
In that speech, Hitler once again offered unconditional peace to Britain.
This speech was printed in English and dropped by the tens of thousands from German aircraft over Britain.
Although nearly half the British cabinet wanted to take Hitler up on his offer, Churchill put an end to this final peace offer.
Hitler receives the Olympic olive branch from Greek athlete Spyridon Louis, winner of the 1896 marathon, at the 1936 Berlin Olympics.
They both agreed the borders between the two nations were undisputed and agreed to consult over future issues.
Slightly earlier, on October 24, Hitler presented a proposal to Poland on generous terms for the return of Danzig to Germany and construction of an autobahn and railroad through the Polish Corridor to connect Germany with its severed East Prussia region.
Hitler offered to allow the Poles to use this transportation avenue as well, at no cost, strengthening economic activity between the two nations.
By August 23, 1939, the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact was signed, declaring “spheres of influence” for the USSR and Germany, and ensuring neither nation would attack the other.
While this is considered another of Hitler’s peace measures—or at least avoidance of war—it is understood that both sides planned to break the agreement, Stalin at the time when European nations had exhausted themselves fighting each other, and Hitler advocated for arms reductions to protect civilians, particularly women and children.
The second called for a “reorganization of the international economic system” so that “unrestricted trade” could flourish.
The third once more advocated arms reductions to protect civilians, particularly women and children.
The following spring, Britain and France, having declared war on Germany, fielded an immense army pointed at Germany through Belgium.
Belgium participated by supporting infrastructure to pass the army through to Germany.
A FINAL APPEAL TO REASON After French and British armies were subdued within six weeks, Hitler presented another Reichstag speech, this time on July 19, 1940.
It was translated into English and dropped as leaflets by Luftwaffe planes into British cities.
Hitler emphasized that it was the goal of the NSDAP to be allies with Italy and Britain.
It still saddens me today that, in spite of all my endeavors, I have not succeeded in obtaining this friendship with England which, I believe, should have been a blessing for both peoples, especially because I was not able to do so despite my persistent, sincere efforts.
I know of the women and mothers at home whose hearts, despite their willingness to sacrifice tacked America.
Prior to WWII, the anti-war sentiment in United States was widespread, as many Americans wanted to to the , hang onto this last with all avoid yet another costly and deadly war overseas.
Ortheir might.” ganizations such as the America First Committee, which Britain had been bombing German civilian organized rallies and speeches such as the one shown cities since May 10 and, a month after Hitler's below, advocated for neutrality and sought to keep United States speech, Churchill ordered Berlin, Germany’s capital, bombed for the first time.
N S his “Political Testament,” even as Red Army c OA N\ Vvoys forces were advancing on his Berlin bunker N O% troops from entering a protracted European conflict. from the east, and American and British forces Des a7, on Fi oR AMERICAN BOYS were approaching from the west.
It was desired and instigated exclusively by those international statesmen who were either of Jewish origin or who worked for Jewish interests.
Written by Germany’s foremost diplomatic historian of the early 20th century, this work maps out all the numerous times that Hitler made unconditional offers of peace to all the nations of Europe—and how the major antiGerman belligerents, France and Britain, turned down these offers each and every time.
Call 1-877-773-9077 toll free to charge, Mon.-Thu.-4:30 ET. posterity will not be able to disregard forever for the responsibility for the outbreak of this war to be laid on me.
I have furthermore never wished that, after the first disastrous world war, a second should arise against England, much less against America.
Hitler points to his “proposal to the British ambassador in Berlin of a solution to the German-Polish problem” as proof of his peaceful intentions.
What the World Rejected ends with two chapters, including one containing Hermann Goring’s letter from the Nuremberg Trials to Winston Churchill, blaming Churchill for forcing war on Germany, allowing Europe to be overrun by “Asiatics” (Soviets and Jews) and setting in motion the destruction of the British Empire.
The final chapter addresses the diaries of Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal toward the end of the war and first secretary of defense afterward.
Since America, especially the FDR administration, was largely under communist/Jewish/Zionist influence, as honest research has detailed, this statement is redundant.
More than 80 years of ongoing Jewish war propaganda depicting Adolf Hitler as a warmonger and lusting after bloody conflict are not only refuted but inverted by the historical record presented in What the World Rejected.
KKARL HAEMERS is the pen name of an author and researcher currently working in Oregon.
Some of his essays have been published in the online journal The Occidental Observer, and reproduced elsewhere.
He is currently assembling his writings and thoughts over the past year and a half into a book tentatively titled Covid Culprits.
PREPARE YOURSELF FOR KINGDOM SERVICE Hear Pastor Pete Peters daily on WWCR shortwave radio. 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
HISTORY YOU MAY HAVE MISSED A digest of interesting historical news items gleaned from various sources around the world that most likely did not appear in your local newspaper or on your mainstream television news broadcasts.
Born in January 1940 in Heidelberg, Germany, Deckert worked as an English and French teacher in German schools and uni versities for roughly 20 years before he was “cancelled” for his political views.
During his lifetime, he not only served as a leader of the nationalist NPD political party from 1991 through 2005, he also worked tirelessly as an activist and stood for office in multiple elections.
Deckert was imprisoned on two separate occasions as a result of his activities on behalf of the Revisionist cause.
From 1995-2000, he was imprisoned in a facility at Bruchsal for translating the words of American Revisionist Fred Leuchter into German.
In 2018, he spent five months in prison for helping translate a book written in Italian by Carlos Mattogno dealing with the Auschwitz concentration camp.
ROH OK Austrian Musician Sentenced A 37-year-old Austrian musician has been sentenced to 10 years in prison for violating Austria’s tyrannical Nazi Prohibition Act, perhaps the most severe and lengthiest prison sentence handed out for thought crimes in history.
He was recently sentenced in March by ajudge at the Vienna Region Court to a 10-year prison term, partially due to the popularity and success of his politically incorrect music.
Readers are encouraged to visit www.FreeMrBond.com for more details and to support the young man financially.
Haverbeck has insisted the concentration camps administered by the National Socialist regime during WWII were not “death camps,” as maintained by Court Historians and Zionist organizations, but rather labor and transit camps.
She has bravely stated her belief that the official German policy was to ensure inmates were properly cared for.
Haverbeck has powerfully argued that the official “Holocaust story is the biggest and most persistent lie in history” and, for this act of historical defiance, she has been repeatedly persecuted and jailed.
Zelensky has repeatedly invoked the memory of the “Jewish Holocaust” in his criticism of Russia’s attack on Ukraine, demanding Western leaders send more money and weaponry to Ukrainian armed forces and even potentially get involved militarily in the conflict.
Speaking to the German Bundestag in mid-March, Zelensky denounced Western politicians for not following through on their commitments to “never again,” a reference to pledges made by pandering politicians and groveling governments to never let the world allow a “Holocaust” to occur on European soil again.
So, while Zelensky invokes West1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE ern pity with references to “the Holocaust,” he cares not that his pleas for more weapons and a no-fly zone could end up in anuclear holocaust— the death and destruction from which could dwarf even the Soviet Holocaust, estimated at 60 million people.
AOR oO Paint Swastikas, Get Paid A Jewish oligarch in Ukraine with close ties to Russia was allegedly paying local Ukrainians to spray paint swastikas and other Nazi graffiti in Kiev and Kharkiv, two of the largest cities in Ukraine, in the months leading up to the Russian invasion.
Pavel Fuks, a powerful businessman who has made much of his fortune in Russia, was “allegedly approached by Russian agents and persuaded to pay local criminals anywhere between $500 and $1,500 through intermediaries to vandalize the streets of Kharkiv with Nazi symbols,” The Times of Israel reported in late March.
In the past, Fuks has donated to Jewish organizations in Ukraine, including the Babi Yar Holocaust Memorial Center in Kiev.
So-called “neo-Nazi” groups operating in Ukraine have long been exposed and denounced by Western media outlets and organized Jewish groups, such as the Anti-Defamation League.
The Azov Battalion, one of the most infamous and effective “neo-Nazi” militias operating against Russian military forces in Ukraine, was described as an “extremist group” with “ties to neo-Nazis and White supremacists” by the ADL as recently as 2019.
Note that the Ukrainian government is led by a Jewish president and a Jewish vice president, not to mention the large THE BARNES REVIEW > number of Jews in powerful political and business positions in Ukraine.
Some have alleged that groups such as the Azov Battalion and other farright militias have ties to Western intelligence and are being manipulated in order to carry out a proxy war against Russia.
Other credible reports indicate Israel is a funder of the Azov Brigade.
We would find it hard to believe that the Azov Battalion is neoNazi and, at the same time, attracting so much Jewish support.
That being said, it is certainly not hard to imagine Ukrainians being virulently anti-Russian if they are aware of the history of Ukraine and Communist Russia, a relationship that ended in millions of dead Ukrainians, starved to death or murdered by Soviet commissars.
YH OK OH It’s All Propaganda Father Patrick Desbois, a French Catholic priest known for popularizing the term “Holocaust by bullets” in reference to the alleged mass shootings of Jews on the Eastern Front during WWII, will lead an investigation into alleged war crimes committed by Russia in Ukraine, it was recently reported.
Previously, Desbois created an organization called Yahad In Unum based in France that investigated the alleged mass killings of Jews in Ukraine by so-called “Nazi mobile killing units,” epitomized by the purported massacre of 34,000 Jews at Babi Yar near Kiev in September 1941.
No forensic evidence exists of this alleged massacre, yet the myth remains.
AOR OH March of the Living to Resume The International March of the Living will once again conduct its annual march from the former site of Auschwitz to Birkenau, the infamous “death camps” in Poland that scores of historians and investigators have conclusively demonstrated to be nothing more than labor and industrial camps.
The annual pilgrimage has been on hold the past two years due to the Covid-19 pandemic, but will resume on April 28 of this year.
Kim Reynolds recently signed two bills that require the state to officially adopt the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance’s definition of anti-Semitism as well as prohibit the state from investing in “companies that boycott Israel,” according to the Jewish Telegraphic Agency.
AN AMERICAN PUTIN Wanted: An American Version of Vladimir Putin to Save Us From the NWO Oligarchs By Dr.
Zbigniew Brzezinski, former national security advisor, agrees, calling Putin not just another Hitler but also a thug, a menace, a Mafia gangster, and a Mussolini.
Because Putin is standing up against Western aggression—not only in Ukraine but also in Syria and Iran.
Ongoing Western attempts to destabilize these and other countries are just the most recent examples of a decades-old pattern of aggression.
Total destruction of traditional nations and values and the creation of a New World Order global dictatorship.
Today, the childish anti-Putin namecalling is rising to new heights of hysteria.
The Western-dominated globalist oligarchy nearly destroyed Russia in the 1990s.
Russian men lost eight years of life expectancy, the equivalent of what happens to a country completely defeated and destroyed in an all-out war.
After the neoliberal globalist oligarchs had burned Russia to the ground, it somehow arose, phoenix-like, from the ashes.
At the helm, charting the course of Christian Russia’s rebirth, is Vladimir Putin.
During the 1990s, Russia’s oligarchs looted the country in service to Zionism and the New World Order— and to their own aspirations for power.
From now on, stay out of politics, keep your corruption within limits, and don’t harm Russia’s national interests.
To show he meant business, Putin had Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Vladimir Yevtushenkov, two of Russia’s richest oligarchs, imprisoned for tax fraud and money laundering.
Freed from the worst excesses of oligarchical parasitism, Putin rebuilt his country’s economy and, with it, its military.
Russia’s abundant national resources were suddenly no longer open for looting.
Like Saddam Hussein in Iraq, Muammar Qaddafi in Libya 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE “Oligarchs” is a term largely associated with Russia due to the rapacious plutocrats who took over large swaths of the Russian economy following the collapse of the Soviet Union, resulting in their immense wealth, power and influence in the newly created Russian Federation.
Vladimir Putin has effectively checked these oligarchs in Russia, but they operate freely in the United States and other Western nations, often to the detriment of the people and nation’s national interests.
George Soros, Jeff Bezos, Bill Gates and Mark Zuckerberg, featured above, are just some of the oligarchs dominating American politics and big business. and the guardians of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Putin insisted that the people, not globalist oligarchs, should be the primary beneficiaries of his nation’s God-given wealth.
In 2014 they hatched a plot to steal Sevastopol, Russia’s most important naval base, by sponsoring a coup d’état in Ukraine.
When Putin pre-empted their plot by respecting the wishes of the people of Crimea, as expressed in a referendum, to secede from Ukraine and join the Russian Federation, the oligarchs and their hideous harpies Hillary Clinton and Victoria Nuland went ballistic.
They used their control over the puppet government in Kiev to launch a genocidal war against the Russianspeaking 40% of Ukraine.
And they began arming Ukraine with NATO weapons, including possibly biological weapons.
Crucially, they made it clear that Ukraine would join NATO and host American first-strike nuclear missiles on the Russia-Ukraine border, THE BARNES REVIEW > which could reach Moscow in a matter of minutes.
He said it over and over, calmly laying out Russia’s legitimate security concerns.
So, contrary to everything our oligarch-owned media tell you, Putin’s leadership of Russia has been distinguished by competence and courage.
He would encourage a long-term effort to restore traditional spiritual and religious values.
He would refuse to let Israel completely control our Middle East policy.
Though Trump has some of the instincts of an “American Putin,” he wasn’t capable of pursuing, much less achieving, a real Make America Great Again agenda.
Barrett taught at colleges and universities in San Francisco, Paris, and Wisconsin.
VLADIMIR PUTIN & THE EMPIRE OF LIES Putin Explains His Rationale for the Invasion of Ukraine Alleges government in Ukraine was cultural, financial, military threat to Russian nation in February 2022 speech censored by West By Vladimir Putin Citizens of Russia, friends, I consider it necessary today to speak again about the tragic events in Donbass and the key aspects of ensuring the security of Russia.
Ispoke about our biggest concerns and worries, and about the fundamental threats which irresponsible Western politicians created for Russia consistently, rudely and unceremoniously for decades.
I am referring to the eastward expansion of NATO, which is moving its military infrastructure ever closer to the Russian border.
NATO EXPANSION It is a fact that, over the past 30 years, we have been patiently trying to come to an agreement with the leading NATO countries regarding the principles of equal and indivisible security in Europe.
In response to our proposals, we invariably faced either cynical deception and lies or attempts at pressure and blackmail, while the North Atlantic alliance continued to expand despite our protests and concerns.
Its military machine is moving and, as I said, is approaching our very border.
In the late 1980s, the Soviet Union grew weaker and subsequently broke apart.
We lost confidence for only one moment, but it was enough to disrupt the balance of forces in the world.
THE ARCHAIC WORLD ORDER As a result, the old treaties and agreements are no longer effective.
Anything that does not suit the dominant state, the powers that be, is denounced as archaic, obsolete and useless.
At the same time, everything it regards as useful is presented as the ultimate truth and forced on others regardless of the cost, abusively and by any means available.
This has to do with the entire system of international relations, and sometimes even United States allies.
The collapse of the USSR led to a redivision of the world, and the norms of international law that developed by that time—and the most important of them, the fundamental norms that were adopted following WWII and largely formalized its outcome—came in the 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE A propaganda image created to recruit new members for the Ukrainian nationalist Azov Brigade. way of those who declared themselves the winners of the Cold War.
Of course, the practice of international relations and the rules regulating them had to take into account the changes that took place in the world and in the balance of forces.
However, this should have been done professionally, smoothly, patiently and with due regard and respect for the interests of all states and one’s own responsibility.
Instead, we saw a state of euphoria created by the feeling of absolute superiority, a kind of modern absolutism, coupled with the low cultural standards and arrogance of those who formulated and pushed through decisions that suited only themselves.
THE BARNES REVIEW » United States INTERVENTIONS FAIL There are many examples of this.
First a bloody military operation was waged against Serbia without the UN Security Council's sanction, but with combat aircraft and missiles used in the heart of Europe.
The bombing of peaceful cities and vital infrastructure went on for several weeks.
I have to recall these facts, because some Western colleagues prefer to forget them.
When we mentioned the event, they prefer to avoid speaking about international law, instead emphasizing the circumstances which they interpret as ... necessary.
The tragedy, which was created for hundreds of thousands and even millions of people not only in Libya but in the whole region, has led to a large-scale exodus from the Middle East and North Africa to Europe.
The combat operations conducted by the Western coalition in that country without the Syrian government’s approval or UN Security * MAY/JUNE 2022 + 45 Council's sanction can only be defined as aggression and intervention.
But the example that stands apart from the above events is, of course, the invasion of Iraq without any legal grounds. used the pretext of allegedly reliable information available in the United States about the presence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.
To prove that allegation, the United States secretary of state held up a vial with white power, publicly, for the whole world to see, assuring the international community that it was a chemical warfare agent created in Iraq.
It later turned out that all of that was a fake and a sham, and that Iraq did not have any chemical weapons.
We witnessed lies made at the highest state level and voiced from the high UN rostrum.
As a result, we saw a tremendous loss in human life, damage, destruction and a colossal upsurge of terrorism.
AN EMPIRE OF LIES Overall, it appears that nearly everywhere, in many regions of the world where the United States brought its “law and order,” this created bloody, festering wounds and the curse of international terrorism and extremism.
Ihave only mentioned the most glaring but far from only examples of Western disregard for international law.
This array includes promises not to expand NATO eastward, even by an inch.
It could be, but it shouldn’t be as dirty as it is now, not to such an extent.
This type of shady, con-artist behavior is contrary not only to the principles of international relations but also— and above all—to the generally accepted norms of morality and ethics.
Incidentally, United States politicians, political scientists and journalists write and say that a veritable “Empire of Lies” has been created inside the 46 »+ THE BARNES REVIEW > MAY/JUNE 2022 + United States in recent years.
All its satellites not only humbly and obediently say “yes” to it and parrot it at the slightest pretext, but also imitate its behavior and enthusiastically accept the rules it is offering them.
As for our country, after the disintegration of the USSR, given the They have sought to destroy our traditional values and force on us their false values. entire unprecedented openness of the new, modern Russia, its readiness to work honestly with the United States and other Western partners, and its practically unilateral disarmament, they immediately tried to put the final squeeze on us, finish us off and utterly destroy us.
This is how it was in the 1990s and the early 2000s, when the so-called collective West was actively supporting separatism and gangs of mercenaries in southern Russia.
Properly speaking, the attempts to use us in their own interests never ceased.
The West has sought to destroy our traditional values and force on us their false values that erode us—our people—from within.
Despite all that, in December 2021, we made yet another attempt to reach an agreement with the United States and its allies on the principles of European security and NATO’s non-expansion.
It does not believe it necessary to agree with Russia on a matter that is critical for us.
The United States is pursuing its own objectives, while neglecting our interests.
If history is any guide, we know that, in 1940 and early 1941, the Soviet Union went to great lengths to prevent war or at least delay its outbreak.
To this end, the USSR sought not to provoke the potential aggressor until the very end by refraining or postponing the most urgent and obvious preparations it had to make to defend itself from an imminent attack.
As a result, the country was not prepared to counter the invasion by Nazi Germany, which attacked our Motherland on June 22, 1941 without declaring war.
The country stopped the enemy and went on to defeat it, but this came at a tremendous cost.
The attempt to appease the aggressor ahead of the Great Patriotic War proved to be a mistake and came at a high cost for our people.
In the first months after hostilities broke out, we lost vast 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE territories of strategic importance, as well as millions of lives.
RUSSIA STILL POWERFUL Those who aspire to global dominance have publicly designated Russia as their enemy.
It is true that they have considerable financial, scientific, technological and military capabilities.
We are aware of this and have an objective view of the economic threats we have been hearing, just as our ability to counter this brash and never-ending blackmail.
Let me reiterate that we have no illusions in this regard, and are extremely realistic in our assessments.
As for military affairs, even after the dissolution of the USSR and losing a considerable part of its capabilities, today’s Russia remains one of the most powerful nuclear states.
In this context, there should be no doubt for anyone that any potential aggressor will face defeat and ominous consequences should it directly attack our country.
At the same time, technology, including in the defense sector, is changing rapidly.
But a military presence in territories bordering on Russia, if we permit it to go ahead, will stay for decades to come or maybe forever, creating an ever-mounting and totally unacceptable threat for Russia.
SITUATION MORE DANGEROUS Even now, with NATO’s eastward expansion, the situation for Russia has been becoming worse and more dangerous by the year.
Moreover, these past days, NATO leadership has been blunt in its statements that they need to accelerate and step-up efforts to bring the alliance’s infrastructure closer to Russia’s borders.
In other words, they have been toughening THE BARNES REVIEW > their position.
Any further expansion of the North Atlantic alliance’s infrastructure or ongoing efforts to gain a military foothold inside Ukrainian territory are unacceptable for us.
The problem is that, in territories adjacent to Russia, which I have to note are our historical lands, a hostile “anti-Russia” is taking shape.
Fully controlled from the outside, it is doing everything to attract NATO armed forces and obtain cutting-edge weapons.
CONTAINING RUSSIA For the United States and its allies, it is a policy of containing Russia, with obvious geopolitical dividends.
For our country, it is a matter of life and death; a matter of our historical future as a nation.
It is not only a very real threat to our interests but to the very existence of our state and to its sovereignty.
We can see that the forces that staged the coup in Ukraine in 2014 have seized power, are keeping it with the help of ornamental election procedures and have abandoned the path of a peaceful settlement of this conflict.
For eight years—for eight endless years—we have been doing everything possible to settle the situation by peaceful political means.
We had to stop that atrocity, that genocide of the millions of people who live there and who pinned their hopes on Russia, on all of us.
A New History of WWII Prize-winning historian Sean McMeekin reveals how Stalin—not Hitler—was the driving force of World War II in this major new history.
WWII endures in the popular imagination as a heroic struggle between good and evil, with villainous Hitler driving events.
But Hitler was not in power when the conflict erupted in Asia—and he was dead before it ended.
His armies did not fight in multiple theaters, did not span the Eurasian continent, and he did not inherit any of the spoils of war.
Drawing on new research in Soviet, European and USS. archives, Stalin’s War revolutionizes our understanding of this global conflict by moving its epicenter to the east.
McMeekin shows the war that emerged in Europe in 1939 was the one Stalin wanted, not Hitler.
So, too, did the Pacific war of 1941-1945 fulfill Stalin’s goal of unleashing a war between Japan and the “Anglo-Saxon” capitalist powers he viewed as his ultimate adversary.
McMeekin also reveals the extent to which Soviet Communism was rescued by the self-defeating strategy of America and Britain via Lend-Lease aid.
This unreciprocated American generosity gave Stalin’s armies the mobile striking power to conquer most of Eurasia, from Berlin to Peking.
McMeekin is no fan of Adolf Hitler and accepts many of the claims of “the Holocaust” without question.
Focused on their own goals, the leading NATO countries are supporting the far-right nationalists and neo-Nazis in Ukraine, those who will never forgive the people of Crimea and Sevastopol for freely making a choice to reunite with Russia.
They will undoubtedly try to bring war to Crimea just as they have done in Donbass, to kill innocent people just as members of the punitive units of Ukrainian nationalists and Adolf Hitler’s accomplices did during the Great Patriotic War.
SHOWDOWN UNAVOIDABLE If we look at the sequence of events and the incoming reports, the showdown between Russia and these forces cannot be avoided.
We have been treating all new post-Soviet states with respect and will continue to act this way.
We respect and will respect their sovereignty, as proven by the assistance we provided to Kazakhstan when it faced a challenge to its statehood and integrity.
However, Russia cannot feel safe, develop, and exist while facing a permanent threat from the territory of today’s Ukraine.
Let me remind you that, in 2000-— 2005, we used our military to push back against terrorists in the Caucasus and stood up for the integrity of our state.
In 2015, we used our armed forces to create a reliable shield that prevented terrorists from 48 *+ THE BARNES REVIEW > MAY/JUNE 2022 + Syria from penetrating Russia.
They did not leave us any other option for defending Russia and our people, other than the one we are forced to use today.
In this context, in accordance with Article 51 of the UN Charter, with permission of Russia’s Federation Council, and in execution of the treaties of friendship and mutual assistance with the Donetsk People’s Republic and the Lugansk People’s Republic, ratified by the Federal AsIt is not our plan to occupy Ukraine.
We do not intend to impose anything on anyone by force. sembly on February 22, I made a decision to carry out a special military operation.
The purpose of this operation is to protect people who, for eight years now, have been facing humiliation and genocide perpetrated by the Kiev regime.
To this end, we will seek to demilitarize and de-Nazify Ukraine, as well as bring to trial those who perpetrated numerous bloody crimes against civilians, including against citizens of the Russian Federation.
At the same time, we have been hearing an increasing number of statements coming from the West that there is no need any more to abide by the documents approved after World War II, as signed by the totalitarian Soviet regime.
The sacrifices our people had to make to defeat Nazism in World War II are sacred.
This does not contradict the high values of human rights and freedoms in the reality that emerged over the postwar decades.
This does not mean that nations cannot enjoy the right to self-determination.
Freedom guides our policy, the freedom to choose independently our future and the future of our children.
We believe that all the peoples living in today’s Ukraine, anyone who wants to do this, must be able to enjoy this right to make a free choice.
MESSAGE TO THE PEOPLE In this context, I would like to address the citizens of Ukraine.
The people of Crimea and Sevastopol made their choice in favor of being with their historical homeland, Russia, and we supported their choice.
The current events have nothing to do with a desire to infringe on the interests of Ukraine and the Ukrainian people.
They are connected with the defense of Russia from those who have taken Ukraine hostage and are trying to use it against our country and our people.
We are acting to defend ourselves from the threats created against us and from a worse peril than what is happening now.
I am asking you, however hard this may be, to understand this and to work together with us so as to turn this tragic page as soon as possible and to move forward together.
We will do what we must independently, so as to create 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE a favorable environment so that we can overcome all of these challenges.
This will strengthen us from within as a single whole, despite the existence of state borders.
I would also like to address the military personnel of the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
Comrade officers, Your fathers, grandfathers and great-grandfathers did not fight the Nazi occupiers and did not defend our common Motherland to allow today’s neo-Nazis to seize power in Ukraine.
You swore the oath of allegiance to the Ukrainian people and not to the junta, the people’s adversary that is plundering Ukraine and humiliating the Ukrainian people.
The military personnel of the Ukrainian army who do this will be able to freely leave the zone of hostilities and return to their families.
I want to emphasize again that all responsibility for the possible bloodshed will lie fully and wholly with the ruling Ukrainian regime.
I would now like to say something very important for those who may be tempted to interfere in these developments from the outside.
No matter who tries to stand in our way or create threats for our country and our people, they must know that Russia will respond immediately.
The consequences will be such as you have never seen in your entire history.
Citizens of Russia, the culture and values, experience and traditions of our ancestors invariably provided a powerful underpinning for the wellbeing and the very existence of entire states and nations, their success and viability.
Of course, this directly depends on the ability to quickly adapt to constant change, maintain social THE BARNES REVIEW > cohesion, and the readiness to consolidate and summon all available forces in order to move forward.
We always need to be strong, but this strength can take on different forms.
The “Empire of Lies ” that I mentioned in the beginning of my speech proceeds in its policy primarily from base, direct force.
We all know that having justice and truth on our side is what makes us truly strong.
If this is the case, it would be hard to disagree with the fact that it is our strength and our readiness to fight that are the bedrock of independence and sovereignty.
These provide the necessary foundation for building a reliable future for your home, your family and your Motherland.
Dear compatriots, I am certain that devoted soldiers and officers of Russia’s armed forces will perform their duty with professionalism and courage.
I have no doubt that the government institutions at all levels and specialists will work effectively to guarantee the stability of our economy, financial system and social wellbeing, and the same applies to corporate executives and the entire business sector.
I hope that all parliamentary parties and civil society take a consolidated, patriotic position.
At the end of the day, the future of Russia is in the hands of its multiethnic people, as has always been the case in our history.
This means that the decisions that I made will be executed, that we will achieve the goals we have set and reliably guarantee the security of our Motherland.
He was also the prime minister from 1999 to 2000, and again from 2008 to 2012.
At the same time, few leaders worldwide have maintained such high levels of popularity as he.
Putin’s political and economic successes are too startling to be debated.
With high rates of economic growth, military and police reform, and a concerted attack on official corruption, Putin has become a trusted populist leader, and a significant figure in global nationalism, non-alignment and multipolarity.
This book, written by former BARNES REVIEW editor Matthew Raphael Johnson, Ph.D.—an internationally acknowledged expert on Slavic and Russian studies—attempts to synthesize the basic political views of Putin.
A Poetic Memoir Leon Degrelle’s The Burning Souls is now available in English.
Following the German occupation of Belgium, Degrelle and his party loyalists enlisted in the Wehrmachtorganized Walloon Legion to aid in the liberation of the peoples of the Soviet Republics.
After the fall of Berlin, Degrelle escaped to Spain, where he was safeguarded by Franco.
The Burning Souls is Degrelle’s reflection on his experiences and on the soul—part poetry but mostly memoir.
He traces his journey, from his idyllic childhood to the steppes of Russia, not just as a physical journey but as a spiritual trial.
He instructs us that to give oneself completely to service of a transcendent ideal is what is required to overcome the spiritual malaise of our day.
His Betrayal & Murder Following his capture by the Allies in Scotland, Germany’s Rudolf Hess remained a prisoner of the Allies for 46 years until he died at 93 in Spandau Prison.
But that changed with the publication of this book by Abdallah Melaouhi.
Melaouhi spent five years with Hess, acting as Hess’s medical aide at the Military Prison in Spandau, up until Hess’s death.
Here Melaouhi gives us the entire story about Hess’s time in Spandau, his murder, the plot to cover it up and the effort to suppress this book.
Thanks to the energetic efforts of a group of honest historians—graciously supported by Madame Degrelle, the general’s widow—a substantial portion of Degrelle’s writings were rescued.
This is one of those volumes, painstakingly recreated by expert translators and editors.
In this amazing book, the former Belgian Waften SS officer discusses the tragedy of the Versailles Treaty, the enigma of Adolf Hitler and his rise to power, Hitler’s impressive WWI experiences, Hitler’s popularity with the people, the inside story of the Beer Hall Putsch, Hitler’s unification of the German state and the Anschluss, the feud with the tenacious Ernst Roehm, the political challenges of the 1930s, the 1932 Geneva Conferences, Mussolini, Blum, Tukhachevsky, Nuremberg and much more.
For many years, Elie Wiesel was the face of the “Holocaust,” appearing on “Oprah” and any other venue.
Large crowds listened intently as he described his time in WWII “death camps” and how he miraculously survived them all.
But, for just as many years, Holocaust Revisionists have been exposing this fraud, pointing out that his writings show gross ignorance of the camps in which he was allegedly incarcerated and poking holes in his tall tales.
The Man & His Work This, the only official biography of Hermann Goering, was a bestseller in Germany and in the English-speaking world when published in 1938.
Written by senior staff member Erich Gritzbach, this book details the many astonishing services that Goering rendered the German state, besides recreating the German air force.
This book contains the original English version plus all 57 original photographs and the 1938 introduction written by Sir Robert Lockhart.
Germany’s War documents that the Allied leaders were primarily responsible for starting and prolonging WWII—costing millions of lives.
FDR’s numerous provocations forced Germany to declare war on the U.S.A. despite Hitler’s desire for peace.
Also covers Stalin’s plan for European conquest, America’s second crusade, how WWII was planned and instigated, the Allied conspiracy to prolong the war, the Allied POW camps that killed a million Germans, the appalling plight of expelled Germans, history’s most terrible peace, crimes committed in German camps, the alleged genocide of 6 million Jews, and more.
Reynouard compared the accusations made against the Gestapo at the Nuremberg Tribunals by the Allies with the postwar French trials of the same personnel, involving the same cases, the same victims and the same eyewitnesses.
What he found was that the evidence and accusations presented by the Allies against the Germans were fake.
The author has been imprisoned because he refuses to parrot the official lies of the German and Allied governments.
Here, Walendy describes the hidden truth of the “legal” origin of today’s German laws, forced on a defeated people, now stripped of their history and their identity.
If you want to know why the German government is so intent on suppressing “Holocaust” research, then you need to read this book.
After years of five-star ratings, Amazon finally caved and banned Mike King’s The Bad War.
A photo-journalistic chronology—300 of the most important events of the war reinterpreted in brief synopses. illustrations.
In this book, for the first time ever, the reader will see a real historical debate on the issues.
Operation Keelhaul Author Peter J Huxley-Blythe discovered why the Russian people do not trust the United States or Great Britain.
When WWII ended, millions of Russian men, women and children in the West were shipped back to the Soviet Union to face Stalin’s executioners or to serve long sentences at hard labor in the death camps of Siberia—with the approval and assistance of the Allies.
This was a betrayal that resulted in the death and enslavement of millions of good Russian freedom fighters and their families.
An Investigation Into the Mass Deaths of German Prisoners at the Hands of the French and Americans After WWII By James Bacque.
Dwight D Eisenhower deliberately starved to death German prisoners of war in huge numbers.
Photo section shows the deplorable conditions in which the German prisoners were kept.
While concentration camp inmates got barracks, bunks, food and heat, the Germans were kept in open-air pens in freezing weather without proper sanitation.
Allied air photos of Auschwitz show that there were no “gas chambers,” no “burning pits,” no “continuously smoking chimneys,” no “Zyklon-B insertion holes” etc.
Throughout history, Jews have played an exceptionally active role in promoting and inciting war, says the author.
With their influence in government, we find recurrent instances of Jews promoting hardline, uncompromising stances and actively inciting people to hatred.
The author maintains that Jewish misanthropy, rooted in Old Testament mandates, and combined with a ruthless materialism, has led them, time and again, to instigate warfare if it served their larger interests.
Along the way, Dalton dissects Jewish strategies for maximizing gain amidst warfare, reaching back centuries.
By Marc Roland he North Atlantic Treaty Organization is a self-evident front for the United States government.
All European nations in the alliance are Uncle Sam’s indentured puppets.
Because Ukrainian politics have always been among the most deeply corrupt on Earth, even NATO consistently denied membership to Ukraine for fear the contending criminal syndicates that run that brazenly exploited country would use advanced weapons against one another in gang warfare that could potentially spill over its borders into regional conflicts.
That very real concern was abruptly put aside, however, in June 2021, when NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg stated that Ukraine would be put on a path to NATO membership regardless of what Russia had to say.
As a NATO member, Ukraine would then receive the latest guided missile systems and other high-tech weaponry from the United States, something Moscow has long 52 + THE BARNES REVIEW > MAY/JUNE 2022 + VOLODYMYR ZELENSKY Ukrainian president. viewed as an existential threat.
So, too, is the imminent placement of modern weapon systems in Ukraine a blatant threat to Russia—a flagrant act of aggression—that no other nation in the world, faced with a similar situation, would accept.
To not have responded as Russian President Vladimir Putin did in February, cide, tantamount to surrendering to foreign coercion without a fight.
Stoltenberg and his ilk certainly knew they had backed Putin into a corner from which he could escape only by recourse to military action.
It is clear, then, that they were directly responsible for a war they wanted and made as unavoidable as it was inevitable.
Years earlier, current President Joe Biden and his scandal-plagued son Hunter were infamously implicated in underhanded financial dealings with Kiev’s party bosses and organized crime figures.
The Ukrainian capital was known worldwide as a playground and rich pasture for oligarchs and high-profile influence peddlers, where law enforcement authorities and politicians were mostly on the take, illicit cash flowed like running water and everything and everyone had a price tag.
Many if not most of the corporate 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE or government thieves are not even Ukrainians.
As such, the whole country had become a kind of transnational Las Vegas.
There, oligarchs, mobsters, major-league criminals and Ukrainian versions of Jeffrey Epstein or Bernie Madoff flourish in their own element, making some of their biggest investments, from cocaine peddling and sex trafficking, to illegal arms swindles and espionage for profit.
The threatened loss of these lucrative investments suddenly endangered by foreign invasion was and is the sole impetus behind the unilateral demonization of Russian President Vladimir Putin by all news media and government authorities throughout the entire Western world.
They are often the same faceless manipulators of public opinion up to their necks in Ukrainian corruption.
Putin only decided to act following NATO’s attempt to admit Ukraine, but especially after seeing America’s disastrous withdrawal from Afghanistan in August 2021.
They had been fatally distracted by Critical Race Theory, systemic racism, Black Lives Matter grievances, gender discrimination, gay pride and other forms THE BARNES REVIEW > of political correctness, and were too weak, therefore, to interfere with Putin’s plans for Ukraine.
In Putin’s view, Ukraine had become a backed-up toilet overflowing with an excess of Western degeneracy, threatening Russian society with contamination.
Western cultural poison is exacerbated by possibly quite real deadly poisons contained inside dozens of Ukrainian bacteriological laboratories overseen by United States and British scientists.
This is a violation of both the Chemical Weapons and Biological Weapons conventions.
Initially, Washington officials vehemently denied the existence of any such laboratories.
State Department official Victoria Nuland finally admitted, after being caught in the act, that the labs are there, being run for humanitarian reasons, of course, but that they are worried the contents of the labs might escape or be used by the Russians.
Russia’s only goal in Ukraine is to either make it a buffer against serious NATO threats or neutralize the country by removing the hostile, anti-Russian puppet regime in Kiev.
Russia’s enemies hate her because she has so far escaped contamination by their delightful decadence.
The “progressive West,” being fanatically intolerant of any contrary views, wants the Russian people subsumed in the same kind of wholesale degeneracy degrading Western civilization.
Then there are those congenital liars in power, telling millions of emotionally engineered audiences who to hate and who to love according to the greed-obsessed investors in Ukraine’s misery.
They stand on the sidelines, counting their coin—amused by the spectacle of a modern-day Esau slaughtering fellow Goyim.
Contains five dozen blackand-white illustrations, genealogies and a full index.
The book ends in 1911 before the period of the Bolshevik overthrow of the Romanovs.
THE CIVIL WAR IN THE DONBASS The Donbass Rebellion and the New World Order An analysis of the eastern Ukrainian region comprising the new People’s Republics of Donetsk and Lugansk A pro-Russian separatist movement in a relatively remote and largely unknown region of eastern Ukraine has led to a major realignment of the international political order, demonstrating, once again, the power and significance of nationalism in an era of globalization.
Matthew Raphael Johnson krainian nationalism has been one of the most heartbreaking failures of recent decades.
Twice, Ukrainian nationalists have been fooled into believing the West was their champion.
In 2004 and again in 2014, Western-financed violence and riots brought in governments that were nothing more than collection agencies for Western capital.
Ukraine has now fallen to the level of Gambia or the Ivory Coast in economic terms.
Her potential has been destroyed and her public morale— even before the invasion—is low.
Today, the Ukrainian government, installed as a result of violent protests organized from the American Embassy, has neither legitimacy nor money.
Her economy is entirely based on foreign aid, and this is guaranteed to the extent Kiev postures as the main force against Russia in the east.
RA 2 rd NS Donetsk 5 Luhansk 9 A, it | ‘OZDnipro 4 Sv Sty Dnipropetrovsk 5 D oO Was Ss Donen.
AL \ / Sa rq ‘ | Kherson DA, NDE BS E S( lente att Up moment the West seems to tire of writing checks, warnings of “an imminent Russian invasion” appear in the Western press.
Many of the instigators of the uprising had ties to the West, especially the United States through the National Endowment for Democracy and other subversive anti-Russian, proWestern NGOs operating in Ukraine.
A leaked 2014 phone call between Victoria Nuland, a longtime State Department operative and anti-Russian fanatic, and thenUnited States Ambassador to Ukraine Geoffrey Pyatt demonstrates overt United States involvement and interference in Ukrainian internal political affairs. entire international world order, long dominated by the petrodollar and United States economic, political and military hegemony.
The Donbass rebellion and its aftermath has already upset the liberal American-centric world order.
THE RIOTS OF 2014 As is well-known, the violence of the Maidan protesters in 2014 overwhelmed the police forces.
A variety of political dissidents and troublemakers, many of whom were financed, trained and backed by the West, including the National Endowment for Democracy (long viewed as a CIA front organization), used the Maidan Square in central Kiev as their rallying point and occupation zone.
The United States embassy was giving away Captigon, a strong amphetamine and painkiller that permitted protesters to withstand tear gas and truncheons, according to eyewitnesses.
The violence of the Kiev riots surpasses anything this author has seen in riots from South Korea to Northern Ireland.
Police were strangely hesitant to defend themselves, even when their lives were in danger.
Shockingly, the United States was claiming the Maidan protests were peaceful and only the separatists in the eastern Donbass region were violent.
The American press and government were merely making up facts to suit their agenda, knowing that there were very few that could dispute them.
Since Ukraine is largely unknown territory for even well-educated Americans, the press and the then-Obama administration could say whatever they wanted and make up whatever they pleased.
We absolutely reject the comments by the Donetsk separatists that the evacuation of their forces is contingent upon Maidan activities ending their legal and peaceful protests.
You know where we stand on the legitimacy of the government of Ukraine.
You know where we stand on these claims that there was a coup, which we completely disagree with.
Elements of the junta, governors appointed from Kiev, moved southeast to the pro-Russian Donbass region to take the profitable firms there and sell them off to the West to pay debts.
The workers there quickly organized arevolt leading to an armed uprising.
Russian volunteers, especially Cossacks, quickly came to the aid of the Donbass and reinforced their armed forces.
Earlier, on March 16, a referendum in Crimea voted overwhelmingly to rejoin Russia, as the population there had always been pro-Russian.
In response, a group of thugs burned alive more than 40 pro-Russian sympathizers in Odessa on the same day as the failed invasion.
While legitimate referenda were the norm in the Donbass and Crimea, in Kiev the billionaire oligarch Petro Poroshenko, who was determined to align Ukraine with the West and the European Union , was essentially appointed president by Western bankers who held Ukraine’s debt.
Russian gas chief Alexei Miller warned little had been paid on Ukraine’s gas bill.
Russia offered a loan to Ukraine to assist them since, by early April, Ukrainian economic production had come to a halt.
As with the protests of 2004, all promises made by the leaders of the coup were immediately discarded and broken.
To cover for this, Ukrainian media continued fanning anti-Russian hysteria and intimidation.
Kolomoisky was the governor of the Dnepropetrovsk region at the time and promised $10,000 for each Donbass separatist soldier or sympathizer killed.
Oleg Tsarev was the 56 *+ THE BARNES REVIEW > MAY/JUNE 2022 + coordinator of the southeast resistance in Ukraine based in Donetsk, one of the largest cities in the Donbass region.
The oligarch Kolomoisky was paying mercenaries to attack the separatists, since most of the Ukrainian army fled or went over to the rebels.
About 5,000 Ukrainians a day were applying for visas to move to Russia.
Putin and Dmitry Medvedev sought cooperation to rebuild the moribund Ukrainian economy.
The politAs with the protests of 2004, all promises made by the leaders of the coup were immediately broken.
Ukrainian authorities soon began an “anti-terrorist operation” in Slavyansk.
The operation began after a confidential visit to Kiev by CIA Director John Brennan.
The Ukrainian military and its allies struggled to make progress against the pro-Russian separatists.
To cover for Ukrainian defeats, the story of a “Russian invasion” was then invented.
Public debt was now 60% of GDP, though the real figure was likely higher.
The Kiev government then began a round up and execution of its enemies.
From January to February 2014, 5,172 were executed in Kiev prisons; 10,000 were killed immediately after the coup and another 5,000 in March.
Kiev cut off the canal supplying fresh water to Crimea’s farmers, ruining their harvest.
Strikes in industrial centers and mines in western Ukraine turned pro-Russian.
Food prices rose by an average of 25% in Kiev, closing about 50 restaurants and cafes.
In response, the United States financed legislative bills and a television propaganda blitz to legalize samesex marriage.
In 2009, the electricity produced in Ukraine was about 40% of the last year of the Soviet Union, 1991.
Agricultural production of meat and dairy products was 56% and 53% less than that level respectively.
Since its independence, Ukraine had lost 40% of its equity capital and 60% of its fixed asset investment disappeared.
Ukraine’s heavy industry, chemical and mechanical engineering and light industry largely disappeared, except in the Donbass.
Major protests in western Ukraine erupted over 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE TAPOSEEBO ‘| B28 TOP 1 ~om Since the Maidan coup in 2014, a bitter civil war in the Donbass region of Ukraine has resulted in the deaths of thousands of residents there.
Russian officials have described the situation as a genocide against ethnic Russians, yet the Western media and political establishment have entirely ignored the plight of the Donbass people.
Above, residents demand an end to the Ukrainian assault on Donbass. unpaid wages and high fuel costs.
Pavel Gubarev, who declared himself the “people’s governor” of the Donetsk region in March 2014, stated that the main reason for the development of the “Donbass Idea,” or independence from the Kiev regime, was the nature of the second Orange Revolution in 2014.
Its purpose was to sell Ukraine off to pay debts and to pocket the cash for the corrupt oligarchs plundering the nation.
WESTERN POLICY IN THE REGION The Donbass and the so-called “southern Russian regions of Ukraine” are directly interested in the development of economic and cultural relations with the Russian Federation.
Looking westward toward Kiev and western Ukraine, as both a market and resource base, is insufficient for the Donbass region.
On the other hand, western Ukraine is an extremely favorable transit position.
On the contrary, Russia has traditionally sought to establish contacts with the business world in Lviv and Uzhgorod in order to secure fa vorable conditions for transit of raw materials elsewhere.
The Ukrainian political elite, from communists to nationalists, have used and continue to use the idea of national independence for the purposes of the uncontrolled plunder of their own people.
Therefore, the problem with pro-Russian eastern regions rejoining or even aligning with Russia in the minds of Kiev’s political leadership is directly related to the question of their own responsibility for crimes committed.
Since the middle of the 1990s, this author has stated that Russia and Russia alone possesses the people, tradition, territory and self-reliance to be the brake on the New World Order, or the plans of capital to destroy all national and regional borders.
MATTHEW RAPHAEL JOHNSON The Soviet Experiment Challenging the Apologists for Communist Tyranny Br.
The USSR remains one of the least understood of all societies despite its having only existed in the 20th century.
It stands as the great embarrassment of the globe’s liberal elite and they do all they can to mystify their role in creating and supporting this totalitarian disaster.
One of the reasons it remains so misunderstood is that very few can wrap their heads around depravity of this magnitude.
Matthew Johnson explains the catastrophe of the Marxist Soviet Union and the ideological fog behind which it hid for so long.
Visit us at www.BarnesReview.com to see hundreds of Revisionist books, videos and other items.
It is distorted by the desire of the United States and the United Kingdom to maintain Ukraine as a force against Russia and, hence, to maintain globalization at its present pace.
The goal of the Western powers is to oust Russia from the Black Sea basin and to eliminate its influence on developments in the Mediterranean and in Central Europe.
Russia also had to be removed from the Caucasus, which explains the Western backing of separatist efforts in the Muslim autonomous regions in the late 1990s.
The United States needs a strong hand in Eastern Europe, the Black Sea, the Mediterranean, at the mouth of the Danube and in the Balkans, as well as in transit routes of raw materials from the Caspian basin and Central Asia to Europe.
Strengthening the United States position in these areas comes only by weakening the position of the Russians in these areas, or at least that’s how the situation is viewed in Washington, London and Brussels.
The Anglo-Saxons traditionally have sought to isolate Russia from the countries of Europe, and an independent, Western-leaning Ukraine serves their interests perfectly.
Therefore, the conservation of Ukraine as an economically insolvent, culturally backward but legally independent state is meeting the “vital interests” of the United States and her allies in the West.
Her system collapsed before the first Orange Revolution financed by the United States in 2004 and has been sustained solely with aid from the West ever since.
No one denies that it is intensely corrupt and has a non-functioning economy.
The International Monetary Fund , of course, has been working with the United States to sell off what’s left of Ukraine to the banking cartel.
The regime in Kiev exists only with foreign money and is thus under foreign control.
Ukraine is today an experiment in the privatization not BARNESREVIEW.COM «+ just of assets, but of state sovereignty, itself.
Organized crime has taken over, and smaller revolts—such as the uprising in Bessarabia—are breaking out with little media coverage.
Generally, the media and political establishment hysterically insist that Russia is an “aggressor” nation, particularly in light of the special military operation launched against Ukraine in February 2022 that flaunts the “rules and norms” of international relations, while China is denounced as a systemic abuser of human rights and a thief of industrial and technological innovations in the West, highly hypocritical claims, in fact.
Real power lies with banks, energy firms, finance and media and entertainment giants.
In fact, American politics ceases to make any sense at all unless one looks at both the global and the domestic economic situation.
Russia is a “threat” worthy of a major war because it refuses to abide by American dictates and commands.
Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia has genuinely attempted to work cooperatively and respectfully with the West, including the United States, only to be disrespected, ignored and denigrated, all in an effort to undermine Russia’s rise on the world stage and sabotage her dealings with other major international players.
The simple fact of the matter is that the American-dominated international order is losing its legitimacy and has largely sabotaged the very 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE foundation upon which it was built.
The decadent, decaying and degenerate Western powers are rapidly crumbling, an ugly reality Western political and financial elites wish to ignore, hide or deny.
Some of the more extreme elements in the Western political establishment have even threatened to launch World War III in order to maintain their international hegemony—a frightening prospect, to say the least.
Moscow and Beijing, however, clearly recognize this fact and have developed a close, mutually beneficial relationship that has grown much stronger recently.
In essence, they are pursuing a geopolitical strategy to break United States control over the Eurasian landmass, and thereby break United States global power.
They think that they are witnessing the birth, the historic birth, of a New World Order in which the great global hegemon, the United States, which has dominated the world for the past 70 years—will see its global power broken and its dominance over Eurasia, something the United States has maintained since the start of the Cold War in the early 1950s, coming also to an end.
Following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the United States and its allies have enacted a variety of economic sanctions against Russia, many of its top political and business leaders, entire industries and corporations and its export commodities, which, in essence, amounts to a form of economic warfare.
President Joe Biden and other Western officials insist the measures are designed to punish the Russian regime, preventing them from carrying on their military operation THE BARNES REVIEW > Russian pride Many countries that made up the former Soviet republics still have a large ethnic Russian population.
Percent of ethnic Russians in former Soviet republics ; Estonia 24.8% Latvia 26.
CIA World Factbook Graphic: Melina Yingling Putin has described the Russian people as a “state-forming people,” underscoring their history of influencing the culture, politics and economic foundations of the regions where large populations of ethnic Russians reside.
Western media portray all Russians as brutes, particularly following the invasion of Ukraine. in Ukraine while severely impacting their domestic economy.
The measures, however, have largely backfired and have only undermined and delegitimized not only the political and economic position of the Western powers, but their very currencies and the status of the dollar as the world’s reserve currency.
In a move that will have major repercussions on international financial and currency markets, Putin announced in late March 2022 that Russia would only accept payment in Russian rubles for its natural gas, which is sold extensively in Europe.
This could end up destroying the petrodollar system that has dominated international energy markets—and nations—for decades.
Russian Finance Minister Anton Siluanov has stated that roughly $300 billion worth of foreign reserves held by Russia in Western institutions have been frozen with Russia being unable to access them as a result of the Western-imposed sanctions.
Many commentators have seen this move as a confiscation of Russian foreign reserves.
This, in essence amounts to a theft of Russian assets at worst or a default on Western obligations to Russia at best.
Given the economic warfare being waged against Russia by the West, Putin insisted it “makes no sense anymore” to sell Russian goods and commodities for dollars or euros to the U.S., EU members or any other hostile nation.
Joe Biden and other Western leaders incessantly blame Russia for rising inflation, rising energy costs and other economic maladies, failing to recognize that their own misguided policies are causing significant damage and harm to their own economies.
In fact, the United States and the EU have defaulted on their obligations to Russia.
And many countries in the immediate future may begin—I am sure this is what will happen—to convert their paper and digital assets into real reserves of raw materials, land, food, gold and other real assets which will only result in more shortages in these markets.
The incessant Western demands for a potential World War IIT scenario can only be viewed as a desperate and quite pathetic attempt at maintaining Western political, financial and economy hegemony.
The fact that the Donbass rebellion sparked this wider chain of events that will have reverberations for decades to Families with two parents are rarely poor and rarely produce misfit children. come is yet another remarkable aspect of the nationalist struggle for independence, self-determination and, ultimately, dignity and respect on the world stage.
THE IDEOLOGY OF NEW RUSSIA The political theory of Novorossiya is worth noting at some length.
The Republic of New Russia is a social state and has under its jurisdiction national land, nationalized property, as well as all mineral resources, production facilities, farmland—possibly leased to entrepreneurs for a limited time ... but never to create the possibility of large monopoly conglomerates.
In New Russia, there will be no monopoly on social institutions such as a party monopoly or presidential autocracy that would control and destroy all other administrative institutions, leading to dictatorship, as it did in Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union under Josef Stalin.
This leads to a change of constitutional power and the loss of the legal authority of all state bodies.
The oligarchy in Ukraine, from the clans created during privatization, is also forbidden.
It, like so many of the scientific theories of the Enlightenment, assumes a vacuum.
The reality is that the market was forced on Russia and Ukraine that already had people in power.
Market thinking implies that all are equal at the time the system is imposed.
Priority is given to international laws and regulations if they do not contradict the development of public, social, cultural, ideological, economic and other moral relations of the Republic of New Russia, as international laws have morally declined in their economic, political, ideological preferences and programs in advocating a brutal, vicious, oligarchic system of competition and profit.
Promoting a rigid system, an evil oligarchical, competitive idea of self-interest and gain, encourages all of society toward competitive relations for survival.
However, the Republic of New Russia will not survive if competition within and among countries is the goal.
Regardless of existing provisions of international legal instruments and agreements, they are given sanction only when they harmonize their economies with other public policies with existing international standards, but also with our own state interest.
Using the government of the Unites States or the European Union, banks and other irresponsible entities impose their will on the world.
These conglomerates have no interest in free markets, as they seek total monopoly.
Private property is held in contempt as wealth and power are the domain of a tiny handful, almost totally alienated from the population at large.
Without fatherhood, a paternal, military awareness, one cannot be a citizen or statesman.
In the kitchen, in the domain of a woman’s life, a busy landscape exists.
In aself-reliant and responsible society, a working identity is one not self-created.
And because preferential treatment in the upbringing of children should be paternal, it is necessary in the education of the new generation that they not fall into the primitive narrowminded, consumer, egoistic attitude toward social life.
The scientific literature showing the destructive effects of broken homes is so overwhelming that only a handful of academic feminists choose to ignore it.
Families with two parents are rarely poor and rarely produce misfit children.
Divorce and family breakdown lead to social destruction and the very competitiveness and ego that is decried elsewhere.
In Novorossiya, the family, not the person, is the foundation of the state.
As Novorossiya begins to rebuild and sees its pensions and salaries rise, Ukraine is now at Fourth World status.
The government is merely a puppet of the United States and the IMF Her army has failed to dislodge the rebels in the east and has virtually collapsed following the Russian invasion.
For Ukraine to have any future in the West is absurd, as the West itself appears to have no future.
It is an essential signal showing the destruction of the Western imperium.
It shows that national socialists can win victories against larger armies fighting for nothing.
The only sad consequence is the continued sinking of Ukraine into a failed state and economic servitude to globalist interests as a direct result of Western intervention and >, meddling.
Kiev Junta’s Days Are Numbered,” “Sputnik News,” May 16, 2014, www.sputniknews.com.
Pravy Sektor vs. the Kiev Junta,” Greanville Post, 2015, www.greanvillepost.com.
Problems in Ukraine’s Economy About Which Official Statistics Remains Silent,” “Vox Ukraine,” August 2015. www.voxukraine.org.
MATTHEW RAPHAEL JOHNSON is a nationalist historian and writer specializing in the Russian Orthodox political tradition.
The nature of autocracy is inimical to the great oligarchic interests for it controls their reach to the levers of power.
In Russia, that meant real property ownership for the peasants and a system of social insurance and labor legislation second to none in the world.
All of this under an absolutist system while the sweatshops dominated “democratic” America.
Holy Russia, Tsavism and Orthodoxy establishes the reasons why, and, in so doing, shows the true historical roots of modern Russia and resistance to the Zionist cabal of the New World Order.
This is first-class Revisionist history, proving the link between monarchy and resistance to the great oligarchic cabals that presently rule most of the world.
Includes chapters on the most prominent Russian leaders from Ivan III to Alexander Karensky.
Outside the United States please email Sales@BarnesReview.org for best shipping rates to your nation.
The Incredible Story of the Real Captain Morgan Graham A Thomas presents the compelling true story of a Welshman who became one of the most ruthless and brutal buccaneers of the golden age of piracy.
The inspiration for dozens of fictionalized pirates in film, television and literature, as well as the namesake of one of the world’s most popular rum brands, Capt.
Unlike most of his contemporaries, he was not hunted down and killed or captured by the authorities.
Instead he was considered a hero in England and given a knighthood and eventually made governor of Jamaica.
The author reveals a complex and intriguing character—an exceptional military leader whose prime motivation was to amass as much wealth as he could by sacking and plundering settlements, towns, and cities up and down the Spanish Main.
The Barbarian Rebellion Against the Roman Empire A fresh and vivid narrative history of the Roman Empire from the point of view of the “barbarian” enemies of Rome.
History is written by the victors, and Rome had some very eloquent historians.
Those the Romans regarded as barbarians left few records of their own, but they had a tremendous impact on the Roman imagination.
Stephen Kershaw builds a narrative around the lives, personalities, successes, and failures both of the key opponents of Rome’s rise and dominance, and of those who ultimately brought the empire down.
Rome’s history follows a remarkable trajectory from its origins as a tiny village of refugees from a conflict zone to a dominant superpower.
The most astonishing survival tale of all might be that of 16th-century Dutch explorer William Barents and his crew of 16, who ventured farther north than any Europeans before and, on their third polar exploration, lost their ship off the frozen coast of Nova Zembla to unforgiving ice.
The men would spend the next year fighting off ravenous polar bears, gnawing hunger, and endless winter.
Pitzer masterfully combines a gripping tale of survival with a sweeping history of the great Age of Exploration—a time of hope, adventure, and seemingly unlimited geographic frontiers.
At the story’s center is Barents, one of the 16th century’s greatest navigators whose obsessive quest to chart a path through the deepest, most remote regions of the Arctic ended in both tragedy and glory.
The author retraces Barents’s steps and also gives us a history of mutiny and the art of celestial navigation.
For 1,400 years, the Christians of the Mideast lived under a system of sustained persecution as a distinct lower class of citizens under their Muslim rulers.
Despite this systemic oppression, Christianity maintained a tenuous—even sometimes prosperous—foothold in the land of its birthplace up until the past several decades.
Yet today, Christianity stands on the brink of extinction in much of the Mideast.
This book examines these questions based on the firsthand accounts of those who are living it.
Irish immigrants were very active in the American Revolution, both on the battlefields and off, and yet their stories are not well known.
The important contributions of the Irish on military, political, and economic levels have been long ignored by generations of historians.
An authoritative and immersive history of the far-reaching events in England that led to the sailing of the Mayflower.
The voyage that took the Pilgrim fathers to the New World was a foundational event in American history, but it began as an English story, which pioneered the idea of religious freedom.
The illegal underground movement of Protestant separatists from Elizabeth I’s Church of England is a story of subterfuge and danger, arrests and interrogations, prison and executions.
It starts with Queen Mary’s attempts to burn Protestantism out of England, which created a Protestant underground.
Later, when Elizabeth’s Protestant reformation didn’t go far enough, radicals recreated that underground, meeting illegally throughout England, facing prison and death for their crimes.
They went into exile in the Netherlands, where they lived in poverty—and finally to the New World.
Of the Dead Sea Scrolls, none has baffled experts more than the 2,000-yearold Copper Scroll, discovered in 1952 by a team of Bedouins led by Henri de Contenson.
Appearing to be a list of buried treasure engraved on copper pieces, the Copper Scroll is considered to be the work of a secretive Jewish sect of devout Essenes, who lived by the Dead Sea around the time of Jesus.
No one has been able to explain its meaning or discover any of the 64 locations where the Biblical treasures it lists are buried.
Robert Feather has unraveled the enigma of the Copper Scroll in a fascinating study that takes the reader on a journey from ancient Mesopotamia, through Canaan, into Egypt, and back to the shores of the Dead Sea.
His exploration links the scroll to the ancient Egyptian king Akhenaten, confirming the influence of this pharaoh’s religious beliefs on those of the Hebrews.
Gobekli Tepe and the Spiritual Matrix for the World’s Cosmologies Reveals Gobekli Tepe as a center of civilizing knowledge for the ancient world.
Scranton explains how the carved images on Gobekli Tepe’s pillars were the precursors to the sacred symbols of the Dogon, Egyptians, Tibetans, and Chinese as well as the matriarchal Sakti cult of ancient Iran and India.
By Antonius J Patrick half century ago, one of the most disastrous monetary decisions in United States history was made by Richard Nixon.
In a television address, the president declared that the nation would end the convertibility of dollars to gold, a key fixture of the post-WWII Bretton Woods system established following the war.
The Bretton Woods system established the dollar as the world’s reserve currency, to which foreign currencies were fixed.
As part of the agreement, the dollar was fixed to gold and nations could theoretically exchange their dollars for physical gold.
Since the dollar was the world’s reserve currency, Nixon’s closing of the “gold window” put the world on an irredeemable paper monetary standard.
America’s repeated and ongoing financial crises, budget deficits, reoccurring booms and busts and the decline of living standards (particularly for the middle and working class) all have their genesis with Nixon’s infamous decision in August 1971.
Abandoning the last vestiges of the gold standard was the culmination of 64 + THE BARNES REVIEW > MAY/JUNE 2022 + Richard Nixon has been judged by some scholars to be the worst president in American history, while others insist the opposite.
According to author Antonius Patrick, however, Nixon’s decision to end the convertibility of dollars to gold was a disastrous monetary decision. a long-term goal of the bankers, politicians, financial elites and deceitful economists.
The first step was the establishment of the Federal Reserve in 1913, whose primary purpose was to allow its member banks to inflate the money supply without fearing the consequences—bank failures and panics, bank runs and recessions and depressions.
The Fed could, and still does, enrich itself, the government and its aligned financial elites at the expense of the public at large through BARNESREVIEW.COM «+ its control and manipulation of the money supply.
The next step on the road to monetary debasement was Franklin Roosevelt’s draconian measure of outlawing the private ownership of gold.
This was not only an unprecedented and outrageous attack on private property, but it also eliminated gold redemption of dollars domestically, which gave the Fed unlimited power to print money without fear of its notes being redeemed.
Of course, the measure did nothing to mitigate the Depression which, in fact, was not caused by Americans’ ownership of gold, but rather the Federal Reserve itself and its wild inflationary policies enacted throughout the so-called Roaring Twenties.
FDR's action, like Nixon's, demonstrated how much the power of the presidency had expanded.
It shows again the flawed and frankly naive argument put forth by constitutionalists and conservatives of every ideological persuasion that the celebrated “separation of powers” theory that supposedly checks the aggrandizement of federal power could not prevent the audacious acts of FDR and Nixon.
Despite what is taught in social sciences courses, a true gold standard is a greater protector of an individual’s economic well-being and, ultimately, their political liberty than any legislation, bills of rights or constitution ever penned.
The primary reason why Nixon closed the gold window was to fund the nation’s “guns and butter” economic and social policies that had begun under his predecessor Lyndon Johnson.
Johnson’s “War on Poverty” and his escalation of the war in Vietnam caused the Fed to print vast amounts of money that began to drain the United States Treasury of gold.
While United States citizens and financial institutions could not redeem dollars for gold, foreign central banks could.
America’s inflationary policy to fund its domestic and foreign objectives was why the gold window was closed.
In effect, the United States was reneging on the commitment it had made at Bretton Woods.
Instead, it was the type of monetary chicanery that banana republics often pursue.
Culturally, the eradication of hard money was part of the transformation of a mature, frugal, hardworking and future-oriented people into an infantile, self-absorbed, dysfunctional and hedonistic collection of brainwashed proles.
Not only has the national debt exploded, which now exceeds $30 trillion, but personal and corporate debt are at dizzying heights, as well.
At this point, a reversal of Nixon’s decision would do little to confront the immense problems that the United States economy faces.
A “Great Reset” of the economic system is in order, but not the kind envisioned by the world’s financial elites represented by the World Economic Forum and other globalist institutions.
An honest-to-goodness reset would begin with a return to a metallic monetary standard where all national currencies would be redeemable in gold or silver.
Such a move would put areal check on banks’ ability to create money out of thin air.
The return of prosperity will only come about when gold is again a part of the monetary order and reasserts its critical role in the limitation of cen2 tral bank power.
This essay is dedicated to the greatest hard-money advocate in Congressional history, Rep.
For more from Patrick, see the index TBR includes in every TBR November/December issue.
From Vietnam to the Southern Strategy, from the opening of China to the scandal of Watergate, Pat Buchanan—speechwriter and senior adviser to President Richard Nixon— tells the untold story of Nixon’s embattled White House, from its historic wins to it devastating defeats.
In his inaugural address, Nixon held out a hand in friendship to Republicans and Democrats alike.
But by the fall of 1969, massive demonstrations in Washington and around the country had been mounted to break his presidency.
Buchanan chronicles Nixon’s historic trip to China, and describes the White House strategy that brought about Nixon’s 49-state landslide victory over George McGovern in 1972 and the ensuing Watergate scandal.
MAURICE DUPLESSIS Maurice Duplessis and the Legend of ‘the Great Darkness’ A Revisionist look at a legendary French Canadian traditionalist who dominated politics in Quebec for close to two decades As more rational, levelheaded people, both contemporarily and historically, get “canceled” and demonized for their political, social or historical views, a renewed interest is growing in exploring just what these types of “thought criminals” really stood for.
Canadian political figure Maurice Duplessis is one such example worth taking a good look at.
By Rémi Tremblay oday’s progressives describe Maurice Duplessis, an important yet overlooked political and historical leader in Quebec, as a reactionary figure who kept the province in what was called the Great Darkness.
His name has been associated with religious bigotry and ignorance and he is considered a dark legend that preceded the Quiet Revolution of the 1960s that overturned Quebec's traditional society.
It is time to reassess the legacy of Duplessis, Quebec's version of Dr.
Antonio de Oliveira Salazar, the antiliberal traditionalist who ruled Portugal 66 *+ THE BARNES REVIEW > MAY/JUNE 2022 + MAURICE DUPLESSIS Canadian traditionalist. for three decades.
Maurice Le Noblet Duplessis was born on April 20, 1890, in Trois-Riviéres, a city on the St.
He had a traditional upbringing in a deeply Catholic society and his youth was otherwise uneventful.
Quebec Premier Louis-Alexandre Taschereau predicted a great future, as well, for the young politician, and he quickly began to shine in the Legislative Assembly.
In the parliament, he was known as a fierce debater, a bulldog always ready to defend his point and humiliate his opponent.
In Canadian politics, Conservatives and Liberals alternate on a regular basis, similar to how the Democrats and Republicans trade places in American politics.
This balance was locked in Quebec, and Conservatives had 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE « ff Maurice Duplessis served as the 16th premier of the province of Quebec from 1936 to 1939 and again from 1944 to 1959.
He dedicated much of his adult life to the welfare of his constituents once famously saying, “| have no family.
My only responsibility is the welfare of Quebec. | belong to the province.” been kept in the opposition for the previous 35 years.
He then managed to merge with the Action Libérale Nationale led by Paul Gouin under the banner of the Union Nationale (National Union) and, with very anti-establishment rhetoric, managed to win the 1936 elections, sweeping the Liberals, capturing 76 seats out of a total of 90.
The elections had been initiated after the Liberal leader LouisAlexandre Taschereau had stepped down in favor of Joseph-Adélard Godbout amidst a corruption scandal.
His government was considered to be a puppet of the Anglo-Saxon trusts.
Thus, on August 26, 1936, Duplessis fulfilled his own prediction and became Quebec’s premier.
The achievements of the first mandate are impressive, especially since neither he nor any of his MPs had any prior experience in government.
And Duplessis was indeed the boss, ruling his party in an authoritarian way, while still being loved and respected.
With such a positive track record, one would think that historians would present him favorably—or at least impartially.
Quickly after taking power, he started a crusade against communist subversion in the province.
He adopted the Act to Protect the Province Against Communistic Propaganda, commonly known as the Padlock Law, a law prohibiting communist propaganda.
For the record, it must be noted that most contemporary politicians and commentators condemning that law are quick to condone laws enacted by current Prime Minister Justin Trudeau criminalizing any speech critical of immigration, diversity or prevailing historical narratives.
The Padlock Law was extremely popular in Quebec, where most people were favorable to strong Catholic Latin regimes, such as those of Antonio Salazar in Portugal, Benito Mussolini in Italy and Francisco Franco in Spain.
The law was first applied in November 1937 against the communist newspaper Clarté and, later, against the Daily Clarion.
Raids were launched by policemen who seized communist papers and tracts.
Opponents claimed that Duplessis was doing much to fight Communism, but 68 »+ THE BARNES REVIEW > MAY/JUNE 2022 + nothing against Fascism; an attack to which Duplessis replied that there was no fascist threat in Quebec.
It was federal opposition to the law that finally forced Quebec to abandon it in 1957.
Duplessis was in a full-scale political struggle against Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King for the respect of provincial autonomy.
To make sure he had the support of the population, Duplessis launched elections on the theme of autonomy.
His opponents, Adelard Godbout’s Liberals, raised the issue of a possible conscription if Duplessis was elected.
There was no logical basis for that assumption, but Duplessis, being politically closer to the Conservatives who had imposed forced enrollment during WWI, coupled with the fact that Godbout claimed that a Liberal province would have more weight as Liberals were in power in Ottawa, convinced the population of Quebec.
In the end, Quebecers elected Godbout in 1939, more so ouf of fear of conscription, rather then disapproval of Duplessis.
Ironically, despite their pledges and promises, Prime Minister King forced Canadians to go fight and die in Europe.
At the following elections in 1944, the roles were reversed and Duplessis defeated Godbout, who had presented himself as a bulwark against forced conscription.
The debater of yesteryears had become a more dignified man, a statesman.
His popular support would increase in the years to come, allowing him to win a stunning victory in 1948.
A CATHOLIC RULER During his first mandate (19361939), Duplessis had placed a crucifix in the Blue Room of the parliament in Quebec, only removed in 2019.
Duplessis was extremely close to the Church, a fact that some historians have wrongfully claimed to be a 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE duplicitous, dishonest strategy.
In this sense, he can be considered of the same breed as Eamon de Valera, Antonio Salazar, Engelbert Dolfuss and, to a lesser degree, Francisco Franco, who always sought to govern in a Catholic way.
PUPPET OF THE TRUSTS Duplessis was also close to foreign investors, whom he tried to attract in order to give work to French Canadians.
Mainstream historians tend to focus on some of the extremely long and even violent strikes in Quebec’s mines, where Duplessis took the side of the owners rather than that of the workers.
That cannot be denied, but it must be remembered that, first and foremost, Duplessis was not opposed to unionization— he himself simplified the unionization process, allowing the creation of more unions—but only to left-wing groups, especially those he felt were subversive or aligned with Communism.
The dishonest legend fails to mention that there were fewer strikes under Duplessis than under other premiers.
They may have been more intense, more sensationalized by the media, but assuredly not more frequent.
Cities, schools and universities were heavily indebted, and the region’s infrastructure was in asorry state.
He enacted a law for reasonable wages, forcing employers to offer decent salaries to their employees.
Schools and hospitals continued to be run by the clergy, improving quality and also ensuring THE BARNES REVIEW > “Ss 35 SALAZAR & DUPLESSIS MAURICE DUPLESSIS can be compared to Antonio de Oliveira Salazar who ruled Portugal from 1932 to 1968.
Described as a dictator, Salazar was an authoritarian leader who ruled based on Catholic social teaching.
Far from the fascist and Nazi leaders who cpnsidered the people as an instrument for the betterment of the state or the race, he envisioned a state that would be turned toward the spiritual and material needs of his people.
Salazar governed like a father or a professor—which is what he was—refraining from any violence.
They avoided demagoguery and, though religious, relied on cold logic rather than passion.
They were both devout Catholics who rejected Communism, atheism and internationalism.
The major difference is that Duplessis was elected democratically, while Salazar had banned the existence of political parties within Portugal.
Overall, the standard of living greatly increased during this period, as Pierre Berthelot has detailed.
NATIONALIST Duplessis was a true French Canadian nationalist, working for the survival of his people within the bilingual and bicultural union of Canada.
However, he broke with the traditional way of conceptualizing French Canadian nationalism.
Instead of defending the French across Canada, he felt his work was to secure their homeland, namely Quebec, and the dominance of Moliére’s language in the province.
He once stated, in 1953, that if Quebec’s place in Canada was problematic, they could simply leave the confederation.
His words were what allowed a transition in the 1960s from an ethnic, linguistic and religious form of nationalism toward a purely civic brand of provincial nationalism.
Allhis life, Duplessis fought against the forces of centralization, adopting a position similar to the states’ rights movement in the United States.
But his greatest feat was the adoption of a national flag for Quebec—the fleurdelisé, an emblem combining the French fleur-de-lis with a white cross in the center of a blue field.
His autonomous stance led him to modernize government operations, something all objective historians recognize today.
He was arrested in August 1940 after calling for defiance of draft registration, and interned in Ontario for four years.
On the other hand, Lionel Groulx found him too “old school” and “too compliant,” while still applauding some of his accomplishments.
In fact, he loved refined pleasures like the opera, was an avid reader and collected paintings, especially those of Auguste Renoir.
He thought those interests may have sounded a bitt too pedantic, so he only advertised his passion for baseball.
He listened to citizen’s concerns, answered letters addressed to him and he would freely give his own money to help others, although he himself struggled with financial difficulties.
He always remained a bachelor, literally giving his life for the service of his nation.
He would wake up early, go to work and come back to his hotel room after the day was done to further study the most important issues of the day, never slowing down despite growing old.
I have no responsibility other than the wealth of Quebec,” as Duplessis put it.
He sometimes used the state as his own possession, without consulting with the parliament, even shortcutting the usual legislative procedures.
He did so not for his own sake but for the sake of what he considered to be the good of the province.
While interviewing members of Adrien Arcand’s inner circle for a biography this author wrote about Arcand, several told me that, from time to time, a man’s car would stop a block or two before Arcand’s home.
The man would walk with a hat covering the upper half of his face, the lower half hidden behind his collar.
He would enter Arcand’s home quietly, almost secretly, and would sit and watch a hockey game before the black car would come back to get him.
The story has never been proven, however, it is far from being improb1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE able as the two men had a common friend, Ernest Laforce, who had served as a bridge between Duplessis and groups on the right in the 1920s and 1930s.
Laforce remained a good friend of both Duplessis and Arcand, who wrote him “that when he will leave, I am scared that it will be a catastrophe for our race already so threatened.
After more than a decade in power, his party had come to resemble the Liberals.
Paul Sauvé, who Duplessis had personally chosen as his heir, became premier and leader of the National Union.
The following decade would become known as the Quiet Revolution with the Liberals breaking away from French Canadian traditions and making a hard left turn characterized by statism, secularism and a redefinition of Quebec’s identity.
The new doctrine of the Quiet Revolution insisted that Quebec was born in the 1960s, and anything preceding it was not worth honoring.
In this changing context, Maurice Duplessis, who had epitomized the era before this new “enlightenment,” became an object of fascination.
Le Chef, une biographie politique de Maurice Duplessis, Editions du Jour, 1963, 19.
REmI TREMBLAY is the editor of the French-Canadian magazine Le Harfang as well as the author of Le Canada frangais, de Jacques Cartier au genocide tranquille.
In addition, Tremblay is a popular freelance journalist for European and North American media outlets.
Lawrence, Canada won by Wolfe; transition, Pontiac’s War; Quebec Act; American Revolution; invasion of Canada; death of Montgomery; coming of the Loyalists; new provinces; War of 1812; patriotism; strife and rebellion; Federal Union, relations between the United States and Canada; rule of the fur traders, acquisition of the Northwest, Manitoba, Riel’s Rebellions; British Columbia and Prince Edward Island enter the Union, national events since 1867; Canada as a nation, political rights; the desires of French Canada.
Cavalry engaged by massive Indian force shortly before disastrous Battle of Little Big Horn By Thomas Goodrich are is the American who has not heard of the Battle of the Little Bighorn.
On June 25, 1876, while the nation celebrated its centennial, shocking news came from Montana that America’s most famous fighting regiment, the United States 7th Cavalry, had suffered a devastating defeat.
In addition to the deaths of hundreds of soldiers, their leader, the “Boy General” of the recent Civil War, George Armstrong Custer, had also been killed when thousands of Indians had overwhelmed him and his men.
Curiously, few are aware that an incident that occurred a mere week before the disaster contributed directly to the devastating defeat of Custer and his 7th Cavalry.
In an effort to clear the last of the prairie tribes from their High Plains homeland, the federal government called in the military to complete the task in 1876.
To accomplish this feat, thousands of United States soldiers were assigned the job.
Alfred Terry (pictured from left to right above) were three prominent United States officers tasked with battling renegade Indians on the High Plains in the 1870s.
George Custer would be committing suicide to challenge the massive Indian army assembled around the Little Bighorn without a whole lot more soldiers. fantry from Fort Ellis and would sweep east.
George Crook, victor over the Paiute in Oregon and the Apache in Arizona.
The plan was to drive the Sioux, along with their allies the Northern Arapaho and Cheyenne, into an area where all could be either herded onto reservations or simply be defeated in a pitched battle.
The Sioux were a major force like no other tribe, and the fate of their captives was well known.
Any man who ignored those words faced torture so hideous and prolonged that they would wish they had never been born.
Taylor captures the United States Cavalry’s charge at Rosebud Creek, where American troops were lucky not to have been overwhelmed by a much larger Indian force.
George Custer and his men were wiped out by the same massive Indian force, numbering a minimum of 2,500 Indian braves.
When Custer arrived with his command, he should have known that he would be facing the largest unified Plains Indian army ever assembled.
By mid-June, the southern wing of the campaign had begun its thrust into Montana.
With 1,000 soldiers, Crook was also leading several hundred Indian scouts as they searched for the Sioux.
Because the much smaller Crow and Shoshoni (or Snake) tribes had spent years fighting the Sioux, they now welcomed the chance to join the powerful Whites and punish their cruel oppressors.
One day, when it was announced that a large trail of Sioux had been discovered leading down the valley of Rosebud Creek, the Indian scouts immediately applied war paint on their faces and their mounts, then began racing the animals back and forth in a frenzy.
Startled by the demonstration when there was no enemy in sight, anewsman with the column, John Finerty, asked a White scout what it meant.
The next day, June 17, Crook formed his column for the march to a large Sioux encampment believed to be somewhere down the Rosebud.
After a march of 10 miles, Crook called a temporary halt to feed his horses and men.
Resting his head on his saddle, John Finerty seized the opportunity to gain a bit more sleep.
Suddenly, the newsman heard sporadic gun fire beyond the bluff just north of the creek.
The growing racket was dismissed by the newsman as nothing more than the Indian scouts hunting buffalo.
Crook, however, thought otherwise and began deploying his force to meet the enemy.
With Indians, friend and foe alike, screaming “at the tops of their lungs giving the war whoop that caused the hair to raise on end,” the general was momentarily stunned.
What Crook saw made his blood run cold—perhaps 2,500 Sioux and Northern Cheyenne warriors, either on the bluffs facing him or racing over the prairie to reach him.
Anson Mills and most of the cavalry to charge up the bluff and scatter the Indians.
These Indians were most hideous, every one being painted in ... colors and designs, stark naked, except their moccasins, breech clouts and head gear. ... he Indians proved then and there that they were the best cavalry soldiers on Earth.
In charging up toward us they exposed little of their person, hanging on with one arm around the neck and one leg over the horse, firing and lancing from underneath the horses’ necks, so that there was no part of the Indian at which we could aim.
The Indians came not in a line but in flocks or herds like buffalo, and they piled in upon us until I think there must have been 1,000 or 1,500 in our immediate front.
As bullets and arrows whizzed by, a young officer paused briefly beside his commander.
When the soldiers were ordered to dismount and fight on foot behind the rocks, the Indians wisely withdrew to the next ridge.
As they did so, many laughed and slapped their posteriors as if encouraging the soldiers to follow.
Crook quickly ordered his men to remount and take the next ridge, which they did, with the If you go down there, you can never get out of the trap; you will all be killed. same results.
It was noticed that some leader—perhaps Crazy Horse— was orchestrating Indian movements with a pocket mirror.
When it was observed that the hostiles were filtering away and regrouping on the south bank, it became clear to Crook that the Indians were trying to merely divide his command and attack its weakest part.
As troopers fell back from the bluffs already taken, many Sioux swarmed into the valley.
It was now that Crook and his men realized not only how desperately outnumbered they were, but how greatly outgunned they were as well, with many of the enemy armed with repeating rifles.
In one spot, six soldiers who straggled, were slaughtered where they stood.
Just when hundreds of Sioux threatened to slice Crook’s force in half, a large party of Shoshoni scouts appeared.
But more Sioux came pouring in when they heard of the fight and the Shoshoni were forced back—not, however, before a small, misshapen Crow scout named “Humpy” rode into the midst of a dozen Sioux and rescued a big sergeant they were trying to kill.
The audacity of the move and the sheer speed of Humpy’s horse saved the day.
For the next several hours, Crook and Crazy Horse traded blows along the Rosebud.
A battalion of cavalry was ordered to form up and move down the valley as though determined to strike the Sioux village, felt to lay just beyond several miles.
As the Indians began falling back to protect their families, Crook thereupon called back his cavalry battalion.
It was only then, when the screams and shouts had ceased and the exhausted soldiers finally could see through the lifting smoke, that they truly appreciated what had occurred.
Accustomed as he was to relatively easy victories in the desert Southwest against Apaches, Crook was shattered by his check on the northern Plains. “ never saw a man more dejected,” an officer later wrote.
When, despite all that had passed, Crook once more muttered something about heading for the Sioux village, the exhausted Crow allies dismissed the words as the ravings of a lunatic.
With that, the Crow rubbed his palms together as if grinding a clod of dirt to dust.
Ironically, even as one column fell back, another force, much smaller than Crook’s, was preparing to advance.
Unaware of defeat on the Rosebud, this column, the 7th Cavalry under Col.
George Armstrong Custer, would, within days, march right into that huge camp that the Crow and United States officers feared.
THOMAS GOODRICH is a professional writer living in the United States and Europe.
His biological father was a United States Marine in the WWII Pacific Theater and his adoptive father was in the United States Air Force in Europe.
For more on the subject and reference sources used in this article, we suggest you read Black Flag and The Day Dixie Died, upon which this article was based.
THE BARNES REVIEW > Trouble Brewing in Bighorn Valley Dispatches reveal United States military well aware a massive Indian force was present in the Little Bighorn Valley May 29, 1876.
They report going to fight Crow Indians, but he says they are going to join Sitting Bull.” kok ok May 30, 1876.
Contemplate the faces, expressions, and clothing of hundreds of men, women, and children in this unique book that brings home the realities of the “Civil War” through rare pictures.
Where possible, they have been carefully repaired and enhanced by the author.
Feel the antebellum, bellum and postbellum periods come alive as you peruse the searing portraits of the people who endured one of the most unnecessary conflicts ever.
Includes author’s introduction, a full index, an exhaustive bibliography, footnotes and educational appendices.
In his campaign to preserve authentic Southern history, Seabrook has compiled thousands of scrumptious old-timey recipes from America’s Southland.
Spanning 1838 to 1924, the book’s recipes provide detailed instructions on how to prepare a wide variety of Southern victuals—most endemic to Dixie, but many borrowed from places as diverse as New England, the West Coast, Europe and Russia.
Lincoln's Legacy of Destruction in the American South Historian Lochlainn Seabrook reveals in The Unholy Crusade that Lincoln’s illegal, unnecessary, and merciless destruction of the South and her people is his legacy.
This book provides hundreds of 19thcentury photos and drawings of the North’s four-year demolition of Dixie, ranging from the ransacking and burning of thousands of Southern homes and businesses to the bombing of countless mills, factories, trains, ships, roads, depots, docks, bridges, telegraph lines, warehouses, churches, banks, libraries and even cemeteries.
Universities, hospitals, livestock and even family pets were wantonly destroyed by Union troops, as well.
Also documents the arrest, abuse, torture, rape and murder of thousands of innocent Southern civilians—of all ages and races.
The story of the unique relationship between Lee and Jackson, two leaders who chiseled a strategic path forward against the odds and almost triumphed.
Written by the man who was at the very center of the CSA and who held its highest office, this remarkable history tells the story of the rebel republic from its very beginning to its bitter end.
It is not an exhaustive story of the War between the States, but rather the events of those times as experienced by Davis.
The author deals with the fundamental questions that caused the rupture.
Real and Imagined September/October 2018—Topics covered include: American Indian holocaust; Bolshevik holocaust in Russia; Hitler and the World War I holocaust; the WWII holocaust on the Eastern Front and the activities of the Einsatzgruppen; evidence for Babi Yar massacre lacking; holocaust of Tokyo; Dresden holocaust; how the Cossacks avoided a holocaust; Northern greed and the holocaust of the American South; the WWII mass expulsion holocaust; the MK Ultra “mind holocaust”; the modern-day holocaust of European culture; more. pages, $15 each.
Defending American Heroes September/October 2020—Honest biographies of some of America’s slandered heroes.
Stuart; abolitionist Matthias Baldwin; Charles Lindbergh; Mayor Frank Rizzo; how Abe Lincoln messed up George Washington’s America; what they are hiding about Judah.
Hitler vs. the Bankers September/October 2021—Adolf Hitler locks up members of the Rothschild family; why Josef Stalin is really the founding father of the Zionist state of Israel; the Spanish Civil War as a warning for the West today; the forgotten legacy of José Antonio Primo de Rivera; the Zionist hand instigating for World War II; Big Zionist Jews vs.
Little Jews and “the Holocaust”; why the Zionists want David Irving silenced; Dr.
Sigmund Rascher’s medical experiments; Canada’s Great Upheaval of the Acadians; the Aryan race in antiquity; more. pages, $15 each.
As a subscriber to THE BARNES REVIEW since its inception and to its predecessor, the Journal of Historical Review, I would like to go on record as stating that TBR’s September/October 2021 “Hitler vs. the Bankers” issue has to be the most informative issue thus far in your 28-year history.
The articles by Antonius J Patrick and Marc Roland (“Forgotten Legacy of Jose Antonio de Primavera”) were very helpful in showing readers the sequence of events that lead up to a communist takeover of a nation.
The relationship to the events of the past year under the Biden administration are startling.
Both articles contained factual information relevant to explaining what is happening in America today.
Both should be required reading for all high school students in America.
BRUCE GATHY Connecticut [The expanded September/October 2021 “Hitler vs. the Bankers” edition of TBR is available for sale if subscribers would like to buy extra copies to send to friends and family.
See page 77 for a list of our special expanded TBR issues published over recent years.—Ed.
The ANP was founded some two decades ago by Rocky Suhayda as a party of education and racial consolidation.
The party name was assumed with permission from Matt Koehl, George Lincoln Rockwell’s successor.
Nazi was used instead of National Socialist because of this very problem, Le., the average American is completely ignorant of Adolf Hitler's conception of socialism.
As an old LIBERTY LOBBY supporter and reader of The American Mercury and The Spotlight (my college library, oddly enough, subscribed to both publications) in the late 1960s and early 1970s, I was privileged to correspond fairly regularly with Willis Carto,the great nationalist publisher.
His comments on the Ukraine war, also in the March/April issue, are, however, too tolerant of Vladimir Putin.
Whatever the reason, Whites killing Whites on such a scale is an irredeemable crime.
Despite the lessons of the previous century, White fratricide is well under way, again.
Our race has been diminished not only in numbers, but also in common social discourse, denigrated as ever-criminal, evil, worthless, a history for which all Whites must feel shame.
He is dragging Russia, and as much of Europe as he can convince or corral through gas and oil dependencies, to the East, to some imagined Eurasian New Jerusalem.
Putin pronounces again and again that he is fighting against nationalists and Nazis.
He bombs hospitals, schools and shelters with the justification that the buildings actually house nationalists using civilians as shields.
And, yet, White nationalists and self-described Nazis still support this epigone tzar.
In August, Russia intends on convening an international conference focused on the destruction of nationalism and fascism.
JOHN KOEHLER Via email Q&A SECTION A GOOD IDEA Ihave been a loyal supporter of THE BARNES REVIEW and AMERICAN FREE Press for many years.
I have written a newsletter for just as many years to family, extended family and others, enclosing your editorials and articles and encouraging their subscriptions to your periodicals.
Having said this, I hope I have enough status with you to take me seriously.
I believe that a Q&A section would enhance the circulation of THE BARNES REVIEW, and I think you should try it.
LAURENCE BALDAUF Via email [People seem to like this idea, so we will give it a try and answer as many questions as we can in the time we have and with our limited staff.
Since being introduced to your magazine and becoming a subscriber, I've bought numerous books from your store and told many others about your publication.
Idon’t imagine prisoners are on your “A List” of subscribers, but I assure you that you are widely read within the California prison system.
I look forward to every issue, along with your politically incorrect coverage of current events.
Without TBR, I would not know what is really going on in the free world—and I use the word “free” liberally.
RopNeEY UTLEY California [We here at TBR love all our subscribers, and we are aware that we have a strong following inside and, of course, outside prisons.
Many prisoners across America have not had such “tolerant” jailers and have seen their magazines destroyed and book orders returned— deemed a bit too politically incorrect for their tastes.
In response, we have written dozens of letters to various wardens across the country imploring them to lift the ban on TBR, but to no avail.
THE THEOLOGIAN & THE DEVIL Klaus Schwab, the béte noire or Darth Vader of our time, seemed to be endorsing none other than Lutheran theologian Rudolf Bultmann who I showcase in my book Salvaging Civilization.
Schwab recently was quoted also saying that the preexistence of Jesus and the resurrection are fake news.
But, in trying to save the “baby’—Christian values—we have left it in the bathwater for centuries.
Having discovered the way to truly humanize human beings, we don’t dare let these Christian values slip away.
But they are slipping away, nonetheless, because we haven't distinguished the baby from the bathwater much better than Schwab.
We abandoned the myth that the sky is an astrodome and the Earth, a flat pancake, is the platform of the universe.
That doesn’t infer that the universe has evaporated, but those notions are long extinct.
Equally extinct are the other ways of pre-scientific thinking, the “spirit and wonder world” in Bultmann’s words.
Because they were the package bringing us the everlasting Good News, folks just can’t bear to throw out the wrappings.
The virgin-birth myths, 2000 years ago, flunk today’s scientific biology test.
When we link these values that liberate and fulfill our nature with antiquated concepts, we discredit them.
In fact, research confirms that sincere atheists (I include all “non-Christians”) practice these Christian values on a par with identified Christians.
As that becomes more developed, more enlightened, as new discoveries are made, new truths discovered and manners and opinions change, with the change of circumstances, institutions must advance also to keep pace with the times.
Our Founders stressed that teaching universal brotherhood and a standard of right and wrong is essential; that only an educated and moral people can succeed at self-governance.
Keeping pace with the times we all— united—urgently need an updated refresher course to uphold these humanizing values and recruit everyone to reclaim America.
Otherwise, Schwab will get his way and throw out our cherished baby, the Good News that defines human homo sapiens—once and for all.
Everything Putin’s Russia is doing these days is exactly the opposite of what the “Great Reset” wants done.
In fact, how would Schwab have even gotten into the same orbit as Putin, who came to power out of nowhere by the graces of Boris Yeltsin, who, although a drunk, was not in love with the West.
Then, the West was already in the process of raping Russia's resources.
Please leave a phone number so we can call to discuss your letter or answer your questions.
ORDER BOOKS / DONATE / TOTAL YOUR ORDER TOLL FREE ORDERS LINE Call toll free to charge.
GIFT SUBSCRIPTIONS: $28 EACH INSIDE United States TBR SUBSCRIBERS—TAKE 10% OFF SUBTOTAL INSIDE U.S.—ADD DOMESTIC S&H ON BOOK ORDER SUBTOTAL OUTSIDE U.S.—ADD FOREIGN S&H ON BOOK ORDER SUBTOTAL RENEW MY TBR SUBSCRIPTION FOR __ YEAR @ $ MAKE A DONATION TO THE BARNES REVIEW ORDER TOTAL PAYMENT METHOD: Check OMoney Order Cash OCredit Card Card # Expires ***Sec.
EMAIL ADDRESS REQUIRED: If you would like to send electronic gift subscriptions to friends, we must have their email addresses.
EMAIL ADDRESS REQUIRED: If you are a current subscriber and would like to receive our PDF edition as well as your print edition, please list your email address here.
