A former Russian insider says he was there when Putin began openly planning the present invasion of Ukraine back in 2003.
At a conference in Brussels this week, Andrey Illarionov, a Russian economist and former economic advisor to Vladimir Putin informed that the invasion of Ukraine has been in official planning since at least 2003.
I can say that certain questions relating to the future war with Ukraine were discussed in my presence.
In an anguished response to the Orange Revolution a year later which brought about an ostensibly pro-Western government, Russian officials then began discussing the potential for launching a military occupation of Crimea and it’s subsequent annexation.
Illarionov also discussed leaked documents which detail the operation of Russia’s future war with Ukraine.
By 2009, he stated that plans to conjure and support separatism in Ukraine began to surface.
It is now known that the terrorist organization known as the ‘Donetsk Republic’ began to reassert itself online in 2008 after then Russian-backed Viktor Yanukovych lost his position as Prime Minister.
Created in 2005 also in the wake of the Orange Revolution, ‘Donetsk Republic’ members attended training camps in Russia funded by the Russian Presidential Administration, where instructors from the security services taught methods of espionage, sabotage and guerrilla tactics to attendees.
Syncing with Illarionov’s statement, the group began organizing local terrorist training camps as early as 2009.
A war he steadfastly describes as being long in the works that will continue to play out in the long term.
The other matter is that it is a long war that has been continuing for more than 16 months.
It was officially launched on July 27, 2013, by Putin’s speech in Kyiv on the occasion of the anniversary of the baptism of Kyivan Rus,” he said.
At another point, Putin speaks glowingly of Stalin’s reforms and investment in Ukraine during his first ‘Five Year Plan,’ a disastrous policy which resulted in the Moscow-orchestrated genocide of up to 7 million Ukrainians.
The next day Putin would attend Russian naval celebrations in the Ukrainian city of Sevastopol in Crimea.
All of this, of course, amounted to a cynical sales pitch for Russia’s unborn Eurasian Union and reunion with Russia, and to convince Ukrainians the perils of European integration.
Illarionov resigned from his position within the administration in 2005, has been an outspoken critic of president Vladimir Putin since that time.
In October 2008 he quickly exposed that the Russian invasion and occupation of Georgia in August of that year was premeditated and instigated by the Russian government, when many still debated whether Georgia fired on Russian soldiers first.
In February of this year, prior to Russia’s “green men” swarming into Crimea, he fully predicted the occupation of the peninsula and similar destabilizing actions in the south and east.
Igor Girkin, “Supreme Commander” of the Donetsk Republic, openly admitted recently to Russia’s involvement in the war and told how his special forces group entered Ukraine in April to seize government buildings.
Russian President Vladimir Putin says insurgent and terrorist groups in Ukraine’s east “will always get weapons,” including armored vehicles and artillery in response to questions of Russia’s material involvement the war against Ukraine.
He reiterated this position on the German channel ARD prior to the G20 Summit in Australia, days after NATO officials confirmed reports that the Russian military’s invasion of Ukraine was continuing full speed despite an agreed upon ceasefire.
In a recent article on RT , the state-owned international network published an analysis on the aftermath of the fall of the Berlin Wall, and in it, a shocking comparison that likens Russian President Vladimir Putin to former United States President John F Kennedy, and the Western world to Cold War era Russia.
JFK was an unapologetic liberal , and it’s only those among the conservative right who would ever raise the specter and threat of Obama-brand socialism.
For good measure, we should also point out that Mr Butler is an MH17 truther.
The JFK comparison was not the only oddity put out by RT today, with Butler describing what can only be assumed as a continuation of his alternate bizarro reality, one where NATO expansion was designed to prevent a brain drain at gunpoint of western dissidents pining for greener pastures in Russia.
While it’s refreshing to see RT paint Moscow as the villain for once, maybe waxing poetic on Putin has its logical limits.
Those “observers” who would go illegally to Eastern Ukraine, took a morning flight from Moscow to Rostov-on-Don on the 1st of November and then travelled by bus from there to the Russian town of Kuybyshevo, right on the Russia-Ukraine border.
At the border, Russian extremists put armed escorts into the buses of “observers” and then they crossed the border.
On the same day, the “observers” were introduced to the leadership of the terrorist organisation “Donetsk People’s Republic” and issued with “international observer” cards.
On the 2nd of November, international “observers” began their work of “legitimising” illegal, fake elections held by Russian extremists.
Adrienn Szaniszló of the extreme right Jobbik party, for example, stayed in the Rostov region to observe the “elections” there.
ARTEMIVSK, Ukraine – Bureaucratic stonewalling is hurting the morale of Ukraine’s fighting men and women by denying their rights, injured soldiers have charged.
Some are even taking photos of their deployment to prove their involvement to disbelieving officials.
When his friend was shot and injured by a sniper he couldn’t get status as a casualty of anti-terrorist operations, which affects his ability to get benefits.
His brother, serving in the 95th Brigade, was advised to take photographs as proof of his war service.
The bed, helmet and kit bag of one of the soldiers alleging some of their officers are betraying them.
The three, who refused to give names or be photographed for fear of punishment from the army, spoke to a Canadian journalist and his Ukrainian interpreter who were placed in their room recently at the regional hospital here while traveling with volunteers.
One of them had been injured that afternoon after the turret of a large gun on an armored vehicle swung unexpectedly and struck him, which he attributed to officer error; he bled from the ear and wears a bandage around his head.
This city of 78,000 is about 88 kilometres north of Donetsk, where fighting has raged over control of its airport, despite the Sept.th ceasefire.
The United Nations Human Rights Office reports that at least 3,517 civilians and Ukrainian soldiers have died in the war since April.
Normally, soldiers are not allowed to speak to the press unless officers are present.
The soldiers also said that some of their senior officers were selling information about their whereabouts to the enemy, but this could not be confirmed.
They said many of their peers have died when shelled by separatists after their coordinates were sold.
One soldier said evidence of this is that on one occasion the men refused to stop as scheduled, and proceeded on.
A new shell comes right down onto the trenches,” and sends shrapnel far and wide, injuring and killing, the head-wound man said.
One of the injured men said that since they lack winter clothing and other equipment, the Ukrainian army may have to shut down operations for the winter.
Graham Phillips, a controversial British reporter for the Kremlin’s disinformation serviceRussia Today, has interviewed Austrian right-wing politician Ewald Stadler, who is one of the “observers” at “elections” in the Donbas.
OK, so Stadler does not see a man in military fatigues standing behind him.
Right, according to Stadler, there are no armed men “inside” polling stations.
