The annexation also violated a number of bilateral agreements between Ukraine and Russia.
Russia's actions were immediately condemned by the international community.
The massive disruption of economic relations between Crimea and the rest of Ukraine, the nationalisation and confiscation of companies and a decrease in the agricultural and tourism sectors, along with international sanctions and isolation have brought about an increasingly difficult economic situation.
Furthermore, there has been a worrying rise in extremism, xenophobia, and violations against human rights and fundamental freedoms.
One of the most disturbing outcomes has been the persecution of persons belonging to minorities, in particular the Crimean ethnic Tatar community.
While war in Eastern Ukraine has drawn the world's attention away from Crimea, the plight of the people in an increasingly lawless Crimea should not be forgotten.
The international community should remain committed to a policy of non-recognition while increased pressure needs to be placed on Russia over the deteriorating human rights situation.
They populated Crimea in the 13th century following Genghis Khan's great Mongol expansion.
By the middle of the 15th century, they had founded their own state, the Khanate of Crimea, which became a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire.
Moscow began its reign in the 18th century, when Catherine the Great invaded the Peninsula.
Viewed as Ottoman allies, the Tatars were regularly persecuted and driven into exile to the Ottoman Empire.
The city was crucially important as it offered access to Black Sea trade routes, the Caucasus and allowed Russia to extend its naval might in the Mediterranean.
Today it also serves as headquarters for Russia's newly constituted Mediterranean Task Force, which has recently resumed permanent operations in the Eastern Mediterranean.
The base's significance was highlighted during the 2008 Russia-Georgia war, when the Fleet was used to conduct a blockade against Georgia.
Only in 1944 did Crimea become an overwhelmingly Russian populated territory.
Stalin ordered the deportation of the entire Crimean Tatar population to Central Asia.
Almost 200.000 were abandoned there in camps, surrounded by barren wastelands.
Tens of thousands of Russians were settled on the land vacated by the Tatars.
In 1954, following Stalin's death, Nikita Khrushchev gave Crimea to Ukraine.
However, the consequences of this decision were only really felt with the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, which had a huge impact on Crimea's population, Ukraine and the new Russian state.
The King Baudouin Foundation is the strategic partner of the European Policy Centre It was difficult for Russia to accept the independence of Ukraine due to the pivotal role of Ukraine for Russia.
The annexation unfolds Russia's annexation of Crimea began when armed men with no insignia, who were quickly labelled ""little green men"", appeared on the Peninsula in late February 2014, shortly after the departure from office of Ukraine's then President, Viktor Yanukovych.
This was the beginning of what has become commonly known as ""hybrid warfare"" – covert as well as overt activities backed up by a disinformation campaign.
As the unmarked men captured the Crimean government and parliament buildings, other pro-Russian actors began to claim that Kyiv's new pro-Western leadership were fascist nationalists, representing a significant threat to Russians and Russian speakers.
While Ukraine's governance of Crimea was far from perfect – with Kyiv's attention frequently drifting away from the Peninsula, resulting in high unemployment, low salaries and pensions, and a collapsing infrastructure – this was not so different from many other parts of Ukraine.
The Russian language was furthermore protected by the Constitution of the Autonomous Republic in Ukraine.
The little green men spread out, taking control of key infrastructure, clearing the way for the seizure of power.
The international community condemned the referendum and the unfree and unfair circumstances under which it took place.
The UN General Assembly immediately passed a resolution declaring the referendum invalid.
While Russia initially denied any military involvement, in the aftermath of the referendum Putin stated that Russian soldiers backed Crimean self-defence units to prevent a conflict.
More recently, in a documentary on the annexation, President Putin stated it was all carefully planned, claiming that he personally oversaw the annexation.
A large majority of Russians have never stopped viewing Crimea as culturally and ethnically a part of Russia; hence there was never any doubt in Putin's mind that the majority of Russian society would back his annexation.
The banking sector is paralysed with international investors long gone.
While pensioners, some 500.000 people, have seen their pensions increase, many residents struggle to make ends meet.
An embargo on any goods originating from Crimea, unless accompanied by a certificate of origin from the Ukrainian authorities, has been imposed, and trade and investment restrictions are in place.
In 2013, Ukraine signed exploration and production agreements for large areas of Crimea's eastern and western coast with a number of international energy giants including eni, EDF, ExxonMobil and Royal Dutch Shell.
Prior to annexation Crimea received some six million tourists annually.% came from Ukraine.
Russians amounted to some 30%, with the remainder being mainly passengers from international cruise liners docking at the Peninsula.
According to the Crimean authorities tourist numbers more than halved in 2014, despite the Russian government launching a programme promoting tourism.
The economic impact of sanctions, the drop in oil price and subsequent devaluation of the Ruble has made Russians more cautious about spending money.
Furthermore, other destinations, in particular Turkey and Egypt, are more popular – and often cheaper – than Crimea.
While Crimea remains dependent on water and electricity from Ukraine, there are frequent blackouts and disruptions.
The closure of the North Crimean Canal, the main irrigation source for Crimea's interior dry steppe lands, has adversely affected agriculture, with numerous crops failing.
Crimeans hope that the construction of a bridge connecting Crimea to Russia across the Strait of Kerch will bring an economic upturn, although it is not due to be completed before 2019.
Furthermore, the economic downturn in Russia means there are less employment opportunities for seasonal workers.
While Putin originally pledged $18 billion for development, most of that money is yet to be seen.
Instead Crimea has witnissed a huge influx of administrative and security personnel from Russia, along with a consolidated and enlarged Russian military presence.
Erosion of human rights According to UNDP some 20.000 people have left Crimea for mainland Ukraine.
While this is partly a consequence of the worsening economic situation, it is also a result of the deteriorating human rights situation, with a harsh crackdown on voices of dissent under way.
Most independent or critical journalists and activists have left for mainland Ukraine.
Those who remain are constantly at risk of being attacked or worse, especially if they are perceived as pro-Ukraine.
Ukrainian schools in Scholkino and Kerch are being closed while the Ukrainian Gymnasium in Simferopol is under increased pressure.
Only four Ukrainian schools remain operational, with an uncertain future.
After the annexation Russia launched the so-called ""passportisation"" process, which required any permanent resident of Crimea with Ukrainian citizenship to either apply for Russian citizenship or declare an intent to maintain Ukrainian citizenship.
Refusing to surrender Ukrainian passports and rejecting Russian citizenship can have dire consequences.
With the exception of the Russian Orthodox Church, most religious faiths are experiencing intimidation and discrimination; destruction of property, summonses for questioning and other forms of pressure are common.
Several Kyiv Patriarchate Orthodox priests have been forced to leave Crimea, while Kyiv Patriarchate churches have been shut down in Sevastopol, Krasnoperekopsk, Kerch, and the village of Perevalne, which was subjected to an armed attack in June.
Kyiv Patriarchate Archbishop Klyment of Simferopol and Crimea constantly receives threats and his dacha was burned down.
The Kyiv Patriarchate is under increasing pressure to relinquish its main church in Simferopol.
The persecution of Crimean Tatars No group has been hit harder than the Crimean Tatars.
When Ukraine became independent in 1991 high numbers began to return to the Peninsula and Tatar in-migration has continued ever since.
While their resettlement never enjoyed the full support of various governments in Kyiv, with struggles on issues such as land and property returns, the Tatars have remained a reliable pro-Ukrainian and pro-Western electoral bloc and staunch supporters of Ukraine's territorial integrity.
The majority boycotted the illegal referendum and Russian local elections in September 2014.
In the past twelve months, their freedoms and rights have been repeatedly attacked.
Mustafa Dzhemiliev, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko's representative on Crimean Tatar affairs and Refat Chubarov, the President of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatars.
The Tatars have also broadly been prohibited from celebrating their holidays and remembering the victims of political repressions; they are harassed by secret services and ""self-defence forces"" that search homes, offices and mosques.
Today the Tatars feel they are reliving the brutal events that led to the 1944 deportation.
While Ankara has professed itself the steadfast defender of the Crimean Tatars, this has been little more than lip service as Ankara has taken steps to deepen economic ties with Russia in the last 12 months.
PROSPECTS While Putin may still be basking in his ""glory"", with high popularity ratings and many people in Crimea still euphoric about being part of Russia, this is unlikely to last forever.
Crimea has quickly become a millstone around Russia's neck and this financial burden is likely to get heavier rather than lighter as time goes by and the realities of international isolation begin to hit home on the Peninsula.
This will particularly be the case with the younger generation that will find themselves trapped under corrupt and criminal authorities with few opportunities for the future.
However, it seems unlikely that Crimea will be ""returned"" to Ukraine any time soon.
Even if Putin's rule comes to an end it seems unlikely a new leader would make a U-turn.
Such was the popularity of the annexation in Russia that any attempt at reversal would be political suicide.
Even leading opposition figures such as Alexei Navalny and Mikhail Khodorkovsky recognise this fact with Khodorkovsky stating that the Crimea problem will go on for decades.
A recent survey revealed that only 13% of Ukrainians believe that Western sanctions will bring about a return of Crimea.
However, this is not a reason for the international community to give up on Crimea.
Though it is still internationally unrecognised, almost every country in the world now seems to see the Crimean situation as a fait accompli.
During the recent Minsk II ceasefire negotiations, Crimea was not even mentioned during the discussions.
It is important that the international community, including the EU, maintains a strong focus on developments on the ground and stays consistent and united, avoiding any direct or indirect recognition of Crimea as was underlined by High Representative Mogherini on the anniversary of the illegal referendum.
For example, Russia's recent effort to press UEFA, the European governing body for football, to recognise Crimea as an entity seperate from Ukraine should be robustly rebuked.
By changing the image and face of Ukraine, there is a far greater likelihood that at some point in the future a compromise can be found regarding Crimea.
We would like to thank the Government of Canada/Mission of Canada to the European Union for their kind support for this Policy Brief.
