Call us crazy, but we believe a savings account should actually help you save.
The odds on a nuclear deal have shortened, butitis notyetin the bag, page 42 Cuba American business is eager to cross the Florida Strait, but obstacles remain, page 31.
Printed by Quad/Graphics, Saratoga Springs, NY 12866 £C Ourfrictioniess enterprise has nearly tripled our capacity to deliver projects ofvalueto the business.
David Giambruno, CtO T Tribune Media Tribune Media’s goal was to increase IT’s capacity to bring value to their business teams while reducing costs.
FedEx was confident that it could surmount any competition concerns in Europe over its $4. billion bid for tnt Express, a delivery company based in the Netherlands that has operations in 40 countries.
UPS, FedEx’s main rival in America, tried to buy tnt in 2012, but Europe’s antitrust regulator withheld its approval.
Mr Kim plans to place the issue high on the agenda of the forthcoming spring meeting of the World Bank and imp.
Some GOOP OLPFAailOHEP RUSSIAN T7EAMH/ schoolofC' PUBLIC HEALTH,, UNIVERSITY OF MICHIOAN The only way to ENSURE THE HEALTH OF OUR WORLD IS TO PROTECT THE PEOPLE WHO LIVE IN IT. 'tin Philbert, Ph.Di Wherever the toughest challenges in public health may be, we will be on the front lines, creating new and exploratory paths through deep science and global action that will lead to the elegant and meaningful solutions the world needs.
The most familiar candidate is surprisingly unknown H a NY day now, Hillary Clinton -/xis expected to declare that she is running for president.
As secretary of state, she flew nearly a million miles and visited U2 countries.
By encouraging the Islamists, the government is fanning racial and religious divisions in a majority-Malay country with large ethnic-Chinese and ethnic-Indian minorities.1969 bloody race riots nearly tore Malaysia apart.
Having lost so much ground, the euro area clearly has enor►► He’s a fan.
Many European firms have done a good j oh of expanding their foreign sales in recent years ; they will do well from a weaker currency.
But neither Erance, the second-biggest economy in the currency bloc, nor Italy, the third-biggest, is expected to muster growth above 1% this year.
Critical details over the verification and monitoring of Iran’s programme and the consequences for any violations (for instance, how ►► IBM and Smarter Planet and their logos, lbm.com, Watson Analytics and made with IBM are trademarks of International Business Machines Corp, registered In many jurisdictions worldwide.
Unearth new opportunities at ibm.com/nnadewithibnn Smarter decisions are made with IBM. iiii ;ii; INI 16 Leaders The Economist April 11th 2015 ► sanctions would be reimposed) have yet to be settled.
Each year non-doms contribute about £8. billion in income taxes and at least £i5om in fees.
Because when your mind says efficiency** and your foot soys power, only Volkswagen TDI® Cleon Diesel technology gives you the option of both.
Your mileage will vary and depends on several factors, including your driving habits and vehicle condition.
What we are striving to ensure is that the SDGS fully address the systemic injustices that women experience daily The earlier Millennium Development Goals fell far short of addressing gender inequalities.
MARCUS WETHERED London Eor the past 40 years the question of Britain’s relationship with Europe has been the Great Rift Valley running through British politics.
Eirst, that occasionally in a democracy, and despite the fears of the elite of getting a “wrong” result, the people must be allowed to have their say on important matters in order to clear the air.
ULYSSES LATEINER Somerviiie, Massachusetts In the late 1970s, business cards were just being reintroduced in China.
Using our unique intemanoual nctu ork and in-deprh market knowledgei we act discreetly to provide unrivalled access to pritne opportunities which are rarely published.
The United Nations is looking for an experienced senior executive, who as a key member of the management team, will oversee strategic, programmatic and managerial aspects on safety and security as the Assistant Secretary-Genera L Candidates should have extensive senior management and leadership experience in handling complex safety and security issues and in implementing workplace reform and change management.
All applications should include a curriculum vitae and be sent to the Secretariat or emailed to UNDSSJobs@yn.org by 25 May 2015.
This individual will play a vital role In positioning AEMERA as a trusted and globally recognized source of credible, accessible, scientifically sound environmental data and information on the condition of the environment in Alber ta, The ideal candidate is a proven leader with at least ten years of executive experience who can build the strategy and organizational capacity to effectively spur innovation and deliver results in a complex provincewide organization.
You may not have heard of us but Crisis Action is an awardwinning organisation at the forefront of giobai advocacy.
The oftplcprA dMHihl how oMCOcmfeng qcxidefnlc pedfnoA diuMgliciut. mduikig a ni.EI Elw^vc hmn p rapulfdliHUlidionmth FM CloHdi^^ Bocholor'torMi Moftor'ilnai.
Th* pouthan h bosod at Ikihtafc wHNn the P4otkiaa( Coptaol Re^hm. opproaimottlir o two~hout diiw hofn hkw Oete.
The Didctor Hd tie appointed ollv obtoineig opptavol d tht AppornimtfiU ComfTiiaoe of Cobnot (hCQ boHd on the ieconmpidahon» mode Q Swdi^wii-'Seicaipn Cdmniatee (5CSO, the SCSC wH corohStr a p pi ta a tl ofa MUing th* obov* ottorta received tn reiponu to ihti advertHemeol a% wtM oi noffi^notlon fecehred hwn emlneht peviofn 'In itte held of mon o gen u nt /nm i um i n etil educolJort.
Selected contMolHJhal hove a conmetud tenm of oppoHment for hve ywi or unci ottoMng tfw ogt of lupeneviuotipn of hS whrehewer 4 eoilieT ^dWdondh<etWlidQ| j|JMJ » d* thoddiendtlie*oiipiogtlQioiettfi.detBdidk du ii r i ut l w iori themwenpongnetiTt memured m Appicetian CAdin*Bee‘t)of thenotlfkoElon ovoidilton^^ l»tlliJe'svveiBil*ivm.feri«iHahAi^ , teonii Ho.Qi.C Oepomnent t0 hh^her Eduamorv MMiQi, 9ioded ihoiivn.
Nm Oite noixn . hidio ond tp The opphcortEi dwuld pnpnge IP lend the Vif^fonce ChwonoeiVachTomil Oeenna dhecdif horn theh' priwnt lyganhodon mthi oddiiA meiiiioitid iibove. iott doMmtubmrtih* upv tS 201S Crown Agents Chief Executive Officer Crown Agents Ltd is an international development company headquartered in the United Kingdom.
Caroline Wright, Hanson Green, Amadeus House, 27b Floral Street London WC2E 9DP Tel: +44 20 7255 7940 Email: cwright@hansongreen.co.uk The closing date of the vacancy is: Friday 17 April 2015 and challenge of the position.
CROWN AGENTS Vice President, Treasurer The World Bank has commenced a global search for its next Vice President and Treasurer.
The Treasurer will lead an intemalional staff covering business areas including asset management and advisory, bond and investment products, financing and risk management, debt managemei^t and financial advisory and pension and endowments.
The position is based in Washington, D.C A full position description will be sent upon receipt of nominations or expressions of interest to WBTreasurer^RussellReynolds.com Deadline April 17, aois^ The World Bank Group ts committed to achieving diversity in terms of gender* notionotity* culture and educatiomi background, individuoh with disabfiiries are equalfy encouraged to apply.
Working for a Worid Free of Poverty The Economist April nth 2015 Two hundred years ago the most powerful eruption in modern history made itself felt around the world.
If such numbers seem suspiciously accurate, considering that most of the world of 1816 was devoid of thermometers and rain gauges, it is because they come from recent computer modelling of the climate ►► 22 Briefing Volcanoes and cLimate The Economist April 11th 2015 ► that seeks to mimic the conditions Tambora created.
The situation in Yunnan would hardly have been as dire had the population not been hugely expanded by the Oing dynasty’s encouragement of new settlers.
If the airspace in question were hard to reroute around, that would have both direct impacts on the aviation industry-Eyjafjallajokull cost it about $1. billion-and indirect impacts on its users-valued at about twice the direct effects in that ►► 24 Briefing Volcanoes and dimate The Economist April 11th 2015 ► case.
Eor a smallish volcano at high latitudes the effects on the itcz would probably Pinatubo— picayune by comparison swamp the local and regional effects.
U In the Bible it says they asked Jesus how many times you should forgive, and he said 70 times 7.
Hillary Clinton; The Economist 26 United States The Economist April 11th 2015 ► Marshall, visited New Hampshire and Iowa just before Easter, meeting local Democratic power-brokers.
New Hampshire Democrats want a candidate who will fight against inequality and for the middle class.
LOUISVILLE A libertarian pitch for the White House H e IS a senator and the son of a former congressman who ran for president three times.
That is a hard sell-libertarians are probably no more than 11% of the American electorate.
CHICAGO Voters opt for fiscal realism over “Hanukkah Harry” C ALIFORNIA is no longer taking a laidback approach to drought.
With unfunded pension liabilities of more than $20 billion, an operating-budget deficit of more than $300m and a payment of $550m for the pensions funds of police and firemen due at the end of this year, America’s third city is veering toward insolvency.
Each day the institute, housed in an elegant white and grey complex beside the John E Kennedy Presidential Library, will focus on a single issue.
The teenager cast as a Texas Republican channelled a real-life firebrand from that state.
Senator Ted Cruz, and growled that, “worst come to worst,” he would try to shut the government down.
Although the mood is giddy, the obstacles to trade and investment remain formidable.
Mr Zakharov says his business suffered recently because ►► And they're off, again 32 The Americas The Economist April llth 2015 ► duties on car parts have soared.
The vote was a stinging rebuke to the ►► The Americas 33 The Economist April llth 2015 ► MAS, and a warning to Mr Morales.
Although the MAS enjoyed the benefits of incumbency and the backing of the highly partisan State-run media, it received just 41% of the votes, down from 61% in October’s national election.
At a Summit of the Americas in Argentina in 2005 George W Bush was greeted by a mass rally organised by the host, Nestor Kirchner, at which his country’s plan for a Eree Trade Area of the Americas was denounced by Venezuela’s leader, Hugo Chavez.
Eour years later, at a similar summit in Trinidad, Chavez presented Barack Obama with an anti-imperialist tract.
Mr Obama’s staff doubtless thought that their boss would be greeted as a hero at the latest summit in Panama, to be held on April 10th and uth.
And while many Latin Americans dislike Cuba’s Eidel Castro and his brother, Raiil, the country’s current president, they dislike the embargo even more.
Eirst, talks over reopening embassies have been going more slowly than some had hoped.
Pew Latin Americans like unilateral interventions by the United States, and the sanctions undercut a attempt by the South American Union to mediate between Venezuela’s autocratic regime and the opposition.
Argentina’s Cristina Pernandez de Kirchner departs in December; her successor will be more moderate.
Still, zero inflation is far short of the target of 2% ►► 36 Asia The Economist April 11th 2015 ► that the bank has a mandate to reach.
Their supporters would help the dpp broaden its alliances beyond those who emphasise “ethnic” differences between original dwellers of Taiwan and immigrants (or their descendants) who fled to the island at the end of the Chinese civil war in 1949.
KMT voters alienated by bickering between the two parties over relations with China may be attracted by third-force parties’ emphasis on domestic reforms.
If she hopes to co-opt the young acFlower power tivists, she may have to take greater risks with the island’s truculent neighbour.
Unfortunately, that is only a fraction of the tens of millions of crown-of-thorns starfish thought to inhabit the entire reef The species has few predators, reproduces profusely and can devastate a reef in months.
Strong evidence links population explosions to floods that wash high levels of nutrients from farms onto the reef Australia’s latest plan for the Great Barrier Reef, which it hopes will convince the World Heritage Committee not to classify it as endangered, sets targets to cut nitrogen loads in half by 2018 and by four-fifths seven years later.
Eor Russell Reichelt of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, a federal body charged with protecting it, the “burning question” is whether this is climate change in action.
Together with the Queensland state government, his administration will spend about A$2 billion over the next ten years to sustain the reef Dumping dredge waste from port expansions in reef waters has now been banned.
Where all Silk Roads lead For daily analysis and debate on China, visit Economist.com/china 39 BEIJING Officials increasingly ask people a once taboo question: what they think Opinion polls The critical masses I N RECENT weeks official media have published a flurry of opinion polls.
Since the party seized power in 1949 it has repeatedly unleashed public opinion only to suppress it with force, from the “Hundred Elowers Campaign” in 1956, when it briefly tolerated critical voices, to the student-led protests in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
Eor the past two decades, the party has effectively bought people’s obedience by promising-and delivering-a better, richer future.
Around the same time party officials organised polls on religious belief But for years the use of such methods remained limited, whether by government or others.
A survey in Beijing in 1995 found that 90% of people were satisfied with the city government’s performance, for example-yet some in the government, steeped in the party’s traditional view that it enjoys universal public support, worried that as many as 10%, or over im people, were dissatisfied.
America’s initial position had been that sanctions would come off only in stages, and would depend on Also in this section 43 Islamic State's gains in Syria 43 The looming battle for Mosul 44 The fight for Libyan oil 45 Nigeria's hopeful president-elect 45 The regeneration of Johannesburg 46 An atrocity in Kenya For daily analysis and debate on the Middle East and Africa, visit Economist.com/world/middle-east-africa Iran establishing a record of strict compliance.
Once lifted through a new Security Council resolution they may be well-nigh impossible to slap back on unless the Iranian violation is both severe and flagrant enough even for Russia to refrain from us►► The Economist April llth 2015 Middle East and Africa 43 ► ing its veto.
In Tikrit, Shia militias had to be pulled out after looting and revenge attacks on Sunni residents; last year hundreds of Shia soldiers were executed, and their bodies are now ►► 44 Middle East and Africa Planting the Iraqi flag in Tikrit.
The noc The Economist April llth 2015 and the central bank, both in Tripoli, have somehow preserved their independence, but at a cost.
Eew expect the nog’s revenue to end up in the coffers of the Beida government, which has tried to get hold of the cash before by setting up a parallel outfit at Ras Lanuf, an oil hub it controls, and installing a rival chairman of the bank.
Bloomberg Middle East and Africa 45 The Economist April llth 2015 Nigerian politics Please don’t expect miracles LAGOS The president-elect faces enormous tasks, starting with halting corruption M UHAMMADU BUHARI is fast learning what excessive expectations can do.
It is called “The Blackanese,” and it is owned by a black entrepreneur who was once a security guard for cars.
Nigeriaelections.org ; r States j with j sharia Lagos Niger Delta of dollars without bidding during Mr Jonathan’s presidency.
The Economist 48 Poland's election 49 Eastern Ukraine 50 Greece and Russia 50 French radio 51 Charlemagne: A Minsk muddle For daily analysis and debate on Europe, visit Economist.com/europe cial support for constitutional and political reform, the former prime minister had expected a say in choosing the new head of state.
At the top of Mr Erdogan’s list of foes is Fethullah Gulen, a Sunni cleric based in Pennsylvania with whom he once made common cause against army tutelage in the early days of ak rule.
Eor its part, pis has reached out to educated voters by nominating Andrzej Duda, a 42year-old moderate conservative who serves as a member of the European Parliament.
Eor a campaign stunt last month he travelled to neighbouring Slovakia, which adopted the euro in 2009, to show that groceries are more expensive there.
Mr Nowak caused a stir in Eebruary by suggesting that Mr Kaczynski, who is 65, is too old to lead the party.
In late Eebruary a blast at a parade commemorating the Maidan anniversary left four dead.
National polling data now show the Opposition Bloc outpacing the People’s Eront party of Arseniy Yatsenyuk, the prime minister, which won last year’s elections and has borne the blame for the country’s continuing economic woes.
Cosco, a Chinese shipping giant, already controls a container terminal at Piraeus, Greece’s largest port, and is transporting goods from it by special train to central Europe.
Greece managed to scrape together its €458m repayment to the imf on April 9th, but another €950m comes due in May.
This circular 1960s Paris landmark has itself cost €43om to revamp, twice the original estimate, including the construction of a brand-new auditorium for €42m.
The government has urged an end to the strike and summoned Mr Gallet, supposedly an independent appointee, to explain himself It ought to be possible to create consensus for change.
Europe 51 The Economist April llth 2015 Charlemagne | Belarus and the great hear Russia’s antics in Ukraine are upending politics elsewhere U NTIL science unlocks the secrets of time travel, the world will have to make do with Belarus.
Little seems to have changed in this landlocked country of lom souls, tucked between Poland and Russia, since it emerged blinking into independence after the Soviet disintegration in 1991.
Belarus is the only Ear country that has no territorial disputes with its neighbours.
Earlier this year Belarus asked the Kremlin for a $2. billion loan, but received just $iiom.
An Ear summit in Riga next month will be watched closely for signs of a thaw, particularly if Mr Lukashenko is allowed to attend.
All about that base For daily analysis and debate on Britain, and analysis of the campaign, visit: economist.com/britain economist.com/ukelection20i5 enthusiasm it worked up during the referendum campaign.
The Britain section is Looking for an intern to work for several months in The Economist's London ofh'ces this summer.
Electoral Commission; Ashcroft polling 2015 ONLINE: UK election central, all our coverage in one location at Econoniist.com/ukelection2015 0+10 20 30 40 Cumbernauld^ Glasgow O ^Dundee ^Edinburgh Motherwell Ayr^ ► For this assistance, she would extract a leftist price.
Associates, a tax-advice firm, out of the 110,700 people who declared themselves as nondoms.
The non-dom system is an anomaly, but Britain should not stop the flow of skilled foreigners the economy needs.
Imagine if it had been Mr Cameron promising to dismantle the “non-dom” status until recently enjoyed by his party’s erstwhile biggest donor.
Belatedly, he realised his error; having no credibility on the economy.
Labour has little prospect of winning votes beyond its Tory-hating base.
Eurther gains can come from managing demand rather than simply ramping up supply to meet it.
Storing off-peak energy as ice is particularly useful for air-cooling systems, one of the industrialised world’s biggest energy ►► 56 International The Economist April 11th 2015 ► hogs.
Renewable energy Not a toy The lEA reckons that only one-third of the available energy-saving opportunities with a cost-effective payback period are taken up.
Some savings can seem too low to be worth the hassle, such as buying a new appliance to halve a small running cost.
Bloomberg; company reports; The Economist raise its share buy-backs, all to its newly enlarged investor base.
The fall in the oil price has highlighted S OMETHING new is in the air.
The firm, founded in 2006 by a mainthe weaknesses of energy companies that place big, long-term bets on difficult production and exploration projects.
But this is an age of mammals. ■ lander who studied engineering in Hong Kong, has become a leading light in the industry.
It has filed hundreds of patents, and is launching lawsuits against rivals it suspects of infringing its intellectual property.
It is thought to have made around $500m in revenues in 2014 , and it may be on track to become the first maker of consumer drones to reach a billion dollars in annual sales.
In March Sony unveiled PlayStation Vue, which uses MLBAM to transmit television shows over Drug dealing The net closes game consoles.
And only a well-heeled rival could replicate its network of data centres-its capital spending has already exceeded $50om. mlbam’s success has led analysts to ask whether its non-baseball services might ►► The web’s two largest drug markets go down, panicking dealers and buyers 4 4 T JUST can’t bear this any longer,” i writes “Megan” in an anonymous internet forum.
Streamed live to your smartphone 60 Business ► fare better on their own.
Bob Bowman, mlbam’s head, insists that it is only pursuing minority investments from partners within its industry.
MLB has no interest in disrupting networks like ESPN, whose rights fees help keep it afloat.
However, streaming video could shift the balance of power between upstart ott services and legacy cable providers.
A recent report by McKinsey, a consulting firm, describes how one Japanese firm, Bridgestone, made the mistake of promoting a new line of golf The Economist April llth 2015 clubs as being for senior citizens; a rival brand did better by avoiding any explicit mention of age, but stressing its clubs’ ability to make the ball travel far, tapping into older golfers’ anxieties about not being able to whack it like they used to.
Germany, where real wages are rising, will do most to pull the euro zone out of the mire, but Erance and Italy, hitherto laggards, are expected to show slightly perkier growth too.
Sanofi, a Erench drugmaker, reckons foreign-exchange movements added three percentage points to its revenue growth in the fourth quarter of 2014.
Total, a Erench oil company, reported sharply lower revenue in the last three months of 2014, for example, and has been busily downsizing since then.
Over three-fifths of the sales of the companies that make up the main stockmarket indices in Germany, Erance, Italy and Spain are from outside their home markets.
Bloomberg; revenues outside of Europe Thomson Reuters; ^Weighted by European revenues Dealogic; The Economist ^Four-quarter moving average ning to do big deals once more.
In 2012 Mr Schuller sold his Crystal Cathedral to the Roman Catholic diocese of Orange for $57.5m.
Mr Schuller even sued his former ministry for $5m for copyright infringement and breach of contract-he was awarded a lesser sum.
The same may one day be true of some of the Valley’s booming tech empires. ■ ±iT>Ki5App, |)0|^±Jti^}lk. #il5SI4gif«IS^^> (t’HjRis. -mm^ PIB’tffeffiTtg The Economist Global Business Review Introducing The Economist Global Business Review* Our new bilingual app delivers insightful ana lysis on global trends in business, finance and technology.
Robin Hood economics For daily analysis and debate on economics, visit Economist.com/economics 65 ROYERSFORD, PENNSYLVANIA Unless wages grow, America’s economic blip could become a trend Growth in America Careful now T he people of Royersford are feeling pinched.
Federal Reserve *Three-nnonth average Bank of St Louis; Bureau tNon-defence of Economic Analysis capital goods show that orders for “durable” goodsthings that last a long time, like industrial machinery-dropped by 1.4% in the previous month.
A research paper from the Eederal Reserve Bank of Chicago estimates that, if real wage growth had followed its historical relationship with the unemployment rate, by mid-2014 it would have been 3. percentage points higher than it actually was.
According to a Chicago Eed paper, the PTER rate is a particularly important determinant of wage levels.
David Blanchflower of Dartmouth College and Andrew Levin of the imp found similar results in a paper published in March.
Nervousness about asking for more pay may ripple through the labour market, says Daniel Aaronson of the Chicago Eed.
If so, the latest data suggest pay could be about to take off One survey found that 70% of American companies expected to increase wages by at least 3% in the year from March.
If healthier wage data keep coming, interestrate rises from the Eederal Reserve will soon follow.
Under one of the provisions of the JOBS Act, a compendium of enterprise-boosting laws passed in 2012, companies will be able to raise up to $5om in what is commonly referred to as a “Mini IPO”, or initial public offering.
Pote n ti a 1 0 utp ut i s a n esti m ate of a n economy's speed limit— how rapidly it can grow before inflationary overheating sets in.
Now anyone will be able to invest up to 10% of their income in earlystage ventures, a type of investment that makes stockmarket gyrations look dull.
The case involves $65m suspected of having been embezzled and laundered abroad by Lazaro Baez, a building tycoon with ties to Cristina Eernandez de Kirchner, Argentina’s president, and her late husband , Nestor.
Elliott sued in Nevada for information on the shell companies from their agent, MF Nevada, and, by association, Mossack Eonseca, the Panamanian law firm understood to be mf’s parent.
The ruling will also increase scrutiny of Cash in Argentina Low bill BUENOS AIRES A government in denial over inflation O N MARCH 26th Argentina’s president, Cristina Eernandez de Kirchner, announced a newioo-peso note honouring the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, a group whose children were “disappeared” during Argentina’s military dictatorship.
What the country needs, three private Argentine banking organisations argued in a letter to the Central Bank on April ist, is not a newioo-peso note-the country now has three-but a more valuable one.
Despite these drains on Argentines’ purchasing power, Ms Eernandez has refused to allow a higher-value banknote.
Shells it helped set up have been linked to tax evaders and kleptocrats.
If the relevant records are in Panama, a country with strict secrecy laws, they are unlikely to be produced in a hurry. black market, which flourished after 2011 when Ms Eernandez throttled foreigncurrency dealings.
Once the vehicle arrives at the site of the sale, bricks of pesos are shuffied inside using duffel bags.
With only eight months left in office, Ms Eernandez is unlikely to allow a more valuable banknote.
U.S-; persons arrd entities should consult a tax advisor for more information.
By the mid-2000s they were much less in favour, doubtless fearing that help for the poor would cut health benefits.
As a result, fast mobile networks are far from ubiquitous even in rural parts of the rich world They are almost unheard of in poor-country villages.
Because a single satellite will be able to provide backhaul to dozens of villages at a time, Mr Wyler hopes that local operators will be able to afford to build phone masts or internet base-stations in rural schools, village centres and the like.
But although low orbits offer much bet►► The Economist April llth 2015 Science and technology 73 ► ter latency, they are also more complicated.
The firm has already carried out flight tests in Britain, where its drones are built by Ascenta, a firm that Facebook bought for $2om in 2014.
In contrast to the rival companies, which are mostly concentrating on providing ways to deliver the internet to mobile-phone towers or Wi-Fi relays on the ground.
Loon balloons may be used as flying base stations, capable of talking directly to mobile devices on the ground.
By taking advantage of different wind speeds, the balloons should be able to minimise the time they spend over uninhabited areas, drifting in slow winds over ►► One day Google's balloon will go up 74 Science and technology The Economist April 11th 2015 populated areas while rising or falling into faster currents to speed them across oceans or deserts.
Eor 30 years Mr Enwezor has been a curator and critic, intent on stretching the canon of traditional Western contemporary art and testing what it might become.
Eound materials like this are also an important feature of the work of many artists in Mozambique, where 15 years of civil war left behind tonnes of armaments.
William Collins; £20 AFRICANS ask many questions about xxwhat ails a continent that abounds with natural riches yet suffers, too, from greedy rulers, bad government and entrenched poverty.
But Mr Burgis sees Africa-with a third of the Earth’s mineral deposits and some of its weakest institutions-as being particularly vulnerable to the predations that arise from the combination of mineral wealth and poor governance.
An Argentine diplomat’s son, he knows many languages, and he lived in many places before settling in Erance.
Pew readers have collected more curiosities from the world of books than he has.
Henry Pord so admired his friend Thomas Edison that he supposedly trapped his last breath in a test tube.
Lawrence struggles with the demons that punctuate his seemingly normal life and Rachel must address her own destructive tendencies if she is to form real relationships and become a mother herself It is a compelling, psychological drama; one that perhaps dominates to the detriment of other parts of the book.
A storyline involving a protester in a wolf mask and sinister threats aimed at the project is never resolved and the darker side of the earl’s family does not feel fully explored.
Courses 79 GAME PLAYER Oxford Executive MBA Go from a game player to a successful game changer.
This modular programme offers you the chance to )0in one of the world's most powerful networks and create a new future for your organisation and for yourself as a leader.
Your EOl should not exceed 3 sides of A4 , excluding CVs, company brochures etc.
The HYpropouKRTPI docurwn c«i be obUlned «t WHWJTideriwHcigQimAI ibave Tender Tite ind Number bi the «ml t4A]|)eft ihcstid be emiled to iqiXi*jlemjfkei rom.
The cknlhg detefor b 4 ih uty 39i9no leter then Id 00 ^^Jn Jmuni*/ locel lime tRAOE HARK r srAOi MARK PREQUAJJFrCATION ANNOUNCEM ENT | TENDER TITLE; DEVELOPMENT OF BUSINESS PLAN FOR TRADEMARK EAST AFRICA I CATALYTIC INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT FACILITY | TENDER NUMBER; PRQ20l4lS4l> £ The 3rd Ejnt Afrke ComFnunIty [EACl H»di of Stdte InhAtruclure Febeet. held In November 2014 ^ Mentffied tlQO b i fa n of priority Irdtesmxiufe protects lobe comm e nced wdihfe the next decede.
M email aiB adTmantr mml be 5MR 9 msAavoumn met berheckd to pfooi Oidif apifcHMis hnn fallMVConeorbieM ***** r™ ■ 1 n i Hi I Tim 1 1 iia nj i tub I ii iii iiia i i S m ii 11 Mai XSlS THEA cannot anvworeny query reieting to des tender three deym or Ins prior lo the mbniiealon de u imei.
The Bank^ main product Snet ccjnipfise of Trade Finance and Pto)«i ^ Irrfrjstructuril Rnance and to a lesser extenL equity finance and guaranlees.
PTA Bank is. in this connectiQn. inviting quakhed and experienced consulting firms to submit proposals to undertake the study.
Any profiosais received after thii date and time wti not J be coniidtred.
So join us in Washington, or on Twitter at IlSStogitmr — Christine Lagarde.
The Economist Newspaper Limited shall not be Liable to any person for Loss or damage incurred or suffered as a result of his/her accepting or offering to accept an invitation contained in any advertisement published in The Economist The Economist April nth 2015 Residential London We build on advantage to bring you the best that London has to offer Central London East London 01.
Economic and finandal Indicators The Economist April llth 2015 83 Economic data % change on year ago Gross domestic product latest qtr* 2015t Industrial production latest Consumer prices Unemployment latest 2015t rate, % Current-account balance latest 12 % of GDP months, $bn 20151 Budget balance % of GDP 2015t Interest rates, % 10-year gov't bonds, latest Currency units, per $ Apr 8th year ago United States +2.
I www.oup. com/us 84 Economic and finandal indicators The Economist April 11th 2015 Markets % change on Dec 31st 2014 Index Apr 8th one week in local in $ currency terms United States 17,902.
Our global teams actively manage for long-term performance by assessing risk at every stage of the investment process.
The Economist April 11th 2015 Visitors sceptical of his strangely smooth skin would be invited to check behind his ears for the telltale signs of a facelift.
Economisi Espresso Unlimited access to The full weekly edition in The audio version of each week's A head start each weekday Econo mist com, providing print, at Economistxom issue of The Economist read by morning with our new daily news and analysis throughout and via our apps for a professional broadcasters. briefing, via smartphone the week and our extensive range of mobile devices. app or e-maiL online archive.
