Russia continues to use a variety of tactics, apart from military force, to influence Ukraine.
Among the key tactics are coercion in the gas sector, naval blockade, “passport colonialism,” attempts to sway Ukrainian elections, support for the pro-Russian politician Viktor Medvedchuk, and promotion of religious influence through the Russian Orthodox Church.
None of these tactics is novel, but each is evolving along with circumstances.
Regardless of what happens in Donbas, Ukraine will continue to feel multifaceted pressure from Russia.
Introduction While the conflict in Donbas is the most important means by such as restricting navigation in the Sea of Azov, have which Russia seeks to shape Ukrainian politics and foreign increased dramatically since 2014.
It is important, therefore, to exam­ extending Russian passports and citizenship to Ukrainian ine the Russia–Ukraine conflict in the broader context of all citizens; influencing elections; promoting the pro-Russian oli­ these interactions.
This article asks three related questions. garch Viktor Medvedchuk; and deploying the Russian First, what tactics is Russia using to influence Ukraine beyond Orthodox Church to promote Russian–Ukrainian unity.
Without denying the importance body of the paper addresses the first two questions.
We return of these tactics, this article focuses on some actions that, to the third in the conclusion. because of their lower intensity, may escape attention, even The importance of these questions was demonstrated on though they are pervasive.
However, even “sovereign democracy,” and his reputation as a sower of the most pro-Russian Ukrainian presidents, Viktor chaos, his removal led to speculation that Vladimir Putin Yanukovych and Leonid Kuchma (1994– was initiating a change in policy toward Ukraine.
Moreover, is that Kozak, who appears to be more concerned with the since 2014, Ukrainian ruling elites have pursued only economic cost of the ongoing conflict, will be amenable to Western-oriented integration projects.
In February 2019, the Rada This raises the question of just what Russia’s policy toward amended Ukraine’s constitution to make European Union Ukraine is.
If a change is underway, is it a change of goals, of and NATO membership official goals.
Before we can address such questions, Konstytutsii pro kurs Ukrainy na YeS i NATO nabuly we need to more clearly understand Russia’s policies in chynnosti 2019) Ukraine in recent years.
Russia has deployed a range of Meanwhile, in November 2016, Vladimir Putin approved methods for shaping both the options open to Ukrainian the current Foreign Policy Concept of the Russian Federation, leaders and the choices they make.
Others, an integral part of efforts to achieve foreign policy objectives.
During 2018 and the first half of 2019, Russia sought again While Joseph Nye, who coined term “soft power,” appears to use the gas trade to bring Ukraine closer.
While con­ March 1, during a period of extreme cold, Gazprom abruptly siderable attention has been focused on the so-called announced a shutoff of supplies to Ukraine, cut gas sales to “Gerasimov doctrine” and hybrid warfare, in fact, Russia other customers to a minimum, and reduced gas pressure by seeks to wield influence in Ukraine with a much broader 20 percent (“Gazprom” sorval import gaza v Ukrainu za 15 repertoire of policies.
Russia’s shutoffs of gas deliveries after the Orange transit through Ukraine would be reduced to about 10 to Revolution convinced the EU to get more involved in stabiliz­ 15 billion cubic meters of gas a year, in comparison with ing the energy relationship; that process strengthened after 93 billion cubic meters in 2017 (“Miller rasskazal o snizhenii 2014, when Ukraine found itself in the position of being tranzita gaza cherez Ukrainu v 10 raz posle 2019 goda” 2018). highly dependent for energy on a country with which it was In May 2018, Vladimir Putin stressed that the transit of at war.
Russian gas through the transmission system of Ukraine In February 2009, after a shutoff of gas deliveries, the two could be saved if Ukrainians were to prove the “economic sides signed a ten-year agreement that was seen as highly validity and appropriateness” of such a step (“Putin poobesh­ disadvantageous to Ukraine.
After initially rejecting this idea, tries, rather than directly from Russia.
In tives disrupted tripartite consultations on gas transit at the December 2017, the SCC rejected Gazprom’s claim to be owed expert level (“‘Hazprom’ zirvav tekhnichni trystoronni pere­ 56 billion USD under the take-or-pay provision of the deal hovory z Ukrainoiu ta YeS shchodo postachannia hazu” signed in 2009.
Ukraine was paying twice as much as was necessary for gas, Russia’s immense leverage has been offset by Russia’s reli­ and that it could be paying 25 percent less for it.
He went on ance on pipelines through Ukraine to deliver gas to its most to state that after the opening of the new pipelines, Ukraine lucrative markets in Western Europe.
In the 1990s, Gazprom sought trilateral consultations on gas issues in September to purchase the pipelines in return for forgiving accumulated (“Trystoronni konsultatsii shchodo hazu mozhut proity debts.
On 2 and Turkstream appear to have been crucial in loosening April 27, 2018, the Border Guard Service of the Federal Russia’s bargaining position.
Security Service of the Russian Federation started carrying Although a dramatic shift in pipeline power has been out selective inspections of vessels going to and from deferred, it will almost certainly take place eventually.
Immediately after the agreement signed in 2019 allows for shipment of 65 billion the opening of the Crimean Bridge in May 2018, Russia began cubic meters of Russian gas through Ukraine, Nord Stream 2 making similar ship stops in the middle of the Azov Sea.
As transiting the Kerch Strait, slowing passage through the strait more capacity in pipelines bypassing Ukraine comes on line, significantly.
In October 2018, average waiting times were Ukraine will not only lose transshipment revenues, but will three days to enter the Sea of Azov and four days to exit. also become much more vulnerable to a gas shutoff.
Although Since the cost of the ships’ downtime varies from 5,000 USD EU countries seek to bolster Ukraine’s independence, they to 15,000 USD per day, these delays caused considerable have powerful commercial and security interests in securing damage to Ukrainian companies.
Germany in particular has sup­ of Infrastructure of Ukraine, since the beginning of the con­ ported the Nord Stream and Nord Stream 2 pipelines, which flict with Russia, the total state losses due to the detention of will dramatically reduce Russia’s reliance on Ukrainian pipe­ ships in the Azov Sea at year-end 2018 amounted to 6 billion lines.
Thus, the economic problem became a security to the Sea of Azov, which is separated from the Black Sea by problem.
Ukraine’s National Security and Defense Council the Kerch Strait between the Crimean Peninsula and Russia’s decided in September 2018 to strengthen Ukraine’s naval Krasnodar region.
Because the Kerch Strait and Sea of Azov presence in the Azov Sea and to create a naval base in provide access to the Ukrainian port city of Mariupol, in Berdiansk.
A few days later, as part of the implementation unoccupied Donetsk Oblast, they represent the hinterland of of that decision, two small gun boats—Kremenchuk and the Donbas conflict.
Russia’s actions appear to serve four Lubny—were delivered to the Azov coast by land.
For Ukraine, there are they were fired on and captured (“U Bellingcat pidtverdyly, two potential dangers.
Second, Russia will have taken On December 12, 2018, the European Parliament adopted a further step toward potentially blockading the entire a resolution strongly condemning Russia’s actions in the Ukrainian Black Sea coast, landlocking the country.
Kerch Strait and demanding the immediate and unconditional Russia made an initial probe in the area of the Kerch Strait release of all Ukrainian vessels and sailors (European in 2003.
On December 17, the UN General unoccupied island in the middle of the strait, Russia sought to Assembly approved a resolution calling on Russia “to release take control of an island that had been previously considered of vessels and their crews and equipment unconditionally and part of Crimea, and hence Ukraine.
Law of the Sea, on May 25, 2019, called Russia’s move an “act Following Russia’s seizure of Crimea, Russia made plans to of aggression of Russia against Ukraine at sea” and required supply Crimea via a new bridge, across the Kerch Strait, from the immediate release and return to Ukraine of both crews of Krasnodar region to Crimea.
Russia would face problems in 2016 when the technical parameters refused, and released the captives only as part of a larger of the Crimean Bridge were made known . prisoner swap in November 2019.
Russia’s “Passport Colonialism” Putin raised the issue again during his annual news con­ Offering passports to citizens of neighboring countries is ference on December 18, 2018.
Answering a question from a strategy of influence that seems unique to post-Soviet Russia Today, Putin said that the government was preparing Russia.
Rather than sending settlers to colonize new terri­ the relevant law and would adopt it in early 2019.
Once Russia has claimed these people as citizens, it support policies of division or the ones designed to alienate seems a reasonable next step to assert Russia’s interest in the peoples of Russia and Ukraine.
They [Ukrainian protecting them, which justifies intervention in other coun­ authorities] are pursuing a historic task of separating the tries’ politics.
Thus, paragraph 2. of Article 10 of the Russian peoples of Russia and Ukraine.
Russian Federation outside the territory of the Russian These statements were complemented by concrete legal Federation from armed attack on them” (Russian Federation and practical steps.
On April 24, 2019, few had done so (“Podviine Putin signed a special Executive Order according to which hromadianstvo zahrozhuie bezpetsi krainy.
Mass issuance of Russian cedure when applying for the Russian Federation citizenship” passports began after Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
In Donbas, “passport colonialism” was launched on On April 29, 2019, Putin approved a new executive order February 18, 2017, the same day as a Normandy Group under which the right to obtain Russian citizenship was ministers meeting at the Munich Security Conference.
The second refers to “citizens of Ukraine and stateless . persons who have a temporary residence permit in the In mid-2018, the Russian government raised the issue of Russian Federation, a regular residence permit in the granting Russian passports to different categories of Russian Federation, a refugee certificate, a certificate of tem­ Ukrainians under a simplified procedure.
He emphasized that “liberalising well as their children, spouses and parents” (“Executive Order everything connected with obtaining Russian citizenship” is on Certain Categories of Foreign Citizens and Stateless a problem that has both a humanitarian and an economic Persons Entitled to Fast-Track Procedure When Applying dimension and is on the agenda.
In this vein, Putin’s performance during the “Direct Line” on June 20, 2019, was indicative.
I remember his performance particular interest comparatively, because it appears that on the KVN comedy show in Moscow back in the mid-2000s.
Putin recommended the steps the methods that are then deployed elsewhere.
Much of the effort new president should take to establish a dialogue with has consisted of vocal support by Vladimir Putin for particu­ Moscow, namely beginning direct negotiations with represen­ lar candidates.
More broadly, Russian media, controlled by tatives of the DNR and LNR (“Direct Line with Vladimir the state and widely available in Ukraine, have long promoted Putin” 2019; “Putin nazval uslovie dialoga s Kievom” 2019), candidates and parties seen as favorable to Russia. which Ukraine defined as terrorist organizations.
Again, The crucial importance of the 2019 Ukrainian elections for Putin’s pronouncements were linked to Russia’s concrete the Kremlin is demonstrated by the attention that Vladimir actions, in this case the steady level of violence across the Putin gave to them personally, via interviews and press con­ line of contact in eastern Ukraine. ferences.
After 2014, Putin’s popularity in divided by historical accidents; Ukraine currently finds itself Ukraine declined dramatically.
According to a poll conducted in a difficult situation and Russia can help; the Ukrainian in October to November 2019, 71 percent of Ukrainians leadership is corrupt and is unable to solve the problems evaluated him negatively, and only 17 percent positively facing Ukrainians, especially those who live in Donbas; the (“Sered Inozemnykh Lideriv Ukraiintsyam naibil’she situation can only change after the presidential and parlia­ Podobayet’sya Lukashenko.
Naimenshe—Putin” 2019). mentary elections in Ukraine; Ukrainians should support the Before 2014, Russia was also able to shape Ukrainian forces that will work with Russia to solve Ukraine’s problems; opinion through government control over Russian media, most important among them is Viktor Medvedchuk. which were widely consumed in Ukraine.
For a time, Russia had to rely on and save their money in offshore accounts for a rainy day.” the many pro-Russian sources within Ukraine controlled by Putin also stressed that Ukraine had entered a new political pro-Russian oligarchs, such as Vesti.UA and Stran.UA (Gala cycle, including the upcoming Rada and presidential elections, Sklyarevskaya 2016), which were created by the journalist Igor and that in this connection the situation would deteriorate Guzhva.
According to the Industrial Television 2002–2005 under Leonid Kuchma, and is close enough person­ Committee, in May 2019, these channels held more than ally to Putin that Putin is the godfather to Medvedchuk’s a 50 percent viewer share of seven Ukrainian television news daughter. channels.
As Petro candidacy in the presidential election, and he finished fourth.
The party won 13. percent of the repeaters of Russian propaganda in Ukraine (Burkovskyi proportional representation vote and captured 43 seats.
Moreover, residents of the Donbas Medvedchuk is far from the only politician in Ukraine being continued to watch Russian television channels (Baliuk 2019; supported by Russia, he is the most prominent in terms of his Chabarai 2019). influence in Ukraine and the amount of attention being given Beyond direct advocacy for individual can­ to him by the Russian government. didates, Russia deployed a variety of other tactics.
One of It is unclear exactly how support for Medvedchuk fits into these was simply to discredit the election process itself.
As in other aspects of Russia’s strategy, it may not the findings of international observer missions (Ukraine be necessary to foresee the exact impact of this tactic.
Even the Election Task Force 2019). least ambitious of these goals would justify the investment, and if The Kerch Straits incident in November 2018 was poten­ more could be achieved, the opportunity would be taken. tially especially disruptive.
As Ukraine prepared for the pos­ Russia focused considerable resources on promoting not sibility of military escalation, a 30-day state of emergency was just the new alliance, but Medvedchuk personally.
Since the declared, creating uncertainty at a crucial point in the cam­ Kuchma administration, Medvedchuk had not only promoted paign whether the presidential election would even be held. close ties between Ukraine and Russia, but also played Aleksei Venediktov, editor of the Ekho Moskvy media outlet, a visible unofficial role in communication between the two said, “If we are talking about our Russian candidate in governments.
For example, in July 2012, when Putin came to Ukraine … Mister Chaos is our candidate.
Putin asserted that the Medvedchuk has played a prominent role in efforts to Ukrainian leadership hoped that one of its sailors would die in resolve the conflict in Donbas.
At the suggestion of Putin, the incident, and were disappointed that this did not happen.
German chancellor Angela Merkel recommended to President As this example shows, the distinctions between military and Poroshenko that he include Medvedchuk in the Minsk pro­ “soft” power and between influencing elections and broader cess (“Medvedchuka do Minskoho protsesu zaluchyv ne efforts to control Ukraine, are blurry in practice.
Recognizing Viktor Medvedchuk as “de In 2018, one of Russia’s most consistent and most powerful facto Putin’s representative,” Poroshenko was also forced to supporters in Ukraine, Viktor Medvedchuk, joined forces with admit that he was “the only source for transmitting informa­ two prominent pro-Russian political parties.
Medvedchuk’s special place in relations between Ukraine The content of the film boils down to the Kremlin’s key theses and Russia was systematically emphasized by Putin himself. about Ukraine.
At the beginning, Stone states that he learned During the “Direct Line with Vladimir Putin” in June 2017, a great deal about Ukraine from Putin.
The Revolution of Putin spoke at length about Viktor Medvedchuk and his Dignity is presented as a United States special operation aimed at views.
The film highlights the difficult economic nationalist,” stating that Medvedchuk’s views are based on the situation in Ukraine after 2014, the loss of Crimea, and the writings of such Ukrainian nationalists as Mykhailo ongoing war in the Donbas, without addressing Russia’s role Hrushevsky, Ivan Franko, Mykhailo Drahomanov, and in these conflicts.
It criticizes Ukraine for trying to distance Viacheslav Chornovil and that Medvedchuk’s father itself from Russia, accusing Ukraine of violating the rights of Volodymyr had been an “active participant of the Russian speakers.
The events in the Kerch Strait on November 25, Medvedchuk’s views are disliked by many in Ukraine because 2018, are outlined as a pre-election provocation set up by he advocates the federalization of the state and supports good Petro Poroshenko.
Putin also said that Medvedchuk was Medvedchuk and Yuriy Boyko to Moscow, during which they dealing with the prisoner exchange issue, stressing that he was agreed with the Russian leadership on a better gas price for doing this on instructions from Petro Poroshenko (“Direct Ukraine.
Commenting after this At the end of the film, Medvedchuk states that his poli­ speech, the Russian commentator Stanislav Belkovsky stated tical force intends to win the parliamentary elections and that “Medvedchuk remains an important figure for Putin as bring peace to Ukraine, since Zelensky had so far been a like-minded person, and if Putin is going to bet on someone unable to do so.
Finally, Putin states in an interview that in Ukrainian politics, then it will be Medvedchuk and only friendly and even allied relations between Russia and him” (“‘Ukrainskii natsionalist’ Medvedchuk—eto khoroshii Ukraine are inevitable, and characterizes Medvedchuk as znak—Palii” 2017). a person who has strong convictions and stands for As presidential and then parliamentary elections in Ukraine’s independence.
The enlistment of a filmmaker of Ukraine loomed, Russia expanded its support for the proStone’s status to create such a promotional film for Russian forces united around Medvedchuk.
Just before the Medvedchuk’s campaign demonstrates how high the stakes first round of the presidential election, Medvedchuk, together were in the run-up to Ukraine’s 2019 parliamentary elections with the Opposition Platform–For Life party presidential can­ for the leadership of Russia and for Ukrainian pro-Russian didate Yuriy Boyko, met with Russian prime minister Dmitry forces.
Medvedev and chairman of the board of directors of Gazprom Three days before the parliamentary election, Medvedchuk Aleksey Miller.
Medvedchuk reported after­ nomic negotiations,” discussed a return of Ukrainian goods to ward that the Russian president supported the Opposition the Russian market and a resumption of direct deliveries of Platform–For Life party’s peace plan for Donbas.
Medvedchuk’s involvement in the process leading to In early June 2019, Medvedchuk and Boyko held another release of four Ukrainians from Russian captivity at the end meeting with Miller in St.
Petersburg to discuss renegotiation of June 2019 was given special attention.
While Russia sought of the gas transit contract and a possible discount on Russian to promote Medvedchuk as the key negotiator who got credit gas (“Boiko ta Medvedchuk zustrilysia z holovoiu ‘Hazpromu’ for any positive news, Ukraine resisted his involvment.
Representatives of the Opposition Platform– December 2018, after a year had passed since the previous For Life party, led by Viktor Medvedchuk, met with Dmitry prisoner exchange, the new Ukrainian representative in the Medvedev again on July 10, 2019.
The goal of all willing to discuss potential prisoner exchanges (“U Putina these meetings appears to have been to show Ukrainian voters kazhut, shcho Medvedchuk zalyshytsia ‘zviazkovym’” 2019). that Boyko and Medvedchuk could restore trade ties with Medvedchuk’s role in the release of the four Ukrainian pris­ Russia and secure cheaper energy. oners appeared to confirm Medvedchuk as the person who A few days before the parliamentary elections, the docu­ could deliver deals with Russia.
This is not just Ukraine’s civi­ had garnered in 2012 and in previous elections.
The Baptism of Rus was a great event its performance improved dramatically compared to that of that defined Russia’s and Ukraine’s spiritual and cultural the Opposition Bloc in 2014.
Putin again relied on the official opposition, and therefore gave it access to significant argument of joint religious history justifying the annexation of leadership positions in the Rada.
Whereas In order to eliminate this channel of Russian influence, the Russian foreign policy in the 1990s made claims about Poroshenko government pursued the official recognition of an Russian citizens in the “near abroad,” the Russkii mir includes autocephalous Ukrainian Orthodox Church that would be those who speak Russian or belong to Russian Orthodox internationally recognized and would include the UOC-KP, Church, which is potentially a far larger group of people the UAOC, and any parishes of the UOC-MP that chose to covering far more territory.
In 1921, after Ukraine unsuccessfully declared inde­ Council in the middle of the night.
The ROC responded by pendence, a Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church severing ties with Constantinople, “creating one of the biggest was founded.
Orthodox Church, including the UOC-MP, the UAOC was The fact that the question of autocephaly of the Ukrainian repressed, along with other denominations.
In 1992, following Orthodox Church was as much a matter for the Russian and Ukraine’s independence, the Ukrainian Orthodox Church– Ukrainian governments as for church officials is a measure of Kyiv Patriarchate was founded.
Russian control and of Ukrainian independence, and that the While the tomos of autocephaly was seen as a huge victory for UOC-MP, with its close links to the Soviet and then Russian Ukraine, its consequences will take years to emerge.
Poroshenko, it did not lead the to the political boost he hoped The alliance between the Kremlin and the Orthodox for in an election year.
Whether Russia’s claims of a Russkii church has increased in prominence under Putin.
Foreign mir and of the natural unity of Russians and Ukrainians will Minister Sergei Lavrov said, “It is impossible to overestimate lose traction is also too early to say.
In 2013, as Russia was The 2014 Revolution of Dignity dramatically undermined trying to get Ukraine to abandon the EU Association Russia’s political position in Ukraine, and Russia’s annexation Agreement and to join instead a customs union with Russia, of Crimea and intervention in Donbas further undermined Putin traveled to Kyiv with Patriarch Kirill to celebrate the support in Ukraine for close relations with Russia.
While that conflict, and the potential for Russia’s actions in the Sea of Azov, which had less precedent, resolving it, has received immense attention, Russia has main­ the other behaviors described here resemble efforts Russia has tained and refined an array of tactics that largely predate the pursued in Ukraine and elsewhere throughout the post-Soviet events of 2014.
Gas cutoffs and the promise of cheap gas in return for deploy are coercion in the gas sector, naval blockade of the political concessions emerged in the early 1990s, as did claims Azov coast, “passport colonialism,” attempts to sway that Russia had the right to intervene on behalf of Russian Ukrainian elections, promotion of thea pro-Russian politician citizens in other countries, issuing passports to other coun­ Viktor Medvedchuk, and the use of the Russian Orthodox tries’ citizens, promotion of pro-Russian politicians, and the Church to influence Ukrainians.
None of these tactics is broader narrative that the separation of Ukraine from Russia novel, but each is evolving along with circumstances, and an was artificial.
Similarly, the deployment of Orthodoxy to important question for the future is how effective these tools legitimize Russian territorial claims has a long history. will be and how Russia might further modify them.
Four conclusions emerge from this as well as various blends, all backed by the threat or use of force. analysis.
First, Russia is not satisfied with the current status The strategy, therefore, seems to be to apply as much pressure quo, but rather seeks to further expand its influence in across as many fronts as possible.
Second, the the idea that any individual tactic will lead to clearly predictable tactics on display are consistent with a range of Russian results, the approach seems to be that applying broad pressure goals, from the somewhat limited to the very extensive. patiently over time is bound to lead to positive results.
Third, while these tactics may represent a coherent strategy, It may well be that Russia’s ultimate goals in Ukraine are they might also represent an approach that is more opportu­ not clearly defined, and that the tactics we see have endured nistic.
Finally, based on the exposition of tactics in this article, over time because they are flexible, low-cost means of increas­ there is not much sign of a change in either strategy or tactics ing Russia’s influence, regardless of the ultimate goal.
In this since Putin’s appointment of Dmitry Kozak. interpretation, Russia is sensitive to costs and will be oppor­ Much of the discussion about the conflict between Ukraine tunistic, rather than pursuing clearly defined objectives with­ and Russia, and about possible solutions, has concerned out regard to cost.
This is a crucial question, because many pro­ the events of 2014 that sees Russia acting as it did because the posed Western policies depend on assumptions about Russian chaos created by the Revolution of Dignity allowed it to seize goals.
If Russia’s goals are entirely defensive, then making Crimea and much of Donbas at low cost. concessions in Ukraine might usher in an era of stability.
If At the outset, we raised the question of whether the its goals are more expansive, then concessions are less likely to appointment of new leadership over Russia’s operations in solve the problem.
As the six issues we the tactics analyzed in this article, Russia’s aims are not as have covered indicate, there is considerable continuity in minimalist and defensive as some analysts have suggested (e.g.
Instead, it appears that there much sign that Russia’s ultimate goals in Ukraine have Russia continues to seek, at a minimum, a dominant relation­ changed, even acknowledging that there is no agreement on ship with Ukraine, and perhaps reintegration on Russian what those goals are.
It is not clear. statements about the unity of the two peoples and the claims One possible interpretation is that the change represents the of the Russian Orthodox Church, but also by the fact that the hope of getting the intended results without dramatically replacement of the pro-Western Petro Poroshenko by the changing tactics.
Perhaps more skilled use of the same tools much more balanced Vladimir Zelensky did not significantly will lead to better results.
Rather than being satisfied with the the change represents a desire to tinker with the tactics, but looming victory of Zelensky’s “Sluha Narodu” party in the not to change them dramatically. parliamentary elections, Russia promoted the new party This analysis highlights the pressure that Russia continues to formed by the ardently pro-Russian Viktor Medvedchuk. put on Ukraine.
Even if the conflict in Donbas were somehow While the evidence indicates that Russia’s motives are not stabilized, Ukraine will still face increasing challenges.
We can expect Russian interference in these elections to these questions. be widespread and systematic.
This will disrupt a-46466351. the correlation of energy forces that has been more or less Burkovskyi, Petro.19a.
Many studies of Russian foreign policy focus on the concept of putin_pratsyue_na_medvedchuka_telekanali_medvedchuka_na_ “soft power” to describe nonmilitary means of influence.
We find putina_oglyad_proniknennya_rosiyskoi_propagandi_v_ukrainski_ that coercion, attraction, and subversion are so thoroughly inter­ media_v_chervni_2019_roku/. twined that trying to label them as “soft” or “hard” would cause as Burkovskyi, Petro.19d.
Ukraine Election Task Force, “Foreign Interference in Ukraine’s D’Anieri, Paul.99.
The Opposition Bloc had been formed to run in the 2014 parlia­ D’Anieri, Paul.19.
The Quarterly Journal 15 :5–31. eu/doceo/document/TA-8-2018-0435_EN.html. doi:10.11610/Connections..1.01.
Religion and Nation in Modern ukrainarosiaes-sefcovic-zaaviv-pro-uspih-persogo-raundu.html.
Foreign Affairs of Russia, to the Holy Synod of the Russian Pyvovarov, Serhii.18.
Financial Times, August 21. -poroshenko-a-putin-novyi-predstavnyk-ukrainy-v-tkh-195585.html.
