Laura Osterman | Germanic and Slavic Languages and Literature Department | Primary Advisor Dr.
Introduction On February 14, 2014, the Russian government sent troops to illegally invade Crimea, Ukraine, and on March 18, 2014, Crimea was formally annexed to the Russian Federation.
This event offers multiple avenues for research, but this thesis focuses on how and why the Russian government justified their illegal actions.
Specifically, the purpose of this thesis is to study sources from the Russian government regarding the 2014 annexation of Crimea and their connection to the anti-West conspiracy theory.
This conspiracy theory states that there is a secret group in the Western world, mostly in the United States, that for generations has been attempting to undermine Russian culture and power in the Eurasian world for their own benefit.
Studying the relevance of this conspiracy theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea is crucial because Russia is an authoritative, powerful nation, and their ability to use conspiracy theories as part of their aggressive foregin policy is something that needs to be better understood.
Using a case study to narrow in on a specific incident can eventually lead to solutions on how to combat this type of disinformation.
The Russian government has proven that their disinformation tactics work, one example being their interference in the 2016 American Presidential elections, as well as the 2022 war in Ukraine.
By using disinformation tactics such as conspiratorial discourse, the Russian government is able to manipulate people around the world into believing their false narratives to promote their own agenda.
The study of the Crimean annexation where disinformation was used can be helpful in exploring what makes Russian disinformation and propaganda so powerful, and may shed light on how American policymakers can create a recommendation to prevent that disinformation from spreading beyond Russian borders.
Plots Against Russia, Eliot Borenstein, and Fortress Russia, by Ilya Yablokov.
The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 3 Through the close study of government sources on the 2014 annexation of Crimea, this thesis will explore how and why the anti-West conspiracy theory played a role in the 2014 annexation of Crimea.
Focusing on a few sources will allow for an in depth study on specific diction used by the Russian governments to spread the anti-West conspiracy theory.
Through this analysis, this thesis aims to understand how conspiratorial discourse serves as a successful tool for controlling and influencing the post-Soviet sphere.
This research will begin with pertinent background information on this topic, including the long-standing relationship between Russia, Ukraine and Crimea specifically, as well as Russia’s relationship with the West.
This will be followed by a literature review, which will serve as a summary of conspiracy theory discourse in the post-Soviet space.
This will be studied by way of an outline on conspiracy theories as a discipline, followed by methodology of the study, and an analysis of the primary sources.
As it stands, it can be concluded that conspiracy theories are not a marginal topic, but rather a powerful tool used to control the masses and seduce citizens into submitting to the whims of their government.
By studying the 2014 annexation of Crimea in regards to the anti-West conspiracy theory, this thesis will contribute to the discourse about conspiracy theories in the post-Soviet space.
Additionally, the West has gradually become an enemy of the Russian government, as it’s seen as a menacing body with no specific country of origin.
Scholar Ilya Yablokov argues that this constructed image of the West as an eternal, single enemy to the Russian government has had deep effects on Russian national identity.
To understand this transformation and its significance, this thesis will discuss the evolving idea of the West in Imperial, Soviet and post-Soviet Russia.
Westernizers wanted to look to Western Europe for a more liberal, reformed Russia with a Constitutional Monarchy.
They hailed Peter the Great and his reforms from decades earlier, and believed it would benefit Russia to implement Western institutions.
Slavophiles instead argued that Russia has its own unique story that gives Russia a special path in history.
Rather than look West, Slavophiles believed that Russians should look inward at their own folklore and tradition to determine how to best rule Russia.
The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 5 At the time of the nineteenth century and Westernizer versus Slavophile debate, there were other additional actors at work.
For example, Mikhail Katkov was a conservative conspiracy theorist who focused on the Western plot , which is a theory that the West continually tried to undermine and usurp Russia as a world power.
Thus, Russia’s anti-Western sentiment has been present for centuries, and has been an integral part in determining Russian identity.
It is significant to note that this anti-West plot has been ingrained in Russian identity to such an extent that part of Russian culture now entails being suspicious of the West.
Looking to Imperial Russia for the origins of the anti-Western sentiment is important because it identifies two different versions of Russia.
During Soviet times, the outcomes from Imperial Russia continued and were built upon by the Bolsheviks and the Cold War.
In order to be superior, the Bolsheviks needed an inferior, different system to demonize.
Also, during the Cold War, the Central Intelligence Agency was a chief antagonist in Soviet propaganda and this opposition helped to create a general atmosphere of skepticism and paranoia during The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 6 Soviet times.
The Cold War was a conflict between the Eastern and Western bloc, and the tensions between the differing ideologies in the blocs were never fully resolved.
That feeling is shared among many Russians, and is a bitter sentiment that permeates Russian culture today.
Russia’s relationship with Ukraine Russia’s relationship with Ukraine is dense and complex.
To understand it for the purpose of this thesis, a timeline of Ukraine’s history will be discussed in its relation to Russia.
Ukraine and Russia’s history both began in the 9th century with the founding of Kievan Rus’ by the Varangians.
Kyiv began as Kievan Rus’ first capital, which is now the capital of Ukraine.
This is significant to note because both Ukrainian and Russian cultures share the same founding place and history.
In the 10th century Prince Vladimir accepted Orthodox Christianity into Kievan Rus’, adopting it from Byzantium.
Throughout Ukraine’s history it has been ruled by other states not including Russia.
For two hundred and fifty years, part of Ukraine at the time named Kievan Rus’, was under control by the Mongols in the Golden Horde.
Two other parts were under control by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Poland.
During the twelfth through seventeenth centuries, different parts of Ukraine were occupied and conquered by numerous states including Poland.
In 1783, the Russian Empire gained southern Ukraine via the annexation of the Crimean Khanate.
Given these shifts in power, Ukrainian intellectuals pursuing nationalist goals had to advocate for their own language and cultures even though they did not yet have independence.
For centuries, Ukrainian history was a part of Russian history, but Ukrainian nationalists began to ponder the idea of Ukrainian history as its own, separate story.
Importantly, it is at this time, scholar Vera Tolz argues, that the historical paths of Russia and Ukraine diverged.
In the Westernizer versus Slavophile debate mentioned previously, Ukrainian intellectuals felt underrepresented.
Ukrainian intellectuals felt simultaneously ignored and oppressed by Russian leadership.
The creation of the Soviet Union also increased conflict between Russia and Ukraine.
By this time, Russians saw Ukrainian history as intertwined with Russian history, and the independence of Ukraine from Russia would not only shrink Russia’s size, but impact Russia’s sense of itself.
There were many other events during Soviet times that have since left Ukrainians with historical trauma due to actions by the Soviet government.
One such example is the Holodomor, a man-made famine that took place in Ukraine in 1932.
This famine came as a result of Stalin’s collectivization policies, and killed millions of Ukrainians.
Another shocking event was the deportation of 200,000 Crimean Tatars from their indigenous land of Crimea, Ukraine, due to false allegations of Nazi collaboration.
These events left Ukrainians scarred and fearful of brutal government regimes, and deepened their desire to declare independence, which they did from 1918-1922 and in 1991.
In other words, when Ukraine seems to be drifting toward Western institutions and ideals, this is seen as a direct threat to Russian culture and identity.
To conclude, although Russian and Ukrainian interpretations of history began to diverge in the 1840s, Russians still view Ukrainian history and culture as integral to Russian national The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 9 identity.
Russia’s relationship to Crimea and the 2014 annexation of Crimean Peninsula This portion of the background serves to outline Crimea’s history and its relationship to Russia, as well as what happened in Ukraine during the 2014 annexation and the immediate implications of this event.
Starting in the mid-1700s, the Crimean Khanate felt Russian aggression as Russia was attempting to access the ‘warm seas’, including the Black and Mediterranean Seas.
Russia having access to naval ports in the Black Sea has been critical to their security, trade and transportation networks for centuries.
Crimean history became even more complex in 1954 when Nikita Khrushchev decided to ‘give’ the peninsula to Ukraine.
In other words, Krushchev believed that the Soviet Union would exist indefinitely, and thus viewed Crimea being a part of Ukraine as trivial, since it was still part of the Soviet Union.
Additionally, Khrushchev was attempting to reorient the centralized system of the Soviet Union and move on from the collective trauma of the Holodomor.
Given that Russia has strong historical and political ties to both Ukraine and Crimea itself, it is not surprising that Russia has a long standing interest in Crimea.
The Crimean peninsula had been part of Russia for centuries, and after the forced removal of the indigenous population, the peninsula is now home to majority ethnic Russians.
That is not to say that the Russian government had the right to invade the sovereign nation of Ukraine, but it is helpful to understand the connection between the peninsula and Russia, and how that history played into the 2014 annexation of Crimea.
In 2014, Ukrainian citizens went to Maidan, the central square in Kyiv, to protest widespread government corruption and to remove Russian backed President Viktor Yanukovych The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 11 from power.
This protest succeeded, President Yanukovych was removed from power and Ukraine replaced him with an interim government.
Following this revolution, Russian separatists took control of different Crimean government buildings on the Crimean peninsula of Ukraine and declared independence from the government in Kyiv.
Later, the Russian government formally annexed Crimea in March of 2014.
This annexation came quickly and abruptly, entering the world stage once Russian soldiers were already occupying the peninsula.
This is a serious accusation, and is a narrative that became pervasive in state-sponsored Russian media at the time of the 2014 annexation.
Russian elites said that Ukraine had become a ‘puppet state’ of the West, and that Russia’s actions in the Crimean peninsula was a defensive operation to prevent escalation of the war against Russia itself.
Thus, during the time surrounding both the Maidan revolution and the 2014 annexation of Crimea, the Russian government viewed the ousting of Yanukovych and replacement with a pro-Western government as an attack to Russian security.
As this is an up and coming field, each of these scholars have, and are continuing to add crucial new research to the discourse.
The literature being reviewed provides a foundation for understanding conspiracy theories, their importance, their salience in the post-communist world, how they are developed, why they are developed and how they are being used by the Russian government.
Conspiracy theories are not a fringe topic, but rather a tool that governments can use to manipulate their population, assert power and create narratives that promote their own ideology above all else.
This literature review focuses on conspiracy theories within the post-Soviet space.
Thus, this study does not include literature on conspiracy as a broad concept, or studies pertaining to conspiracy in other regions of the world.
Although these ideas are mentioned in the literature, they are not the focus.
Additionally, pre-Soviet times are not within the scope of this review.
Discourse exists on that part of history and the importance of conspiracy theories, but are not relevant to the review.
This will be followed by different themes found in the discourse in order to orient the reader to the discourse in regards to the post-coomunist space.
The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 13 Several scholars use Mark Fenster’s definition for a conspiracy theory.
Mark Fenster argues that conspiracy theories are a populist theory of power because they unite their audience as ‘the people’ against an imagined other that acts as a secretive power bloc.
Scott Radnitz provides a useful guide for identifying conspiracy theories that relate to Fenster’s definition.
To be a conspiracy, the idea must have a small number of actors that were or are acting secretly with a malicious goal, there must be a conflict with a plausible explanation and must lack credible evidence.
Importantly, nearly every scholar in this discourse makes it clear that conspiracy and conspiracy narratives are not phenomena unique to Russia.
The United States and Middle East have had their own rise in conspiracy theories in recent years, and no country is immune to the creation of alternative histories for political gain.
However, Eliot Borenstein points out that the proliferation of conspiracy theories after the recent collapse of the USSR is what makes them important to study.
Thus, Borenstein argues that this historical time makes ‘fertile ground’ for the rise and use of conspiracy theories in the post-Soviet space.
It is a consensus among scholars that the study of conspiracy theories is not a marginal topic.
Ilya Yablokov argues that Russian political authorities have transformed conspiracy theories into official political discourse, and this argument is backed by Marlene Laruelle, who argues that conspiracy theories and the rewriting of history is a main instrument for spreading nationalist theories in Russia.
Similarly, Scott Radnitz claims that conspiracy theories are meant to leave people confused and paranoid and may function as a weapon in places where few people The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 14 are trusted in society.
Stefanie Ortmann and John Heathershaw claim that conspiracy theories shed light on mainstream culture, social and political change within the Eurasian sphere.
Regardless of the specific argument different scholars pose, they each contribute to an understanding of how conspiracy theories are being used by the Russian elite and government to assert power and dominance in the Eurasian.
Through their work, scholars demonstrate that studying topics where conspiratorial discourse is present is an important aspect of understanding Russian disinformation.
Hence, studying specific sources relevant to the 2014 annexation of Crimea will contribute to the discussion of conspiracy theories and their importance in Russian policy.
Now that there is an understanding of the underlying concepts of the discourse, themes in the literature may be explored.
The specific wording of ‘fertile’ is an interesting word that is repeatedly mentioned in the discourse.
It is referenced when writing about how the post-Soviet space is a ‘fertile environment’ for the proliferation of conspiracy theories.
Ortmann and Heathershaw claim that conspiracy theories find ‘fertile ground’ where history is being rewritten and where there have been sharp reversals, such as the fall of the USSR, therefore shifting Russia’s role in the post-Cold War environment.
Another theme that arises throughout the discourse of conspiracy theories in the Eurasian space is the idea of parallel, or alternative histories.
A Nationalist Equation for Success?” , and is also discussed by other scholars.
Parallel and alternate histories suggest that elites in power use conspiracy theories to discuss why Russia has been denied its greatness by outside actors, such as the United States or the Catholic church, for many years.
In these histories, Russia is an empire by destiny, and is the victim of a global conspiracy.
The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 15 In this framework, Ukraine only exists as a piece of Russian history and it has no unique history outside of the Russo-centric framework.
In regards to parallel histories, scholars such as Laruelle and Borenstein point to Fomenko’s New Chronology.
Fomenko is a Russian mathematician who claims to have statistically proven that the current timeline of mankind is incorrect.
Instead, mankind’s time on Earth has been shorter than previously thought, and Russia is at the center of world history.
Although this piece has not entered academia and is not taken seriously, there are some institutions in Russia that use and study these works.
Along these lines, PB Craik writes how alternative perspectives are a feature of postmodernism in Russia today.
Elites promote insecurity among their populations by undermining trust between them and the information they receive, therefore creating space to conjure up alternative histories.
These alternate histories make their audience, the Russian people, question what is true or false, which creates an atmosphere of skepticism and uncertainty.
In sum, there are different plots or stories that underlie Russian history.
These plots structure discrete events into sets of trends and motifs that all suggest there is a guiding hand directing the narrative.
These plots put Russia at the center of world history, and whenever things get bad, elites can claim that it is because ‘others’ are plotting against them.
Examples of these plots that Laruelle mentions are the Christian plot against Russia, and the world plot against Russia.
This thesis will look in depth at a few key sources involved in the 2014 annexation, and this close analysis will allow for the tracking of these plots and narratives, and how they were used for justifying the annexation.
An additional theme with conspiracy theories is the idea of information overload, and different scholars address this from different angles.
Ilya Yablokov looks at Russia Today , a The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 16 government-controlled media outlet in Russia, and argues that Russia Today’s goal is to counteract the information monopoly of the West by overloading their audience with their own information.
PB Craik also looks at this phenomenon in relation to postmodernism, and how the Russian government uses information warfare to establish Russia as a global superpower alongside the United States.
Given that information overload is a common thing in conspiratorial discourse, it will be useful to look at specific sources related to the 2014 Crimean annexation to understand how exactly this information overload is portrayed to their audiences.
This thesis will study how this information is used to muddy the political environment, making it difficult to differentiate between what is true or false.
In sum, the study of conspiratorial discourse is a relatively new discourse, meaning that there is adequate knowledge on the subject, but there still needs to be research to better determine their salience in foreign policy, especially in the post-Soviet space.
Conspiracy theories work well in the post-communist space given the recent collapse of the USSR, and play on people's distrust of outside groups and forces in their society.
This being said, one large gap in the existing knowledge is a study of conspiracy theories in areas that are not democratic.
In general, scholars concur that there is a lack of academic and systematic research on the issue.
Many journalists, newspapers and other media outlets have written pieces about conspiracy theories in the Eurasian space, but not much research has been done in the academic field on the importance of conspiracy theories in the political realm.
Therefore, in order to better understand how conspiratorial discourse works in non-democratic countries, this thesis will focus specifically on the anti-West conspiracy theory, using the 2014 annexation of Crimea as a case study to examine the power of this theory.
In addition, this thesis will have a narrower focus on four specific primary sources.
Other scholars The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 17 who have studied conspiratorial discourse in the Eurasian space tend to look at large amounts of data and sources, such as Scott Radnitz and his database.
In contrast, this thesis will look at fewer sources with an emphasis on studying specific terminology and rhetoric that relates to conspiratorial thinking.
This will allow for the study on how different plots and alternative histories are used, and how the Russian government used the anti-West conspiracy theory in discourse relating to the 2014 annexation.
The case study of the annexation of Crimea in 2014 will provide specific evidence as to how and why the Russian government uses the anti-West conspiracy theory in their political discourse and media to control and manipulate their population.
As stated earlier, a conspiracy theory is an idea where a small number of actors behave with malicious intent, causing problems on both small and large scales.
In this theory, there must be a conflict with a plausible explanation, and any credible evidence must not be available at the time of the theory.
Thus, conspiracy theories function as a way of offering simple explanations for complex issues , since leaders have the power to dictate what they do and do not tell their audience about events and their relationship to certain conspiracy theories.
Conspiracy theories allow those in power to manipulate evidence and create a useful dynamic between leaders and their perceived enemies.
By using conspiracy theories, leaders are able to create enemies, and they use these enemies as scapegoats (Radnitz, 2021, The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 18 15) and as justification for their own retaliatory actions.
Furthermore, conspiracy theories allow leaders to demonstrate their power by providing their audience with oversimplified explanations of political events.
When an event like the annexation of Crimea occurs, Russians look to their government for an explanation, and the use of the anti-West conspiracy theory allows for a simplified justification for the annexation.
Instead of having to justify their own actions, the Russian government can lean into the longstanding anti-West sentiment to somehow relate Western powers to the 2014 annexation.
In simple terms, conspiracy theories are a form of propaganda that aim to create inand out-groups of people within a society in order to instill fear about the out-group so that the in-group follows the orders of their leader.
Leaders take advantage of situations where citizens do not have all the information about a topic, and they use that lack of knowledge to create their own narratives to suit their own needs.
Conspiracy theories tend to become prominent in societies that undergo destabilizing events, for example the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Another characteristic of societies prone to conspiracy theories are those that undergo large amounts of competition.
For example, states that are used to foreign countries interfering in their actions have lots of complicated events to draw from when creating conspiracy theories.
For the purpose of this thesis, the type of conspiracy theory that will be studied is sustained official conspiracism, as this is the type of conspiracy that the Russian government relies on.
This type of conspiracy imposes an overarching conspiracy narrative over an extended The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 19 period of time , one example being the anti-West conspiracy theory, which is the focal point of this thesis.
In addition, the creation of the USSR was violent and based on the fear of perceived internal and external enemies.
This fear of an ‘other’ group has persisted throughout Russia’s history, with the West becoming an enemy that is both an internal and external threat to Russia.
During the Cold War, fear of a capitalist takeover of Russia in connection with the arms race villainized the West, making it easier for later leaders to use this fear as a reason to believe the anti-West conspiracy theory.
Additionally, the collapse of the Soviet Union was quick and chaotic, leaving millions of citizens confused about their identities and role in the Eurasian space.
In this atmosphere, conspiracy theories give citizens an enemy, the West, to blame for the collapse of the Soviet Union.
The loss of the Soviet ‘empire’ left many feeling powerless, and Putin has been able to capitalize on this feeling by blaming the West for Russia’s current issues, and claiming that he is powerful enough to protect Russia from the power hungry West.
Conspiracy theories have continued to gain prominence in Russia in recent years for a number of reasons.
Some scholars believe that Russia has attempted to Westernize over the course of its history, but has been rejected by Western powers, which is why the Russian government now has such a heavy anti-Western sentiment.
Annexation of Crimea, 2014 In order to study the relevance of conspiracy theories in Russian policy, this thesis will conduct a case study focused on the illegal 2014 annexation of Crimea by Russia.
This event demonstrated that the Russian government will attack sovereign nations if it thinks it will benefit them in the long run.
Given Russia’s long standing relationship with Ukraine, Ukraine’s recent leanings towards the West and Russia’s tenuous relationship with the West, the Crimean annexation makes for an interesting case study.
Overview of the study For the study of the illegal annexation of Crimea in 2014, I will begin by collecting an array of sources that originated from the Russian government or Russian backed media sites throughout the year of 2014.
To do this, I will look at sites like Kremlin.ru, documents put out by Russian state officials as well as state-owned media companies such as Rossiya 1.
Next, I will condense the amount of sources I study by only choosing to analyze sources that specifically pertain to the involvement of the anti-West conspiracy theory and the annexation.
Once I have a list of sources that meet that criteria, I will analyze these sources from two lenses.
First, I will look at the specific words and phrases used within the sources, and determine how rhetoric can be used to facilitate the justification of the annexation via the anti-West conspiracy theory.
At the same time, I will look at how phrases and ideas work together in the different sources to create plots and alternative histories where Putin is able to construct his own version of reality in order to explain the illegal annexation of Crimea.
By approaching the The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 21 sources in two ways, I aim to demonstrate not only the importance of specific words used in Russian disinformation techniques, but how those words play into larger anti-Western plots that allow Putin to legitimize his illegal actions by villainizing the West.
After my findings have been relayed, I will end the thesis with a conclusion on why this case study matters, and how it is applicable to broader issues, not only the annexation of Crimea.
The Kremlin used certain, repeated buzzwords in their political discourse to both directly and indirectly allude to the conspiracy that the West is scheming against Russia.
In other words, the Kremlin used the anti-West conspiracy theory to deflect attention from the Russian government onto the United States.
When leaders use conspiracy theories like anti-Western conspiracy theories, they use them to create an enemy in order to maintain their own power.
Thus, Putin used the United States as the eternal enemy of Russia, and by drawing attention to this idea, he shifted blame from his own aggressive actions onto the United States.
In conspiratorial discourse, it is common for actors to use conspiracy theories to prove that their opinion is correct, and some other opponent is wrong.
This The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 22 thesis argues that Putin used the United States as an alternative actor to remove Russian aggression from the spotlight and highlight the wrongdoings of the United States.
The Kremlin used conspiracy theories to promote a negative narrative of the United States that therefore justified Russian aggression in Crimea.
Drawing upon Scott Radnitz, this hypothesis follows the thinking that the Russian government uses sustained official conspiratism in their policy actions.
By relying on this type of conspiracism, Putin continues the plot that the United States is out to conquer the Eastern world, and to corrupt all Russians.
Terms that are commonly used alongside conspiracy theories are plots, alternative histories and narratives.
By using the anti-West plot that developed in Russia centuries ago, the Kremlin is able to depict the United States as a seemingly legitimate enemy to Russia.
Going off of this narrative allows the Kremlin to act as the protector to the Eastern world from the threat of the United States.
Textual Analysis of Two Sources Directly Pertaining to President Vladimir Putin.
This chapter will be a close analysis of certain terms, context and general phrasing of two primary sources involving the 2014 annexation of Crimea.
These sources are an interview with Putin from March, 2014 about the Ukraine situation, followed by Vladimir Putin’s address about the annexation on March 18,2014.
We will examine the parts in which there is a mention of the anti-Western sentiment.
Vladimir Putin answered journalists questions on the situation in Ukraine, March 14, 2014 2.
Putin’s March 18 address was a widely circulated address and contains numerous references to the anti-West conspiracy theory, and touches on major themes that Putin talks about in other meetings and interviews.
When the Kremlin publishes dialogues in English that include the anti-West conspiracy theory, it signals that it wants that conspiracy theory promoted and circulated beyond Eurasian borders.
On March 4, 2014, Russian President Vladimir Putin met with Russian media representatives2 to answer their questions regarding the Crimean annexation.
At this time, Russian military troops had entered Crimea, but Crimea had not been formally annexed into the Russian Federation.
The majority of the journalists' questions toward Vladimir Putin were about Russia and Ukraine, with no mention of the West.
However, there were six questions that mentioned the West or the United States, and those questions and their answers will be analyzed.
It should be noted that all the questions posed to Putin were asked in a way that would allow him to paint the Russian government in a positive light, and allowed him to villainize anyone who disagreed with actions or intentions.
Only a photo of Putin meeting with a small group of representatives was provided.
Question One: The first question posed to Putin was whether he expected such a harsh reaction to Russia’s actions from Western partners following Russian actions in Ukraine.
By this time, March 4, 2014, the Maidan Revolution had already occurred, President Yanukovych had fled and Russia’s parliament had authorized Vladimir Putin’s request to use force in Ukraine to protect Russian interests.
In Putin’s response to this question, he provided the journalist with a brief summary of how conversations go with his Western colleagues.
Putin said that Russia’s actions are often characterized as illegitimate, but when he asked the West if they think that their actions are legitimate, they said yes.
This is an exaggeration, but Putin used this statement to then provide examples of United State’s actions in Afghanistan, Libya and Iraq where it acted illegitimately and caused unneeded discord.
As is the case with conspiracy theories, leaders take advantage of the things that their populace does not know about, and give irrelevant information to justify themselves.
For example, the average Russian most likely does not have an in-depth understanding of past United States’ actions in Afghanistan, and whether they were legitimate or not.
Rather, by Putin giving a sweeping statement that Russia is often criticized for their actions, but the West does as it pleases, Putin was then able to give three seemingly relevant examples to support his claim, even if they are not valid examples or an accurate claim.
This feeds into the anti-West sentiment that has been an underlying piece of Russian culture for centuries.
Moreover, within Putin’s response to this same question, he claimed that the United States creates their own rules in the international environment, and then uses the principle, “You’re either with us or against us,” in order to draw the world into the The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 25 United States’ own interests.
Additionally, any states that do not adhere to these self made rules will get “beaten” until they do.
By following this line of thinking, Putin designed the narrative that in a world run by American ideals and agendas, of course Russian actions in Ukraine would be deemed as illegitimate, because it went against the American plot to overthrow Russian power in Eurasia.
Additionally, the use of the word “beat” when referring to how the United States will beat countries into submission, added to the portrayal of the United States as power hungry and violent actor, rather than the United States as protectors of democracy and freedom.
This is inaccurate, but in a country so highly regulated by censorship, Putin was able to successfully create alternative histories that categorize the United States as a criminal entity set on disrupting the order that the Russian government keeps in Eurasia.
In contrast, Putin’s Russia serves as the protector of Eurasia against the Western plot to overthrow their freedoms.
The second question regarding the West is when the journalist asked Putin how he would assess the reaction from the West in regards to Ukraine, and if Western countries would pull out of the G8 and place sanctions on Russia.
Putin began with a threat-like statement, saying that countries that put sanctions on Russia would need to consider the consequences, as we live in a globalized world where everything is interconnected.
By adding the additional phrase about living in an interconnected world, Putin downplayed his threat about the consequences, because he made it seem like the result of the sanctions would hurt the West due to the whole world being The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 26 globalized, not due to intentional Russian retaliation.
Nonetheless, the use of the word “consequences” in his response was still intimidating, which was likely Putin’s goal.
In the second portion of Putin’s answer to this question, he claimed that Russia’s main motivation was to act in accordance with international law and to provide those who want their freedoms, the power and resources to do so.
This would later become one of his justifications for the annexation of Crimea because he claimed that Russia must help Crimeans find their voice and seek independence from Ukraine if they felt the desire to do so.
Russia is motivated by advocating for the freedom of Crimeans, whereas Putin claimed that the West is motivated by supporting unconstitutional actions abroad that benefit Western powers.
In his line of reasoning, Putin claimed that throughout the crisis in Ukraine, Russia had tried to be cooperative and respectful of Ukraine’s autonomy, even as Western states have villainized Russian actions throughout the Ukrainian revolution.
The contrasting adjectives of “reasonable” versus “counterproductive” and “harmful” added to the narrative that Western countries aimed to cause conflict in the Eurasian world, meanwhile Russian actions aimed to promote freedom of will.
By using phrases such as the one mentioned, Putin created a narrative wherein Russia was being unfairly targeted by Western powers who seek to create conflict, even when conflict is not necessary.
To drive this point home, Putin finished his response to this question by stating that Russia would be ready to host the G8 summit, even if the other members did not want to join.
By ending the question in this manner, Putin solidified his plot that Russia was acting legally and legitimately in the international environment, whereas his Western colleagues preferred to create conflict for ‘petty’ reasons, such as annexation of Crimea.
The journalist then turned attention away from the West for several questions before circling back with their third question involving the West.
In this question, the journalist asked if Putin wanted to pull the Russian ambassador out of the United States following the harsh statement made by the United States Secretary of State.
Putin responded by saying that he did not want to pull the Ambassador because he still wanted to facilitate cooperation between Russia and the United States.
By making this claim, he inadvertently asserted that if cooperation between Russia and the United States were to halt, it would be due to American actions, not Russia.
The fourth question involving the West involved the Paralympics that were to begin in Sochi in a few days.
The journalist asked Putin if these games ran the risk of being disrupted in terms of international media coverage.
Putin responded by saying how cynical it would be if these games were to be disrupted, given that the Paralympics are a time for people with disabilities to show their capabilities and prove themselves to the world.
This response is full of irony, one The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 28 reason being that Russia is not a country that caters to people with disabilities.
This is not to say that all Western countries have better accessibility features than Russia, but given that Putin’s response to the journalist was about the unlimited potential of those with disabilities, it is ironic that in reality, Russian people with disabilities have very limited access to everyday items like basic transportation.
Putin feigned empathy for those with disabilities performing in the Paralympics to continue the narrative that Russia is a role model for other countries.
If any Western country were to interfere with Russia’s push toward better representation of those with disabilities, then that Western country would be characterized as an ableist country.
Answering this question is smart of Putin, because he redirected the focus from the illegal annexation of Crimea to the Paralympics, an entirely different event.
By doing this, he created an alternative version of history where the Paralympics are more important than defending Ukraine over the illegal occupation and annexation of Ukraine.
The annexation was condemned by the international community, but Putin used the Paralympics, another world event, to his advantage to attempt and shift focus from Russia’s illegal actions to something positive occurring in Russia.
Again, Putin’s response to this question perpetuated the anti-Western plot that Russia is trying to be the hero in the international community whilst Western countries like the United States attempt to usurp Russian power for their own gain, even if it meant disrupting the Paralympics.
This question relates to the anti-West conspiracy theory in that Putin wanted his audience to believe that the West is always able to sink to new lows, including disrupting the Paralympics in Sochi.
Again, this develops the theory that the West is an eternal enemy of Russia, and would hurt innocent people if it meant hurting the Russian government as well.
The characterization of “brief” is illogical, as this question was not simple.
The beginning of Putin’s response said that this coup was well-prepared, and that “Western instructors tried hard,” to make the coup efficient.
As is the case with conspiracy theories, there is a kernel of truth in this statement.
It is true that Western countries and institutions like NATO wanted to see Ukraine shift more towards a democratic nation independent of Russia.
Western countries and diplomats worked to try and help Ukraine foster more democratic values, and this is also what many Ukrainians wanted.
However, it is inaccurate to say that the West initiated the protests and the resulting Maidan Revolution.
The Ukrainians saw their president submitting to Russia when they had wanted a future in which Ukraine would be independent from Russia’s grasp.
When they saw that history was guiding them again into Russia’s hands, they protested, demanding that their voices be heard and respected.
For Putin’s purposes, however, it was more beneficial to say that the West was behind the coup, and thus were the puppet masters behind any conflict that opposed Russian power.
In this same response, Putin also discussed the different standards of living between Russia and Ukraine, and how Ukrainians have lower living standards than Russians.
He ended his response by saying that a change of power was probably necessary in Ukraine, but it should have been done through legitimate means.
Once again, Putin is well versed in making it seem like the Russian perspective is the rational perspective, whereas the Ukrainian and Western perspectives are motivated by conflict.
By claiming that he thought a change in power was necessary in Ukraine, he acknowledged the tensions and issues that had been occurring in The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 30 Ukraine, without talking about what those issues were.
In truth, the issues in Ukraine stemmed from constant oppression and bullying from the Russian government, and a change in leadership to a positive leader would most likely only come out of a Revolution, like the Maidan Revolution.
By not acknowledging the truth, Putin painted Russia as a protective body attempting to improve Ukraine, but being met with chaos from the Maidan.
The entire interview was created in a way where Putin painted his actions in a valiant light whilst pushing the plot that the West is an immoral civilization.
By touching on numerous topics, from the Paralympics to the G8 summit, Putin avoided the need to explicitly talk about the illegality of the Crimean annexation and general Russian interference in Ukraine.
Using the anti-West conspiracy theory allowed Putin to play on already existing negative stereotypes about the Western world, and used this to create his own alternative history, with himself as the protagonist.
This 15:50 minute 2014 address by President Vladimir Putin was aimed at State Duma deputies, Federal Council Members, heads of Russian regions and civil society representatives in the Kremlin.
The Crimean peninsula was annexed between February 20, 2014 and March 26, 2014, so this address took place near the end of the event.
For the purpose of this analysis, this 2014 address was divided by topic into seven different sections, five of which pertained to the anti-Western sentiment and were therefore included in this analysis.
The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 31 1.
Discussion on international law with the 2009 Kosovo incident as an example 3.
The Ukraine situation as an example of the world run by the militaristic United States and Western institutions such as NATO and the UN 4.
Wants cooperation between Russia and Ukraine that fit Russia’s interests 7.
Discussion on international law with the 2009 Kosovo incident as an example The aim of this address was to justify the referendum held on March 16, 2014 that formally annexed the Crimean peninsula into the Russian Federation.
In this section, Putin claimed that Russia attempted to help Crimea express their free will by choosing to rejoin Russia, and it was the West that inappropriately interjected themselves into the situation.
The use of the word “good thing” is an example of sarcastic rhetoric, as is true of the claim that it is “better late than never” that Western countries decided to follow international law standards in the case of Crimean annexation.
By using sarcasm, Putin attempted to trivialize the concern of the Western The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 32 world about the annexation of Crimea to give the impression that they were overreacting, and that the West only adhered to international law when it involved their adversaries.
He also did this to portray Russia as a victim of international law and Western power.
Moving forward through the address Putin talked about the stance that the United States took on the Kosovo incident in 2009.
This portion of the address will be analyzed in depth in this section of the thesis.
This acknowledgement came nine years after NATO’s intervention in Kosovo to prevent more attacks on the local Kosovar Albanian population.
The history between Kosovo and Serbia is long and complex, but in short, before Slobodan Milosevic came into power in 1987, Kosovo had a fair amount of autonomy, despite not being an independent state.
When Milosevic came into power, he moved quickly to suppress the autonomy of Kosovo, and sent in troops to disband their government.
In the early 1990s, the world witnessed in Bosnia what could happen when international institutions do not step in to improve the situation.
In Putin’s address, however, he did not mention any context as to why the United States supported Kosovo, and how if the West had not stepped in, another atrocitry such as the genocide The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 33 in Bosnia in the 1990s could have occured.
Rather, in this section, Putin said that Crimean authorities referred to the Kosovo incident as a precedent for their own legitimate separation from Ukraine.
The UN International Court’s ruling on the incident was “crystal clear” to the Western world, according to Putin.
First, Putin’s use of the word “precedent” as justification for Crimean authorities comparing their situation to the Kosovo incident is interesting because it is in common law that precedents are used as legal justification, and Russia follows civil law practices.
Whether or not this word was intentionally used by Putin because he knows Americans follow common law is unclear.
However, given Putin’s anti-West stance throughout the whole address, it would not be a stretch to infer that his use of the word “precedent” was intentional.
If it was intentional, Putin may have used the word to demonstrate how the United States’ and Western institutions create precedents for their allies to follow, but when it comes to Russia, it is not able to follow those same precedents.
Also regarding the Kosovo incident, Putin said that, “I do not like to resort to quotes, but in this case, I cannot help it,” when referring to that in 2009, the United States submitted a statement to the United Nations telling that sometimes declarations of independence such as that from Kosovo violate domestic law, but not international law.
When Putin said that he“doesn’t like to resort to quotes,” he feigned guilt in his address, as if he really did not want to point out the flaws of past United State’s actions.
This allowed him to come across as apologetic, and suggested that he had no choice but to mention past American actions in foreign countries like Kosovo.
It is as if he exposed an American secret with the word “resorting,” like he had exhausted all options of cooperating with the United States, and was forced to “resort” to exposing the written statement from the United States about Kosovo, even though the statement was never a secret.
By phrasing his words this way, he created a narrative that the United States hid their past foreign policy statements and then judged Crimeans and Russians in ways it does not judge other states.
Conveniently, while accusing the United States of treating Russia differently than other states like Kosovo, Putin failed to mention the difference in the ethnic makeups and historical histories of Kosovo and Crimea.
In the situation on the Crimean peninsula, over 200,000 ethinic Crimean Tatars were deported by Stalin in 1944,3 and many Ukrainians fled Crimea once they sensed aggression from Russia.
Putin did not touch on these questions because they would invalidate his argument that the United States is out to oppress Russians, wherever they may be.
When talking about the Kosovo incident in his address, Putin knew that many Russians lack the education to fully understand American statements about Kosovo.
By extracting one statement from the UN international court without context, Putin used it as evidence for American hypocrisy on the annexation.
Crimean Tatars The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 35 Serbia did in fact occur in 2009, and the United States did indeed make a statement supporting this separation.
However, to condense the whole event down to claiming that the United States supported Kosovo Albanians but not Crimeans is an oversimplification.
As stated earlier, the ethnic composition and history of these regions could not be more different, yet Putin still made the comparison.
The demographics of the Crimean peninsula have shifted overtime and eventually became majority Russian, but those shifts in the demographics did not occur in the Kosovo region.
The United States’ and NATO intervened in Kosovo in order to prevent possible ethnic cleansing, but Putin shifted the narrative to make it seem like Kosovo in 1999 was similar to Crimea in 2014.
This is a common characteristic of conspiracy theories in that complex situations are able to be simplified and therefore used by specific leaders for their own political gain.
In this instance, the oversimplification and comparison of the Kosovo incident creates the narrative that the West wants to help certain communities, but not those who are aligned with Russia.
This rhetoric of “some” infers that the United States had a specific, unknown vendetta against Russia specifically.
The United States supported certain actions like their 2009 statement about Kosovo separating from Serbia, but when Russia is involved like with the Crimean annexation, the United States is difficult.
It created the The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 36 narrative that the West is not only a hypocrite, but also tends to over react.
Even though the American media is painting the annexation as some sort of aggression, Putin creates that narrative that is ridiculous.
He wanted to take away Western credibility by circulating a narrative that not only has Crimea always belonged to Russia, but that the West does not understand the annexation and are therefore calling it an aggressive act.
He also ended his questioning with “Again, one wonders why,” Crimeans are not allowed to call for freedom, but the Kosovo Albanians were.
By using rhetorical statements Putin made the audience question Western motives by allowing space for skepticism.
He asked the audience to question why the West is so upset about the Crimean annexation, when it supported the Kosovo Albanians and their calls for independence in 2009.
When he concluded by saying that there is no answer why the West is so enraged by the annexation, he allowed the audience to wonder why the United States acted in this way towards Russia, and again reiterated the narrative that the United States has a secret.
Putin meant that there is no longer stability in the international community, and that the United States intervening in the ‘legal’ annexation of Crimea demonstrated how the United States does not follow international law but rather acts in whatever way will benefit them the most.
By this he meant that the United States acts aggressively toward their adversaries, making situations tenuous for no reason.
Putin connected the collapse of the Soviet Union to the Kosovo incident, stating that without a competitor like the Soviet Union, the United States is now able to act however it pleases in foreign policy.
This accusation was smart, as Putin capitalized on the historical trauma that the dissolution of the USSR caused many people.
He then instilled fear by claiming the United States is not run by law, but by gun.
This statement is ironic because at the time he made this statement, Crimea had been littered with armed, Russian gunmen.
However, since Putin had previously mentioned the specific 2009 Kosovo incident as well as specific United Nation charter statements and the United State’s involvement, he then felt that he had the credibility to make sweeping statements.
This is a common trait of conspiracy theories as political leaders use one specific example to then make broad claims that need not be accurate, but can be connected to an event that happened in order to make their false claims about other events valid.
By using buzz words like “exceptionalism” that is a common American stereotype, Putin equated any American intervention as a symptom of their superiority.
This narrative worked well with the annexation of Crimea, because Putin used the narrative to accuse the United States of intervening in order to hurt Russia, not to help the Ukrainians.
In other words, by continuing this narrative, Putin was able to portray America not as a country looking to aid others, but rather to look for opportunities to weaken Russia.
Putin also believed in Russian exceptionalism and exclusivity, but in this scenario decides to paint America as a villain that is backing Russia into a corner.
He The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 38 says that past United States actions in Kosovo, the color revolutions, the Arab spring and the Ukrainian presidential elections in 2004 were all aimed at preventing Eurasian integration at the hands of the United States.
He said that Russians understand this is happening despite Russian attempts at cooperation.
Again, this created a sense of victimhood in the audience by demonstrating that the United States continually berates Russia, making Russia the victim.
These examples were all mentioned so that Putin could make the United States out to be the aggressor in the Crimean annexation.
That way, he has justification for invading because he must save the Crimeans from the United States who are now running freely around the world exercising their rule of gun.
Having an eternal enemy that can be used as rationale for leaders committing illegal or questionable acts is another characteristic of conspiracy theories, and was evident in Putin’s address.
In short, we have every reason to assume that the infamous policy of containment, led in the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, continues today.
They are constantly trying to sweep us into a corner because we have an independent position, because we maintain it and because we call things like they are and do not engage in hypocrisy.
And with Ukraine, our Western partners have crossed the line… (Kremlin, 2014, 9) First, the phrase “in short” made it seem that Putin made a summative statement to explain Western and United States’ actions, even though these actions are complicated and oftentimes can not be condensed down into one sentence.
Moreover, equating the United States’ condemnation of the annexation of Crimea to a policy of containment is ill founded.
During this The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 39 time Russia expanded into central Asia and the Caucasus region.
Where Putin claimed that the West had been containing Russia for centuries, it was actually preventing Russian expansion, and at times aligned with Russia in order to prevent other powers like France from expanding past their own borders.
Additionally, in this quote Putin leaned on the narrative that Russia has been taken advantage of for years by the competitive United States, and invading Crimea was Russia’s final straw with them.
This rewriting of how events unfolded directly relates to Marlene Laruelle’s concept of alternative histories, and how these new narratives are used to convince the populace that certain actions like the annexation of Crimea were not only valid, but necessary in order to maintain Russian security.
In an address centered on demonizing the United States, Putin still attempted to appeal to the American people.
If Americans could understand the fallacies of their government, maybe then they would understand the pleas for Crimean independence from Ukraine.
As was the case with the Kosovo example, the comparison of American freedom from Britain and the Crimea situation are not valid comparisons.
Putin took advantage of traditional American values of freedom and attempted to manipulate them to demonstrate the plot that American foreign policy is hypocritical.
This is interesting in that if there were a secret, elite group within the United States plotting against Russia, then average American citizens would have no idea about the existence The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 40 of this group.
Thus, Putin furthered the anti-West conspiracy theory by demonstrating that he was reaching out to American citizens who were ‘oblivious’ to actions being committed by an elite group within the United States against Russia.
In reality, Putin telling that Americans value freedom above all else connects more to the sovereignty of Ukraine than to Russia attempting to ‘help’ the Crimean people express their free will.
Putin’s illegal annexation of Crimea went against American pillars of freedom in every way, as it was an attack on the independent state of Ukraine.
By using two examples of past United States interventions in Kosovo and Yugoslavia, Putin demonstrated to his audience that the United States is the villain, and Putin is the savior.
He related United States actions to containment, since that is a phenomenon that many Russians alive today still remember.
Putin was able to create a narrative that the United States wants to specifically target Russia to limit its power.
According to Putin, this gave him no other option than to invade Crimea to protect the Eastern bloc from the United States.
This argument is somewhat illogical, as he goes from wanting what’s best for the Crimean people and the unique area of Crimea, to using the United States as a major reason for annexing Crimea.
This is a leap that Putin does not explain well, but he does not need to have a good explanation when he relies on the existing anti-Western sentiment in Russia.
Putin’s March 2014 address relied heavily on the anti-West conspiracy theory.
After making an illogical leap from Crimea being crucial to Russian history, to the United States as the aggressor in the 2014 annexation, he focused on demonizing the United States using historical narratives and plots.
He used the conspiracy theory that the United States has a secret intention The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 41 behind backing Ukraine, and the intention is to take Russia’s power for itself.
With this threat, Putin had no choice but to annex Crimea to protect Russia from the power-hungry United States.
Textual Analysis on Two Sources Originating from the Russian Government.
This chapter will follow the same structure as chapter one, but will look at two sources originating from the Russian government or the state-sponsored media outlet, Russia 1.
Crimea, The Way Home, is a 2015 Russian pseudo-documentary that premiered on the state run channel, Rossiya 1, and on YouTube, on March 15,2015.
It offers an alternative history of the 2014 events in Ukraine, including the Maidan Revolution and events leading up to the official annexation of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
This analysis will begin with the plot of the pseudo-documentary, followed by a discussion of important themes.
These themes will lead into a discussion of certain instances The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 42 where the anti-West conspiracy theory was present, and how the theory played a role in the pseudo-documentary overall.
The pseudo-documentary was a mix of interviews and overdramatized reenactments of contentious events within Ukraine in 2014, including the Maidan Revolution, the alleged Korsun Massacre and general violence directed towards the Crimean people.
One interview that underlined the whole film was between the main interviewer, Andrey Kondrashov,4 and President Vladimir Putin.
This main interview was complemented with Kondrashov traveling to different sites in Crimea and interviewing different citizens, all of whom were sympathetic to Russia’s version of history.
These interviews were developed by over-dramatic reenactments of events in order to provide visuals for the audience.
Thus, the pseudo-documentary began with Putin discussing how he was asked to save President Yanukovych’s life amidst Maidan protests.
Following this first scene was a reenactment of helicopters at night attempting to save the Ukrainian President from Ukrainian nationalists.
Throughout the film the Ukrainian ‘nationalists’ were characterized as violent criminals.
In reality, the majority of the ‘nationalists’ that the film talked about were patriots who wanted a Ukraine free from Russian corruption.
This Ukrainian patriotism did not fit the narrative that Russia wanted to create of Ukrainians, so they were instead made out to be criminal nationalists.
From this scene, the film laid the foundation for Putin’s main argument, that the violence during the Maidan Revolution forced him to begin work on returning Crimea back to Russia “...because we cannot abandon the land and people there.
Moving on from the violence of Maidan, Kondrashov traveled to what appeared to be an exploded bus, where he conducted his next interview.
The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 43 portion of the pseudo-documentary was dedicated to the Korsun Massacre, an event that is heavily disputed.
In this interview, the Korsun Massacre was recapped by Roman Yakovlev, a pro-Russian Crimean citizen.
He discussed how during the Maidan Revolution, he had been a part of a bus convoy from Crimea that had gone to Kyiv in order to protest the Revolution.
Upon returning to Crimea, their bus was stopped by Ukrainian ‘nationalists’ and ‘barbarians’, and they were forced to sing the Ukrainian national anthem.
Furthermore, they feared that they would be shot if the Russian flag were found in their bus.
However, there is very little evidence that this event occurred at all,5 and it has been generally concluded that the Korsun Massacre/Pogrom was created as a propaganda tool to create the fear that Crimeans were in danger from ‘nationalists’ as long as they were part of Ukraine.
The pseudo-documentary continued with interviewing pro-Russian citizens throughout Crimea, all who claimed to fear Ukrainian ‘nationalists’, and were grateful for the “polite, little green men,” that came to save them from the masked, violent, ‘barbaric’ Ukrainians.
About an hour and a half into the pseudo-documentary, the maritime situation regarding Crimea was discussed, and NATO was demonized as attempting to interfere with Russian interests.
The interviewer also met with Vitaly Punko, a Ukrainian citizen part of a pro-Russian biker gang.
Although he is Ukrainian, he felt that he was Russian at heart, despite American attempts to break the brotherly bond between the countries.
In sum, the pseudo-documentary focused on a few disputed events, followed by lengthy, repetitive interviews with citizens who looked fondly towards Russia, and told that their identity would be best protected by the Russian government.
Kyiv Post The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 44 Throughout the pseudo-documentary, several themes arose that alluded to the anti-West conspiracy theory.
When Putin claimed that he needed to help save the Ukrainian President, this was supported by the over dramatic scenes showing Ukrainian nationalists hitting passers by and creating unneeded violence.
When the interviewer interviewed Sergei Aksyonov, a Crimean military commander, he claimed that the Crimeans were scared of the Ukrainians, alluding that Crimea needed Russia to intervene and serve as the protector.
A second theme throughout the pseudo-documentary was that Russia was not an aggressive power, but rather a virtuous nation looking to make sure that everyone's voice is heard.
Throughout the pseudo-documentary, Putin repeated that it was not he who wanted to invade Crimea.
In the end, it was the Crimeans who pleaded for Putin to come in and help defend them from Ukraine and from the West.
By the end of the pseudo-documentary, the viewer has seen hours of dramatic, violent scenes in Ukraine, and listened to heartfelt interviews of Crimean families who felt that they would be better off as part of Russia.
By including pro-Russian Ukrainians and Crimeans, Putin was able to demonstrate that it was not only Russians who wanted intervention, but non-Russians as well.
Of course, the people interviewed in the pseudo-documentary are non verifiable, as there is no way to research if the people in the interview were Crimean, or truly pro-Russian.
Nonetheless, by incorporating many different interviews, the end result gives the illusion that Putin needed to intervene to help innocent people like those in the pseudo-documentary.
The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 45 The other two themes present in the pseudo-documentary are related to the anti-West conspiracy theory.
The film spent large amounts of time developing the narrative that the Ukrainian nationalists were targeting the Crimeans, and that Russia needed to step in to prevent conflict and bloodshed.
As this narrative developed, the pseudo-documentary hinted that it was not only the Ukrainian ‘nationalists’ who wanted this tension between Russia and Ukraine, but that there was an external actor, the West, present as well.
The film did this by developing the idea that many Ukrainians did not want conflict with Russia, but were forced into it.
This was demonstrated more so towards the end of the pseudo-documentary, when Putin told that his main goal was to prevent bloodshed, not to illegally occupy nations.
He said that by the time Crimea had been annexed into Russia, out of 20,000 Ukrainian troops in Crimea, only 2,500 ended up returning to Ukraine.
By giving this statistic, Putin hoped to demonstrate that once Ukrainians were shown the truth about Russia’s intentions, they would end up supporting Russia instead of Ukraine’s manic actions.
As has been mentioned throughout this thesis, the oversimplification of a statistic, one that would be hard to know if it's true from an outside perspective, is a common characteristic of authoritative leaders, as it allows them to use that oversimplification to explain their oppressive actions.
The answer that this pseudo-documentary gives is that the United States were the masterminds behind the Maidan Revolution as well as the conflict between Crimeans, Ukrainians and Russians.
In this phone call, Nuland and Pyatt spoke about what a new Ukrainian government should look like if and when President Yanukovych was removed from power.
The leaked phone call demonstrated that the United States was more involved in the Maidan than it publicly wanted to let on.
Thus, in Putin’s above statement, there is the kernel of truth that the United States was involved in pushing the Maidan Revolution into full effect.
However in Putin’s alternative history, he made it seem that the United States were not only involved in the revolution, but they also spearheaded it.
The idea that the United States were ‘puppeteers’ of the revolution directly related to conspiracy theories and the idea that within the United States there is a small, secret group of people pulling the strings of weaker nations.
NATO trains foreign troops, but this is not a secret, even though the film makes it seem like they are exposing hidden aspects of American policy.
Putin put his own spin on things by saying that the United States trained the ‘nationalists,’ who were deemed as ‘violent barbarians’ set on hurting anyone who was not pro-Maidan.
Throughout all of Putin’s diction, he refers to those who oppose Russian occupation as ‘nationalists’ or ‘barbarians’, when a better term for most of them would be Ukrainian patriots, advocating for Ukraine to become a democratic country.
In addition, by connecting the ‘barbarians’ and ‘nationalists’ to the The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 47 puppeteers of the United States, Putin created an alternative history where it was not really the Ukrainians behind the revolution or subsequent actions, but rather the elusive United States.
On the same thread of the United States being behind the Maidan Revolution and conflict in Crimea, there is also the theme of the West being unnecessarily militarily aggressive.
About an hour and a half into the pseudo-documentary, Putin spoke about the maritime situation surrounding Crimea, and how when Russia involved itself in Crimea, NATO and the United States became aggressive.
He told how NATO had announced naval exercises in Black sea, a US destroyer approached the Romanian Coast and how the USS Donald Cook, a cruise missile destroyer headed toward Crimea.
With no context, these actions by NATO and the United States could have been seen as measures intended to prevent war and conflict.
However, throughout the pseudo-documentary, any group that supported the Ukrainian revolution was seen as supporting violent criminals.
Thus, when NATO and the United States put ships near Crimea, the Russian narrative had been made to see these actions as aggressive towards Russia, not an act of defense and protection for Ukraine.
Thus, these actions furthered the stereotype that the United States follows the rule of gun mentality, and acts with military force, even when that is not necessary.
Additionally, when Putin claimed earlier in the pseudo-documentary that the United States was behind Ukrainian actions during the Maidan Revolution and events in Crimea, their later actions of deploying ships near Crimea could be seen as evidence for the anti-West conspiracy theory in Russia.
This pseudo-documentary has been viewed on YouTube over 13 million times as well as on Rossiya 1.
The comments are turned off, which leads one to believe that many people would have called out the many blatant lies in the film.
That being said, one can see the amount of time and effort that went into the film, demonstrating that the Russian government felt it necessary to The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 48 create the pseudo-documentary.
There are enough alternative history sources like Crimea, the Way Home, that circulate the Russian sphere that make it difficult to discern fact from lies.
Thus, although this film is saturated with falsities, in a country full of disinformation, it can be difficult to pick apart this film and see it for what it is, propaganda.
The focus of this conference was on security and instability in North Africa, the Middle East and South Asia, but there was still inclusion of the ‘Ukraine Situation’, the pro-Russian term for the Maidan and annexation of Crimea.
Given that Crimea had already been annexed at this time, one might have thought that security in Ukraine and Crimea would have been the topic of conversation among Ministers of Defense from different countries, Army Generals and other key actors.
However, this was not the case, and Ukraine was only mentioned at times when the West could be convicted of villainous actions towards Russia and the world as a whole.
Conveniently, no Western actors were present at this conference, and it consisted mostly of key actors from Russia, Belarus, Iran, India and China.
Only dialogues and sections regarding Ukraine, the West and the United States’ interactions with one another will be analyzed.
This conference had a focus on instability in the Middle East, so majority of this conference was about terrorism within the Arab world.
However, especially in the beginning of the conference, several actors provide in depth discussions on how the United States’ and Western institutions have harmed attempts for peace and security not only in the Middle East, but in Ukraine as well.
This analysis will be divided into subsections based on the actor who spoke about specific issues.
Shoygu, spoke The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 49 about the approach of the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation to global security and regional security.
Hence, his dialogue will have its own section and analysis in this study.
Shoygu The approach of the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation to global security and regional security In the plenary session, Army General Shoygu, the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation, was the first to speak and is the first actor after the introductory messages in the printed version of the conference.
General Shoygu touched on the “color revolutions” that had been occurring in the former USSR in recent years.
He said that this had happened in Central Asian countries as well as Georgia, and was now happening in Ukraine.
In his words “After the forcible removal from power of the incumbent president with the active involvement of external forces, the country hurtled towards civil war.
The term ‘external forces’ directly relates to the West, as it had already been established by Russian media that the West had an influential hand behind the ‘unneeded’ Maidan Revolution in Kyiv earlier that year.
By telling that this forced removal was leading Ukraine to a civil war, General Shoygu put blame on the external forces that caused the revolution, the West.
By claiming that tension had been ‘artificially created’ in Europe, General Shoygu played into the narrative that not only was the Maidan Revolution not needed, but it was intentionally created by external forces to hurt peace and global security.
Lavrov, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, was the next to speak.
He said that instead of Europe attempting to create peace in the world, they were focused on creating conflict within itself, in Ukraine.
The phrases ‘not a coincidence’ and ‘predictable’ are conspiratorial language, as Lavrov insinuated that the crisis in Ukraine was directly driven by Europe’s desire to focus on itself rather than attempt to build peace in foreign regions.
By framing his discussion in this manner, Lavrov artfully created the narrative that the Ukraine crisis was intentional, building on General Shoygu’s argument that the Maidan Revolution was fueled by external forces.
Thus, the plot that the West intentionally created the Revolution in order to keep power and resources within Europe had already begun within the conference.
At a conference where most actors came from regions outside of Europe, this plot made the West out to be selfish to the point of causing unneeded conflict, just so that the West could refrain from devoting resources to regions in the Middle East, South Asia and North Africa.
This plot set the stage for the Russian government to characterize itself as the nation that would promote international cooperation, as opposed to the West.
Including the word Nazi in anti-Ukrainian rhetoric is not a new phenomenon.
Despite this, calling Ukrainians Nazis is a popular trope that is a surefire way to gain Russian people’s attention.
There is an annual demonstration called the Immortal Regiment where family members carry portraits of family members that died lost in World War Two.
The government has since co-opted this event, and used it as a way to keep the fear of Nazism alive.
By falsely connecting Ukrainians to Nazis, the Russian government is able to justify any action in Ukraine as protecting Russia from Nazis, which was once a valid fear.
In addition, using the word Nazi was a buzzword in Russian media portrayals of the Maidan Revolution and surrounding events in Ukraine.
By comparing pro-Revolution Ukrainians to Nazis, it allowed Russian media sites and the government to create the narrative that they needed to intervene to prevent neo-Nazi attitudes from spreading.
Saying that the world could help Ukraine by abandoning xenophobic values and superiority complexes was a pivot from acknowledging that the conflict in Ukraine was in large part due to Maidan in February of 2014 and the following illegal annexation of Crimea.
Preaching that peace could be reached by behaving properly created the illusion that the Russian government was the moral actor in this situation, even though they had recently illegally annexed a foreign country, Ukraine.
Again, this idealistic vision for Europe to enact equal and undivided security as well as common economic and humanitarian space furthered the narrative that the Russian government was seeking to better the world, but the West was pushing back by supporting the Maidan Revolution and opposing the illegal annexation of Crimea.
Lavrov set the stage for the Russian government to act as the savior and promoter of peace and stability, despite attempts against this goal.
The Russian government’s vision of implementing principles of equal and undivided security were good in theory, but in practice that meant occupying foreign nations in order to promote the Russian government’s version of security.
As was the case with the other sources, speakers such as Lavrov only had to talk about certain ideals like equal and undivided security, they did not have to go into detail about how they would go about doing so.
Rather, in creating an enemy out of the West, the best way to promote security would be to prevent intervention from the West.
This is an oversimplified solution, but one that gained power when it was repeated by different actors continually.
Gerasimov, Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation was the next to speak.
Immediately, he told how the destruction of the bipolar world via the collapse of the Soviet Union had not made the world any safer.
This is a popular plot in the post-Soviet space, as Putin had told in previous speeches that the collapse of the USSR was a catastrophe.
As is the case with conspiracy theories, there is some truth to this sentiment.
As a world leader, the United States has the power and resources to act in ways that weaker states can not.
In addition, the United States government acts in ways that serve its best interests, as does the Russian, Chinese and every other government.
General Gerasmov’s point, however, was that since the collapse of the USSR, the United States has not only increased its power, but was now able to use this power with no other state powerful enough to keep the United States in check.
To back up his claims, Gerasimov referenced the 1991 Gulf War, Yugoslavia in 1999 and Afghanistan in 2001.
Again, this is not a false claim, as military actions were used in all of the mentioned scenarios.
However, to only speak on the militaristic actions of the United States, and not mention the actions of the Russian government, is hypocritical.
It was especially hypocritical at the time, given that just months prior to the conference, the Russian government had used direct military force to illegally annex Crimea.
By shifting the focus onto the United States and their past actions, the Russian government was able to keep the conference centered on the anti-Western sentiment, not their recent actions in Ukraine.
When General Gerasimov did eventually talk about events in Ukraine, it was from an anti-Western, pro-Russian perspective.
Due to the number of alliance troops near Russia’s border, General Gerasimov said that “Under these The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 54 circumstances, we cannot remain indifferent to what is happening.
In this alternate history, NATO troops were not approaching Russian and Ukrainian borders in order to prevent total war, but instead were acting in a predatory, hostile way that forced the Russian government to retaliate.
Again, this pushed the narrative that the West was not out to help the international community, but rather wanted to capitalize on any conflict near Russia to limit their power in the Eurasian space.
Bordyuzha CSTO and the Challenges of Global and Regional Security General Bordyuzha, the Secretary General of the Collective Security Treaty Organization, directly blamed events in Ukraine on the United States.
It is important to note that no time during this conference was there speech about how the Ukrainians themselves wanted a revolution or change in political structure.
Rather, events in Ukraine were seen as negative events, artificially created and instigated by the West, specifically the United States.
By providing examples in addition to Ukraine, General Bordyuzha bolstered his argument that the United States has consistently created conflict and inhibited peace all over the world.
Again, this furthers the plot that the United States is power hungry, and non-Western countries like Ukraine fall victim to violence in the United States’ struggle for world power.
Bordyuzha said that Ukraine was being used to create a proxy between the West and Russia, disregarding any voices from Ukrainians themselves and their desires to become a more democratic country.
By claiming that there is a struggle to “drive Russia to the fringes of European civilization,” he draws upon the plot that although the Russian government likes to act as the protector of Eurasia, they also act like a victim when deemed fit.
By twisting the narrative, Bordyuzha attempted to use ‘the Ukraine situation’, the illegal annexation of Crimea, as an example of how Russia is victimized on the international stage.
This claim in itself does not make sense, but within the context of the entire conference, it continues the narrative that the only reason the West was involved in Ukraine was in order to limit Russian power.
By characterizing Russia as the victim in international politics, the Russian government is better able to justify their actions in Crimea as attempts to prevent Western powers from unfairly taking advantage of Russia.
In reality, the West is not attempting to drive Russia to the ‘fringes of European civilization’, but rather prevent the Russian government from invading and occupying sovereign nations like the state of Ukraine.
Throughout this conference, the different military officers portrayed Ukraine as a victim of Western aggression towards Russia.
At no point was it mentioned that the Ukrainians may have wanted Western aid, or wanted less influence from the Russian government within their borders.
Rather, the plot that was developed by these actors was that the only way to achieve stability in Eurasia and the Middle East would be to limit Western involvement and constantly critique their foregin policy initiatives.
As was the case with other sources, the same examples of American actions in Kosovo and the Middle East are mentioned with no context other than that The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 56 the West acts as an aggressive military power.
Although this may be true, it was also intentional that the actors did not talk about the aggression of the Russian government as well, which in turn made this source one sided against the West.
It is unfair and inaccurate to claim that stability would be brought to the Eastern world simply by excluding the West from participating in the region.
Furthermore, tying in ‘the Ukraine crisis’ to the discussion created the false idea that the West was only intervening for its own gain, just as it had done in the Middle East.
This oversimplification of history by these generals echoed that of Putin as well.
Content Analysis Findings In an effort to answer the research question: ‘how and why the anti-West conspiracy theory was used in the illegal 2014 annexation of Crimea’, several findings will be discussed in their relation to the research question and argument portions of the thesis.
In particular, the Russian government emphasized Russia’s special path in history, made illogical comparisons and used kernels of truth to connect the anti-West conspiracy to the justification of the annexation.
By making this connection between the long standing conspiracy theory and the annexation, the Russian government created the narrative that Russia needed to protect Crimea from the West.
In all of the sources analyzed, the Russian government alluded to their unique history, and how the West continually violated this history, alongside Russia’s unique destiny in the world order.
To create the plot that Russia is oppressed in the world order, numerous sources talked about how the United States is allowed to act internationally as they please, but Russian international actions are deemed illegitimate.
To prove his point, Putin The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 57 repeatedly used the Kosovo example where NATO intervened in 1999 to prevent an ethnic cleansing campaign.
By using the kernel of truth that the West did illegally intervene in Kosovo, Putin created the narrative that Russia is unfairly treated by other states, and therefore chose to annex Crimea despite international criticism.
Putin also continually said that he wanted to cooperate with the West, but was forced to act against them when Russia was backed into a corner.
Putin said that he did not want to pull the Russian Ambassador out of the United States, nor did he want to resort to quoting international law that pointed out the West’s illegal actions in Kosovo.
However, due to Western aggression, Putin said, Russia was forced to retaliate.
As the sources created Russia to be a victim of Western power, they simultaneously made Russia out to be the savior of the Eurasian world.
Putin developed the plot that the Russian government did not annex Crimea because they wanted to, but rather because the Crimean people were worried that the Ukrainian ‘Nazis’, backed by the West, were going to overrun the peninsula.
By calling upon dual myths, Russia as the victim and Russia as the protector, the Russian government was able to attract more support to their disinformation campaign.
Russia could be both the benevolent protector of ethnic Russians and the state suffering from the West, which allowed the Russian government to justify the 2014 annexation.
In the same vein, the Russian government used false comparisons and kernels of truth in order to explain the annexation.
Throughout the sources, Kosovo was brought up numerous times, along with comparing living standards in Crimea to Russia, how the Paralympics were at risk due to Western intervention, containment policies in past centuries and Crimeans who supported Russian occupation were interviewed.
The diction used in all sources worked to develop the alternate history where Russia was the righteous protagonist in the world, working hard to prevent a global takeover from the West.
Although the West was explicitly spoken about in the sources, the subtle rhetoric that was used by Putin and government officials throughout their sources demonstrated that the anti-West conspiracy runs deep in Russian discourse, and is so common that their audience may not be aware of the indoctrination that is taking place in Russia.
To answer the ‘how’ portion of the research question about how the anti-West conspiracy theory was used to justify the 2014 annexation, this thesis argues that the subtle rhetoric used in Russian government discourse slowly worked to develop the plot that Russia’s destiny is to prevent the West from overrunning the Eurasian sphere.
In the case of the Crimean annexation, this was justified in that Russia needed to intervene in order to prevent Western backed Ukrainian ‘Nazis’ from attacking local Crimeans.
By characterizing the United States and the West as the aggressors, the Russian government was then able to characterize themselves as the saviors.
As is the case with many conspiracy theories, the anti-West conspiracy theory allowed for the creation of an enemy, the West.
As long as the Russian government had an enemy, they could rationalize their actions, such as the annexation, as protecting their people from an eternal enemy.
Since Imperial times, the Russian grand narrative has in large part been centered on being different and better than the West.
This idea has been present in Russian culture for centuries, and was a somewhat easy issue to capitalize on in order to justify the annexation.
It is The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 59 true that the West was somewhat involved in the Maidan Revolution, as it would benefit the West to have a democratic Ukraine.
To reiterate, the Ukrainian people wanted the revolution, and the West helped to facilitate this desire.
By using these kernels of truth, the Russian government was able to create an alternative history where the West was the antagonist.
Given that the West had been an antagonist in Russian culture for generations, it was logical and expected that the Russian government would somehow tie actions in Ukraine and Crimea to the West.
In sum, the anti-West conspiracy theory was used to justify the illegal annexation because it was an already widely circulated idea in Russian culture that has existed for generations.
The fact that the Russian government was able to successfully annex the Crimean peninsula, partially on the basis of protecting Crimea from the West, demonstrated the power of Russian disinformation.
It showed that the anti-West conspiracy theory is so deeply rooted in Russian history, and is easy for Russian government officials to allude to Western collusion to justify their actions.
It was not necessary for Russian government officials to provide evidence or context of past American actions in other parts of the world, because all they had to do was mention contentious American actions in order to rationalize their own actions in Crimea.
This further exemplifies the power of words and rhetoric, as the Russian government was good at combining the anti-West sentiment with diction that alludes to the Western plot to overthrow Russia in the Eurasian space.
Conclusion This thesis concludes that the anti-West conspiracy theory was heavily present in sources regarding the 2014 illegal annexation of Crimea, and that the two ideas expressed in the Argument portion of the thesis are correct.
First, the Russian government used the West, specifically the United States, as an alternative actor to shift attention away from the Russian The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 60 government and onto the West during the 2014 annexation of Crimea.
Second, the Russian government used the anti-West conspiracy theory to promote the negative perception of the United States in Russia in order to rationalize the illegal annexation of Crimea.
These findings are significant in that they prove how powerful rhetoric can be when it works with the anti-West conspiracy theory.
The analysis of specific words within the sources from the Russian government demonstrate how crucial it is that citizens are well informed on how to identify and refute disinformation.
The Russian government is well versed in disinformation, and how to form it in a way that makes it look like the truth.
If someone were to watch the pseudo-documentary Crimea, The Way Home, or listen to Putin’s 2014 address, it would be difficult to find the fallacies if one was not educated on Russian, Ukrainian and American history.
The rhetoric used in the sources that were analyzed in this thesis go hand in hand with propaganda and disinformation.
Given that this thesis concludes that the anti-West conspiracy theory was used to justify the annexation of Crimea, more research needs to be done on conspiratorial discourse in the post-Soviet space and its relevance in Russian propaganda more broadly.
In addition, Putin and the Russian government have a certain toolkit when it comes to disinformation, and using the anti-West conspiracy theory is within that toolkit.
If one were to study the different ways in which Putin speaks, they would see that he uses the same examples of American hypocrisy repeatedly, often resorts to sarcasm or rhetorical statements and commonly refers back to Russia’s uniqueness in the international order.
Thus, if one understands how Putin The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 61 and the Russian government uses the anti-West conspiracy theory in order to hide their authoritarian actions, then they can learn how to fact check the Russian government’s lies.
Given that it seems that Putin tends to pull the same examples and use the same phrases when attacking Western actions, it would be beneficial to study the sources in this thesis at an even deeper level to better understand how to counter and prevent Russian disinformation from circulating.
Moreover, on February 24, 2022, the Russian government invaded the state of Ukraine.
Tensions have been escalating between Ukraine and Russia since 2014, but Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine nonetheless shocked the international community.
If the rhetoric surrounding the Crimean annexation of 2014 had been better researched and followed, it is possible that the international community would have better understood the magnitude of Russian disinformation and been more prepared for the invasion of Ukraine.
By doing narrow analyses of a few sources, the gravity of certain phrases, connections and examples came to light.
Since the anti-West conspiracy theory underpinned all of the sources analyzed in this thesis, it demonstrated how Putin skillfully created an alternative history where he was the hero, and the United States was the villain.
At this point in history, Ukraine is suffering the consequences of an authoritarian ruler whose rhetoric needs to be studied with a critical eye at all times.
The international community should listen to all of Putin and the Russian government's words very closely, as they are good at creating plots and narratives that slowly gain weight and momentum over time.
Citizens must be cognizant of where they retrieve their news from, and should fact check all sources, especially when they hear news from world leaders.
In a hyper-globalized world where information overload is used as a weapon to confuse people, citizens should educate The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 62 themselves and seek out facts individually, without relying on news networks.
In the post Cold War era, military force is far from the only weapon states have to inflict violence and pain on other states.
The Russian government has successfully weaponized words, and it is the responsibility of both the international community and individual people to combat the weaponization of words by recognizing propaganda and understanding the power that disinformation holds.
Putin claims “denazification” to justify Russia’s attack on Ukraine, experts say.
