Syria has once again captured the world’s attention, casting a long shadow over the ongoing war in Ukraine.
In early 2014, Ukraine’s east fell into turmoil after a wave of demonstrations hit the main square of Kiev, the capital of Ukraine.
This agreement would distance Ukraine from Russia, a nation with which Ukraine has close historical and physical ties.
With this agreement, Ukraine would inch ever closer to the European Union — a move that divided many in the country and abroad, eventually pushing Ukraine to war.
Yanukovych fled to Russia in March 2014 after his efforts to quell protests using snipers enflamed the situation.
That same month, ‘self-defense’ militias formed in the east striving to form Novorossiya , and the situation escalated into an armed conflict.
Since the conflict’s start, the European Union and the United States have backed Ukraine, providing non-lethal military support such as training, equipment and financial support for the country’s collapsing economy.
As Moscow sees things, Russian ‘volunteers’ are fighting in Ukraine to ‘defend’ Russian speakers from Kiev’s ‘fascist junta,’ side by side with the armies of the self-proclaimed republics in Lugansk and Donetsk.
Muslim Cherberloevky, leader of the Chechen Battalion in the name of Sheikh Mansur, pointing to Allah up above sits with leader of the ultra-nationalist militia Pravy Sektor, Dmytro Yarosh, to discuss strategy over tea.
A number of factions from different geographic regions and identities have coalesced around similar interests – bringing Ukrainian nationalists together with Chechen Islamists.
Two recent gastronomic incidents highlight the micro-level aggressions of war.
On October 1, a Ukrainian ambassador deliberately spilled hot coffee on the Vice-Premier of Crimea Dmitri Polonski at a meeting of the OSCE in Poland in a sign of protest against the occupation of the peninsula.
Another scandal occurred when Vladimir Putin and former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi tasted a 1775 vintage wine in Crimea causing outrage in Ukraine.
On October 2, French President Francois Hollande hosted the latest talks between Russian and Ukrainian leaders in Paris to discuss options for a peace accord, which would end the violence in eastern Ukraine.
Yet, Russia’s military expansion in Syria led the discussion away from the topic at hand.
Russian diplomats played hooky during Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko's speech and President of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin attempted to regain a place on the world-stage by lambasting the United States, albeit without dropping any names, in an accusatory diatribe against United States foreign policy in the Middle East and North Africa.
In the days approaching the Assembly, focus shifted from Russia's involvement in Ukraine to Syria.
This wasn't only a reaction to Russia's deployment of troops and military buildup in Syria but to a welcomed lull in fighting in Ukraine's east.
September 11 witnessed the first day with no incidence of shelling in 18 months, and has rekindled hopes that an end to the conflict is possible and near.
Just in early August, Denis Pushilin, Donetsk People's Republic Chairman, threatened Ukraine with a “big war” if it did not fully implement the Minsk agreement, signed in September 2014 and February 2015.
The second accord, penned in the capital of Belarus by German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Francois Hollande, Vladimir Putin and Petro Poroshenko, would extend greater autonomy to the eastern oblasts of Lugansk and Donetsk and consider asylum for separatist fighters.
The Minsk negotiations are “an opportunity for us through political, peaceful means, and without arms to return Ukraine and integrate it onto the path the Donbass has taken,” Pushilin said at a conference.
Integration on the Donbass's terms has translated into problems for the country's nationalists.
On August 31, Ukraine's parliament, the Verkhovna Rada, passed the first reading of legislation that would grant more autonomy to the east.
A massive protest of nearly 1,000 demonstrators opposed to the bill erupted outside of the legislative headquarters.
Ukraine's general prosecutor says the attack could be classified as terrorism.
Even if a resolution to the armed conflict comes about, Russia will remain in perpetual struggle with the West.
