Ecuador Halts All OIl Operations Amid Escalating Protests Find us on: Oil Bears Burst Back Onto The Scene Oil bears are back with… Energy Crisis Hits European Factories Where It Hurts Europe’s energy-intensive industry is struggling… The Ports Receiving Most Russian Oil And Gas While the West is slapping… Home Energy Energy-General RFE/RL staff RFE/RL journalists report the news in 21 countries where a free press is banned by the government or not fully established.
Ever since Russia's annexation of Crimea in March sparked the worst East-West showdown since the Cold War, Moscow has enjoyed a clear asymmetrical advantage it was prepared to use force to achieve its ends in Ukraine -and perhaps elsewhere -while the West was not.
The Russian currency -reeling from the combined effect of sanctions and falling energy prices -experienced its sharpest one-day drop since the August 1998 financial crisis on December 1, falling below the psychologically important level of 50 to the dollar for the first time.Related&nbsp;Scrapping South Stream Underscores Russia&rsquo;s Weakness And then there was oil.
And capital flight is forecast to reach $128 billion.Related&nbsp;Russia Expects Oil Price To Rise, But Not Enough To Balance Moscow&rsquo;s Budget And on top of all that, Russian firms owe $700 billion to foreign banks and, due to sanctions, are largely blocked from any additional Western financing.
Scrapping South Stream Underscores Russia’s WeaknessAnd then there was oil.
And by manufacturing a pro-Moscow insurgency in Donbas, he effectively invaded Ukraine.Once this happened -and particularly after pro-Moscow separatists downed Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 -it was no longer possible for Western leaders to continue to pretend that Russia is a respectable member of the international community.
Instead, Russia became a problem they needed to confront.Russia became a rogue state.
And once it did, a crucial source of its strength began to melt away.Western sanctions and the steady isolation of Russia from the world economy might not have been enough to contain Moscow in the short term.
But, with an assist from falling energy prices, they are more than enough to cripple it in the long run. googletag.cmd.push{googletag.display;}); And the long run begins now.The Russian government on December 2 acknowledged what has long been obvious, that the economy would slide into recession in 2015.
He has always been lucky, and this time, he is not lucky,"" Guriyev added.As 2013 drew to a close, Putin appeared to be running circles around his Western counterparts.He managed to thwart United States air strikes against his ally, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.
He strong-armed Armenia -and temporarily, Ukraine -into abandoning plans for a free-trade pact with the European Union in favor of the Moscow-led Eurasian Union.Putin has indeed had a strong year.
You really need someone from outside the United States State Dept to write your articles on Russia.
Leave a comment First Name Last Name Email That email address is already in the database.
Please login to your account to post your comment, or enter a different email address to continue with your comment & account creation.
Captcha Comment Please understand that, by submitting this form, you will be creating a free OilPrice.com account, and therefore agree to abide by our Terms of Use.
Your details will be stored in our database and shared with our third party mailing list provider.
You will be sent an email containing a link that will ask you to generate a new password please follow the link to complete your OilPrice account activation.
If approved, your data will then be publically viewable on this article.
Nothing contained on the Web site shall be considered a recommendation, solicitation, or offer to buy or sell a security to any person in any jurisdiction.
Trading and investing carries a high risk of losing money rapidly due to leverage.
