As tensions between Russia and Ukraine intensify, the G.O.P. nominee’s pro-Russian rhetoric could become an even bigger liability.
Tensions between Russia and Ukraine have reached a fever pitch amid heightened rhetoric and recriminations between the two countries.
The escalation has prompted both governments to shore up military and security resources surrounding the Crimea peninsula in the Black Sea.
The military buildup has sparked concerns that another Russian incursion could be imminent—a somewhat problematic development for Donald Trump, who has taken an increasingly pro-Russian stance and recently claimed that Russia isn’t in Crimea at all.
Despite widespread speculation that the Kremlin might be at the center of a devious plot to get The Donald elected, the G.O.P. nominee has continued to use his campaign pulpit to push for thawing relations between the United States and Russia.
Trump, who has repeatedly praised Vladimir Putin for his leadership, first stunned national security experts when he suggested that should he become president, he might not come to the defense of America’s NATO allies in the event of a Russian invasion.
Trump accused the media of misconstruing his comment and proceeded to blame President Barack Obama.
So far, it’s not clear how much Trump’s pro-Russian rhetoric has hurt him in the polls.
But the real estate-mogul’s foreign policy stance could become particularly vexing if fighting between Russia and Ukraine does break out.
Earlier this week, Vladimir Putin accused his western neighbor of using “terror tactics” in an effort to stabilize Crimea, resulting in the deaths of two Russian soldiers.
In response, Poroshenko put the Ukrainian military on high-alert along the Crimean border and in eastern Ukraine.
Putin subsequently met with his Security Council to talk about “anti-terrorist security scenarios at the land, border, sea and in the airspace of Crimea,” the Wall Street Journal reports.
Other experts, however, argue that Putin is just trying to display strength and improve his bargaining position with the United States and other western countries.
As many as 40,000 Russian troops are believed to be stationed along the Crimea-Ukraine border.
Either way, the latest geopolitical intrigues aren’t exactly a boon for Trump.
Should Russia invade Ukraine or should a skirmish break out, Trump’s recent remarks are likely to backfire on the Republican nominee and give his rival, Hillary Clinton, another edge in an already lopsided race.
