FA essay on Putin losing control of nationalists should have been written 3 years ago.
Russian Senate names nine main threats to Russia – every single one is provably self-inflicted.
Gudkov and Pastukhov on reversion to the Soviet, while Russia promotes bitcoin in Transnistria, it aims to ban it in Russia.
Fedyk on Russian Zapad 2017 play to assume control of Belarus military.
Poroshenko attends PACE summit in Strasbourg and presents an excellent speech.
Multiple IMINT from Kyiv Arms & Security 2017 show – Yastreb FAB-250 LGB kit, Karasyuk 122mm Precision Guided Artillery Projectile, inertially guided 152mm Kvitnik PGAP variant, 80K6T AESA, Arsenal’s ZSU-23-4М upgrade with a solid state “Digital Antenna Array” and thermal imager.
Igor Girkin of Slavyansk fame tells media of heavy Russian body count in Syria.
LRM promotes female friend to key propaganda role, trial of clueless assassins continues.
Kaspersky backdoor discovered by Israelis during penetration of Russian sites.
Beyond elections, cyberwarfare has made traditional rules governing armed conflict irrelevant.
Just this week, it has emerged that Russia has targeted NATO soldiers’ smartphones in order to gain information about troop activity and to intimidate soldiers.
The response to these cybercrimes must be international and must be broad-based, ranging from regulating social media to guarding our electrical grid and electoral systems.
It would be difficult but so too was the founding of NATO itself, which was called into being only after successive communist coups in Eastern Europe.
The ban, which serves to corroborate reports of Russian troops’ activity denied by the Kremlin, “confirms the value, and the power, of open-source research,” according to Nimmo.
As first reported by the BBC, the initial draft of the law, set to go into effect in January 2018, would prohibit Russian professional military personnel, not conscripts, from uploading to the internet photos, videos, or other material which could reveal details about Russia’s military activity.
The Kremlin “knows this is a problem that they face, and they’re grasping at how to deal with it,” said Brookie.
Nimmo described how, in the past, the private posts of Russian soldiers have made public the details of troop movements in Ukraine and Syria.
Open-source research organizations such as the DFRLab and Bellingcat leveraged the publicly available information to reveal a cohesive picture of Russian military activity abroad and implicate the Kremlin.
When Russian President Vladimir Putin denied reports of Russian military involvement in the invasion of Ukraine in 2014, as well as the ongoing fighting in the eastern part of that country, an Atlantic Council report by the DFRLab, Hiding in Plain Sight, presented evidence to the contrary.
The report accumulated open-source research, largely consisting of information available on the social media platforms of Russian soldiers, to confirm the presence of Russian troops in Ukraine.
The fact that Russian President Vladimir Putin hasn’t stopped the anti-Matilda campaign reveals a paradox at the heart of his authoritarian rule.
Paul Goble Staunton, October 11 – Moscow’s case against theater director Kirill Serebrennikov is not the sideshow many assume, Vladimir Pastukhov says.
Instead, it marks a fundamental and even dangerous change in the Kremlin’s approach to the intelligentsia and the very possibility of any kind of aesthetic freedom in Russia.
Unlike the first two, this question is “not abstract but very concrete” and requires a consideration of the motives of particular individuals in particular government agencies.
Many people believe that Serebrennikov is guilty as charged, that he violated some law and is now being brought to justice, Pastukhov says; but his case in fact is “a classic example of the legal arbitrariness of the Putin era” and one that says more about where the Kremlin is heading than many acknowledge.
More evidence may come out in the trial, but it is already obvious that the charges brought against the director reflect a distortion of the law itself, a perversion of what the statutes actually say, in order that the powers that be can send a message to the intelligentsia and society as a whole.
This is not a case of some “abstract confict of the spirit and the letter of the law” but rather a conscious use of a law that is not at all appropriate.
Serebrennikov may be guilty of many things, including misuse of funds or not paying his taxes, but there is no possibility that he engaged in fraud.
Although the current version of terror is less bloody, he continues, “in long-term historical perspective, it is more dangerous than the ante-diluvian Stalinist model.
Today, the very fabric of law is being destroyed,” and that in turn means that it will be even more difficult to climb out of this whole than it was from the collapse of the Great Terror.
But the most important lesson of the Serebrennikov case, Pastukhov argues, is to be found in another place.
In reality, the historian says, Serebrennikov is “suffering not for the law or for politics but for aesthetics.
At a certain instance, his non-traditional art became aesthetically alien to the powers that be,” and he and it had to be suppressed via the use of the criminal code.
It demanded loyalty from those artists it supported but did not dictate the content of the work.
That is because, he argues, having gained support from “the most marginal and reactionary elements of Russian society, they were forced to stylize their worldview” according to the tastes of these groups.
Under these new conditions, the powers weren’t prepared anymore to allow an artist to do what he or she wanted at least on government money.
By means of this case, Pastukhov concludes, “the government has sent a signal that it will no longer be indifferent” about what is on stage.
And thus the relative freedom of the first two “post-communist decades is coming to an end.
And at least in the next months and years, they will unfortunately ever more resemble “the ideological and aesthetic standards” many will remember from Soviet times.
Paul Goble Staunton, October 10 – The relative paucity of detentions in Moscow during the anti-Putin Navalny demonstrations last weekend, despite the much larger and more brutal actions of the authorities beyond the ring road, has generated a lively discussion as to why the Kremlin didn’t come down harder.
Two commentators, Yekatarina Vinokurova of Znak and Dmitry Travin of St.
Political scientist Abbas Gallyamov says that the authorities may have reacted as they did because they saw that the latest demonstrations attracted far fewer people than earlier and thus felt that they were “winners” and could afford to be generous.
What is disturbing, he continues, is that the authorities have such a limited number of instruments for reacting to any public manifestation, repression or non-repression.
Yevgeny Minchenko, head of the International Institute for Political Expertise, agrees that the Kremlin’s response reflected the smaller number of protests as well as problems within Navalny’s own command.
The fact that there was so much variance in the ways officials reacted shows that no common approach was planned in the Kremlin.
And Konstantin Kalachev of the Political Expertise Group said that the softer approach reflected an appreciation within the Kremlin that harsh measures would only lead to further radicalization and the growth of the opposition.
He says that if the authorities were really afraid of a challenge, they would have acted exactly the opposite to the way that they did, taking a hard line in Moscow and a softer one elsewhere.
But the Kremlin showed its confidence that everything is under control.
Clearly, Putin doesn’t see Navalny as a competitor or a threat, Travin continues.
One cannot understand what happened, he suggests, unless one recognizes that the Kremlin is not a single thing but a collection of competing groups who make use of whatever they can to advance their interests.
Navalny can be used by some because he threatens others or at least can be made to look that way, the economist says.
Given that Navalny has only minimal impact on that goal, he can be allowed to function especially since he has proven incapable of mobilizing the population for something rather than just against corruption.
If it were otherwise, he would not have been sentenced to 20 days but perhaps to 20 years.
But in the absence of specific goals, his protest will peter out just as others have over the last two decades.
And one can conclude, Travin says, that Navalny’s position has been weakened by what occurred last Saturday.
At some point that may grow into a political movement but not immediately, the commentator suggests.
Russian president Vladimir Putin warned about the risks of cryptocurrencies on Tuesday and indicated regulators in Moscow were ready to crack down on the boom.
Software produced by Microsoft Corp has been acquired by state organizations and firms in Russia and Crimea despite sanctions barring U.S-based companies from doing business with them, official documents show.
The carrier’s long delayed deep refit and modernization program has had its budget slashed in half putting in question the carrier’s future relevance.
The Ratnik-3 is a future infantry combat suit with a built-in exoskeleton, state-of-the-art reconnaissance and weaponry and, now, a nuclear-resistant watch.
At the same time, the Zapad drills had important political and informational overtones aimed directly at the West.
Generally speaking, the military tasks accomplished within the scope of Zapad 2017 were typical for maneuvers of such scale.
In particular, the Russian military top brass was using the joint drills to check the readiness of the Belarusian army to act under the command of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces.
In this context, it should be noted that the same compatibility and chain-of-command checks were carried out during the joint Russian-Belarusian operational exercise Union Shield 2015.
In other words, within the framework of Zapad 2017—and Union Shield 2015 before it— the Russian side specifically sought to evaluate how smoothly the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation could bypass various pre-existing layers of command and control, including the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Belarus, in order to take direct command of Belarusian units.
It highlights the thinking in Moscow that, in the event of an offensive operation in the western strategic direction, the Russian General Staff would need to be certain that all its orders will be carried without question by Belarusian soldiers.
Russian commanders also want to be sure they will not encounter any obstacles or push back from individual patriotically-minded Belarusian military leaders.
Russian President Vladimir Putin expressed on Tuesday his gratitude toward his Moldovan counterpart Igor Dodon for the latter’s efforts to boost relations between the two countries.
Russia's hybrid military forces attacked Ukrainian army positions in Donbas 15 times in the past 24 hours, as a result of which four Ukrainian soldiers were reported wounded in action , according to the press service of the Anti-Terrorist Operation Headquarters.
Ukrainian civil volunteer and activist Yuriy Mysyagin claims that an enemy reconnaissance group has been destroyed at the Svitlodarska Duha bulge in Donbas.
Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov has said that the latest samples of weapons and military equipment will soon be used on the front line.
Kyiv hosts the XIV International specialized exhibition ‘Arms and Security – 2017’ in Kyiv.
The tests showed that a half of items failed to meet the requirements for protection classes.
It permitted to avoid supply of bad items for the Armed Forces and other security institutions of Ukraine.
This year, the university laboratory can become the single laboratory in Ukraine issuing the quality certificates under NATO standards to defence industry manufacturers.
If we compare first Ukrainian anti-tank systems Stuhna and Korsar and their current versions, we’ll see the difference.
Our priorities for the next year are air defence equipment, anti-tank equipment, electronic warfare equipment, unmanned aerial vehicles, other spheres which will boost combat capabilities of our Armed Forces,” the Minister informed.
The National Police of Ukraine will purchase professional communication systems from Turkey's leading defense company Aselsan.
At the request of the European Court of Human Rights , Ukraine is sending to Krasnodar a group of doctors to check on the health condition of an illegally detained 19-year-old Pavol Hryb, despite Russia not having issued a relevant permission, that&rsquo;s according to a comment to UNIAN by director of the consular service department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine Serhiy Pohoreltsev.
Investors from Singapore and the United States plan to invest about US$300 million in the construction of two vegetable oil extraction plants, a grain terminal, and&nbsp;transshipment&nbsp;facilities in Odesa region's Lyman district, according to Odesa Regional State Administration.
The Association of the United States Army’s Annual Meeting is the largest landpower exposition and professional development forum in North America.
Taking place over three days, the Annual Meeting is designed to deliver the Army’s message by highlighting the capabilities of Army organizations and presenting a wide range of industry products and services.
AUSA accomplishes this task throughout the entire event by providing informative and relevant presentations on the state of the Army, panel discussions and seminars on pertinent military and national security subjects, and a variety of valuable networking events available to all that attend.
The military experts and visitors of the Ukrainian stand at the AUSA 2017 saw promising Ukrainian armored vehicles, including BTR-4 8×8 wheeled armoured personnel carrier and updated Phantom-2 unmanned tactical multipurpose vehicle, promising precise aircraft weapon, new radar systems, new small weapons and artillery armament.
Spectechnoexport, Promoboronexport, Progress, Ukroboronservice and Ukrinmash.
The Ukrainian military industry is increasingly getting integrated into the Western model, and all the equipment has been tested in combat conditions.
Domestic machinery and weapons are officially represented by the Ukroboronprom State Concern.
The SFTE “SpetsTechnoExport”, part of UkrOboronProm, has unveiled its new Phantom-2 unmanned tactical multipurpose vehicle at the AUSA 2017 Annual Meeting & Exposition unmanned tactical multipurpose vehicle provides more firepower and a stand-off capability to detect and confirm the presence of, identify the disposition of, and counter hazards by carrying various platform payloads in support of current and future missions.
The “Phantom-2 based on 8×8 wheeled chassis and is designed to support tactical level operations on the battlefield.
This modification allows for bigger payloads and, correspondingly, for more powerful weapons on top of the carrier.
One of the key features of the Phantom is its anti-tank missile system, called Barrier, and its new rocket launcher turret for RS-80 rockets.
Also, the “Phantom-2 is equipped with a remote weapon station that can carry a weapon fit as per an operator’s requirements – one such configuration features an armed with a 30mm cannon.
The UGV is intended to perform a variety of tasks in complex urban environments.
Its mission capabilities include combat, reconnaissance, ammunition transportation to forward operating bases, and evacuation of wounded soldiers from the battlefield.
Ukrainian state defence manufacturer UkrOboronProm has taken the opportunity at the Arms and Security exhibition being held from 10 to 13 October to unveil a prototype wheeled armoured fighting vehicle that is presently known as the BTR-4MV1.
The new BTR-4MV1 is the latest generation of 8×8 APC armoured personnel carrier designed, developed and produced by the Kharkiv Morozov Machine Building Design Bureau, part of UkrOboronProm.
It differs from the previous versions mostly in a modified configuration of the vehicle’s hull, which makes it possible to install additional types of protection to reach the fourth and fifth protection levels in accordance with the NATO standards.
Apart from that, the hull rear is fitted with a ramp that not only enables troopers to enter and leave the vehicle much quicker, but also enables the armoured personnel carrier to transport various large-size cargoes, including additional ammunition, spare parts, etc.
President Donald Trump is expected this week to “decertify” the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action , better known simply as the Iran deal, declaring that the agreement reached in 2015 by the United States and five other international powers is not in America’s national interest.
As the Trump administration prepares to take a tougher line on Iran, senior United States officials previewed a new offensive against Iranian-backed Hezbollah, claiming the group aspires to conduct attacks against the United States homeland.
The lira erased gains against the dollar after the White House backed its ambassador’s decision to suspend visas from the country and a Turkish court convicted in absentia a journalist from The Wall Street Journal.
The latest figures from Air Force Central Command show that more bombs are being dropped than have been in nearly seven years.
Among the data stolen in a hack last year was a plan to remove the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, referred to as the “decapitation” plan.
Hyon Song-wol, who was once falsely rumored to have been executed for starring in a pornographic video, is the leader of the all-female music group Moranbong Band.
He said this answering a question whether he felt he had been deceived by Russian President Vladimir Putin, who, according to the German newspaper WirtschaftsWoche, had promised the German Foreign Minister that the turbines, produced on factory jointly owned by Siemens and the Russian company Power Machines that the turbines would not end up in Crimea, which before being occupied by Russia in 2014 was energy reliant upon mainland Ukraine.
After the turbines finally ended up in Crimea, Siemens’ claimed it was innocent, had been duped by its Russian partner OAO Technopromexport, and was confident until the very end that the turbines are being produced for a power station in the Taman peninsula.
We decided to fact-check his statements with the help of our open-source investigation How Siemens chose to ignore the obvious.
Far more murkiness than clarify after Catalonia’s leader spoke of new republic but also raised prospect of delay for dialogue with Spain.
While he reasserted the region’s right to independence, his decision will do much to delay a looming constitutional crisis as well as to calm European nerves.
The international media will embrace all things Bolshevik this autumn as the world marks the centenary of the Russian Revolution.
Audiences can expect everything from gushing feature articles about early Soviet cinematography to edgy op-eds on the place of propaganda posters in twentieth-century art.
Amid this deluge of Communist kitsch, we are unlikely to see a serious analysis of Ukraine’s 1917–21 statehood bid and its considerable relevance to the geopolitical tensions of today.
Raytheon Missile Systems has presented its offering for the United States Army’s Long-Range Precision Fires program, a precision-guided missile aptly named DeepStrike.
The weapon is competing against an alternative by Lockheed Martin to succeed Lockheed’s MGM-140 Army Tactical Missile System , developed in the 1980s.
Raytheon and Lockheed were awarded contracts in May to develop competing prototypes under a 34-month LRPF technology maturation and risk-reduction phase.
Raytheon presented a mockup of the DeepStrike missile at the Association of the United States Army exposition in Washington this week, standing alongside the company’s proposed land-based Standard Missile-3 and SkyCeptor interceptors.
Ryan Braden of Raytheon’s advanced land warfare systems group said during an Oct. interview that DeepStrike has passed through an initial design review and the prototype is now being developed for first flight in 2019.
The goal of the LRPF program is to field a smaller, longer range Atacms successor.
The TMRR phase of the program will culminate in a live-fire test of one prototype missile, probably at White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico.
The Russian cybersecurity firm is in the spotlight because of suspicions its products facilitate espionage.
President Trump said he wanted what amounted to a nearly tenfold increase in the United States nuclear arsenal in a meeting with military leaders this summer.
Former Trump foreign policy adviser Carter Page told CNN Monday he is going to plead the Fifth Amendment to keep from turning over a “vast array” of documents the Senate Intelligence committee requested, which he said is “beyond the charter” of the inquiry.
