Russia's Ambiguous Warfare and Implications for the United States Marine Corps Mary Ellen Connell and Ryan Evans Abstract.
The Russian Federation used ambiguous warfare strategies to annex Crimea in 2014 and propagate Ukrainian instability.
Rapidly generated, highly trained, and well-disciplined Russian forces on the ground in Ukraine unofficially coordinated with pro-Russian separatists to conduct psychological operations, intimidation, and bribery among the population to undermine nationalist resistance.
Illustrating warfare’s expanding reach, these activities obscure the factors that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization traditionally uses to identify the need for the cooperative defense of a member nation.
This summary of a CNAorganized meeting of experts captures these topics and their implications on the United States government’s current warfighting strategy.
Gerasimov Doctrine, Russia, Ukraine, Crimea, Donbass, Baltic states, Spetsnaz, United States Marine Corps, maskirovka, ambiguous warfare, warfighting strategy, unmanned aerial vehicle, drone use I n 2014, “little green men”—strongly suspected to be Russian Federation soldiers—surged into Crimea and drove out all elements and symbols of Ukrainian authority.
Peace now prevails on the Crimean peninsula under Russian control, but as of this writing, war still rages in Ukraine’s eastern region of Donbass, where Russian-backed separatists wield Russian weapons, drive Russian Mary Ellen Connell is a research scientist with CNA’s Center for Strategic Studies and a graduate of the National War College.
Ryan Evans is a research analyst at CNA’s Center for Strategic Studies and the founder and editor in chief of War on the Rocks.
This brand of warfare, or Gerasimov Doctrine, involves rapidly generating highly trained and disciplined forces who enter the battlespace out of uniform and in coordination with local supporters, using psychological operations, intimidation, and bribery to undermine nationalist resistance.
Although direct confrontation between United States Marines and Russian Federation forces is unlikely in the near future, other nations and nonstate actors that Marines may encounter within the battlespace are closely observing Russia’s use of ambiguous warfare.
Since these potential adversaries will likely modify their own warfare strategy and tactics, the Corps must also understand the lessons from Crimea and Ukraine and how other adversaries might militarily adapt as a result of Russia’s success.
Ukraine following Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea Connell and Evans 31 MCU Journal nonstate belligerent actor deploys troops and proxies in a deceptive and confusing manner with the intent of achieving political and military effects while obscuring the belligerent’s direct participation.
Russia’s actions in Crimea and Ukraine clearly align with this concept, and discussion participants pointed out that it was not a new concept for Russia.
The events in Crimea and Ukraine were foreshadowed by an article published by the Russian Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov.
In the 21st century we have seen a tendency toward blurring the lines between the states of war and peace.
The role of nonmilitary means of achieving political and strategic goals has grown, and, in many cases, they have exceeded the power of force of weapons in their effectiveness.
The focus of applied methods of conflict has altered in the direction of the broad use of political, economic, informational, humanitarian, and other nonmilitary measures—applied in coordination with the protest potential of the population.
All this is supplemented by military means of a concealed character, including carrying out actions of informational conflict and the actions of special-operations forces.
Experts in the CNA discussion agreed that the Gerasimov Doctrine evolved out of necessity, driven by Russian vulnerability rather than strength.
In December 2014, President Vladimir Putin signed the revised Russian Military Doctrine, which identifies NATO and its enlargement as a fundamental threat to the Russian homeland.
Anticipating that the Russian Federation’s largely conscript military forces would not prevail against NATO in conventional combat, the Gerasimov Doctrine advocates the use of a modern version of partisan warfare that targets an adversary’s weaknesses and avoids direct, overt confrontations.
The nonmilitary measures in Gerasimov’s doctrine include efforts to shape the political, economic, and social landscapes of the adversarial state through subversion, espionage, propaganda, and potentially a combination of these acts with cyberattacks.
Grounded in maskirovka , the Soviet doctrine of denial and deception, use of ambiguous warfare keeps opponents wondering and hesitating by resolutely denying Russian involvement while working through as many agents as possible.
In Ukraine, for example, third-party deniable agents included pro-Russian loyalists and local paramilitary commanders, as well as local gangsters who spotted an opportunity for profit and power.
In the emergence phase, Russia uses ethnic and pro-Russian populations within the target state to foment protests and resistance to the country’s government.
Potentially, these actions initiate tension in the target country by generating backlash and discrimination against ethnic Russians by the government and majority populations.
In essence, Russia activates a self-reinforcing mechanism to escalate conflict.
In the sharpening phase, Russia uses economic warfare and political pressure to intimidate, coerce, punish, and undermine governments in target states to further weaken them.
In the initiating phase, Russia uses ambiguous military and security personnel to infiltrate the target country and activates criminal networks to further foment unrest and ignite open conflict.
In the crisis phase, the military isolates government positions, seizes key terrain, and destroys the defense and security apparatuses of the target country.
In the resolution phase, Russia conducts information operations to deny involvement and sow doubt and discord in the minds of foreign governments about the developing situation and possible responses.
The restoration phase concludes the offensive; Russia consolidates its gains within the target country, takes actions to de-escalate the conflict and reduce tensions, and installs a government amenable to Russian influence.
As one expert noted, ambiguous warfare requires the deliberate integration of military and nonmilitary forces, and while it is a less expensive form of warfare than open, conventional war, it does not always lead to a clear military outcome.
Another expert commented that credible escalation dominance is key to making ambiguous warfare work and added that Russia has adeptly maintained a carefully calibrated balance between low-intensity, ambiguous actions and credible, high-intensity threats.
Clearly, Russia’s military has put Gerasimov’s ideas to good practice in Crimea and Ukraine, though overwhelming success in Crimea has not been similarly replicated in eastern Ukraine to date.
Russia's Military and Special Forces The Russian Military To get a better sense of how Russia’s military operationalizes Gerasimov’s Doctrine, meeting participants discussed the structure of the Russian military generally, as well as its special forces, the Spetsnaz, specifically.
One expert who has extensively studied the Russian military commented that nuclear weapons still play a central role in Russia’s strategic thinking by allowing Russia to maintain a credible deterrent against Western action, as well as put forth a significant threat as part of the fourth phase of ambiguous warfare.
Russia also maintains a considerable military force with a sizeable reserve.
For example, one expert noted that, in less than one week, Russia could mobilize about one army and one airborne brigade.
That said, however, Russia’s military is spread thin over the longest land border of any single country.
As such, the experts discussed how Russia’s military is aligned into different military districts.
The Western District—the district concerned with Ukraine—has a large share of Russia’s air force and air defense assets arrayed against possible NATO air threats from the West.
Southern District forces are based in the volatile Caucasus region, which includes the Russian republics of Chechnya, Dagestan, and Ingushetia.
Russians may now consider Crimea to be part of the Southern Military district, but the United States does not recognize the incorporation of Crimea into the Russian Federation.
Eastern District forces protect the largely unpopulated eastern flank of Russia against potential threats from China.
The Central Asia District largely serves as Russia’s strategic reserve.
This posture provides Russia’s military with a limited ability to mass forces in any one direction without leaving gaps in the nation’s defense elsewhere.
Because ambiguous warfare does not require the higher resource demands of a sustained conventional campaign, the Russian armed forces find it an attractive option to mitigate the impact of overextended border defenses.
One expert noted that, unlike the West, Russia does not think about employing its military forces in terms of Services, such as army, navy, or special operations forces.
Rather, its forces are primarily geared toward “fighting power” or “political impact” and use organizational constructs that place fighting power in support of political impact.
The Spetsnaz One of Russia’s major forces for political impact, the Spetsnaz played a significant role in the government’s actions in Crimea and Ukraine.
As Russia’s special purpose forces, the Spetsnaz have historically conducted deep reconnaissance and nuclear missions, as well as disrupted adversary command and control structures in the context of large-scale conventional warfare.
More recently, the force has gone through a painful but ultimately successful adaptation process to fight small wars more effectively.
In the past, the Russian military lacked a doctrinal base for small wars; however, in the wake of significant challenges in Russia’s wars in Afghanistan and Chechnya, the military purposely evolved the Spetsnaz toward a more deliberate role in small wars.
In 2012, Russia created its own special operations command, Komanda Spetsialnogo Naznacheniya, which was given oversight of the Spetsnaz for a time.
The 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics and the threats of terrorism that accompanied them were used to justify a major expansion of the Spetsnaz, and all of its units were brought to full strength.
Due to this level of readiness, one expert considers the Spetsnaz perhaps the GRU’s most important political asset to their risk-taking organization and likely to remain so, given their practice of employing unorthodox agents, such as private sector individuals, warlords, mercenaries, and organized crime syndicates to conduct unconventional operations and ambiguous warfare.
All present at the discussion agreed, however, that not all Spetsnaz are Tier 1 operators similar to personnel in United States military units, including the Army’s Delta Force, the Navy’s Seal Team 6, and the Marine Corps’ Special Operations Command.
In essence, these special purpose forces closely resemble United States light infantry intervention forces.
Russia's Current and Future Application of the Gerasimov Doctrine Crimea Russia’s Crimea operation in late February 2014, apparently long considered a viable military option, went relatively smoothly.
Russia’s normal resupply activities for its naval base leased in Sevastopol formed a convenient cover for the insertion of elite forces and equipment.
Russian forces maintained strict radio silence, thus foiling NATO monitoring efforts.
These teams isolated Ukrainian bases by cutting communications and disorganizing the Ukrainian troops’ support systems.
Simultaneously, Russia applied information warfare techniques to persuade Ukrainian forces to switch sides.
Ultimately, Russia’s operations in Crimea resulted in the annexation of key terrain for the Russian military at very low cost.
Certainly, these operations surprised the West and served as a wake-up call regarding Russia’s future intentions in the region.
Donbass, Eastern Ukraine In April 2014, a pro-Russian insurgency erupted and quickly intensified within the Donbass coal mining region in Ukraine.
The heartland of former Ukrainian president Viktor F Yanukovich, Donbass borders the Russian Federation and most of the population speaks Russian.
Advised by Russian GRU officers, an odd collection of deniable agents— such as foreign volunteers, paid mercenaries, radical Russian nationalists, local mobsters, and former members of the disbanded Ukrainian Berkut special police force—took control of government institutions and key infrastructure in Luhansk and Donetsk, and proclaimed the cities independent people’s republics.
Despite the many factors favoring Moscow’s design for the Donbass operation, experts discussing the operation doubt it went exacdy as planned.
The Russians found less support for the separatist agenda in Donbass than they had expected.
The deniable agents who first assumed power in the Luhansk and Donetsk People’s Republics were harsh, erratic administrators who often alienated the local population.
Donbass residents able to escape the fighting did so by either going to Russia or by moving to safer areas in Ukraine.
Military coordination among the separatists was poor, and they used sophisticated Russian-supplied equipment recklessly, as seen in the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MFU 7 on 17 July 2014.
By massing 40,000 troops on the Russian side of the border, Moscow heightened uncertainty and temporarily paralyzed decision making within the Kiev government while simultaneously deterring the West from offering significant military aid to Ukraine.
Russian forces crossed the border at will, frequently under the cover of white-painted humanitarian convoys.
In August 2014, the Ukrainian military regrouped, closed in on separatist strongholds in Donbass, and reclaimed 65 towns and villages.
At that point, the Russians were forced to take on more visible roles to prevent the defeat of the self-proclaimed republics.
All the while, Moscow continued to deny Russian military presence in eastern Ukraine, while orchestrating an unrelenting media campaign to reinforce the narrative that the Russian-speaking population needed to be rescued from right-wing fascist extremists and chaos.
Representatives from the Ukraine, the Russian Federation, the Donetsk People’s Republic, and the Luhansk People’s Republic signed a cease-fire protocol known as Minsk I It failed.
In February 2015, a second cease-fire agreement known as Minsk II was negotiated under OSCE auspices, though it remains imperfectly observed.
Ukraine is unable to control its border with Russia, and Russia continues to resupply the separatists.
Some experts predicted further escalation of tensions in the coming Connell and Evans 37 MCU Journal months as a prelude to Russia’s renewed push to create a land bridge to Crimea.
Others believed that Russia does not have the wherewithal to expand the conflict zone substantially but will continue engaging in low-intensity conflict in the Donbass region.
Russian separatists not only abduct torture, assassinate, kill en masse, rape, and execute prisoners, they also record their activities and post the videos on the Internet.
Ground maneuver units employ a combination of contract and irregular forces.
Deep armored raids are prevalent on the dispersed battlefield, and the T-90’s reactive armor deters most singlewarhead infantry-fired antitank weapons used by NATO forces.
These weapons become more effective when used in combination with remotely piloted vehicles’ target acquisition capabilities.
Russian-sponsored operations in neighboring lands have been more successful with support from large ethnic Russian populations and have fallen short in areas where those conditions do not exist.
With operations in Ukraine planned and prepared well in advance, Moscow may have similar plans for other former Soviet states.
Russia’s residual fear of NATO means the government avoids a blatant Article V trigger.
Ambiguous warfare stems from this weakness, but Russia’s lack of traditional state power should not be equated to a lack of serious threat.
A nation-states’ national defense depends on credible, integrated military and security forces.
Ukraine has underfunded its military since the end of the Cold War, failed to modernize its forces, and constantly hobbled its own security efforts by tolerating corruption.
Additionally, steps taken to eliminate conscription negatively impacted military morale and effectiveness.
Furthermore, potential target states should foster collaboration, cooperation, and connectivity among not only their own military and security forces, but also allied forces.
These nation-states’ political stability necessitates the integration of Russian descendants and immigrants into the national identity.
Otherwise, dissention develops among the pro-Russian population that creates an entry point for Moscow to influence the internal affairs of neighboring states.
Russia's Next Moves Russia aspires to replace the current Western-dominated world order with one in which great powers divide the world into internationally recognized spheres of influence.
Seizing pieces of Ukraine will probably not be enough to achieve this goal.
In the near term, however, the experts assembled agreed that Russia is likely to shift its aggression toward the Baltic States and Black Sea region.
The Baltic States The three small Baltic seaside states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania were part of the former Soviet Union and are home to sizable Russian-speaking populaConnell and Evans 39 MCU Journal tions.
Should Russian aggression occur against the Baltics, the offensive would likely take the form of ambiguous, destabilizing operations to avoid triggering NATO’s Article V This strategy sows doubt in the minds of the populations of the Baltic States about Western resolve to defend them and contributes to Moscow’s goal of undermining the NATO Alliance.
When the Baltic republics joined NATO in 2004, they were encouraged to develop niche military specialties rather than worry about territorial defense, which the international community thought unnecessary.
Each nation’s government is addressing this mistake, but finding a solution will take time.
The national armed forces of Lithuania meanwhile have no current mandate to intervene in internal affairs, while the police and the ministry of interior of the Republic of Lithuania share responsibility for domestic security and would be the first to respond to an influx of pro-Russian actors similar to the Crimean annexation.
Lithuania’s efforts to develop a more comprehensive defense plan involve coordinating all national bodies of executive power.
A January 2015 pamphlet written by the Lithuanian Ministry of Defense titled How to Act in Extreme Situations or Instances of War even instructed Lithuanians on surviving foreign occupation and organizing nonviolent resistance.
Black Sea Region Russia’s seizure of Crimea and its continuance of military operations in eastern Ukraine changed the strategic balance in the Black Sea region.
With Moscow’s military presence no longer constrained by former legal agreements with Ukraine, Russia can fully exploit Crimea and its former Ukrainian air bases, using both as a platform to project power.
This base access enabled the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation to deploy conventional and nuclear capabilities of Tupolev TU-22M3 Backfire-C medium-range bombers and Iskander-M short-range ballistic missile systems to the peninsula by 2016.
An ambitious modernization program underway for the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol will add six new frigates, six new submarines, several smaller naval vessels, and possibly a Mistral-class amphibious assault ship.
The fleet and other military units enhance Crimean antiship and antiaircraft capabilities.
Russia’s air defense systems in Crimea reach nearly half of the Black Sea while surface attack systems reach almost all of the Black Sea area.
These military systems create a strong line of defense for the Russian homeland.
Historically, a Russian military build-up of this magnitude on the northern shore of the Black Sea would be of great concern to Turkey.
The prospect of Russian—Turkish energy collaboration, however, may prove a critical factor toward mitigating Turkish concerns.
In contrast, Russian companies are investing in shipping companies and port facilities on the Turkish Black Sea coast, which are also useful for gathering intelligence and serving as entry points for Russian forces if necessary.
Seeking reassurance, Romania and Bulgaria and Moldova and Georgia look to NATO and the European Union for security support because they are also targeted by active Russian influence operations.
Romania’s foreign minister, Titus Corlajean, openly expressed concern over Russian pursuits in the region.
Bulgaria depends heavily on Russian energy supplies and military equipment maintenance and was subject to intense Russian pressure to go forward with its long-planned role as the entry point for the South Stream pipeline.
But when the EU demanded Bulgaria suspend construction on the pipeline while it investigated the way contracts were awarded and then froze political talks between the EU and Russia over the crisis in Ukraine, Russia announced that the South Stream would not be built.
Moscow hobbles Moldova and Ukraine by controlling the pro-Russian separatist enclave of Transnistria and trammels Georgia by formally controlling the foreign and security affairs of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, located within Georgia’s internationally recognized national borders.
Transnistria, Abkhazia, and South Ossetia are also focal points for Russia-linked organized crime in the region in the regard that local gangsters meld with Russian-backed forces to metastasize organized crime in eastern Ukraine.
This social and political evolution suggests that we can anticipate further strengthening and utilization of criminal networks around the Black Sea littoral region.
Implications for the United States Marine Corps Beyond understanding and studying the Gerasimov Doctrine as it has been applied to ambiguous warfare in Crimea and Ukraine, the Marine Corps must be able to view the strategy more conceptually.
Connell and Evans 41 MCU Journal Return to High-Intensity Conflict While the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine has shown that ambiguous warfare can be highly kinetic and extremely intense, the assembled experts noted that battalion-size forces have been rendered combat ineffective in a single wave of artillery strikes.
Fighting in the Information Environment Moscow has displayed its ability to launch covert and overt information operations on a mass scale to global, regional, and local audiences.
It has also shown the ability to rapidly spread carefully crafted lies and disinformation to generate discord at local and international levels.
Marines must begin framing Military Information Support Operations by answering how the Corps will • counter hostile messaging in an ambiguous warfare theater; • transition countermessaging efforts from early in the enemy’s campaign of street protests, agitation, and subversion to the later campaign of open warfare; and • overcome political and strategic decisions that limit and constrict the use of Military Information Support Operations on the battlefield.
Political and Economic Subversion Because the initial phases of ambiguous warfare are often hard to detect, experts agreed that nation-states might maintain a persistent presence in at-risk countries as one way of sensing the application of Gerasimov’s concepts.
Official versus Nonofficial Armed Forces The complicated network of ambiguous actors Russia employed in Crimea and Ukraine intertwined irregular and proxy forces, special forces, militias, criminal syndicates, and unidentified regular military forces.
These relationships necessitate an examination of how future adversaries will challenge and exploit United States rules of engagement by incorporating nonofficial and official forces.
Russia’s use of population shaping measures before the hostilities phase included leveraging Russian-speaking populations in target countries.
A melange of ambiguous actors, including special forces, militias, and criminals; resupply missions disguised as humanitarian assistance convoys; and deliberate disinformation and misinformation about events on the ground furnished particularly effective components of Russia’s ambiguous warfare strategy.
In addition, reactive armor, horrific violence, and advanced munitions were particularly effective tactics on the ground to intimidate and subdue local populations as well as counter Ukrainian national defense forces.
Thinking more broadly, experts considered how these elements of Russia’s strategy and tactics could be generalized to other regions of the world and be employed by potential United States adversaries, such as China and Iran.
The implications of Russia’s ambiguous approach are mostly at the Marine Corps’ strategic level.
At the tactical level, the actions of Russia’s panoply of forces are no less ambiguous than other forces Marines have faced during the insurgencies in Iraq and Afghanistan.
As such, panel participants felt that the basic principles of Marine Corps warfighting remain valid in this kind of environment.
Moreover, the situation in Ukraine—while ambiguous in attribution—still Connell and Evans 43 MCU Journal amounts to state-sponsored warfare with a high intensity battlespace that looks significantly different from Iraq or Afghanistan.
Success in this environment demands Marines consider how to apply their warfighting principles on a battlefield that may include the instantaneous loss of air, fire, and information superiority; rapid fluctuations between highly lethal, lowand high-intensity actions; significant increases in casualty rates; interspersed fighting among populations familiar with extreme violence; and unlimited adversary warfare in the information space.
Notes This article was taken in part from a CNA report published in 2015 titled Russia's “‘Ambiguous Warfare"" and Implications for the United States Marine Corps, coauthored by Mary Ellen Connell and Ryan Evans.
It summarizes a discussion among experienced regional specialists, senior military officers, and internationally renowned security experts that was coordinated by CNA on 25 February 2015, which followed the Chatham House Rule of nonattribution to encourage a candid exchange of ideas between participants.
Experts did not quote official sources during the meeting; however, supplemental information has been added to expand readers’ purviews.
Russia began staging logistical support for military operations in the Donbass region of eastern Ukraine at least as early as December 2014.
Article V of the Washington Treaty signed in 1949 establishes that NATO will view an attack on one NATO nation-state as an attack on all members.
While NATO nations may come to the defense of other members, the NATO Security Council strives for peace.
A narrow strip of land bound between the Dniester River and the Ukrainian border, Transnistria initially declared its independence from Moldova in 1990, but has never been recognized by the international community.
A 2006 referendum brought the issue to bear again, with the additional intention to join Russia.
