He fled from Kyiv, as did many of his supporters, and protestors took over Kyiv.
Ignoring United States and international condemnation, Russia annexed Crimea on March 18.
Ukrainian officials charge that Russia is also trying to stir unrest in eastern and southern Ukraine, where many Russian-speakers live, perhaps in order to provide a pretext for an invasion of those regions.
The Ukrainian government is currently discussing the terms of an IMF loan for Ukraine, which could amount to $15 billion.
The Administration has requested funding from Congress for $1 billion in loan guarantees for Ukraine.
Other United States aid will also help Ukraine stabilize its finances and hold free and fair elections in May 2014.
The Administration has announced visa bans and asset freezes against 16 senior Russian officials, 4 wealthy figures from Putin’s “inner circle,” and one Russian bank.
Since the overthrow of the Yanukovych regime, Congressional action has focused on providing assistance to the new Ukrainian government and condemning the Russian occupation of Crimea.
The bill funds the loan guarantees requested by the Administration for Ukraine from amounts already for provided FY2014 and earlier years.
The bill includes sanctions against Russia and approves $1 billion in loan guarantees for Ukraine.
For Ukraine’s 2004 presidential elections, the oligarchs chose Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych as their candidate to succeed Kuchma.
The chief opposition candidate, former Prime Minister Viktor Yushchenko, was a pro-reform, pro-Western figure.
Ukraine’s Central Election Commission proclaimed Yanukovych the winner.
Yanukovych’s government was criticized over its human rights record and massive high-level corruption, in part committed by Yanukovych’s own family and associates.
United States and EU officials expressed strong concern over the government’s targeting of opposition leaders for selective prosecution.
Yanukoyvch and scores of his supporters in the government and parliament fled the capital by February 21, many heading for the eastern and southern parts of the country, while others continued into Russia.
Policy Current Political Situation Ukraine’s new government faces serious political challenges.
Throughout the protests, the opposition parties were playing catch-up with sentiment on the streets.
Many Maidan protestors view the new governing parties very skeptically, suspecting that they are nearly as opportunistic and corrupt as the Yanukovych regime, as demonstrated by the failure of the Orange Revolution 10 years earlier.
In one of several incidents that have occurred in the past month, on March 18, three members of parliament from Freedom and others broke into the office of the head of Ukraine’s main television station, beat him up, and forced his resignation.
Government officials hope at least some of the men will join the army or a new National Guard that the parliament recently approved.
Ukraine’s new government faces other serious political and economic challenges.
The most urgent issue is Russia’s invasion and seizure of Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula.
The troops did not wear insignia of the Russian armed forces, leading them to be referred to ironically in the Ukrainian press as the “little green men,” from the color of their uniforms.
Russian President Vladimir Putin claims that the troops were not Russian Federation military forces, but only local Crimean self-defense forces.
Policy training, equipment, vehicle license plates, and even statements by the soldiers themselves all point to the Russian armed forces, not unofficial, local militia.
Ukrainian, U.S., and EU country officials have flatly rejected Putin’s statement as a falsehood, charging that Russian Federation military forces have in fact invaded and occupied Crimea in a clear violation of international law.
On March 11, Ukraine’s Foreign Ministry said there were nearly 19,000 Russian troops in Ukraine.
Until March 18, the takeover had been achieved with no bloodshed with the Ukrainian government forces on the peninsula, even in cases where Russian troops have forcibly seized Ukrainian installations.
However, on that day one Ukrainian soldier was killed when Russian forces stormed a Ukrainian base in Simferopol.
On March 24, after its main bases had reportedly been stormed by Russian troops, Ukraine announced that it would withdraw its remaining military personnel from Crimea, due to threats against them and their families made by Russian forces.
This move was also denounced by Ukraine, the United States, the EU, and other countries as a blatant violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and a violation of international law.
The Ukrainian government is struggling to establish control over eastern and southern Ukraine.
Thousands of pro-Russian protestors have demonstrated in the region, especially in the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk in the Donbas region and in Kharkiv.
The Ukrainian government complains that many of the most militant demonstrators have come from Russia.
The government says that it is tightening border security to stop the Russian demonstrators from entering Ukraine.
Ukrainian police, perhaps suffering from low morale due to the events of the past three months, have generally tried to avoid conflict with both pro-and anti-government demonstrators.
The new government in Kyiv has tried to enlist the support of some of the oligarchs of the old regime to try to quiet the situation in the Donbas, Kharkiv, and other areas where they own large businesses.
Vitali Klitchko and Yuliya Tymoshenko have expressed their intention to run.
Another possible major candidate is pro-Westem wealthy businessman Petro Poroshenko.
Pravy Sektor leader Dymytro Yarosh has said he will be a candidate, but he is not expected to mount a serious challenge.
One possible Regions candidate could be Sergei Tihipko, who is not part of the Donbas “clan” of former President Yanukovych.
There is currently debate among Ukrainian political figures on whether to hold early parliamentary elections as well, and if so, when.
After the fall of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, Russia stopped further bond purchases.
Ukraine’s currency slid by nearly 30% between the start of the crisis on November 21, 2013, and late February 2014.
It has dropped further since then, as the government lacks the reserves to support the currency.
Ukraine’s new government is in negotiations with the IMF over the loan terms.
Prime Minister Yatsenyuk has said that his is a “kamikaze” government, given the political unpopularity of some of the decisions that will be required as part of a reform program.
Loans from other sources may have to wait until Ukraine’s reform program receives the seal of approval provided by an IMF loan agreement.
Yanukovych’s foreign policy appeared to fit into this pattern, although he broke with previous Ukrainian presidents by formally rejecting NATO membership for Ukraine.
Yanukovych’s last-minute decision in November 2013 to decline to sign an Association Agreement with the EU touched off a popular revolt that led to the collapse of his regime.
Ukraine’s new government’s main foreign policy priorities are to secure international support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and non-recognition of Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
Kyiv is seeking urgent international assistance to ameliorate the country’s dire financial situation.
The government also strongly supports European Union integration for Ukraine, but says that NATO membership aspirations are not a current priority.
In addition to the annexation of Crimea, Ukraine may face further pressure from a hostile Russian leadership, which does not recognize the legitimacy of the new government.
Russia has implemented some de facto trade sanctions against Ukraine, and used natural gas prices and debts as a weapon against Ukraine.
Russia could also harass or expel Ukrainian citizens working in Russia.
European Union Ukraine seeks eventual EU membership, but most EU countries have opposed raising this issue, in part due to the huge burden a large, poor country like Ukraine coidd place on already-strained EU coffers.
The parts of the A A dealing with economic issues would be signed later this year, after the new Ukrainian President takes office.
In addition, the EU will establish a High Level Investment Forum/Task Force; help modernize Ukraine’s natural gas transit system and work on reversing the flow of pipelines through Slovakia so that Ukraine can receive gas from the west; acceleration of Visa Liberalisation Action Plan; and technical assistance on a number of areas from constitutional to judicial reform and preparation of elections.
Analysts noted that senior Russian leaders were lacking from the list, which nevertheless included several members of the Russian parliament and Russian military commanders in Crimea.
On March 21, the EU imposed sanctions on 12 additional Russian leading figures, after President Putin signed an agreement with Crimean leaders incoiporating the region into Russia/’ However, the EU still stopped short of sanctioning leading business figures who support the Russian regime or key Russian banks and other firms.
Some EU countries may have been reluctant do to do so given the important economic ties many EU countries have with such persons and institutions.
Observers have speculated about Russia’s goals and next moves with regard to Ukraine.
The seizure and annexation of Crimea appeared to surprise some policy makers by its speed and brazenness.
Russia’s moves in Crimea could be one stage in a multi-stage effort that could involve an effort to seize control over eastern and southern Ukraine.
Ukrainian officials say they have proof that Russia is playing a key role in stirring up demonstrations in eastern Ukraine.
Russian officials have said the situation in eastern Ukraine is “chaos,” which could provide a pretext for invasion.
Ukraine’s armed forces have only 6,000 combat-ready soldiers at present, according to acting President Turchynov.
Flowever, Ukraine is mobilizing what forces it has to resist a potential Russian invasion.
Russia has taken other steps against Ukraine, including imposing some de facto trade sanctions against Ukraine.
Key Western European countries may also feel they have less of a stake in Ukraine’s future, if they, like Russia, were no longer dependent on Ukrainian gas transport infrastructure.
Indeed, in March 2014, Oettinger said that only 14% of the EU’s natural gas consumption came from Russia via Ukraine, and that fact, along with ample gas in storage in EU countries, has diminished Russia’s leverage over the EU in a possible gas crisis.
If relations between the EU and Russia continue to deteriorate, South Stream could be scrapped, and western European countries could be more serious in taking effective actions to find alternatives to Russian gas.
After the collapse of the Yanukovych regime, Gazprom warned Ukraine that it coidd cut off supplies to Ukraine if it does not pay the debts it owes.
Russian Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev has said Russia will renounce the Kharkiv agreements, which provided Ukraine a natural gas price discount in exchange for basing rights for the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Crimea.
Ukrainian leaders say that in such a case Gazprom could start charging Ukraine as much as $500 per thousand cubic meters of gas, about a third more than it charges any other country in Europe.
One plan currently pursued by the Ukrainian government is to import gas from western Europe through Slovakia.
In the long term, Ukraine could develop its own shale gas reserves, import liquefied natural gas, or import gas from Azerbaijan, Central Asia, and elsewhere via pipelines through the EU’s planned Southern Energy Corridor.
Policy United States Policy After Yanukovych’s election in 2010 until the beginning of anti-government protests in November 2013, United States policy makers focused on improving cooperation with Ukraine in such fields as nuclear non-proliferation and energy.
During Ukraine’s political upheaval, statements by Obama Administration officials urged Ukrainian leaders and the protestors to find a peaceful, democratic solution to the crisis.
Vice President Biden telephoned Yanukovych repeatedly and at length to urge him to pursue a peaceful settlement.
However, the agreement was rendered moot within hours by the collapse of the Yanukovych regime.
Administration officials have stressed that the IMF will provide the lion’s share of the rescue package for Ukraine, at about $ 15 billion.
Policy is also providing technical advisors to help the Ukrainian government deal with its financial crisis and to implement energy sector reforms.
Reaction to the Russian Military Intervention in Crimea The United States has strongly condemned the Russian military intervention in Crimea.
Perhaps in response to criticism of United States policy by some Members of Congress, the President added that “I’ve heard a lot of talk from Congress about what should be done, what they want to do.
President Obama has warned that there will be costs for Russia if it does not withdraw its troops from Ukraine.
The Administration has decided that it will not participate in the G8 summit in Sochi, Russia, in June 2014.
The United States has also suspended military cooperation with Russia and talks on economic issues.
Policy The United States has imposed additional sanctions on Russian officials as a result of Russia’s seizure of Crimea.
On March 17, the Administration announced visa bans and asset freezes against several senior figures from Russia and the secessionist Crimean government.
So far, there are 16 high-ranking Russian government officials subject to United States visa bans and asset freezes.
They include leadership figures in the Russian parliament, and government, including top-ranking aides to Putin.
One bank, Rank Rossiya, is also sanctioned due to its role as the personal bank of senior Russian officials.
Russia responded to the sanctions by imposing its own visa bans against Speaker of the House John Boehner, Senator Reid, Senator Landrieu, Senator Coats, Senator Menendez, and Senator McCain, as well as presidential advisors Caroline Atkinson, Daniel Pfeiffer, and Benjamin Rhodes.
Of this amount, $53,957 million is in the Economic Support Fund account; $4. million is in Foreign Military Financing; $28,704 million is in AID and State Department Global Health Programs; $1. million is in International Military Education and Training funding; $4. million is in 1NCLE law enforcement aid; and $2.41 million is in the NADR account, for nonproliferation, antiterrorism, demining, and other programs.
A significant portion of United States aid to Ukraine in the ESF account is dedicated to improving the safety of the Chernobyl nuclear facility, including finishing the construction of the containment structure over the damaged reactor and securing and storing spent nuclear fuel.
Global Health funding helps Ukraine fight its H1V/A1DS crisis, which is the most severe in the region, as well as Ukraine’s serious tuberculosis problem.
In its FY2015 Congressional Budget Justification, likely drafted before the crisis in Ukraine, the Administration requested $57 million in Economic Support Fund assistance for Ukraine.
Ukraine is also expected to receive $6. million in USAID Global Health funding, $22 million in State Global Health Funding, $2. million in INCLE law enforcement aid, $1. in 1MET military training assistance, and $2 million in Foreign Military Financing.
The bill funds the loan guarantees requested by the Administration for Ukraine from the amounts appropriated for FY2014 for the Economic Support Fund, and from unobligated balances for State Department and Foreign Operations funding for prior years.
However, press reports claim it may include an IMF quota increase, which could be controversial among some Senate and House Members.
Policy intervention and interference in Ukraine, majority state-owned banks and commercial organizations, and other state agencies, as appropriate; and calls on the United States to work with its allies and other countries to aid Ukraine’s economic recovery efforts.
The bill also “encourages” the President to impose these sanctions on Russian figures responsible for corruption in Russia; requires an annual report by the Secretary of Defense on military and security developments involving the Russian Federation; and includes rescissions to various Department Of Defense and foreign relations accounts.
On March 21, Representative Royce introduced H.R. 4278, the Ukraine Support Act.
Among other provisions, it authorizes $50 million in appropriations to aid Ukraine’s political and economic reforms; authorizes $10 million for increased broadcasting by Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and Voice of America to Ukraine and surrounding countries and $8 million for law enforcement reform in Ukraine; and calls for enhanced security cooperation between Ukraine and central European NATO countries and United States security assistance to Ukraine.
The bill also includes sanctions against persons responsible for violence or undermining the peace, security, stability, sovereignty, or territorial integrity of Ukraine, based on the three Executive Orders issued by the President as of March 20.
It calls for additional sanctions against person responsible for the acts mentioned above, plus those responsible for corruption in Ukraine or human rights abuses in Russia or Ukraine.
It requires reports to Congress on those sanctioned, as well as reports at the request of the chairpersons and ranking Members of the appropriate committees on whether a person is involved in activities for which they could be sanctioned under the legislation.
Another report is required on foreign financial institutions that are involved in activities illegal under United States law, and are organized under the laws of the Russian Federation or by a person subject to sanctions under the legislation, as well as foreign financial institutions involved in violating Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The bill also calls on the Administration to greatly expand the number of Russian officials sanctioned under the Sergei Magnitsky Rule of Law Accountability Act of 2012.
The United States and its NATO allies have limited their military actions so far to a modest increase in air assets to the Baltic states and Poland to signal NATO’s resolve to defend its member states.
Policy Indeed, long before the recent events in Crimea, many observers believed or hoped that Russia would not take the steps that it has already taken, for fear that the Russian elite could lose its vast assets in Europe and elsewhere.
However, now that the deterrent effect of possible sanctions has failed, policy makers may be faced with the possibility that the implementation of sanctions may not be powerful enough to compel Russia’s compliance.
The sanctions would then be mainly a mechanism to show Russia the “cost” of its violation of international norms or perhaps to deter it from occupying additional Ukrainian territory.
Cooperation between Russia and the United States on other issues, such as the withdrawal of United States military cargoes from Afghanistan, could also come to an end.
The prospect of an open-ended deep freeze in relations with Russia may be enough for United States and EU policy makers to decide to not impose serious financial sanctions, or to lift or weaken them later.
A key issue is whether to attack key Russian businessmen and companies, which could have a serious impact on Russia’s economy, or to limit sanctions to a few of Putin’s most outspoken advisors and subordinates, which could have a mainly symbolic impact.
United States and EU policy makers might feel compelled to keep sanctions in place once they are imposed, even if they seem unlikely to achieve their goals, fearing the loss of credibility that could result if they do not.
Some observers continue to call for trying to work with Russia to stabilize Ukraine, due to a lack of workable alternatives.
They say the United States and the EU should at least be willing to discuss issues raised by Russia, including alleged dangers to Russian-speakers in Ukraine and questions about the legitimacy of the new government.
Others are skeptical that close cooperation with Russia on Ukraine is possible.
They view many of Russia’s stated concerns as bogus, and meant to conceal other designs which are presumably unacceptable to United States and EU policy makers.
Another issue is whether to provide military aid to Ukraine, and if so, whether it should include lethal aid.
Those arguing for the aid say the United States needs to show resolve in the face of Russian aggression against Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
