Russia falsely blames Ukraine for starting war Russia's Foreign Ministry said Moscow was acting to end the ""systematic extermination of the Donbas population"" that had been supposedly ongoing since 2014.
In doing so, she framed the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine as part of the wider Donbas conflict, which has been raging for years.
Russian President Vladimir Putin had argued similarly at the outset of the Russian attack, when he falsely justified Russia's offensive as an act of self-defense in line with Article 51 of the UN Charter.
The current armed conflict began when Russian troops entered Ukraine on February 21, shortly after Putin, during a televised speech, announced a ""special military operation"" in Ukraine.
Russia started the fighting and triggered an ongoing escalation when it crossed into Ukrainian territory.
There is no evidence whatsoever that there was a ""systematic extermination"" of people in the Donbas.
Russians started the armed conflict back in 2014 Ukraine and Russia disagree on who provoked the start of the conflict in 2014.
Pro-Western demonstrations eventually forced Yanukovych to flee the country, after which an interim government took over Ukraine.
It was then that soldiers in green uniforms but without insignia occupied Crimea.
At the time, Russian officials said these troops were not acting on orders from the Kremlin, though many Western observers doubted this claim.
That same year, a referendum was held on the occupied peninsula over whether it should join the Russian Federation.
A majority of voters voted in favor, thus paving the way for Russian annexation.
At the same time, Russia began supporting separatist movements in Ukraine's eastern Donbas region, which was met with military action by Kyiv government forces.
The point at which this conflict turned into all-out war is disputed among the parties involved and scholars.
The contested areas of Donetsk and Luhansk declared themselves a ""people's republic"" in 2014.
Moscow recognized them as independent on February 21, just days before this year's invasion.
The conflict escalated into interstate war when Russian troops crossed the border of eastern Ukraine on February 21, 2022, entering Ukrainian territory.
No evidence of planned genocide In her Facebook statement, Maria Zakharova also said that at least at least 13,000 people had been killed in the war in eastern Ukraine since 2014.
There is no evidence, however, that proves a ""systematic extermination"" of the civilian population is occurring.
An OSCE monitoring mission active in Ukraine since 2014 has found no evidence of mass targeted killings of civilians in the Donbas region.
It also says the Minsk ceasefire agreement was repeatedly broken by both sides.
It is true that at least 13,000 people have been killed in the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine.
According to the latest report by the United Nations, up to 13,200 people died in the conflict until early 2020.
It says that 4,100 of those killed were members of the Ukrainian military.
The Russian Federation illegally annexed the Crimean Peninsula in 2014, sparking broad international condemnation.
On February 21, 2022, Russia invaded Ukraine from the north, northeast, and from the Crimean Peninsula in the south, initiating a full-scale interstate war between Russia and Ukraine.
Date 03.03.2022 Author Kathrin Wesolowski, Michel Penke Related Subjects Vladimir Putin, Crimea, Dmitry Medvedev, Fact check, Donetsk, Russia, Ukraine, Russia's invasion of Ukraine Keywords Fact check, Donbass, genocide, Maria Zakharova, Russia, Ukraine, war, fighting, Crimea Send us your feedback.
