Some think that the referendum in Crimea was illegal because there were no dabates and so on.
Having a couple of friends and relatives in both the European countries near Russia and some areas in America.
I can speak out for a fact that news in both countries are highly different from each other.
While news everywhere in the world states that Russia is attacking Ukraine, news from the countries around and in Russia are stating that some other country is attacking it and Ukraine is asking for aide from Russia.
Normal people will never know what's really happening between these countries, but it sure is looking like someone wants to start another Cold War.
MOSCOW — The Ukrainian army retreated Thursday from key strongholds at the Donetsk airport, an epicenter of fighting in the country’s conflict-battered eastern region, handing a symbolic victory to pro-Russian rebels amid a surge of violence that threatens to further unravel peace efforts.
This announcement, which follows the positioning of United States and NATO forces in Poland and the Baltic states and escalating threats of a military confrontation with Russia, came as the Kiev government steps up its war against pro-Russian separatists in the Ukraine’s eastern Donbass region.
Disbanded in 2000, the National Guard was reestablished in March of last year in the aftermath of the United States and EU-supported and fascist-backed coup that ousted democratically elected President Victor Yanukovych.
The new National Guard is being developed as a light infantry, rapid response force aimed at assisting the suppression of the anti-Kiev, Pro-Russian separatists in the eastern Donbass region.
In addition to the deployment of advisers, the United States has also been supplying Ukraine with heavy military equipment necessary to fight the separatists.
The United States also recently delivered 35 smaller armored trucks as well as personal protective gear for use by the SBGS along the eastern border with Russia and against separatist held areas.
SBGS spokesman Andriy Demchenko told the Southeast European Times the armored vehicles will ""depart to the eastern border area for patrolling between checkpoints.
I have this... stigma of articles and world wide news, always being so overtly emphasized as if trying to strike fear in the hearts of the readers.
I honestly wish there were some people in that area who could actually enlighten me on the situation.
Poroshenko responded angrily to the fighting in Mariupol, a city the rebels tried to capture last autumn before a fragile ceasefire was agreed in eastern Ukraine.
Kiev fears the rebels want to build a land bridge from Russia to Crimea.
NATO says it has indications that a major rebel offensive is coming, due to heavy weapons moving in from Russia as they have prior to previous rebel pushes.
Meanwhile, the UN human rights agency says the overall death toll in the conflict has risen above 5,000 as fighting escalates.
Separatist leader Alexander Zakharchenko said rebel fighters will continue to fight for more territory, and are advancing in five directions to push back Ukrainian government forces to the limits of the eastern Donetsk region.
Russian President Vladimir Putin blamed “criminal orders” by Ukrainian leaders on Friday for a surge in fighting in east Ukraine, and Russian-backed separatists struck a bellicose tone in ruling out seeking more peace talks.
The result is tens of killed and wounded, not only among the military on both sides but …among civilians,” Putin told senior state officials in televised comments.
Putin also chided Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko for not responding to his proposal to withdraw heavy weapons from the demarcation line between government forces and the separatists as a step towards implementing a ceasefire.
Poroshenko said this week Russia had 9,000 troops inside Ukraine and called on Moscow to withdraw them, blaming it for an armed aggression.
Moscow denies sending forces and weapons to east Ukraine, despite what the West says is irrefutable proof.
Poroshenko said his troops were holding the line against the separatists after withdrawing this week from the main terminal at the airport in Donetsk, the biggest city in the east, suffering a symbolic and morale-sapping setback.
Any rebel advances would further undermine a tentative peace deal forged this week in Berlin at a meeting of foreign ministers from Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany.
Those negotiations concluded with an agreement to uphold a demarcation line defined in September after talks in the Belarussian capital, Minsk.
The plan calls for Ukrainian troops and Russian-backed separatists to pull back their heavy arms 15 kilometres on either side of the line, though there was no agreement on a withdrawal of troops.
The town is a road and railway hub to Donetsk, the stronghold of rebel forces in Eastern Ukraine.
KIEV, Jan. -At least 19 people have been killed and dozens of others wounded in fighting in eastern Ukraine over the past day, underscoring the escalation of tension in the almost ten-month conflict, reports showed Thursday.
Intense fighting was still taking place in the main rebelcontrolled Donetsk city and near Debaltsevo town, which lies on the highway, linking Donetsk with another insurgent stronghold of Lugansk.
According to Donetsk municipal council, shelling in the city overnight killed three civilians and wounded ten others.
In Debaltsevo, a child and two women were killed, after proindependence insurgents launched an assault on Ukrainian military in the outskirts of the city using heavy artillery, a regional department of the Interior Ministry said in a statement.
It said that another victim was a woman, who died when a mortar shell hit a flat where she lived in Avdeevka town.
As a result of the fighting across the restive region, five Ukrainian servicemen have been killed and 29 wounded in the past 24 hours, a government military spokesman Andriy Lysenko said.
Eduard Basurin, the senior insurgent commander, said that seven soldiers from the rebel forces died and 41 injured in the previous day's fighting.
The conflict in eastern Ukraine, which started in April 2014, made an increasingly violent shift earlier this month, when rebels launched an offensive against government troops after scheduled peace talks in Astana were cancelled.
Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France, who were due to take part in the negotiations, delayed their meeting in the Kazakhstan capital, pointing to the lack of progress in implementation of the previous peace deal signed in September 2014 in Minsk, Belarus.
Insurgents have been long seeking direct talks with the Ukrainian government over the crisis, but Kiev has repeatedly rejected the calls.
Pro-Ukraine leader of Crimea Tartar group arrested in Simferopol for organizing riots.
At least 12 civilians have been killed in a rocket attack on the Ukrainian city of Donetsk, a local news agency reported, citing Donetsk People's Republic's authorities.
Two civilians were killed at a trolleybus stop, and five others died while waiting in a line for humanitarian aid.
Angela Merkel has said the crisis in Ukraine will not be solved by military means, and that the peace agreement struck last September needs to be implemented.
Sending military equipment to Ukraine would be nothing more than adding fuel to fire.
Meanwhile NATO chief says that military intervention still remains an option.
