And thanks very much, Ambassador Nuland, for finding the time to chat with us.
And the trajectory is well known to people in this room, I think to most of them.
You're Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs, meaning you're responsible for 50 countries, as well as NATO, as well as the European Union, and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
And, from 1993 to 1996, you were chief of staff to Deputy Secretary Strobe Talbott.
And this is a personal note -and it was in Strobe's office, in late January of 1995 that I first met you.
It is true that one of the first major pieces of negotiation that I ever worked on in my career was the denuclearization of Kazakhstan, Belarus, and Ukraine.
I continue to think that that was the right decision for those countries to make, to move in the direction of modern European states that secure themselves through their prosperity, through their partnership with other strong democracies rather than needing nuclear weapons.
That said, part of that deal, as you have underscored, was the commitment of all the Budapest powers, notably including the Russian Federation, to keep their hands off the territory of Ukraine.
And, a month later, in his brilliant article in the New Republic titled ""The Battle in Ukraine Means Everything,"" Tim Snyder of Yale wrote, ""Ukraine has no history without Europe but Europe also has no history without Ukraine.
Throughout the centuries, the history of Ukraine revealed the turning points in the history of Europe.
Now, it looks like both you and Tim Snyder are talking about the same thing.
As you know, the United States, in a bipartisan fashion, for 25 years has worked for a Europe whole, free, and at peace.
And the way Ukraine goes will impact not only the neighborhood and the space between Ukraine and the European Union and NATO space but I think will also have an impact on the kind of future that the people of Russia can have.
So it is profoundly in the United States' interest that Ukraine succeed in its aspiration to be democratic, to be more prosperous, to be unified, to be more European, to integrate with our economies, and to beat the cancer of corruption that has plagued it for so long.
It is why we are working so intensively with our European partners and allies, particularly with the EU on increased economic support for Ukraine now, and it's why we welcome the decision of the Congress in a bipartisan fashion to signal its support as well.
I think I've been in Ukraine eight, nine times in the last calendar year in various ways, both with bosses and on my own.
This last trip was --followed the -it was in November, with Vice President Biden.
And we were there after the elections, as the Ukrainians were working to form a government.
We were at that point advocating a broad coalition government with a very strong reform program.
As you saw about a week later, that government was formed with a large number of technocrats with lots of experience in the economy in particular.
As you saw, the government put forward a relatively robust and very concrete reform agenda, including things like cutting the public sector by 10 percent, including broad decentralization of tax authority, including strong measures against corruption.
The Rada, the Ukrainian Parliament, endorsed that, which was by a very wide margin, which speaks to strong support across Ukrainian parties to deliver on what the Ukrainian people asked for in those elections.
So now they have to implement, and, as they implement, we have to continue to support them.
It's almost been half a year since you spoke there, and outlined that plan.
The four points that you outlined are still the way we look at the situation -support for Ukraine, protection of allies and partners, outreach diplomatically with our allies and partners to Russia, offering an off-ramp, offering de-escalation if the Kremlin is willing, primarily now focused around implementation of the peace plan, the Minsk peace plan from September that the Kremlin signed onto but has not yet implemented, and then, the final point, imposing costs for aggression.
So I think you've seen all of those pieces since the summer continue to accelerate.
On the NATO side, you have seen us continue to, on land, sea and air, provide physical reassurance to our allies.
You've seen the security support for Georgia and Moldova and Ukraine increase.
You've seen now, with the congressional support for the European Readiness Initiative that will allow us to preposition equipment as necessary and further strengthen the alliance.
On the Ukraine support side, we talked about $320 million plus the $1 billion loan guarantee in United States support for Ukraine in 2014; very generous authorizations from the Congress in the Ukrainian Freedom Support Act, which allow us to do more in the coming period, but, of course, conditioned on Ukraine staying the reform course.
On the costs side, very tough sanctions imposed jointly by the United States and the EU; in September, continued discussion about what more needs to be done there, but, at the same time, making clear that those sanctions can be rolled back if the Minsk protocols are implemented, if Russia closes that border with Ukraine, pulls back equipment and fighters in eastern Ukraine, and helps release hostages.
Those are the main points that we want to see, and we have made clear that sanctions will roll back if, in fact, they fulfill their obligations, but we haven't seen it yet.
Some of my colleagues in this town and outside have been suggesting in op-eds that, under certain conditions, the United States should recognize Crimea's annexation.
In the speech to the joint session of Congress on September 18, President Petro Poroshenko of Ukraine said that one can't fight aggression with blankets.
Now, last week, the Senate unanimously passed a bill that authorizes, although not requires, the president to provide both lethal and non-lethal military assistance to Ukraine and requires to expand sanctions on Russia.
It seems now that the president will sign the bill, despite some reservations.
Well, I think the Ukraine Freedom Support Act is emblematic of the strong bipartisan, bicameral support for Ukraine and its aspirations that you see across the United States.
And I know from talking to Ukrainians that that has been very important to them politically.
It's been important to them as they seek to build their reform agenda and to know that they have the support not just of the administration, but of the American people and their representatives.
We've had a spectacular number of congressional delegations out to Ukraine, not just during the Maidan period but since, demonstrating support.
And, you know, when you're trying to do difficult new things, to have that national support is very, very important.
The bill gives us -gives the administration-authorization for a broad set of tools but it also allows considerable flexibility to use those tools in a manner that is flexible as we see how the situation develops.
So if I could sort of probe a tiny bit -I know the answer but let me do it anyway because, you know, AEI pays my salary.
So lethal assistance, defense of -obviously, we're all talking about defensive -you know, anti-tank, anti-aircraft.
Well, first of all, let me say I think that the American people can be proud of the security support that we've already given to Ukraine: $118 million in calendar 2014 alone, broad authorization, as I said, from the Congress to do more next year; beginning now to do the equipping and training of Ukrainian units, which is the most important thing, to help them to be at their best, now, being willing to give heavy armor and those kinds of things, including night vision, communications gear, the kinds of things that the United States excels in and the Ukrainians clearly need.
With regard to your question about -so we've been doing security support up to the high-end, non-lethal defensive range, and also considerable support for border security.
I don't have the number in my head but it's at least 70 million in border security, which is important not just to enable us, should the Ukrainians get access back to their border in the east but they're doing a huge amount of work now to harden the rest of the border and make it a real border as compared to the sunflower fields that we -that we saw in the east.
With regard to the question of lethal, I think you've heard the White House and Tony Blinken say that we keep this under review.
We're in constant dialogue with the Ukrainians about what will make a difference to them.
What's most important is that the Russians be deterred in further adventure.
Now, of course, defending against the Russian aggression is just one of the many huge problems that Ukraine faces.
And you alluded to it, and I just thought that I would just collect it all in one.
Ukraine is almost at the bottom of the Transparency International's corruption list.
Its GDP is likely to shrink by 9 percent this year, and, optimistically, by another 3 percent next year.
Its hard currency reserves, at $19 billion, are almost incredibly low for a country that size.
Now, in the testimony to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, you said that the most lasting antidote to separatism and outside interference in the medium term, is for Ukraine to beat back corruption.
And, you know, we certainly believe, and I think the broad majority of Ukrainians believe that if Ukraine does not beat corruption this time, if it does not create a clean, transparent, democratic country, then it will once again blow its chance.
And they -you know, that is what the Maidan was about many things but it was certainly about the Ukrainian people being sick of being ripped off by their leaders, by oligarchs, by a non-transparent system.
They don't want a small handful of kleptocrats running that country anymore.
That's what the current leadership was elected on, whether it was President Poroshenko or whether it's the Rada, and that's what the government has committed to.
This is what they're going to have to do and it's going to be very, very hard work, and they're going to need a lot of help doing it, which is why a good chunk of our technical assistance and the EU's assistance will be earmarked for that kind of work.
You spoke to the House Foreign Relations Committee in May, and you said that the United States and its allies remain committed to a diplomatic off-ramp should Russian choose to take it.
There seems to be a consensus emerging among independent Russian analysts that, at least to a large extent, the Crimean adventure was a classic strategy of authoritarian regimes, that is, to boost domestic legitimacy and popularity and justify repression by providing -by arranging for a confrontation on the outside and hoping for patriotic mobilization on the inside.
I think in Henry IV, Shakespeare has Henry telling Harry, the future Henry V this -he advises him to busy giddy minds with foreign quarrels lest they look too near onto my state.
Well, Leon, there's a lot in the way you phrased this so I don't know exactly where to start.
I mean, look, there's no question that the Russian economy was already in trouble when the Kremlin chose to bite off Crimea, and it was a very nice distraction from the fact that economy was already not going to grow at that moment.
But it doesn't change the fact that the structure of the Russian state, the Russian economy, prosperity has changed over the 20 years that Russians have been allowed to vote for their leaders.
The Russian economy is deeply knitted into the global economy, and that also creates opportunity but it creates vulnerability for authoritarian regimes.
Now, whether or not those making decisions in Russia over the last year fully understood their vulnerability to reputational things, like the fact that when you violate international law repeatedly, it has a knockoff effect on the environment for investment in your country, not to mention the constraints that already existed and were growing inside the Russian system; or whether it's the fact that there's -what we've done through sanctions on the one hand but also the chilling effect it has on willingness to invest further when there's that kind of uncertainty.
But the largest issue here I think is the broader economic mismanagement over more than a decade where the Russian economy was not diversified away from hydrocarbons.
And the Russian people I think did not appreciate how vulnerable they were to this lack of diversification.
So the question is, will this start a conversation inside Russia about the course that they're on, about the fact that the Kremlin has prioritized their foreign adventures over the well-being of the Russian people now, not to mention all the Russian mothers and girlfriends and sisters and parents who lost children in the adventure in the east when so many Russians were killed.
Well, I think you know that we've put a huge amount of effort into making it absolutely clear that NATO space is inviolable.
Three presidential trips to Europe this year, the investment including almost $1 billion in reinforcement that the Congress has now appropriated; the work we've done at NATO, including at the Wales Summit, as I said, land, sea and air, to make clear that you don't mess with NATO allies.
We've also had intensive consultations with the Baltic countries, as have our NATO allies, on an integrated approach to defense.
You see them strengthening border security now; you see allies from all countries participating there.
Just to say that this was not our choice but this is a clear necessity now to ensure that, first of all, those countries feel secure, feel all 28 allies are there for them but also that we made absolutely clear that this is not an adventure that anybody ought to be going on.
I'm glad that you mentioned the information that gets to every Russian.
Now, one of the sources -probably key source of that success in patriotic mobilization was, of course, a monopolistic propaganda.
And if my recollections of my misspent Moscow youth are true, it far surpasses anything that I saw in the '70s, in just in sheer cynicism and not to mention technology and the reach.
A couple of weeks ago, addressing the nation in the state of Russia, President Putin said that the United States supports violence, murder and burning people alive in Ukraine.
Now, I'm bringing this up because there have been quite a private place accorded to you personally in all of this.
And I brought you, and I'll give it to you as a souvenir, this is just a few randomly selected printouts of articles.
Now, I know you're fluent in Russian, but for the audience, let me translate just the headlines that were collected here of the articles that have you.
And if you do and it's not copyrighted, we'll be happy to post it on the AEI site.
I think we have correspondents here from Sputnik and Novosti, so take notice, please.
So, first of all -first of all, this happened -I can't remember -it was December 11th or December 12th, just to tell the story.
Cathy Ashton of the European Union and I were both in Kyiv to try to help foster some dialogue at that point between Maidan leadership, the opposition leadership, and President Yanukovych.
She had spent some four hours with Yanukovych and I had worked with the opposition.
And Ashton, of course, is in charge of the European Union's foreign policy.
And we had made a decision after the OSCE meeting to try to go together and to work in tandem.
So we were there one night, and then I was to see Yanukovych the next day.
And what happened was, at 1:00m. in the morning, we were all awakened because Yanukovych had order the Berkut security forces onto the Maidan.
There were some 2,000 young guys in these sort of Adam Ant suits pushing onto the innocent demonstrators, while Cathy Ashton and I were there.
And what happened was the Maidanchiki starting ringing the bells and started singing.
And they ended up surrounding the Berkut, and the Berkut retreated at about three o'clock in the morning.
Secretary Kerry called it disgusting that they were putting security forces onto the Maidan.
So the next morning, the feeling was that I couldn't go down -we were all going down to see the Maidan leaders regularly during this period, as was Ashton.
But I didn't feel, in classic Slavic tradition, that I could go empty-handed.
So we brought the sandwiches, not only to those demonstrators who had had such a traumatic evening but we also gave them to the Berkut, to these poor 18, 19, 20-year-old Ukrainian kids who had been ordered by their president to move against their own mothers and grandmothers.
So it was a symbol of sympathy with the horrible situation that Yanukovych had put Ukrainians in, pitting them against each other.
Obviously, that wasn't useful to Moscow propaganda to point that out but there are pictures of me giving the sandwiches also to the Berkut, who were equal victims of the authoritarian structure which was also aided and abetted from the north.
That said, the United States will never be shy about supporting efforts for more democracy, more popular choice, more enfranchisement anywhere in the world, as you know.
If you could just -I know who you are but if you could identify yourself.
And what I would particularly would like to ask you, that is, right now, it's a discussion about the IMF says that at least 15 billion dollars is needed for Ukraine.
And, basically, it should be in addition to the IMF funding committed and more money than this will be needed for the next two years.
First, there will be an IMF program, we presume, then there will be a donor conference.
And just to shout out, Anders Aslund, who has been a mentor and a champion for two, three decades for those across the Euro-Atlantic space who have wanted more open, more democratic economies.
With regard to Ukraine's IMF program, you will have seen that senior IMF leadership was in Ukraine this week issuing a public validation of the reform program going forward, but also confirming that the program agreed last year is going to need a significant adjustment, that there is a fiscal hole now to the tune of 10 to 15 billion dollars.
We have been working with senior EU member states and with the commission on the responsibility that we will all have, if the Ukrainians stay on track, to help fill this hole.
We anticipate that the IMF will come forward with formal conclusions relatively shortly.
We expect that the IMF and the World Bank will have to increase their support for Ukraine, but that the United States, Europe and other friends of Ukraine around the world will as well.
But we've also been in very active conversation with the EU asking that they also give a signal of support.
You will have seen President Juncker come forward, saying that there is a need now and beginning to get EU member states ready as well.
It has to be pegged to President Poroshenko, Prime Minister Yatsenyuk, the government, the Rada, and the Ukrainian people meeting their commitments to themselves, to the international community to get it right this time in terms of corruption and in terms of really liberalizing the economy and making it better integrated with Europe and better integrated with the world system.
And, second, as you may very well know, Foreign Affairs this month rewired the whole jalopy of the promises given by the Western powers to Russia 25 years ago about not expanding NATO and the continued specter of Ukraine becoming a NATO member or Georgia they speculate are responsible for the recent actions.
Well, first of all, there were no promises made to Russia that it would have a veto at any point, by any American or European leader that I am aware of over other countries' sovereign choice of alliance.
So, and anybody who tells you otherwise doesn't know the true situation.
With regard to the effect of sanctions, you know, I think the market information that we're seeing from Russia today is a clear indication that the isolation that the Kremlin has wrought, the pressure that the United States and Europe and others have brought to bear on the Russian economy is having an effect.
I personally believe that there might have been even more aggressive action in Ukraine had we not had a steadily escalating set of measures together, the United States and Europe, had had the United States and Europe not been completely unified, along with Australia, Japan, other friends, in our approach.
There were even worse opportunities than what we saw over the course of the year.
But now, we have a really toxic cocktail with the effect of sanctions, with low oil prices, with the impact finally being felt inside Russia of the economic mismanagement of the last 10 to 15 years, where the economy is so heavily hydrocarbon dependent.
So it is a point of decision making I think for the Russian leadership but also for the Russian people whether this aggressive policy vis-a-vis neighbors is worth it, and whether this choice to prioritize imperial ambition over the needs of your own citizens, over their well-being is really in the best interest of the Russian Federation.
I'm a Ukrainian journalist, political journalist, and since June, I am a military journalist to totally I spent around seven weeks in battle zone in eastern Ukraine.
And, firstly, I would like to express my regards from the Ukrainian people to everything you do for my country.
And, secondly, probably you are more aware than me, but I want just to remind something, really what happened there.
And around 80 percent of vehicles in the Ukrainian Army, it comes from the Soviet past, so most of vehicles is around 40, 50 years.
I have-got some like Kalashnikov and some machine guns which had like maybe 60-year history.
So all modern weapons which we can receive like modern weapon --it goes from Russians as of course.
And even though in September, our president, he estimated they've already lost up to 70 percent of these vehicles in battle zones.
I interviewed some Afghanistan veterans, I mean, a veteran who was engaged in the war in Afghanistan during the Soviet Union and now he went to Eastern Ukraine.
And he said to me that compared to Afghanistan, it was a honeymoon for them in comparison with this full-scale war because all Taliban had, the most dangerous it was either Stinger or some rockets or machine guns but they never used missile launchers like Russians do right now in Eastern Ukraine.
Just to say, with regard to your particular concern about armored vehicles, we have been in discussion with the Ukrainian government on this problem, particularly after the extremely intense fighting in August and September, which resulted in the loss of so much equipment.
And as the vice president announced when he was in Ukraine, we are now providing an opportunity for Ukraine to have some of the up-armored vehicles that are coming back from Afghanistan.
And the Ukrainians are pretty good at fixing stuff so a lot of that will be repaired and made ready in Ukraine itself.
That is why one of our main lines of work with Ukraine is this bottom-up review of the military that European command has been conducting, and beginning the equipping and training of Ukrainian military units at their request.
Again, we will continue to use our tools of diplomatic pressure but also diplomatic opportunity to try to get Russia to fulfill the commitments that it made in Minsk.
The Minsk agreement, signed by Russia, by separatists, by Ukraine on September 5th and elaborated on September 19th is a good and fair deal but it requires the return of that international border to sovereignty, closing it to further transfers of equipment and personnel.
We will continue to say to Russia that if that is fully implemented, sanctions will be rolled back.
Madame Secretary, on your last point, Lavrov's recent speeches seem to be resurrecting what Putin put on the table at Yalta, back in August, that is that the cutting loose of Novorossiya as an ideological project, pushing Donbas and its costs onto Ukraine and the West, they keep Crimea, and it's sort of a mulligan.
And that, after that Minsk Agreement which you mentioned, the Pskov brigades went in.
Look, I've long since stopped trying to get inside the head of decision makers in the Kremlin.
What we're trying to do is to make it clear that there is another way, that if de-escalation happens on the Russian side, de-escalation will happen on the United States and the EU side, to make clear that what we're asking is that they live up to the obligations that they undertook in September.
You know, traditionally, in that part of the world, nobody likes to fight in the deep winter.
So the question is, can we use this period when fighting is never a good game, and the clear pressure that is evident now, to have cooler heads prevail, and to get back on a track where Minsk is implemented piece by piece in a way that brings peace and security and reintegration of Donbas.
The Ukrainian government understands that if that border gets closed and if they can have access again to their own people and their own cities, that there is an enormous reconstruction job to be done, that people have suffered a huge amount.
So we have to hope that winter will be a period of cooler heads and come out of it in the spring in a better place but that is very much in the hands of those who are fueling this fire.
Since the beginning of the war for Ukraine, there has been considerable change in the rhetoric of the United States with regard to the regime of Lukashenko, although there has been no change in the domestic policies of Lukashenko and his dictatorial practices.
And the second question is about the statement of Sergei Lavrov, Russian foreign minister, about the right of Russia to deploy nuclear weapons in Crimea.
Second of all, any effort to further militarize that region will be extremely dangerous and would not go unanswered I believe by those of us who also live in that neighborhood.
On the question of Belarus, I'm not sure quite what you're referring to.
We have for many years had an ongoing dialogue with the government of Belarus regarding our concerns about human rights, our concerns about the political environment for dissent.
It's been interesting, in the course of the last year, you've seen what we've seen, which is that the leadership in Belarus is quite uncomfortable being offered a binary choice.
And, you know, I remember seeing the prime minister of Belarus in September, and -at the UN General Assembly, and telling him that they'd done more for their country in having Minsk the term, the brand Minsk be emblematic of a peace deal than we'd seen in a long time.
But we remain open to a warmer, more integrated relationship with Belarus as the human rights situation improves.
But, again, it's in the hands of the leadership whether they want to take their country in a more democratic, open direction, and then we would obviously be able to respond, as would Europe.
And the letter goes on to say, to those who would provoke Russia that remember the last person to attack Russia was Hitler and he was destroyed.
Now, this is coming from Germans to evoke the image of Hitler, you can imagine the level of fear that exists among certain people about this going towards full-on confrontation, potentially nuclear.
Well, first of all, I would underscore the fact that the response that the United States and Europe have brought to bear to Russia's aggression in Ukraine has been to use the considerable economic tools at our disposal in the form of sanctions -and political tools in the form of sanctions and the form of isolation.
What we are doing militarily is protecting allied territory because we have treaty obligation should NATO allies come under attack.
We are seeking to change Russian choices, to bring them back into compliance with international law, primarily through political and economic tools.
I regard you as a friend also and a very skillful presenter of the American official position.
I think that propaganda for the Americans is a very important tool which works probably for them better than for the Russians.
Lavrov yesterday said that you had a satellite and an AWACS plane watching what was happening with the Malaysian airline which obviously is a major milestone in the Ukrainian conflict.
Secondly, from myself, obviously, economic news are in the forefront for all of us now.
And he made clear at that time that we believed it was shot down by a Buk missile from separatist-held territory.
There will be, I believe, in the context of the Dutch case, when they roll it out -they are likely to ask us to declassify some of that, and I think we will be able to help in that regard.
But the best declassified set of information from United States assets is still contained in what Secretary Kerry said that day.
It is -I believe it was the Saturday the 21st, but I don't have the dates exactly in my head.
We have also been very clear publicly and privately with the Russian Federation with regard to what we know.
And we've encouraged both the Dutch and ICAO to seek information from Russia, because there's been a lot of funky theories, let's put it that way, coming out of Russian propaganda.
I completely reject your assertion that we seek to hurt the Russian people.
On the contrary, we have sought for 20, 25 years to see that Russian people live in a more prosperous, more democratic, more open, more peaceful country.
That is what I have personally committed my diplomatic career to over all these years.
That's what we have committed some 20 billion dollars in United States assistance to the Russian Federation over these 20 years too.
Our concern though is that it is the choices that the Russian leadership that is making that are now taking Russia back to a place of isolation, to a place where it is closed off, where its people are closed off, not just from clean, democratic, open information by the Kremlin's propaganda campaign but also from their access to Europe, their access to markets, their access to that opportunity to live in a more open society.
And you've seen, I hope, on Russian social media both on Facebook and on VKontakte all the Russian flex students saying, ""Bring it back.
That's the Russia that is in our interest, is a Russia that is strong, that is democratic, that lives up to its international obligations, that is a good partner for us.
It is extremely regrettable to us that the Russian people are now paying the price in their pocketbook.
We want to go back to a place where we can work together, but it's Russia's choice.
Well, it's been extremely useful I think for you to have this audience to dispel all kinds of things and misinformation and clarify things.
