April 16 Moscow sees the illegal crossing by three Georgian television journalists of the South Ossetian border as a provocation ahead of the Prague meeting between Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Grigory Karasin and Georgian Prime Minister's Special Representative Zurab Abashidze.
The available data confirm that the violators deliberately and demonstratively crossed over from the Georgian border village of Adzvi to the adjacent South Ossetian populated area where they started filming border infrastructure,"" the statement said.
It is remarkable that this is not the first time that such provocations are being organized precisely ahead of a Prague meeting.
All this, along with recent tales of 'violations of the Georgian airspace by Russian aircraft,' points to the ongoing struggle within Georgian society between forces seeking to normalize relations with Russia and those who are sharing the course towards the escalation of hostility, which was pursued by the Saakashvili regime,"" the ministry said.
Georgian Prime Minister Irakli Garibashvili said he hopes that the arrested Georgian journalists will soon be released.
We need ""healthier"" relations with Russia, the Georgian prime minister said.
This is also true for the Russian-Chinese military and military-technical cooperation, Kokoshin said.
April 17 Russian Permanent Representative to the United Nations Vitaly Churkin has dismissed as provocative the allegations that Crimean Tatars fear a new act of genocide.
The new Crimean constitution declares the official status of the Tatar language and assigns official positions for the Tatar community.
April 17 The fears that Russia could take part of Ukraine's eastern territory under control have no grounds, Russian Permanent Representative to the European Union Vladimir Chizhov said in an interview on CNN on Wednesday.
April 17 The policy the Ukrainian authorities are conducting in southeastern regions may lead to a civil war, Russian Permanent Representative to the United Nations Vitaly Churkin opined.
He criticized the report on Ukraine released by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights based on the findings of Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan Simonovic as ""one-sided, politically motivated"" and customized to fit the conclusions drawn well in advance.
Besides, Crimea cannot be a subject of the session dedicated to Ukraine,"" Churkin stated.
The Russian permanent representative said the report was undermining the OHCHR's authority.
April 17 Russia has expressed ""bewilderment"" at the United States' denial of an entry visa to the new Iranian permanent representative to the United Nations, Hamid Aboutalebi.
The accord says, furthermore, that this provision, which is part of its Section 11, ""shall be applicable irrespective of the relations existing between the Governments of the persons referred to in that section and the Government of the United States,"" the ministry pointed out.
April 17 The Russian Foreign Ministry has branded the delivery of U.S.-made BGM-71 Tow anti-tank missiles for the Syrian armed opposition forces ""a dangerous development"" and expressed certainty that such supplies would not have been possible without the consent of the United States.
We are talking about media reports and video files showing that the United States BGM-71 Tow portable anti-tank missile got into the hands of Syrian militants,"" the ministry's Department of Information and Press said in a commentary.
The militants reportedly underwent special training in handling this type of weapon,"" the Russian Foreign Ministry said.
April 17 The question of holding a top level Russian-Georgian meeting was discussed at a meeting in Prague by Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Grigory Karasin and special envoy of the Georgian prime minister for relations with Russia Zurab Abashidze.
At the meeting the sides ""concentrated on practical aspects of bilateral relations,"" he said.
Trade turnover between our two countries grew 50% with exports of Georgian commodities to the Russian market quadrupling,"" Karasin said.
April 17 The crossing of the border of South Ossetian border by Georgian reporters was a provocation, Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Grigory Karasin has said.
Today they were expelled back to Georgian territory under a judgment of the South Ossetian court,"" Karasin said.
April 17 The Russian Foreign Ministry has accused the leadership of the United States of approving 'the war against its own people' declared by the Ukrainian authorities and warned that such 'reckless' support for the regime in Kyiv will have disastrous consequences.
Washington must realize the disastrous consequences of such reckless support for its dependents,"" a Wednesday commentary of the Foreign Ministry information and press department says.
April 17 Questions the Kremlin is receiving for President Vladimir Putin to answer in a planned live television program on Thursday include some from Ukraine, with some of the messages being anti-Russian and some containing demands that Putin move troops into the east of the country, Putin's spokesman said on Wednesday.
They can't understand the essence of what has happened, they believe that Russia is behaving aggressively.
They are obviously largely made ignorant by the information blockade under which they find themselves.
Because behind those questions one can see the fact that Russian television channels have been taken off the air and that they are only able to receive information from one side,"" Dmitry Peskov told Russia's Vesti 24 television.
At the same time, people from eastern Ukraine ""complain about Putin's indecision concerning the east of Ukraine,"" he said.
Some of the people from the east are wondering what Russia would do if a referendum were held in the east and the latter voted for independence from Ukraine, Peskov said.
There are ""too many such questions to ignore them,"" the spokesman said.
The same goes for questions as to how Russian citizenship can be obtained, he said.
April 17 Russia's position on Ukraine is not reaching European citizens because it faces ""a concrete wall of censorship,"" presidential press secretary Dmitry Peskov has said.
This can be admitted with great regret, nevertheless, it is so,"" Peskov said in an interview with Russia-25 TV channel.
They are not going through because they face a crude, concrete wall of censorship.
We have not seen such things and honestly speaking we have not thought that it could be so apparent,"" the presidential press secretary said.
Earlier there were very many signs of a media war, but it was never conducted so widely, on such a scale,"" Peskov said.
It was difficult imagine that ""countries that a year or two ago 'sang songs' about the restriction of the freedom of speech in Russia are simply censoring, strictly censoring all incoming information flows we had forgotten that such things exist concerning the Russian Federation, Ukraine and Crimea,"" he stressed.
It is curious that ""following instructions from their editors TV channels broadcast one information flow, while on the social networks of the same publications spectators in Europe leave their comments,"" he said.
April 17 Russian President Vladimir Putin has been informed about Transdniestria's request on recognizing its independence, Kremlin press secretary Dmitry Peskov said.
He said he was unaware of the channels through which the request from the Transdniestrian Supreme Council had reached the president.
Members of the Supreme Council of Transdniestria had adopted a request on Wednesday addressed to the UN, the Organization for Co-operation and Security in Europe , and the Russian authorities on recognizing the independence of the self-proclaimed Transdniestrian Moldovan Republic.
April 17 Russian President Vladimir Putin has said that there are no Russian Armed Forces units in eastern Ukraine.
The fact that these people have taken off masks in the direct sense of the word proves this best of all,"" he said.
April 17 The current instability in Ukraine can be settled only through a dialogue rather than using military methods, Russian President Vladimir Putin said.
He said he believes it would be very important to start negotiations with all parties involved.
Members of the de facto Kyiv authorities have been coming to eastern parts of Ukraine from time to time, but they have met with their appointees rather than with their opponents there, he said.
It's necessary to speak with the people and their real representatives,"" he said.
April 17 The decision to send tanks and combat aircraft to eastern Ukraine is another serious crime committed by the authorities in Kyiv, Russian President Vladimir Putin said.
It is another very serious crime on the part of the current Kyiv authorities,"" Putin said during his annual call-in live broadcast on Thursday.
April 17 Russian President Vladimir Putin says he attaches great importance to the quadripartite negotiations between Russia, the European Union, the United States and Ukraine, which start in Geneva on Thursday to find a solution to the Ukrainian situation.
They do not have to travel to Donbas; it will suffice to summon to Kyiv and hold a conference there.
It is necessary to speak with people, their genuine representatives, the ones people have faith in,"" Putin said.
April 17 Russia never planned to annex Crimea but threats to the Russian-speaking population were absolutely real, Russian President Vladimir Putin said.
On the contrary, we intended to build our interstate relations with Ukraine on the basis of the present-day geopolitical realities,"" Putin said in the Q&A session on Thursday.
It was when, not five, ten or 20 years ago, that we decided to support the people of Crimea,"" the chief of state underscored.
Putin noted that his decision regarding Crimea was supported by all members of the Russian Security Council.
April 17 The decision concerning Crimea's reconnection with Russia was made at the very last moment, after the results of the March 16 referendum were announced, Russian President Vladimir Putin said.
April 17 Russian military servicemen were behind the back of the self-defense forces in Crimea, and they acted in a very correct but resolute way, Russian President Vladimir Putin said.
They acted in a very correct but, as I've said already, a resolute and professional way,"" Putin said during a Q&A session on Thursday.
April 17 Russian President Vladimir Putin does not agree that Viktor Yanukovych fled Ukraine during the recent events in Kyiv.
Yanukovych presumed that an understanding had been reached with the opposition forces when he signed a February 21 agreement guaranteed by the foreign ministers of Poland, France, and Germany, Putin said.
Yanukovych agreed to early parliamentary elections, the reinstatement of the 2004 constitution, and presidential elections in December 2014, he said.
But no, as soon as he pulled Interior Ministry units out of the capital, they immediately went further, seized his secretariat building and the government building, and staged a coup,"" Putin said.
April 17 Russia is not considering the possibility of establishing a military-political alliance with China, Russian President Vladimir Putin said during his annual Q&A session on Thursday.
We are not raising the issue of establishing any military-political alliance,"" he said.
However, it is absolutely obvious that we will broaden cooperation with China,"" he said.
April 17 Russia and China will have a significant effect on the entire system of international relations, Russian President Vladimir Putin said.
Russia and China ""have never had such trusting relations in the military field"" as they do now, Putin said, pointing out that the two countries have recently conducted joint war games at sea and on the ground, both in Russia and in China.
April 17 Servicemen of the Russian Black Sea Fleet based in Crimea and Sevastopol will be able to benefit from all appropriate social programs that exist in Russia, President Vladimir Putin said during his annual Q&A session on Thursday.
April 17 A compromise regarding Ukraine must be reached by Ukrainian political forces rather than Russia and the United States, Russian President Vladimir Putin said.
The compromise must be reached between various political forces inside Ukraine, not between third parties.
This is of paramount importance; this is a keynote issue,"" Putin said in a Q&A session on Thursday.
April 17 Guarantees that the rights of Ukraine's Russian-speaking population will be observed, not the order of holding a referendum and elections, is vital to settling the Ukrainian crisis, Russian President Vladimir Putin said during his annual Q&A session on Thursday.
Kyiv should be persuaded to give its answer concerning such guarantees, he said.
In tsarist times, a certain part of this territory did not belong to Ukraine, but was transferred to it by the Soviet government in the 1920s, the president said.
All this happened after the victories of Potyomkin and Catherine the Great in the well-known wars,"" the Russian president said.
People who live on this territory today are Ukrainian citizens, and ""they should enjoy the same rights as the other citizens of this country,"" Putin said.
Hopefully, an answer to the question of guarantees will be found, Putin said.
April 17 Russian President Vladimir Putin hopes he will not have to use the right to send army units to Ukraine he has been given by the parliament.
I very much hope I will not have to use this right and we will manage to resolve all pressing, not to say, critical contemporary problems of Ukraine with political and diplomatic means,"" Putin said in a Q&A session.
He thinks Russia should do the utmost to help people in eastern Ukraine stand up for their rights.
April 17 Russian President Vladimir Putin believes that the current election campaign in Ukraine has unacceptable forms, and if it continues to take place in such forms, the Russian authorities will not be able to recognize the legitimacy of Ukraine's upcoming presidential polls.
If it continues like this, we certainly will be unable to recognize the events that will follow May 25 as legitimate,"" Putin said during his annual Q&A session on Thursday.
Yet we have to bear the realities in mind,"" Putin said in a Q&A session on Thursday.
He called for taking a sober view of the situation concerning the further enlargement of the alliance.
Putin recalled earlier assurances of the NATO administration about the absence of eastward enlargement plans.
Yet the alliance grew with former members of the Warsaw Treaty Organization, the Baltic and former Soviet republics.
All right but it will suffice to sign a bilateral treaty of friendship and mutual assistance, including that military, and the security of these countries will be guaranteed,"" the Russian president said.
But this is also true that whenever the infrastructure of a military bloc is moving towards our borders we have certain fears and questions.
Putin admitted that Russia's decision on Crimea was partially linked to considerations about the possible Ukrainian accession to NATO and the eventual ""forcing out"" of the Russian military presence from the Black Sea region and the deployment of North Atlantic Alliance forces on that territory.
Definitely, first of all and mostly we supported the people of Crimea but there were also considerations that if we did nothing Ukraine would be dragged into NATO at some point consistent with the same principles and NATO ships would be deployed in the city of Russian naval glory, Sevastopol,"" Putin said.
This is not about emotions; the thing is that, speaking of strictly military considerations, Crimea does not have the significance it used to have in the 18th-19th centuries, ""bearing in mind the availability of modern assault weapons, including those deployed on the coastline,"" he said.
April 17 Russian President Vladimir Putin insists that presidential elections in Ukraine are impossible without constitutional reform.
Russia has had contacts with all presidential candidates in Ukraine, Putin said.
He is manufacturing chocolates and caramel candies here, which a lot of people here have probably tasted without even knowing that the owner of this enterprise is Mr Poroshenko,"" Putin said.
As for another Ukrainian presidential candidate, Yulia Tymoshenko, Putin said.
Although she has called for destroying Russians with nuclear weapons, I think this was likely a result of some emotional breakdown, but we know each other very well.
By the way, she signed the well-known gas contracts, with which her party associates and those who took part in signing this contract are refusing to fulfill today.
Putin said he personally does not know the rest of the presidential candidates.
April 17 The self-defense forces in eastern Ukraine can be disarmed only after Ukrainian Armed Forces units leave the area and Ukraine's far-right movements surrender their weapons, Russian President Vladimir Putin said.
In this case, however, they ought to drag the army away from the civilian population,"" Putin said during his annual Q&A session on Thursday.
And they will say afterward that there is nothing they could have done about it.
It is impossible to make people in the east to surrender weapons in such conditions.
Furthermore, Berkut soldiers, Interior Ministry officers and even some military units have chosen to take their side,"" the Russian president said.
They should be governed by common sense and today's realities,"" Putin said.
