In the face of mountains of contrary evidence, Kyiv insisted that the war in the Donbas has been an “anti-terrorist operation” and that the enemy found there are “terrorists” rather than the Russian soldiers that most of them are.
In recent days, Moscow has dropped any pretence and is dispatching battalions across the border essentially openly.
Once commonplace efforts to mask insignia identifying these units as regular Russian troops have dissipated as Vladimir Putin feels he no longer needs to hide his aggressive presence in Ukraine.
The Russian artist Ilya Repin was as great in painting as Leo Tolstoy was in literature.
Or take Repin’s famous work Ivan the Terrible and his Son Ivan depicting the historical 16th -century story of the Russian czar mortally wounding his son in a fit of rage.
The Emperor’s face is fraught with terror, as his son lay quietly dying in his arms, blood dripping down the side of his face, a single tear on his cheek.
You may call them stoical and even, to a certain degree, heroic, but the impression is that they have put up with their fate.
For me, these two pictures parallel the two nations as they are now, in the beginning of the 21st century.
Alexander Bednov, a prominent rebel commander in the separatist eastern region of Ukraine was killed when separatist security forces tried to arrest him.
An arrest warrant for Bednov and several other battalion members had been issued by separatists’ prosecutors’ office for murder, abduction, torture and other abuses.
What happened doesn’t look like a case of mere infighting among rebels.
Bednov was too influential and too well-guarded to be done away with so easily.
The present-day leader of the separatist region Igor Plotnitskiy wouldn’t have dared to dispose of Bednov without the Kremlin’s consent or without, what is more likely, its direct participation.
Sooner, it was Putin’s attempt to consolidate the motley rebellion forces before the multi-party negotiations on the future of the region – just to demonstrate that the separatists are united and authoritative enough to come up with their demands.
However, there’s another implication in here if we consider late Bednov’s political views.
He was a an adherent of a new state in the region– Novorossiya, and a strong opponent to the Donbass remaining a part of Ukraine, while other leaders are less radical and more controllable by Moscow.
Apparently, it would be more preferable for Putin not to “feed” the Donbas but to keep it officially integrated in Ukraine, control Ukraine by proxy and, of course, have western sanctions cancelled.
When we look back into history, an analogous case may be traced in the Spanish civil war in the 1930s.
IMHO, Bednov, in the capacity of the Donbas leader, would have accorded more with Ukraine’s interests than Plotnitskiy.
I don’t like the idea of the Donbas being a political hot potato in my country’s hands.
Apparently, my colleague was referring to problems other than technical.
In August 1964 the Soviet government finally gave full go ahead to the lunar landing effort, but two months later, in a palace coup, Khrushchev was forced to step down, which also meant the death of the Soviet lunar project.
At my high school the teachers never missed an opportunity to emphasize the priority of Russian inventors as compared to foreign scientists.
On the other hand, our teacher never told us about what used to happen to those inventions after they were made.
After Ivan Polzunov’s death at age 37 the machine worked three months, then was disassembled and replaced by convenient hydropower, despite paying off its costs in those three months.
By the autumn of 1875 he had moved to Paris where in 1876, he was awarded French patent # 112,024 for his electric candle.
The first public exhibition of the candle was in London on 15 April 1876.
The Yablochkov candle could burn for an average of one and a half hours in a lamp before the candle had to be replaced.
The candles rapidly increased in popularity as another exhibition was held in London on 17 June 1877.
Units were sold in many European countries including Belgium, Spain, Portugal, Sweden and Greece, as well as in cities on other continents including Rio de Janiero, Mexico City, New Delhi, Calcutta, and Madras.
The Shah of Persia and the King of Cambodia used the candles for illuminating their palaces.
At the height of the candle’s popularity, the 8,000 of the candles were produced in France per day.
The Russian government persuaded Yablochkov to come back to Russia after he got rich in France—and to do it in Russia.
In the long run, Yablochkov returned to his home province of Saratov, and set up an office where he worked on plans for lighting the city.
Yablochkov was buried in the village of his parents in the Church of Archangel Michael.
The church was destroyed by the communist regime in the late 1930s, so in 1947, to commemorate the 100th anniversary of his birth, Sergey Vavilov, then president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, attempted to locate the exact grave site.
In 1964 two Russians Alexander Prokhorov and Nikolay Basov and an American Charles Townes shared the Nobel Prize in Physics for inventing the laser.
It never went into the Russian inventors’ heads to commercialize the idea.
Meanwhile, Charles Townes took out a patent on what he had developed, sold it to a business, got his slice and … Russia is buying all its cameras, printers, etc. from the West.
A few articles were published in scientific journals and that seemed to be the end of it.
In the 1980 the Americans took it up and now Chevron, Exxon, BP are teaching the Russians how to successfully do fracking.
One reason may be that the social and political environment does not contribute to the implementation of ideas.
Steve Jobs, Thomas Edison, Bill Gates have iconic status… Stories go about their not particularly having sweated over their courses at school, some of them were even university drop-outs.
But they rose to the heights thanks to their brilliant acumen… In Russia scientists shun away from business which is considered by them to be dirty, corrupted and criminal, and which it, for the most part, is.
However, knowing the lines and the authorship, I – to my embarrassment – didn’t know in what connection the poet had used the words.
A short research revealed that Robert Browning put these words into the mouth of a Renaissance painter Andrea del Sarto, who, possessing unsurpassed technical skills, lacked the spirit and soul of his contemporaries Raphael and Michelangelo.
The protagonist admits that being faultless as a painter, he is only a craftsman, and is stuck with earthly inspirations, but a real talent is able to glimpse heaven.
So, let’s not be afraid to reach for something we won’t probably catch.
That was a 7th form course book , and I have been keeping it on my shelf until today.
Even though it is already worn and shabby after it suffered many readings in many hands, it remains so much dear to me.
You enter your data in there , fix the device somewhere on your clothes and you may forget about it.
All through the day the pedometer performs all the necessary calculations while you move about, and each time you decide to look at it tells you how many calories you have already spent.
Continue you …-day streak on Duolingo” I open the site again and again doing my daily portion of learning.
At 00.00.00 exactly my wife, my daughter and I were holding our glasses toasting each other and the future.
A most significant political result of 2014 for Ukraine was the grown national maturity of the people.
Thanks to Mr Putin, more and more people here started to identify with this country and with its European future as opposed to what had been prepared for them by the ex-President Yanukovych and his Kremlin patron.
And, as millions of Ukrainians, I am thankful to those people and governments all over the world who, by their decent and sober stand, managed to bring Putin to his senses – at least for the time being.
Regarding their national sentiments, the Soviets were split into patriots and nationalists.
I told him that a son had been born into our family and added that the son’s name was Bogdan.
In this view I would like to make a line of division between a great-power nationalism, which I call “chauvinism”, and the nationalism of an oppressed nation, which is for me equivalent to “patriotism” or, in simpler terms, to the love of one’s own country, to a wish to see one’s country independent and just, free and prosperous, godly and civilized.
The Soviet Union left no unturned stone to discredit their names and the ideas of Ukrainian nationalism.
For one, Stepan Bandera was accused of collaborating with Hitler during the Holocaust.
Bandera got imprisoned by the German fascists, while lots of Jews were fighting alongside with the Banderovites against the German fascists – just as seventy years later they were fighting against the Putin-backed Yanukovych.
Incidentally, I always advise my compatriots to learn from the Jewish people how to love one’s native country and how to build it.
And also to how to be nationalists — with the first book of Jewish nationalism being the Old Testament itself.
During the latest parliamentary elections in Ukraine the whole of the Obolon disctrict in Kyiv where I live was flooded with leaflets and billboards promoting the candidacy of a local money-bag.
However, the victory was gained by a person who was a Maidan activist and a participant in the ongoing war with Russia.
You are currently browsing the BLOGGING IS LIVING blog archives for January, 2015.
