I advise law firms and corporations, and once helped to get a famous Russian oligarch out of Putin’s jail.
For 22 years, I was the Heritage Foundation’s leading Russia/Eurasia and international energy expert.
My consultancy focuses on political risk, national security, and energy policy, especially in Russia/Europe/Eurasia, and the Middle East.
The firm’s interventions span international security, economics, law, politics, terrorism, and crime and corruption.
In addition to consulting for both the public and private sectors, I testify regularly before the United States Congress, and appear on Bloomberg, CNN, FOX, BBC, Al Jazeera, and other TV channels.
Merriweather,serif;margin:0;text-align:center}.article-body-container fbs-video .inline-video--container .inline-video--duration{display:inline-block;font:12px/2.
Work Sans,sans-serif}.promotion-shopping__description-info a{font-weight:600}a.promotion-shopping__description-title{font:600 12px/1.33 Work Sans,sans-serif;letter-spacing:.17px;margin-bottom:8px}.article-body .promotion-shopping__description{margin-bottom:16px;padding:12px 16px}} .tp-container-inner{clear:both}.tag__newsletter-headline{color:#d8361e;display:block;font:600 12px/1.
Work Sans,sans-serif;height:112px;opacity:0;padding:12px;position:absolute;text-align:left;top:45px;-webkit-transition:opacity .3s;-o-transition:opacity .3s;transition:opacity .3s;white-space:break-spaces;width:262px;z-index:1}.tooltip-text .tooltip-info{font:normal 12px/1.
Ariel CohenContributorOpinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.I cover energy, security, Europe, Russia/Eurasia & the Middle EastFeb 28, 2019,08:59am EST|This article is more than 3 years old.Share to FacebookShare to TwitterShare to Linkedin Russian warships seen during a naval parade rehearsal in the Crimean port of Sevastopol, 2015 Pavel Rebrov/Reuters If you ask Stepan Kubiv, Ukraine’s Energy Minister, what the long-term economic losses will be as a result of Crimea’s annexation in 2014, he’ll tell you to look towards the sea.
The announcement comes on the heels of a continuing standoff in the adjacent Sea of Azov, where 24 Ukrainian sailors and three navy ships were seized last November by the Russian coast guard.
Moscow’s brazenness in Ukraine’s territorial waters since 2014 serves as a reminder that the Kremlin views these areas and their associated hydrocarbon resources as its exclusive war booty.
While Ukraine has made an effort to resist Russia’s irredentist aspirations – at the cost of more than 10,000 soldiers and civilians since 2014 – her strategic position continues to deteriorate.
Western military support has been muted and economic sanctions against the aggressor are proving an inadequate means of deterrence.
Meanwhile, the little leverage Ukraine does enjoy as a transit hub for Russian natural gas is fading fast.
The controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline, Russia’s latest attempt to strengthen its grip over Europe’s energy supplies, has received approval from Paris and Berlin and may be launched as early as December 2019.
To make matters worse, Ukraine’s oil and gas sector is plagued by corruption, red tape, and dominance by state monopolies.
Kiev has subsequently struggled to attract outside investment in its energy resources, leaving the country in an increasingly perilous economic position.
Any legal actions to gain reparations for the oil and gas assets lost after the capture of Crimea will take many years – if it happens at all – as collecting compensation from a belligerent a nuclear power can be complicated.
Russia's Resource Grab Russian Black Sea EEZ claims StederGroup The Black Sea contains a wealth of hydrocarbon resources.
The northwestern portion holds estimated reserves of 495. bcm of natural gas and 50. million tons of oil and condensate.
The Prykerchenska zone holds about 321. bcm of gas and 126. million tons of oil and condensate, and the continental slope has an estimated 766. bcm of gas and 232. million tons of oil and condensate.
Russia’s energy ambitions in the Black Sea region are further helped by circumstance and geographical luck.
Moscow’s intent to exploit Ukraine’s natural gas deposits is not just idle speculation; it is currently underway.
When Russian forces annexed Crimea in 2014, they seized subsidiaries of Ukraine’s state energy conglomerate Naftogaz operating in the Black Sea.
The Kremlin appropriated these companies — and billions of dollars of equipment — and delivered them to Gazprom, Russia’s state-owned energy giant.
In one fell swoop, Russia ended Ukraine’s offshore oil and gas operations and bolstered its own.
License areas of deepwater oil and gas deposits surrounding Crimea StederGroup Unlike the Donbass, where Moscow exercises indirect control, in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov Russia has sought to gain de-facto control over Ukraine’s territorial waters.
This was seen with its occupation of the strategic port of Sevastopol, the seizure of Ukraine’s offshore oil and gas assets, the claim of exclusive jurisdiction of the Kerch Strait, and the capture of Ukrainian sailors in November.
Ukraine's Domestic Energy Mess Major international energy conglomerates have noticed Ukraine’s energy potential before.
According to Kyiv Post, some of the world’s largest oil and gas companies, Shell , Chevron , Eni and ExxonMobil , have entered the Ukrainian market before and committed to invest millions of dollars.
Despite measurable progress with internal reforms, Ukraine is still unable to meaningfully expand its domestic hydrocarbon production due to over-regulation, corruption and the dominance of state monopolies.
UkrGasVydobuvannya for example, a 100% subsidiary of Naftogaz, controls 75% of all domestic natural gas production.
The dominance of UGV and Naftogaz has led to valuable private leasing contracts being consistently given to those connected to the highest echelons of government.
The best example of this is Mykola Zlochevsky, who served as Ukraine’s natural resource minister under Yanukovych.
During his time in office he would issue extraction licenses to his own company, and despite numerous criminal investigations has successfully escaped all charges levied against him.
This past January, key oil and gas players met in London at Ukraine’s E&P forum to discuss the auctioning of licenses for rights to 30 onshore hydrocarbon deposits.
The licenses – to be awarded March 6th – would allow investors to take part in production sharing agreements with up to 70% private ownership.
Still, questions about Naftogaz dominance, the fiscal regime, and regulation left most attendees skeptical.
Today, only small operators with high tolerance to risk, like Ilya Ponomarev’s Trident Acquisitions and international financial institutions such as the EBRD, are willing to invest in exploration and production in the embattled country – not Western majors.
That is Not the Question Ultimately the energy resources in the Black Sea will be extracted and produced– the question is by whom.
The rightful beneficiaries of Crimea's offshore oil and gas should be the Ukranian people.
Beyond the Black Sea, Ukraine cannot hope to develop its domestic energy sector without getting its regulatory and legal house in order.
At the same time, it will need to find an effective strategy to fend off Russia’s creeping annexation.
A war-torn country dominated by corrupt state monopolies is not an attractive destination for private investment.
She supports the project management and content strategy for Grads of Life’s DEI thought leadership and research work.\n \nJaleesa previously served as a marketing writer/editor for Faegre Drinker, promoting the firm’s legal and consulting expertise and commitment to its communities.
In particular, Jaleesa operated as the go-to consultant for the pro bono and community service team, amplifying the firm’s charitable giving and community service efforts as well as multiyear initiatives aimed at redressing racial and economic injustice.\n \nBefore that, Jaleesa worked as a digital marketing coordinator for American College of Education, advancing the college’s mission of removing barriers to continuing education for education and health care professionals.
She particularly has the interest to support homeless populations and children who are raised in single-parent households.
Her passion developed early on as she was raised by her single mom, alongside her younger brother and sister.
Imani recognized at a young age the opportunity gap amongst young people of color and knew that she wanted to make an impact in the world to close that gap for others as much as possible.
David has enjoyed a 40-year career in the oil and gas industry, the last 23 years of which were spent in the public policy arena, managing regulatory and legislative issues for various companies, including Burlington Resources, Shell, El Paso Corporation, FTI Consulting and LINN Energy.
During this time, David has led numerous industry-wide efforts to address a variety of issues at the local, state and federal level, and from April 2010 through June 2012, he served as the Texas State Lead for America’s Natural Gas Alliance.
