For followers of events in and around Russia and Ukraine, February is a brutal month.
You need true grit to get through all the painful anniversaries of recent injustices and tragedies.
February is the anniversary of the tragic deaths of protesters killed in Ukraine’s Euromaidan Revolution.
After two years, not a single person has been brought to justice, even as new General Prosecutors are appointed and fail to deliver.
It’s also the anniversary of the Minsk Accords which brought together the leaders of France, Germany, Ukraine and Russia in the Belarus capital in February 2015.
After an all-nighter, Putin had played Merkel, Hollande, and Poroshenko into a collective checkmate, resulting in at best an incomplete halt to the fighting in the pro-Russian Donbas region of Ukraine.
Soldiers are still dying, POWs are still being held , war crimes are being documented, the humanitarian crisis has deepened.
February is the anniversary of the horrific battle for Debaltseve, the critical railway hub in eastern Ukraine which Russia claimed was not subject to the Minsk agreement they had just helped to author.
The brutal fighting raged on, thanks to Russia’s endless supply of heavy weaponry to their separatists until Ukrainian forces were surrounded, then defeated.
Combined Russian and separatist forces occupied the devastated city to this day.
And the act that started it all – the invasion of Crimea – began at the end of February 2014 when thousands of Russian troops descended on the peninsula–by land, sea and air–accompanied by a Russian take-over of media, internet and cell phone towers.
Ukraine was forced to abandon Crimea, as Putin’s balaclava-clad gunmen, bizarrely dubbed “polite little green men” stood outside the Crimean Parliament while those inside were shown how to vote for secession from Ukraine.
The leaders of the indigenous population of Crimean Tatars refused to acknowledge Russia’s illegal annexation, as did most of the rest of the civilized world.
Europe and the United States imposed sanctions, and relations between Russia and the West have only grown worse since.
Last year on February 27, 2015, I spent the day thinking about the Russian invasion of Crimea, how quickly Russia had moved to both seize and annex Crimea, how Russia had left the democracies in the West, slow by nature and design, in the dust.
As I was reviewing videos and reports from Crimea, I came across some raw footage from closed-circuit cameras located inside the Belbek Airport terminal in Sevastopol, Crimea.
In the middle of the night, soldiers clad in full military gear streamed through the turnstiles of the airport, greeted by people who obviously expected their arrival.
We all know now that those Russian soldiers who descended on Crimea were but one part of a Russian campaign to undermine Ukraine’s new post-Maidan government, which leaned West to Europe rather than toward Russia, as Putin had planned.
Having failed to keep pro-Russia kleptocrat Yanukovych in power, Putin moved quickly to tear Ukraine apart.
The invasion of Crimea which began at the end of February 2014 was the first of many shocking actions by Russia in Ukraine and elsewhere.
Russians who had opposed Putin’s growing autocratic rule found yet another powerful reason to oppose him.
Putin’s brazen seizure of Crimea was a shameful betrayal of “brotherly” neighbor Ukraine.
And Putin’s aggression was causing an economic crisis inside Russia, whose economy was deteriorating from a global oil glut exacerbated by Western sanctions.
Russia instituted retaliatory sanctions on Western imports, which only increased Russian suffering.
The Russian opposition, made up of a variety of pro-democracy parties, none of whom had widespread influence, began uniting to hold rallies against Putin and against Putin’s war in Ukraine.
Nemtsov was instrumental in organizing large anti-war rallies in March 2014 and again in September 2014.
For the first time since the mass protests against Putin’s re-election in 2012, aggression on Ukraine brought tens of thousands of people to the streets of Moscow and St Petersburg, marching with both anti-war and anti-Putin banners.
As Putin’s war escalated in Ukraine and Russian soldier “volunteers” had begun coming home in body bags, the Opposition parties now planned another mass demonstration for March 1, 2015.
It was to be not only an anti-war protest but a broader anti-crisis protest, connecting Putin’s seizure of Crimea and his subsequent war in Ukraine to the growing social and economic crises in Russia.
Boris Nemtsov called it the “Spring” March, cleverly recalling pro-democracy Spring revolutions around the world that had passed Russia by.
Last February, as the anniversary of Russia’s Crimea invasion approached, Nemtsov was campaigning together with Alexey Navalny and others to spread the word of the Spring March 1 protest.
Russian television systematically excluded the opposition, so their efforts were largely grassroots–social media, independent Echo Moscow radio interviews, word of mouth, and handing out leaflets.
Winter was nearly over, a new symbolic Spring was just around the corner.
In the weeks leading up to the Spring March, Russia’s propaganda campaign against Ukraine and Russian supporters of Ukraine reached a fever pitch.
Fascists, Nazis, ultra-nationalist Ukrainians, Russian haters had taken over Ukraine, according to the nonstop and shameless propaganda broadcast on every Russian-language channel.
Russian patriots were taking to the streets, holding rallies to support Russian volunteers going to fight those awful fascists in Ukraine.
Russian nationalists and pro-Kremlin groups now called themselves Anti-Maidan, as the disinformation campaign turned Ukraine’s “Maidan” into a dirty word.
Only in Russia would a pro-democracy protest of ordinary people be a bad thing.
The Kremlin presented Maidan as dark, evil, violent and destructive, bombarding TV viewers with frightening images of fire and clashes.
Nevermind that the fires were started to protect protesters from riot police who attacked and beat them.
Russians with pro-Ukraine sympathies were now routinely called traitors.
Putin even referred to a Stalineque “fifth column” of “enemies of the people” who seek to overthrow Russia.
Banners began appearing in Moscow with portraits of leading opposition figures as traitors and aliens, not true Russians.
A year ago today, on Feb 20, pro-Kremlin groups held a large pro-Putin Anti-Maidan rally in Moscow with appalling rhetoric echoing Kremlin propaganda bashing Ukraine, the United States and Europe, while co-opting the anti-war message.
Among the many banners praising Putin for standing up to the evil ones, there were some very ugly signs.
The one that stood out to me was a placard with a portrait of Boris Nemtsov, naming him as an organizer of Ukraine’s Maidan, clearly suggesting he was working to do the same in Russia.
One week later, on February 27, 2015, on the one-year anniversary of Russian troops streaming through those turnstiles in that Crimean airport, the anniversary of the beginning of the first invasion of a sovereign European country since World War II, Boris Nemtsov was assassinated in central picturesque Moscow, on a bridge within a stone’s throw from the Kremlin walls, the seat of Putin’s power.
If Crimea was Putin’s first shocking punch against the accepted world order, the assassination of Boris Nemtsov was the knockout.
On the day we should have been scrutinizing the events in Crimea, seeing the parallels between Putin’s strategy in Crimea and Donbas, documenting Russia’s involvement, we learned the horrific news that Nemtsov was dead.
The assassination of Boris Nemtsov–the most prominent of Russia’s opposition leaders, the best known in the West, the one who Anthony Bourdain dined with on his trip to Russia–was the ultimate Kremlin hybrid war “distraction,” shifting focus away from Putin’s actions in Crimea.
Boris Nemtsov’s assassination last February was a game-changer inside and outside Russia, but ironically, it resulted in more scrutiny of Putin, not less.
It unmasked the veil of a seemingly normal civilized post-Soviet Russian government under Putin.
The annexation of Crimea, the war in Donbas, the MH17 disaster all were shocking violations of international law.
The Kremlin’s true colors under Putin have only become more transparent since his murder, as investigations that had been gathering dust for years began receiving renewed attention, adding to the list of suspicious murders of Putin critics.
Like a mafia family, Putin and his circle of Kremlin elites will abide by no embarrassing criticism that could shake their grip on power.
They will find a way to silence critics one way or another, in Chechnya, London, Ukraine and Moscow, and their powerful worldwide propaganda media will clean up the mess with disinformation, obfuscation, and outright lies.
Without the irrepressible and dynamic spirit and wit of their friend and leader Boris Nemtsov, Russia’s opposition has valiantly carried on, finishing his work, speaking out, attempting to participate in elections, documenting government corruption and nepotism.
But their work has become harder than ever against a system that’s increasingly closing off the few remaining civic spaces for independent voices.
And without Nemtsov’s thorn in his side, Putin has had a smoother path to continue his destructive policies.
Only one large protest has been held in Russia since his death, and it was nowhere near the scale of previous years.
The war in Ukraine still smolders, while Putin’s moved on to making new enemies in Turkey and Syria, aggravating Europe’s refugee crisis as Russian airstrikes continue to wipe out Assad’s opposition and any civilians who happen to be in the way.
At home, Putin has only made life more miserable and more unpredictable for many Russians through harassment, intimidation, even prison.
He’s succeeded in silencing some, but others have bravely continued to speak out about the hypocrisy and corruption of Kremlin elites, even Putin himself, and the need for democratic change.
It seems that the Kremlin’s “signal” violence tactic of murdering Nemtsov to scare dissenters into silence has not only failed, but it’s had the opposite reaction.
The fact that officials have rejected people’s attempts to modestly honor, commemorate or even remember Boris Nemtsov in any public or private way has only strengthened commitment to Nemtsov’s memory as well as his struggle for a new Russia.
Boris Nemtsov, a larger-than-life figure in life, has become in death a revered symbol of the struggle for a decent, predictable, rule of law-based, free and democratic Russia.
As the first anniversary of Nemtsov’s brutal assassination approaches, people around the world are planning demonstrations in his honor and to continue his struggle for a democratic Russia.
So far, the list includes some 61 cities, from Kyiv to San Francisco, and throughout Russia.
Below are translations of the recorded announcements from Vladimir Kara-Murza, Ilya Yashin, Mikhail Kasyanov, Gennady Gudkov, and Alexander Ryklin, Sergei Parkhomenko.
Each appeal to join the February march is also a moving and personal tribute to Boris Nemtsov.
Before this miserable February is over, people all over the world in solidarity with so many brave Russians will remind Putin that neither Boris Nemtsov nor his fight to free Russia from the repressive, belligerent, failing security state it has become is forgotten.
One year ago our friend, the leader of the Russian Opposition, Boris Nemtsov was killed at the Kremlin’s walls.
Day in and day out they allow the people’s memorial on the Bolshoy Moskvoretsky Bridge to be destroyed and vandalized.
On February 27, 2016, the one-year anniversary of his murder, we are holding a march in his memory in Moscow.
We’ll be marching on the same path that he himself took during the last march of his life, a march against the war in Ukraine in September 2014.
We’ll be gathering on Pushkin Square on Saturday, February 27 after 1 pm.
We now understand that the organizers and those who ordered this crime have been allowed to walk freely, they feel very comfortable, the government is protecting them.
And judging by everything that’s happened, if they’re allowed to remain free, then the policy of political assassinations in Russia will continue.
The only way to stop this is together, you and I We can’t count on the Kremlin or the security services.
That’s why we must go out on Feb 27th in honor of Boris Nemtsov, to show that we are many, that there are many people who reject political violence, who reject the atmosphere of hatred that’s developed in Russian society, who want to live in a normal, free, democratic country.
Friends, On February 27 will be a march in honor of Boris Nemtsov, my friend, colleague, Opposition leader, an activist for a new Russia.
I ask you all to come to our demonstration to say “no” to lawlessness, to say “no” to political assassinations, to say “no” to authoritarianism, and to say “yes” to a democratic Russia.
Dear fellow citizens, Exactly one year ago a horrible terrorist act was committed at the walls of the old Kremlin.
Five bullets in the back killed a prominent Russian politician, a public governmental figure, and simply a smart and very responsible individual, Boris Nemtsov.
The actual people who ordered the crime aren’t found, the organizers have yet to be determined.
It’s also to unite in a patriotic civic stance, and to demand that our government conduct a real investigation, to hold the true murderers accountable for this crime.
I’m attending this march this year on February 27 because I’m not prepared to accept the conclusions of the so-called investigation without establishing the organizers and those who ordered his killing.
I’m going to the march because I want to express what I think about what’s going on in my country, which for an intents and purposes, has ceased to be a normal country.
This Saturday February 27 is exactly one year to the day that Boris Nemtsov was murdered.
The mayor of Moscow thinks that the anniversary should be observed somewhere else, not at the bridge, but on a boulevard.
First we have a procession down the boulevard, from Pushkin Square to Sakharov Prospect, that’ll be our route.
Many thanks to Paula Cherok for publishing this important and sobering report summarizing the evils that have transpired over the past few years of Putin’s regime.
Every person worldwide who values democratic freedoms and human rights should register their support for those brave and honorable citizens of Russia who will be marching in Moscow on Feb 27th to honor the memory of Boris Nemtsov.
Many United States citizens are feeling insecure after our recent election was hacked by Mr Putin.
Some people disparage our feelings and there is so much controversy I wonder if we will recover.
We seem to now have a president-elect with glaring mental problems who has become friends with Mr Putin.
It is 3:45AM here in California, as I write and I have not been able to sleep.
It’s important to know how we got here, and that’s mostly what my blog traces.
Although I set out to bring clarity to Russia’s aggression in Ukraine & crackdowns on human rights in Russia, I never in my wildest nightmares thought we’d be where we are now.
Our institutions have been subverted, using hybrid psychological propaganda and cyber warfare.
Those who haven’t been brainwashed are now struggling to get the truth out.
I saw the Anthony Bourdain show where he interviewed Boris Nemtsov and visited with others around Moscow.
Now Mr Nemtsov’s friend lies in a Moscow hospital after his second poisoning.
It is amazing how powerful people can always rely upon our complete and utter complacency and willingness to look the other way.
They actually condition themselves to vote against their own best interest and to ignore murder right before their eyes.
