Kremlin-sponsored TV channel releases CCTV footage of terrorist Zakharchenko elimination.
United States urged Russia to reduce mine threat in Donbas: ""Gazprom"" wants to cancel the decision of the Stockholm arbitration in the appeal.
Russia should demand from its mercenaries in the Donbas to reduce the threats of mine the United States Embassy.
In August, foreign direct investment in Ukraine increased by $ 34 million.
In the Kremlin, they do not know about Sentsov's plans for the exchange of 3 Russians arrested in the United States, Peskov.
Russian Church is a daughter-in-law church, not a mother, a Ukrainian church.
Tomos to be received by newly elected head of single local Ukrainian church, Patriarch Filaret.
If Budapest fails to recall its Berehove-based consul, Kyiv to put end to his activities in Zakarpattia on its own.
This was stated by British Defense Minister Gavin Williamson in an interview with The Telegraph.
London is doing this as part of a ""Arctic defense strategy"" against Russia's threat.
In this way, London will react to the activity of Moscow in the Arctic region, which has grown in recent years.
In particular, Williamson pointed out that Russia has resumed work on military bases that have remained since the Soviet Union and increased the activity of submarines in the region to a level close to that which was during the Cold War.
In this regard, the British authorities see the need to demonstrate their presence in the Arctic and defend their interests in the region, said the head of the United Kingdom's Ministry of Defense.
In addition to the British, the new military base will accommodate the troops of Norway, the United States and the Netherlands, said Williamson.
In October and November, NATO's military training will be the largest ever since the Cold War.
During the maneuvers, a scenario of an invasion near the Norwegian coast will be worked out.
The Arctic covers the central part of the Arctic Ocean, its regional seas such as Barents, Kara and Chukotka, as well as the territories of Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, the Russian Federation, Sweden and the United States.
In the spring of 2017, the Russian Ministry of Defense announced that it would rebuild a network of polar airfields in the Arctic and build up military towns.
Moscow also announced its intention to deploy two new C-400 ""Triumph"" anti-aircraft missile systems in the Arctic.
In 2016, the construction of a large military base ""Arctic shamrock"" on the Land of Franz Joseph.
NATO says that Moscow is building a powerful army along the Arctic coast.
President Petro Poroshenko in an interview with the United States CNN channel told about Russian attempts to undermine the situation inside Ukraine and, in particular, to influence the Ukrainian elections.
Russia spends billions on support for the Sputnik TV, Russia Today and many others, ""said Petro Poroshenko.
Beginning with statements that Ukraine is not a Russian aggression, but a ""civil war"" and it is not Russia responsible for aggression, the accusations by the Ukrainian authorities of the thousands of victims of this war, as well as the denial of the presence of Russian troops in the occupied territory.
The president also reminded that the Russian authorities were forbidden from Russian social networks, because they were used by Russian intelligence agencies to conduct a disinformation and subversive campaign.
So called ""finance minister"" of the self-proclaimed republic, Alexander Timofeev aka Tashkent, was also severely wounded in explosion.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said that this ""provocation"" was aimed at disrupting efforts to settle the conflict in the Donbas.
Petrov and Boshirov have been charged with attempting to murder of former Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia in Salisbury in March by spraying Novichok nerve agent on the handle of their door.
Russian President Vladimir Putin said Russia knew the real identity of two men accused by British prosecutors of trying to murder Skripals and that they were civilians with nothing criminal about them.
After the death of three children as a result of the explosion in the occupied Gorlovka, the United States Embassy in Ukraine has called on Russia to influence militants in order to reduce the threats to the Donbas.
The conflict that has been sparked by Russia in the east of Ukraine has made Ukraine one of the most mundane countries in the world, ""the statement said.
The embassy added that the Russian Federation should insist that its proteges in eastern Ukraine reduce their threats.
Ukrainians are suffering from Russian aggression, ""said the United States diplomatic mission.
Recall that on September 30 in Gorlovka, three children were killed as a result of the explosion of an anti-personnel landmine, another child was injured, was taken to a hospital in a difficult condition.
It should be noted that on October 1, information resources of the militants reported, referring to the so-called ""Ministry of Health of the DPR"", that the condition of the injured child is stable, its life does not threaten anything.
Russian monopolist Gazprom at the Swedish Court of Appeal is trying to cancel the decision of the Stockholm Arbitration, under which he is obliged to pay Ukraine nearly $ 2. billion.
Lawyers of ""Naftogaz"" consider their position as strong and ready to substantiate it.
This was in an interview with Censor.NET said the head of the legal department of NJSC ""Naftogaz"" Yaroslav Teklyuk.
There is no ""balance"" has never been, and that ""Gazprom"", was ""balance,"" like selling Ukraine gas at much more expensive market, with the payment for transit services carried out at a level below the market.
In addition, Gazprom almost never fulfilled its obligations to provide transit volumes, causing additional losses to Naftogaz, because Naftogaz, under the terms of a transit contract, had to keep the gas transportation system ready to transport the maximum volumes provided for by the contract , which provided for constant investments in the system in order to maintain its efficiency at a high level"", he explained.
According to Teklyuk, at this stage it is difficult to talk about the prospects of appeals.
However, it should be remembered that on the other hand, there are a lot of professional, intelligent and expensive lawyers working to maximize their position.
By the way, the expenses of Gazprom for legal and related services, in connection with arbitration, is significantly higher than Naftogaz.
If they prove that there were procedural violations, then the cancellation of the arbitral award will go away.
In this case, we will return to 2014, which means that we will need to once again understand this issue,""said the lawyer.
Gazprom has appealed to the court, and the court has ordered a temporary suspension of enforcement of this decision on the territory of Sweden, and this decision was subsequently canceled. all the performance that we have started in other jurisdictions.Today, we are executing in the UK, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and we plan to implement in a much larger number of jurisdictions.
Theoretically, they can be voluntarily paid, although, based on their statements, it is unlikely.
The conflict in eastern Ukraine caused by Russia turned Ukraine into one of the most mundane countries in the world.
He stressed that Ukraine does not ask the American soldiers to fight against Russia, but expects United States assistance in building an effective defense system.
The net inflow of foreign direct investment into the Ukrainian economy in August 2018 increased by $34 million compared to July and amounted to $176 million.
As it is noted, 40% of these investments were directed to the share capital of foreign companies operating in Ukraine.
They also note that the influx of foreign investment contributed to the reduction of Ukraine's balance of payments deficit.
It should be noted that in July 2018, the balance of payments was reduced to a deficit of $170 million.
It was also noted that over the past three years, about 1. billion euros of investments have been invested in alternative energy sources projects in Ukraine.
On the eve of the Japanese financial company Nomura has classified Ukraine into the list of countries, the risk of a currency crisis that has the highest.
Also, the NBU was informed about the growth of external risks for the stability of the hryvnia.
Earlier it was noted that during August the international currency reserves of the National Bank decreased by more than half a billion dollars due to support of the hryvnia exchange rate.
This was reported by the head of the department of preventive activities of the Odessa police Ivan Ishchenko.
The reaction of the law-enforcers was instantaneous, ""Ischenko wrote on Facebook.
According to him, the police established the persons of the detainees and set the purpose of their arrival in Odessa.
The adviser to the head of the Police of the Odesa region Ruslan Farostyak said that police detained and taken hunted firearms and traumatic weapons in the detainees' offices.
The police also transmitted information to weapons registration sites with the requirement that men cancel permits.
During the conciliation council in the Verkhovna Rada, confrontations between the head of the ""Batkivshchyna"" Yulia Tymoshenko and the head of the BPP faction Arthur Gerasimov, as well as the first vice-speaker Irina Gerashchenko, took place.
Iryna that Savchenko was awarded the Order of the Hero of Ukraine, Mr Poroshenko, and that she had taken her from Russia, Iryna Gerashchenko.
Moreover, Iryna Gerashchenko, who has a patriot, flees for some reason not a patriot to the Russian Federation. who shout more loudly about patriotism, including the Minister of Economy of the Government of Yanukovych Poroshenko, will actually surrender Ukraine to the fullest.
I think that all these facts will be brought to the country after the people correctly remove them from the authorities.
Look for the fifth column Moscow in the administration of the President and"", retorted Tymoshenko.
Earlier on the conciliatory council also there was a riot between the leader of the Batkivshchyna and the head of the faction BPP Arthur Gerasimov, who said that the initiative of Tymoshenko to eliminate Naftogaz coincides with the interests of the Kremlin.
Gerasimov also suggested that Tymoshenko is trying to block talks with Europeans in order to give Putin the necessary time for the construction of the North Stream-2.
This suggests that Poroshenko was determined with the main opponent in the elections.
The Kremlin is not aware of the plans for the exchange of Russian sentenced Russians Oleg Sentsov to Russia convicted in the United States of Russia, Victor But and Konstantin Yaroshenko, as well as Maria Butina, who is under arrest.
This was announced by the press secretary of the Russian president Dmitry Peskov, informs Censor.NET with reference to the Crimea.
Earlier in the media there was information that Moscow was discussing the exchange of Sentsova on Bout, Yaroshenko and Butin.
The head of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyiv Patriarchate Filaret recalled that it was the Russian Church at one time separated from the Kyivan Metropolitanate, which was the canonical territory of the Ecumenical Patriarchate.
According to Censor.NET, in the interview to Channel 5, the head of the UOC-KP said that the documents that have the Ecumenical Patriarchate undermine the Kremlin myth that the Ukrainian Orthodox Church is allegedly derived from Russian.
According to him, in fact, on the contrary, it is Kiev, from the church point of view, that it is the maternal church for Moscow, and not vice versa.
Ukraine now has a Ukrainian Orthodox Church, which is a self-governing unit of the canonically recognized Orthodox world of the Russian Orthodox Church, as well as the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyiv Patriarchate and the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church, which have not yet been recognized as canonical.
Recently, the Patriarchate of Constantinople, also known as the Ecumenical Patriarchate, is actively preparing to provide Tomos on canonical autocephaly for the Single Local Ukrainian Orthodox Church which still needs to be created.
The UOC-KP, the UAOC and part of the UOC-MP, which supports the idea of ​​the independence of the Ukrainian Church from Moscow, are believed to be united in such a church, but expects the canonical approval of such independence.
In the Orthodox world, according to tradition, it is the Ecumenical Patriarchate that has exclusive authority to recognize autocephaly of new local churches.
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew has already stated that the process leading to the recognition of the local Ukrainian church is irreversible.
The Ecumenical Patriarchate recently unveiled a selection of historical documents that must challenge these claims, reminiscent of Crimea.
And in 1686 the Ecumenical Patriarch Dionysius IV and the Cathedral of the Bishops in Constantinople issued Tomos on the transfer of the Kyivan Metropolitanate, which was part of the Patriarchate of Constantinople, to the subordination of the Moscow Patriarchate.
Within a few weeks, the Synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate for this act of mzdoomstva""simonyi"" removed Dionysius IV from the patriarchal throne, but did not revoke the decision on the Kievan Metropolitanate.
Since then, the Ecumenical Patriarchate has repeatedly spoken of violations of the canonical order during the events of 1686, but did not abolish the decision to re-subdivide the Kievan Metropolitanate.
Recently, in the Patriarchate of Constantinople, attention was drawn to the fact that then it was primarily about the administrative subdivision, but with the preservation of the Kyivan Metropolitanate as part of the canonical territory of the Ecumenical Patriarchate.
Hierarchs on Sept. held meetings of the Hierarchy of the Ecumenical Throne Constantinople to confirm that the Church of Constantinople is authorized, without the consent of other churches, to grant autonomy, or autocephaly, to a church that has requested it.
Further measures, such as the adoption of documents at the Synod, are expected to be taken in October.
In case if the Hungarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs fails to recall its consul from the village of Berehove , the Ukrainian government is going to suggest him leave the country.
The Ukrainian government was the one that offered its Hungarian counterparts to recall Berehove-based consul in connection with the violation of the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations and Ukrainian laws.
If they fail to recall , we are going to make a decision on our own that he must leave the territory Ukraine and stop its activities in Ukraine,"" spokesperson for the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry Mariana Betsa Monday told Interfax-Ukraine, Censor.NET reports.
The Verkhovna Rada should develop a law on the protection of state information security.
Recently, during my official visit to the United States, I had talks with the most powerful United States energy companies in order to become part of the Ukrainian GTS management.
I believe this is one of the key decisions that affect not only energy, but also all spheres of security in Ukraine, since joint management of the GTS will allow Ukraine to get strong strong investments"", said Parubiy.
According to Parubiy, this issue is related to the North Stream 2 project, given that the United States is one of the most critical critics of this project.
