It moved to tabloid size and its journalism followed the same trajectory.
Other miscellany includes the weather, public notices, obituaries and the like.
It is almost impossible to trust the first two of these categories; so slanted, ill informed or propagandistic is so much of their content.
There are some honourable exceptions, but like mining for gold, an awful lot of dross has to be sifted to find the valuable nuggets.
The manifold problems with what the Herald is please to call “analysis” are exemplified by a piece in the SMH of 30 March 2017 by Helen Womack.
A Google search revealed that those 30 years ended in 2015, so her time there covered the Gorbachev, Yeltsin, Medvedev and Putin years.
It included the Yeltsin years which were an unmitigated disaster for most Russians.
Their living standards plummeted, life expectancy dropped and apart from a select number of oligarchs, the principal beneficiaries of those years were the western capitalist conglomerates that plundered Russia for their own benefit.
Ms Womack ignores this history, but it is critical for putting what she later alleges in proper context.
Her failure to acknowledge the disastrous Yeltsin years means she is unable to attribute credit to subsequent Russian leaders, including but not only Putin, who have led Russia on a remarkable evolution, often in the face of hostility, misrepresentation and sabotage from the west.
Russia is not only the world’s largest country by a significant margin.
More new Orthodox churches have opened under Putin than at any other time since the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution.
Yet in Ms Womack’s view these are somehow unique qualities that disadvantage Mr Putin.
She claims that “discontented youth” threaten Mr Putin’s ability to win another election.
Ms Womack clearly did not follow the results of the 2016 legislative election in Russia, nor is she cognizant of the results of multiple western conducted opinion polls in Russia.
Quite how ‘discontented youth’ are a threat to Putin in the light of these results is unclear.
Ms Womack cites two isolated instances of disaffected youths as somehow conveying a wider truth.
According to opinion polls, Putin consistently scores in the 80%+ approval category across all age groups.
Lest anyone suggest the polls are as managed as Ms Womack claims Russian democracy is, the following are drawn only from polls conducted by American companies.
When respondents were asked about his handling of relations with China, the US, Ukraine and the EU he scored 90.7%, 85%, 83% and 82% approval respectively.
A Washington Post poll conducted on behalf of the one of the world’s leading Russophobic outlets in March 2016 had Putin rated as “trustworthy” by 73% of those polled, and 65% wanting him reelected compared to 57% a year earlier.
Those are the sorts of approval ratings that other European, North American, and Australasian leaders can only dream about.
Ms Womack completely ignores the objective evidence because clearly it does not fit her and the SMH’s narrative of a “beleaguered” leader beset by a youth revolt.
A similar blindness, historical amnesia and geopolitical ignorance marks Ms Womack’s description of Russia’s policies viz a viz Ukraine.
If there is any single measure that is a litmus test of western media objectivity it is surely the consistent misreporting of the events in the Ukraine and Crimea in 2014 and subsequently, including Russia’s policy responses.
Whether or not Russia was “spooked” by the events in 2014 is a moot point.
They were certainly concerned by the American financed and organized coup that overthrew the legitimate government of Ukraine and replaced it with a right wing cabal that draws inspiration and support from Nazi oriented politicians.
Ms Womack is in tune with other western media in refusing to even acknowledge that the events in February 2014 in Kiev were a coup, even though it has been admitted as such by the Americans.
One of the many offensive policies that the Poroshenko regime instigated was the banning of the Russian language, even though that is the first language of a significant majority of Crimean and Eastern Ukraine citizens.
Crimea had been part of Russia since at least since Catherine the Great defeated the Ottomans in 1783.
Australian troops fought Russians in the Crimean War in the 1850s in an early attempt by the British to seize control of the important port of Sevastopol.
Crimea remained part of Russia until 1954 when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and the Soviet Presidium “gifted” Crimea to Ukraine without consulting either the Crimean or the Russian people.
There was an 83% turnout and 96.7% voted in favour of applying to be readmitted to the Russian Federation.
The United Nations Charter recognises the right of people to self-determination, a principle the west was eager to embrace in the case of Kosovo, but wishes to deny the Crimeans.
None of this essential information is allowed to intrude upon Ms Womack’s narrative.
A majority of the people of Donbass wanted to join the Russian Federation, with whom they share linguistic, cultural and family ties.
Russia refused their wish, a fact that the western press goes to considerable lengths to conceal.
As for “fomenting war”, it is the Ukrainian government that is bombing and firing artillery shells and rockets into civilian areas of Donbass.
Of course Russia supplies political and material support to their cultural brethren.
They would be entitled to under the concept of R2P or Responsibility to Protect, were it not for the fact that this is a concept the west reserves to itself for the right to intervene when its own geopolitical goals demand.
It was Russia, along with France and Germany that negotiated the Minsk Accords with Ukraine that set out a specific pathway to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine that has become a civil war.
It is the Ukrainian government however, who have refused to comply with the terms of the settlement that they had agreed to.
That refusal has been criticized by France and Germany, another fact that the Australian media prefer not to publicize.
As to who is actually fomenting war, Ms Womack neglected to mention that United States Senators McCain and Graham travelled to Kiev after the 2016 United States Presidential election and urged Ukraine to keep fighting, promising American support.
As to the sanctions making Russia “beleaguered”, again Ms Womack is apparently oblivious to a whole range of economic and geopolitical initiatives that Russia has taken in response to western sanctions, the main victims of which appear to be the people of Western Europe.
One has only to mention the successful Russian intervention in Syria, the expansion of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, and the huge development projects with China as part of the One Belt One Road developments to note that Ms Womack, along with most of the SMH’s readers one suspects, is simply ignorant.
The SMH does its readers a disservice by promoting what is little more than ill informed anti-Russian propaganda.
It is little wonder that its readership is shrinking ever closer to the point of threatening its very existence.
