She is a career member of the United States Senior Foreign Service, with the rank of Counselor.
Fitzgerald served at the United States Embassies in Port of Spain, Moscow, Minsk, Berlin, Canberra, and Baghdad.
Fitzgerald also served as the United States Deputy Permanent Representative to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in The Hague, and as Arms Control Counselor in the United States Mission to International Organizations in Vienna.
Fitzgerald served as the Foreign Policy Advisor in ISAF HQ’s CJ-9 Civil-Military Affairs Division in Kabul working on governance issues in Provincial Reconstruction Teams , and then as the POLAD to United States Air Forces Central Command in Qatar where she provided diplomatic guidance to the three-star Commander.
Fitzgerald also worked in the Department of State in the Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, dealing with arms control treaties.
She served in West Berlin in the mid-1980s as a United States Army Russian linguist.
This case study is published as part of the PKSOI Trends Global Case Study Series by the Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute and cleared for public release; distribution is unlimited.
Her research interests include national and social identity theories, ethno-religious conflicts and social relationships in nationalistic societies.
She is a native German speaker and also speaks Spanish, French, and some Modern Hebrew.
Case Study # 0517-02 PKSOI TRENDS GLOBAL CASE STUDY SERIES “CONTROLLING UKRAINE” THE EU AND RUSSIA IN UKRAINE “Ukraine is … a sitting duck, a road apple, it’s weak, Newman, it’s feeble.
A Dutchled international investigation concluded in the fall of 2016 that the missile that shot down MH17 was a Russian “Buk” model; the truck carrying the Buk weapons system was seen entering Ukraine over the Russian border the night before and returning to Russia that night.
CNN reported a recording that day by pro-Russian separatists gleefully reporting that they had destroyed their target.
Vladimir Putin, Russian President, 4 June 20143 “The Russian Federation yesterday again claimed that they wanted disengagement.
They even asked that the Monitoring Mission , spend more time monitoring on both sides of the Line of Contact.
Daniel Baer, United States Ambassador to the OSCE, 29 July 20164 The internationally unrecognized annexation of Crimea from Ukraine to Russia in March 2014 and the beginning of fighting in the Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts in April 2014 caused the international community to pay close attention to Ukraine.
The formation of the Trilateral Contact group consisting of representatives of Russia, Ukraine and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe , resulted in the conflict parties signing a deal, known as Minsk I, to end the crisis in Ukraine in September 2014.
After 16 hours of negotiations between Russian President Vladimir Putin, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko, French President Francois Hollande and German Chancellor Angela Merkel, a detailed plan for implementing Minsk I was signed on February 12, 2015.
Known as Minsk II, the 13-point plan includes agreements for immediate ceasefire, withdrawal of heavy weapons from the front lines under OSCE SMM monitoring, prisoner exchanges, local elections and safe delivery of humanitarian aid.
Despite these commitments, Ukraine today remains politically destabilized by civil war, its economy is in tatters, and its territorial integrity is severely compromised.
As of spring 2017, “little green men”5 (Russian soldiers wearing uniforms without insignia) continue to fight with pro-Russian separatists against the Ukrainian government in Eastern 1 Case Study # 0517-02 PKSOI TRENDS GLOBAL CASE STUDY SERIES Ukraine.
Dramatically, it has become a daily routine in the occupied areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
For over two years of this tragedy, Ukraine has received extensive and irrefutable evidence of direct involvement of Russia, its state agencies and officials in financing, sponsorship, and coordination of terrorist groups which have committed countless crimes against my compatriots.
The shocking reality is that there is a roughly 38,000-strong illegal military force in Donbas and its large part is regulars and mercenaries from Russia.
Russia keeps sending weapons, ammunition and manpower to Ukraine through the uncontrolled part of the Ukrainian-Russian state border.
At the same time, the Russian side continues insisting at all forums, including the UN, that it has nothing to do with all of this and that the Russians are not there in Ukraine.
In July 2014 Reuters published an article in which two journalists reported the tracing of a Russian rocket and logbook that was seized in eastern Ukraine.
The rocket had been signed out at a Russian military base three weeks earlier.
According to a March 2017 report by members of the United States Army’s Command and General Staff College, conventional Russian ground forces openly fought with the eastern Ukrainian separatists in five major battles between July 2014 and February 2015 that led to significant Ukrainian defeats.
Some of the BTGs came from as far away as Vladivostok and the Kuril Islands.
The BTGs consisted of one tank company, three mechanized infantry companies, an anti-armor company, two to three self-propelled artillery batteries, a multiple launch rocket battery, and two air defense batteries.
According to the Special Monitoring Mission of the OSCE, Ukraine, the separatists and Russian forces have yet to withdraw their forces and heavy arms behind the lines of contact drawn in Minsk II and to maintain the ceasefire called for under the Accords.
Russia on the other hand claims that Ukraine is not fulfilling nor interested in implementing agreed upon parts of the Minsk agreements.
They keep twisting the issues coming up with preconditions and things like that.
We call upon all those who have influence on Kiev to make sure that they do what they are supposed to do.
Immediately afterwards, in protest of the pro-European stance of the Ukrainian Government, inspired by the referendum in Crimea, and infiltrated by Russian intelligence officers,13 pro-Russian groups began to engage in armed conflict in Luhansk and Donetsk.
In April, Ukraine launched military operations against these Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine.
After referenda unrecognized by the Ukrainian government were held in Luhansk and Donetsk, the pro-Russian separatists declared independence in both regions in May 2014.14 However, within two hours of counting the votes, the leader of the newly minted “Donetsk People’s Republic” asked to join Russia, muddying the true goals of the separatists.
Ukraine intensified its military offensives in the east of the country against an estimated 30,000 partisans, organized into BTGs and independent brigades.
Dutch and Australian experts led an international investigation into the shoot-down that led them to conclude that the air defense weapons system used was Russian.
By late July, the EU and United States announced economic sanctions against Russia, but, undeterred, three weeks later Russia was reported to send substantial “humanitarian aid” to Luhansk without Ukrainian approval.
Reports of hostages, prisoner exchanges, Russian military equipment secretly entering Ukraine and Ukrainian use of cluster bombs in Donetsk surfaced in the following months.
By March 2015, the UN estimated that 6,000 people had been killed in eastern Ukraine as a direct result of violations of the Minsk agreements.
Ukrainian authorities registered 1. million internally displaced persons and the UN reported 900,000 refugees departing Ukraine in 2014-15.
While the UN reported 750,000 of them went to Russia, the Russian Federal Migration Service claimed 2 million Ukrainians had fled to Russia in that time period.
It is unclear what the actual number of refugees was during that time period, but Russia’s numbers made it look more sympathetic to eastern Ukrainians.
Despite international efforts to facilitate the two Minsk talks and to provide assistance in the implementation of the agreements, representatives of Western countries remained critical of the situation and voiced concern regarding the actual progress towards a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
For weeks now, we have been working on a framework agreement aimed at easing the tensions between the two parties to the conflict.
It has not been possible to reach agreement so far, as neither side is willing to compromise.
Ukraine was part of the Russian Empire and later of the Soviet Union, and many Russians view Ukraine as part of their identity until this day.
In fact, the derivation of the word “Ukraine” in Russian means “on the edge” or “frontier” , showing that Ukraine’s identity is shared with Russia’s.
Repeated invasions from the West over centuries inculcated a strong appreciation in Russia proper for its Ukrainian “frontier” as a buffer zone.
In addition, Ukraine and Russia share not only history but also strong economic, religious and linguistic ties.
The region’s Orthodox Christianity is considered to have originated in Ukraine.
Most Ukrainians speak both Russian and Ukrainian and family ties expand past political borders.
A 2013 study claimed the Russian-Ukrainian border to be the second-largest migration corridor of the world.
Many Ukrainians work in Russia and in addition, large investments by Russian businesses in Ukraine intensify the intertwined relationship.
Likewise, Crimea was a part of Russia proper from 1783 to 1954 when Ukrainian-born then-Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev ceded the territory to Ukraine.
Each one of these places is dear to our hearts, symbolising Russian military glory and outstanding valour… In people’s hearts and minds, Crimea has always been an inseparable part of Russia.
We are very concerned about the threat of escalated hostilities in Donbass.
Consistent actions by the Ukrainian military to seize a “no-man’s land” along the demarcation line dangerously reduce the distance between the positions of the warring parties and provoke more intense clashes.
The western part of the Ukrainian population is largely in favor of its country strengthening ties with the EU, while the more eastern regions 4 Case Study # 0517-02 PKSOI TRENDS GLOBAL CASE STUDY SERIES see remaining close to Russia as beneficial.
Several conflicts between the two countries concerning the use, price and transportation of natural gas have simmered for years.
The vast majority of Russian gas exports into the EU are transported through Ukraine and allegations of Ukraine using gas domestically instead of passing it on to other European countries resulted in Russia temporarily shutting off all gas supplies into Ukraine.
Disagreements on Ukrainian debt and dependency on Russian gas have kept this conflict alive.
A proposed Association Agreement between Ukraine and the EU in November 2013 intended to deepen economic and political ties appeared to cross a Russian redline, as evidenced by Ukraine suddenly signing an “action plan” with Russia instead a few weeks later that gave Ukraine preferential natural gas prices and a $15 billion loan, but what Ukraine offered in return is unclear.
Despite Russia’s discontent with its deepening ties with the EU, Ukraine seemed to have been surprised by Russia’s stance on the issue, including its taking over Crimea and its significant covert and moral support for the separatist uprisings that began in April 2014.
Kyiv struggled to identify acceptable ways to change Moscow’s calculus and regain Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Its primary demand as of mid-2016 was for the “full and immediate ceasefire” called for under the two Minsk Agreements to take hold; then it could arrange for local elections to be held in the Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts.
As noted above, leaders of both separatist movements claimed in 2014 after conducting status referenda that the vast majority of voters were in favor of establishing separate republics.
While the Ukrainian Government opposed both separatist movements and Russia had shown support for both self-declared republics, Minsk II laid out a clear plan of action that representatives of all parties had initially agreed to.
According to the agreement, the Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts would be reintegrated into Ukraine in exchange for a special self-governing status by late 2015.
As of May 2017, the Ukrainian parliament had not voted on the constitutional reform to allow for such special status, and reports of an ongoing ‘Russianization’ in Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts, from the changing of license plates to widespread use of Russian currency,28 raise questions as to whether the reintegration of the two regions into Ukraine is feasible in the long run.
Ukraine was part of the Soviet Union from 1922 as one of 15 constituent republics until its breakup in 1991.
In exchange for Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan giving up their nuclear weapons , the three obtained politically binding security guarantees from Russia, the UK and United States against the threat or use of force against their territorial integrity and political independence.
In the immediate aftermath of the 2004 Ukrainian Presidential election, the so-called Orange Revolution took place.
Protestors claimed voter intimidation, corruption, and electoral fraud to ensure pro-Russian candidate and former governor of Donetsk Oblast Viktor Yanukovych’s win.
Civil disobedience and general strikes eventually led to annulment of the results and the Ukrainian Supreme Court ordered a revote for late December.
Widely known as being pro-EU, former Ukrainian National Bank Governor and informal opposition leader Viktor Yushchenko won the re-election with 52% of the vote.
Domestic and international observers declared the revote “fair and free” and Yushchenko was inaugurated on 23 January 2005.32 5 Case Study # 0517-02 PKSOI TRENDS GLOBAL CASE STUDY SERIES The previously defeated Viktor Yanukovych was then elected President in 2010.
In mid-November 2013 Ukrainian protesters took up residence on Maidan Square in Kyiv to protest government corruption again and demand closer integration with Europe.
Many violent clashes with Ukrainian security forces took place in the following weeks.
On November 29, at the last minute, Yanukovych refused to sign the above-mentioned landmark Association Agreement with the European Union that offered limited financial assistance, closer ties to the EU, and preferential access to European markets in exchange for political and judicial reforms.
Instead, allegedly under great pressure from Russia,33 on December 17, Yanukovych signed an “action plan” with Russia and received a 15 billion dollar loan from Moscow and an arrangement for lower natural gas prices.
Meanwhile, he stated he would continue to work on more favorable conditions for Ukraine in the EU agreement.
Ukrainian security forces, reportedly with direct assistance from Russian officers, began live-firing on the protesters in mid-February 2014.36 As tensions rose, Yanukovych fled to Russia on February 21 and never returned.
An interim government was formed which Russia refused to recognize, calling Yanukovych’s removal a Western-sponsored coup d’etat.
The new Parliament also decreed that Ukrainian would be the state’s sole official language from then on.
Previously, regions could make use of additional official languages if that language was spoken by more than 10 percent of the region’s population.
Thirteen out of 27 Ukrainian regions had declared Russian an official second language.
The vote was overwhelmingly in favor, although some Western media reported at the time that pro-Ukrainian voters were personally intimidated to vote in favor of returning Crimea to Russian control, or not to vote.
International observers claimed reported voter intimidation, closure of critical television channels, and a well working Russian propaganda machine to confuse voters.
On 21 March 2014 interim Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko signed the political part of the Association Agreement with the EU, including steps towards visa-free travel and equal rights for workers.
On June 27, after national elections in May, President Poroshenko signed the economic part of the EU agreement.
It commits Ukraine to econom6 Case Study # 0517-02 PKSOI TRENDS GLOBAL CASE STUDY SERIES ic, judicial, and financial reforms to bring its policies and legislation in line with those of the European Union.
The EU agreed to provide Ukraine with political and financial support and preferential access to EU markets.
Meanwhile, starting on April 7, 2014, pro-Russian leaders in the Donbass in eastern Ukraine (primarily in the Luhansk and Donetsk regions) began fighting for eastern Ukraine to separate from Ukraine.
At various international fora in Vienna from 2014 through 2016, Ukrainian authorities repeatedly laid out photos of Russian soldiers’ passports and Russian heavy armaments not contained in the Ukrainian military inventory that it had seized, demonstrating direct Russian involvement in the fighting.
While Russia has continued to deny direct involvement, it has made countercharges against Ukraine and Western countries for inflaming the situation and causing massive numbers of casualties, IDPs and refugees, labeling the pro-Russian population as the victims.
Russian shelling and siege operations in the city of 25,000, located on the border between Donetsk and Luhansk, killed some 6,000 civilians, and forced another 8,000 to flee the city.
Ukrainian forces including the 128th Mechanized Brigade, Donbass Battalion, and other units were all but destroyed.
We once again call on Russia and the separatists to stop the violence, fully implement their commitments in the Minsk agreements, including granting the OSCE full access and guaranteeing the safety of monitors.
However, Ukraine continued to demand a comprehensive ceasefire first, in accordance with the sequencing in the Minsk agreements.
In December 2016, with strong support from Germany and France, the EU decided to extend its sanctions on Russia for another six months.
This means stopping NATO and the EU’s encroachment into Russia’s historical sphere of influence or “near abroad,” and achieving regional hegemony.
In its “near abroad” Russia’s strategy is to use a malleable definition of a victimized “Russian Identity” of ethnic Russians, Russian speakers, or simply Slavic peoples as being under constant political, cultural, or territorial attack from the West.
Therefore, Russia will remain the enemy of the West in the ongoing World War of this new type.
However, they also noted that in the 21st Century new forms of warfare have been added to the armed struggle, namely information warfare, sabotage operations “on an enormous scale,” and the West’s use of “color revolutions” in the former Soviet space, as well as in the Balkans and the Middle East.
According to the authors of a brief assessment of Russia’s warfare in Ukraine, Russia, possessing the capability and political will “to escalate hybrid warfare to the use of physical force to take what want,” underwrites its military campaigning with a strategy of “localized and temporal dominance” that seeks to keep its neighbors destabilized and weak relative to itself and thus gain regional hegemony.
Its means are covert action, cyber operations and information warfare, and the use of separatists in order to create zones of frozen conflict or “strategic outposts” from which to further manipulate its adversaries.
When all these means, including the use of partisans, are not enough to achieve the objective at hand, then Russia commits conventional forces which try to melt into the countryside or back across the Russian border.
A version of this phenomenon has worked in the breakaway Georgian region of South Ossetia, as well as in Ukraine.
A key aspect of Russia’s military involvement in Ukraine has been the lack of use of air power, while relying heavily on air defense systems to keep Ukrainian aircraft out of the battle.
The Russians’ “reconnaissance-strike model” also relies heavily on drones, rocket and artillery fire, special reconnaissance, cyber capabilities, and geo-locating technologies that have delivered impressive tactical and operational results in Donbass.
As for humanitarian effects, Russia and the separatists have not been reluctant to inflict civilian casualties.
Under continuous barrages of rocket and artillery fire throughout Donbass in what have in effect become “siege operations,” the political message has been that the government in Kyiv cannot protect civilians; therefore the local population should support the separatists and side with Russia.
This is limited warfare which does not seek to topple the existing regime, but to “perpetually conduct operations aimed at weakening the adversary from the inside out,” or, put another way, 8 Case Study # 0517-02 PKSOI TRENDS GLOBAL CASE STUDY SERIES to surround the Ukrainian forces, cut off their access to the outside world, and slowly bleed them out over time.
This will be a brainstorming exercise to flesh out the various – and competing – national interests and foreign policy goals of the countries involved.
Once assigned your roles, you will draft one-to-two pages of notes for yourselves for that role, defining what you believe the United States should do about Russia.
Additional actors could include the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, CJCS, the Ambassador to the UN, and, serving as advisors in this instance, the Ambassadors to Russia, Ukraine, the EU, the OSCE, NATO, or even Germany.
Ukraine, Russia, the U.S., Germany, France, Lithuania, Poland, Sweden, etc., with the goal of outlining a new political settlement in Ukraine, either to implement or move beyond the Minsk agreements.
Look at their current actions in the South China Sea and the Persian Gulf, respectively.
They are Russian special operations soldiers and intelligence officers “on vacation” wearing green uniforms without insignia.
Max Boot, “How to Wage Cyber War on the Kremlin,” “Foreign Policy” magazine on-line, December 13, 2016; accessed Dec 27, 2016.
Beachain, D and A Polese , The Colour Revolutions in the Former Soviet Republics.
The majority of ethnic Russians living in Ukraine are in the Donbass region, close to the Russian border.
The 12 Case Study # 0517-02 PKSOI TRENDS GLOBAL CASE STUDY SERIES Donbass is the industrial heartland of Ukraine, and also famous for its rich agricultural soil.
Ensure monitoring and verification by the OSCE of the regime of non-use of weapons.
Ensure permanent monitoring on the Ukrainian-Russian state border and verification by the OSCE, together with the creation of a security area in the border regions of Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
Enact a law prohibiting the prosecution and punishment of persons in connection with the events that took place in certain areas of the Donetsk and the Lugansk regions of Ukraine.
Adopt measures aimed at improving the humanitarian situation in Donbass.
Remove unlawful military formations, military hardware, as well as militants and mercenaries from the territory of Ukraine.
Adopt a program for the economic revival of Donbass and the recovery of economic activity in the region.
Provide personal security guarantees for the participants of the consultations.
The stopping of the units and military formations of the sides at the line of their contact as of September 19, 2014.
The prohibition on the use of all types of weapons and the conduct of offensive operations.
Under the monitoring of the OSCE, the prohibition on the placement of heavy weaponry and military hardware in the area limited by the settlements of Komsomolskoye, Kumachevo, Novoazovsk, Sakhanka.
The prohibition on the placement of new landmine-­‐explosive engineering barriers within the boundaries of the security area.
The obligation to remove the previously placed landmine-­‐explosive barriers within the security area.
Plotnitskiy Minsk, September 19, 2014 Appendix 3 12 February 2015 Package of Measures for the Implementation of the Minsk Agreements 1.
Immediate and comprehensive ceasefire in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine and its strict implementation as of 15 February 2015, 12am local time.
The process shall be facilitated by the OSCE and supported by the Trilateral Contact Group.
Ensure effective monitoring and verification of the ceasefire regime and the withdrawal of heavy weapons by the OSCE from day 1 of the withdrawal, using all technical equipment necessary, including satellites, drones, radar equipment, etc.
Launch a dialogue, on day 1 of the withdrawal, on modalities of local elections in accordance with Ukrainian legislation and the Law of Ukraine “On interim local selfgovernment order in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions” as well as on the future regime of these areas based on this law.
Ensure pardon and amnesty by enacting the law prohibiting the prosecution and punishment of persons in connection with the events that took place in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
This process is to be finished on the day 5 after the withdrawal at the latest.
Ensure safe access, delivery, storage, and distribution of humanitarian assistance to those in need, on the basis of an international mechanism.
To this end, Ukraine shall reinstate control of the segment of its banking system in the conflict-affected areas and possibly an international mechanism to facilitate such transfers shall be established.
Reinstatement of full control of the state border by the government of Ukraine throughout the conflict area, starting on day 1 after the local elections and ending after the comprehensive political settlement (local elections in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions on the basis of the Law of Ukraine and constitutional reform) to be finalized by the end of 2015, provided that paragraph 11 has been implemented in consultation with and upon agreement by representatives of certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in the framework of the Trilateral Contact Group.
Carrying out constitutional reform in Ukraine with a new constitution entering into force by the end of 2015 providing for decentralization as a key element (including a reference to the specificities of certain areas in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, agreed with the representatives of these areas), as well as adopting permanent legislation on the special status of certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in line with measures as set out in the footnote until the end of 2015.1 12.
Based on the Law of Ukraine “On interim local self-government order in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions”, questions related to local elections will be discussed and agreed upon with representatives of certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in the framework of the Trilateral Contact Group.
Intensify the work of the Trilateral Contact Group including through the establishment of working groups on the implementation of relevant aspects of the Minsk agreements.
Kuchma ___________________ Ambassador of the Russian Federation to Ukraine, M Yu.
