Huge military maneuvers have Western leaders worried another invasion is imminent.
Europe Why Russia-Ukraine tensions have again reached a boiling point Facebook Twitter Flipboard Email December 7, 202111:25 AM ET The Associated Press Enlarge this image This frame from a video released on April 23 by Russian Defense Ministry Press Service shows, Russian troops board landing vessels after drills in Crimea.
Russian Defense Ministry Press Service via AP hide caption toggle caption Russian Defense Ministry Press Service via AP This frame from a video released on April 23 by Russian Defense Ministry Press Service shows, Russian troops board landing vessels after drills in Crimea.
Russian Defense Ministry Press Service via AP MOSCOW — Ukrainian and Western officials are worried that a Russian military buildup near Ukraine could signal plans by Moscow to invade its ex-Soviet neighbor.
World How United States military aid has helped Ukraine since 2014 Parallels Why Ukraine is such a big deal for Russia It's unclear whether the Russian troop concentration heralds an imminent attack.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has pushed for Western guarantees precluding NATO's expansion to Ukraine, and the buildup could reflect an attempt to back up the message.
A decision by Kremlin-leaning Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych to reject an association agreement with the European Union in favor of closer ties with Moscow sparked mass protests that led to his ouster in 2014.
Russia responded by annexing Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula and throwing its weight behind a separatist insurgency that broke out in Ukraine's east.
Moscow denied that, charging that Russians who joined the separatists were volunteers.
More than 14,000 people have died in the fighting that devastated Ukraine's eastern industrial heartland known as Donbas.
A 2015 peace agreement brokered by France and Germany helped end large-scale battles, but efforts to reach a political settlement have failed, and sporadic skirmishes have continued along the tense line of contact.
Earlier this year, a spike in cease-fire violations in the east and a Russian troop concentration near Ukraine fueled war fears, but tensions abated when Moscow pulled back the bulk of its forces after maneuvers in April.
The latest Russian military buildup United States intelligence officials last week determined that Russia is planning to deploy an estimated 175,000 troops and almost half of them are already stationed along various points near Ukraine's border in preparation for a possible invasion that could begin as soon as early 2022.
Ukraine has complained that Moscow has kept over 90,000 troops not far from the two countries' border following massive war games in western Russia in the fall.
Enlarge this image Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy is surrounded by servicemen Oct. as he visits the war-hit Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine.
Ukrainian Presidential Press Office via AP hide caption toggle caption Ukrainian Presidential Press Office via AP Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy is surrounded by servicemen Oct. as he visits the war-hit Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine.
Ukrainian Presidential Press Office via AP Ukrainian Defense Minister Oleksii Reznikov told lawmakers Friday that the number of Russian troops near Ukraine and in Russian-annexed Crimea is estimated at 94,300, warning that a ""large-scale escalation"" is possible in January.
Additionally, the commander-in-chief of the Ukrainian armed forces says Russia has about 2,100 military personnel in Ukraine's rebel-controlled east and that Russian officers hold all commanding positions in the separatist forces.
Moscow has repeatedly denied the presence of its troops in eastern Ukraine.
Russia hasn't provided any details about its troop numbers and locations, saying that their deployment on its own territory shouldn't concern anyone.
The agreement was a diplomatic coup for Moscow, requiring Ukraine to grant broad autonomy to the rebel regions and offer a sweeping amnesty to the rebels.
Ukraine, in turn, has pointed to cease-fire violations by Russia-backed separatists and insists there is a continuing Russian troop presence in the rebel east despite the Kremlin's denials.
Amid the recriminations, Russia has rejected a four-way meeting with Ukraine, France and Germany, saying it's useless in view of Ukraine's refusal to abide by the 2015 agreement.
Moscow has strongly criticized the United States and its NATO allies for providing Ukraine with weapons and holding joint drills, saying that encourages Ukrainian hawks to try to regain the rebel-held areas by force.
Enlarge this image Russian President Vladimir Putin, left, and Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu arrive Sept. to attend the joint strategic exercise of the armed forces of the Russian Federation and the Republic of Belarus at the Mulino training ground in the Nizhny Novgorod region of Russia.
Sergei Savostyanov/Sputnik/Kremlin Pool Photo via AP hide caption toggle caption Sergei Savostyanov/Sputnik/Kremlin Pool Photo via AP Russian President Vladimir Putin, left, and Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu arrive Sept. to attend the joint strategic exercise of the armed forces of the Russian Federation and the Republic of Belarus at the Mulino training ground in the Nizhny Novgorod region of Russia.
The Russian president has repeatedly described Russians and Ukrainians as ""one people"" and claims that Ukraine has unfairly received historic Russian lands during Soviet times.
Putin has strongly emphasized that Ukraine's aspirations to join NATO represent a red line for Moscow, and also expressed concern about plans by some NATO members to set up military training centers in Ukraine.
Some observers interpret the troop buildup as a demonstration by Putin that Russia is prepared to raise the stakes to convince NATO to respect Moscow's red lines and stop sending troops and weapons to Ukraine.
Last month, Putin noted with satisfaction that Moscow's warnings finally have some traction and caused a ""certain stress"" in the West.
United States officials conceded that Moscow's intentions are unclear, but pointed to Russia's past behavior as a cause for concern.
Biden pledged Friday to make it ""very, very difficult"" for Putin to attack Ukraine, saying that a set of new initiatives coming from his administration are intended to deter Russian aggression.
