This paper provides an additional interpretation, contending that the annexation became possible due to a particular context in which the events in Ukraine were presented as a threat to Russian compatriots.
It also argues that due to the external shock of February 2014 events, the “threat to compatriots” narrative became a dominant one and was adopted by Russian authorities, which likely contributed to the decision to annex Crimea.
First, I argue that In the aftermath of the Euromaidan revolution in Ukraine at the annexation of Crimea became possible due to a particular the turn of 2013–2014, Russia annexed the Crimean peninsula context in which the events in Ukraine were presented as a threat and began to support pro-independence separatists in eastern to Russian compatriots living there.
The decision to annex Crimea surprised the inter­ Krebs , the way states identify and assess threats is at national community and numerous foreign policy analysts.
Gotz 2015; Mearsheimer 2014; even fascist, and therefore as a threat to Russians and the Sakwa 2015) or domestic factors (e.g.
However, existing studies do not pay enough attention invoked some important historical events, notably including to the changes in the representation of the Euromaidan pro­ World War II, was based on anti-Western emotions and on testers, the Ukrainian opposition, and the crisis in general the feeling of historical injustice regarding Crimea (e.g. see throughout its duration that occurred in RFP discourse.
Charles tell us something more about the crisis and be helpful in Hermann conceives of external shocks as “sources understanding Russia’s reaction to the events in Ukraine.
I do of foreign policy change that result from dramatic international this by analyzing how the “threat to compatriots” narrative events” that may have an immediate impact on the recipient, and became the dominant one and through various processes struc­ therefore cannot be ignored. tured the foreign policy debate and is likely to have contributed The Ukraine crisis started at the end of November 2013 to particular foreign policy decisions.
The Euromaidan protests, as they became narratives and show how interference in Ukrainian affairs was known, were the biggest demonstrations in Ukraine since legitimized.
Third, I show, step by step, how due to an the Orange revolution in 2004.
Nevertheless, I argue that, external shock, the “threat to compatriots” narrative moved initially, the Euromaidan protest was not a shock for Russia; from the periphery to the center of the debate.
These events exacerbated tensions in eastern Ukraine and Richard Sakwa explain the annexation as and Crimea, where pro-Maidan and pro-Russian supporters a response to actions taken by the West.
Mearsheimer began to clash. directly blames the West for the situation in This paper analyzes a recent important case and has mainly Ukraine, saying that “the taproot of the trouble is NATO an empirical focus.
It is worth noting Eastern Europe; and the pro-Western orientation of the new here that politicians of the parliamentary opposition in Russia government in Kyiv.
The author explains that Ukraine is of are not completely strategic importance to Russia and that therefore Russia’s independent of the Kremlin, but that does not exclude their objective is to keep it out of Western military and geopolitical being disloyal to the authorities . alliances.
As such, it is difficult to say to what nales used by the Russian leadership to justify the annexation extent they express their views regardless of the Kremlin’s and link them to energy geopolitics.
Nevertheless, this point is not crucial for the analysis these official narratives were employed to obscure the real below because, as Catharine MacKinnon and reasons for the annexation of an area of maritime territory Shaul Shenhav have argued, dominant narratives with significant gas and oil reserves. ultimately become more forceful and influential than their Explanations focused on internal dynamics point to, narrators themselves.
According to Sergei Guriev although at the beginning of the crisis the Kremlin repre­ , economic slowdown may have contributed to sented a completely different position.
Last but not least, the adoption of imperial ideology and territorial expansion, Russia analysts point out that and is one of the possible explanations for the decision to even if Russian elections are not entirely free or fair, what annex Crimea.
Consequently, scholars (see Mankoff 2009; In addition, some studies focus on the Russian leadership March 2018) note that public opinion matters for RFP deci­ and particularly on Vladimir Putin.
They emphasize that Putin really cares about Andrew Bowen write about Putin’s transformation being supported by the population and argue from a “pragmatic political fixer of the 2000s” into that the leadership is paying more and more attention to a politician who believes that Russia’s exceptional culture is public opinion on international issues (Donaldson, Nogee, threatened and that he is the man to save it.
They claim that and Nadkarni 2014, 146). the Russian president “does not see himself as aggressively This article consists of four sections.
In the first, I argue expanding an empire so much as defending a civilization that existing explanations of the annexation of Crimea are against the “chaotic darkness’ that will ensue if he allows insufficient.
Fiona Hill Russian analysts point out that the history of President argues that in order to understand Putin’s approach to the Putin is not a history of strategy.
Furthermore, Putin’s deci­ this complicated structure of his personality is behind Russia’s sion-making, especially since his third term, has been almost policies in Ukraine.
These arguments are supported by and the European Union as a zero-sum game, and this think­ Dyson and Parent who, after profiling President Putin ing influenced his future decisions. using operational code analysis, argue that his approach is As for the ideational approaches, they mainly focus on the closer to that of an opportunist rather than a strategist.
According to Andrei group of accounts, do not pay enough attention to language Tsygankov , “the West’s lack of recognition for and the representation of the Ukraine crisis, and therefore to Russia’s values and interests” led to Moscow’s actions in the internal context in Russia that was shaped by dominant Ukraine.
Deborah Larson and Alexei Shevchenko , narratives and in which certain decisions, like the annexation writing about the annexation of Crimea, point to Russia’s of Crimea, became not only possible but even probable. bitterness over its loss of great power status.
Consequently, what differentiates this ana­ are the main driving force behind the country’s interests and lysis from the majority of explanations focused on narratives foreign policy behavior.
He argues that Russia’s “newly dis­ is that they argue that the covered civilizational identity assumed the need to protect it mainstream discourse in Russia had changed before the from the West’s pressures” and determined foreign policy Euromaidan crisis.
In concentrate on discourses accompanying the annexation of addition, this article argues that this narrative was introduced Crimea.
Tuomas Forsberg and Sirke The events in Ukraine represented a crisis that required Mäkinen , analyzing the historical evolution of Russian interpretation from Russian elites.
This paper argues that discourses on borders and territorial questions, investigate to multiple interpretations of these events were possible, and what extent they can explain the annexation.
In points to the role of identity in shaping the discourse other words, I contend that events in Ukraine did not have about cultural and historical ties with Russian borderlands. to lead to the annexation, but the fact that they had been The author argues that this discourse was behind a more presented as a threat to Russians and Russian-speaking popu­ militant foreign policy turn, as exemplified by the annexation lations living there, and the fact that after the external shock of Crimea.
Last but not least, Ted Hopf’s prominent this narrative was not contested internally, resulted in the account argues that the Russian national identity discourse events that took place in March 2014. that was dominant by 2014 made the annexation of Crimea Adam Jaworski and Nikolas Coupland thinkable and natural.
He explains that Russians saw the define narratives as “discursive accounts of factual or fictitious removal of Yanukovych as an existential threat because, events which take, or have taken or will take place at within this predominant discourse, Ukraine had become an a particular time,” while for Shenhav , a narrative inalienable part of Russia itself . is essentially a representation of a course of events.
Accordingly, it is impor­ some crucial processes that presumably led to the annexation tant to pay more attention to narratives, which so far have of Crimea.
First, they assume domestic consensus and do not been repeatedly neglected, because they are often more rele­ investigate the differences in attitudes toward the events in vant than commonly examined instrumental and normative Ukraine, which did exist, especially at the beginning of the considerations to which scholars have usually devoted more crisis.
In addition, narratives are essential narratives regarding the situation in Ukraine.
I argue that it resulted from a hostile presentation of ture and explanation of the Ukraine crisis.
Furthermore, Zyuganov The below analysis aims to demonstrate this reciprocal rela­ compared the developments in Ukraine to the fascists ascend­ tionship between political events and narratives, the impor­ ing to power before World War II and said tance of which increased after the external shock of that Russia should support Ukrainians opposing “Bandera” February 2014.
In addition, dominant narratives strongly , referring to Stepan Bandera, the Ukrainian affect the public debate as they set the boundaries of what is nationalist, leader of Ukrainian Independence Movement, and and what is not legitimate, and limit what politicians, both Nazi collaborator during the war.
This is one of a few exam­ government and opposition, can publicly argue.
The fascist theme also dominant narratives, because leaders are not outside the social had a personal character.
The presentation of oppo­ 2016), Anne Clunan writes about Russia’s great nents as Nazis or fascists has special meaning and is parti­ power aspirations, which were crucial for the creation of the cularly important and illustrative in Russia, which had state’s dominant national identity and definition of its suffered from the great burden of fighting the Nazis—24 mil­ national interests.
As such, this article aims to make lion citizens of the Soviet Union died (The National WWII a modest contribution to this body of literature by analyzing Museumd.)—where World War II is called the Great changes in narratives dominant in Russia among not only the Patriotic War, and where the Victory Day over Nazism is leadership but also the parliamentary opposition, throughout one of the most important national holidays.
Consequently, the Kremlin was very careful more, aggressive narratives to refer to the new Ukrainian not to interfere in Ukrainian affairs to avoid mistakes from government.
The administration in Kyiv was described as 2004 Orange revolution when President Putin openly sup­ a “neo-Nazi, Russophobic and anti-Semitic regime” that had ported Yanukovych and prematurely congratulated him on usurped power in Ukraine as a result of “a bloody coup” and his victory.
In a similar tone, Zhirinovsky once again and “behaved in strict accordance with the official line.” used a comparison to Nazism, saying that “the people of Gelman adds that this time, the Russian population “even Germany wanted Hitler.
In general, this Sidorenko 2014). narrative presented events in Ukraine as the approach of Overall, throughout the first phase of the Euromaidan NATO troops closer to Russia, a situation that required deci­ crisis, the Russian leadership mainly spoke about different sive solutions, such as the reintegration of Crimea and south­ responsibilities of their country in relation to Ukraine’s sover­ eastern Ukraine with Russia . eignty.
These statements the course of events in Ukraine until it was adopted by the indicate frequent references to the notions of sovereignty and Russian authorities. external interference and their interpretation not deviating from their common understanding.
It is worth mentioning that already during this phase of the The Beginning of the Crisis and the Leadership crisis, the leadership did mention the Russian-speaking people Emphasis on Ukraine’s Sovereignty living outside Russia.
That said, these statements were of The “threat to compatriots” narrative was not automatically a rather general nature and did not explicitly connect with accepted as a dominant one in RFP discourse.
Lavrov talked about leading up to the signing of the AA between Ukraine and the protection of rights and legal interests of compatriots as the European Union, Russian leaders presented a relatively neu­ most important part of Russian foreign policy.
In A similar attitude was presented by Russian decision makers addition, when criticizing the EU’s reaction to the events in at the beginning of the Euromaidan crisis.
According to Ukraine at the beginning of February, Lavrov asked officials from the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “from why one did not hear “condemning voices addressed to those the start of the protests in Kyiv, the Russian side advocated who have occupied and still hold administrative buildings, a policy of noninterference in the internal political processes attack policemen, set them on fire, use racist, anti-Semitic of Ukraine.
This statement demonstrates that Russian quences would be if the situation got out of hand.
In January, even However, already during the first phase of the crisis in fewer Russians perceived the Maidan protesters positively Ukraine, a competing narrative began to appear and members ; 84 percent viewed the of Russian opposition began to present events in Kyiv as situation in Kyiv as an attempt at a violent coup d’état, only a threat to Russians and the Russian-speaking population 4 percent as peaceful demonstrations . living in Ukraine.
He criticized the Maidan protesters, saying spoke about anti-Russian actions and threats to Russian com­ that the tone there was no longer set by supporters of human patriots living in Ukraine.
They also proposed some radical rights but fascist elements, and added that Western politicians solutions in response to these threats.
At the same time, the and diplomats openly conducted pogroms in Ukraine, as if it dominant narrative among the Russian leadership spoke was not a sovereign state, but one of theirs.
According to about support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and noninterference Zyuganov, Russia could not remain passive when the West in Ukrainian affairs.
From the in Ukraine threatened Russia’s interests and questioned the Periphery to the Center of the Debate dominant, at that time, narrative of noninterference in Ukrainian affairs, openly calling on the Russian foreign min­ After the climax in Kyiv, the “threat to compatriots” narrative ister to be more active and engage more in Ukraine in order became the dominant one.
In one of the increasingly often used by the domestic opposition but also few public disputes on Russia’s international actions, began to be employed by external actors and finally was President Putin reacted to Zhirinovsky’s statement and adopted by Russian authorities.
He said that “threat to compatriots” narrative among the Russian opposi­ people from western Ukraine would always be opponents to tion.
Immediately after these events, voices calling for the Russians living in Ukraine and that, unless the country was protection of Russian citizens in Ukraine began to be more divided, the “slaughter” would continue . common and radical in Russia.
Sergei Mironov, the leader of These statements demonstrate that in the narrative presented A Just Russia, spoke about Russia’s responsibility for compa­ by the parliamentary opposition, the threat was immanent. triots living abroad and said that Russia could not allow any­ Furthermore, Zhirinovsky explained that a “civilizational one to threaten the lives of citizens of the Russian Federation divide” would solve all the problems of Ukraine.
Russians party proposed that the procedure for obtaining Russian and Russified Ukrainians on the one side and the citizenship for Ukrainians should be simplified.
Zyuganov “Westerners” on the other, or Orthodox in the East and referred to World War II, evoked Bandera, and called on Catholics in the West.
By proposing such a solution, he addition, he urged the Russian government to support popu­ referred to the concept of a “gathering of the Russian lands,” lar resistance in Ukraine’s southeastern regions and to openly which had been popular in the times of Ivan III. declare that it would provide all necessary assistance, without The views described above increasingly resonated with excluding any options, for ensuring the safety of their compa­ Russian public opinion.
Zhirinovsky also November 2013—that is, just before the beginning of protests advocated a more active and more decisive foreign policy, in Ukraine—50 percent of Russians presented a neutral atti­ saying that Russia could not remain indifferent to threats to tude to the AA between Ukraine and the EU, saying that this the Russian minority in Ukraine.
Nevertheless, after that speech, Yanukovych did appeal to Russia for help what is important is that decision makers’ reactions to these and President Putin used a justification for a potential inter­ requests demonstrate that they had begun to employ the vention that was very similar to the one presented by “threat to compatriots” narrative, which until that time had Zhirinovsky , which indicates the use of been used by members of the opposition.
Russian public a particular interpretation of international law in the narrative opinion, which was increasingly critical about the events in by both the opposition and the leadership.
Ukraine, is another factor that may be useful in explaining the Shortly after the climax in Ukraine, similar voices began to shift in the leadership position.
One of the first was Volodymyr appeals appeared, the situation in Ukraine and the actions of Konstantynov, the speaker of the Crimean parliament, who the pro-Maidan forces aroused mainly negative emotions warned that he did not rule out separating from Kyiv if the among Russian society.
The above opinion polls and Gudkov’s for the life and security of citizens,” he appealed “to the account show that on the one hand, Russians already had president of Russia, Vladimir Putin, for assistance in guaran­ very negative views about the situation in Ukraine, and on teeing peace and calmness on the territory of the autonomous the other, that the Kremlin tried to strengthen them after the republic of Crimea” (Aksyonov quoted in Lewis, Traynor, and breakthrough events in Kyiv.
Consequently, it implies the Harding 2014). existence of a dialectical mechanism in which authorities In response to these external appeals, a source in monitor expectations of public opinion and try to shape Russia’s presidential administration told RIA Novosti that them, which indicates the importance of the public consent Russia would not leave Aksyonov’s request unattended and in international matters.
Furthermore, Valentina Matvienko, the head of was made at the beginning of March.
Putin submitted asked Russia to send troops to Ukraine to protect civilians. an appeal to the Federation Council to use military force in According to Churkin, Yanukovych described the situation of Ukraine.
As with previous appeals, Putin referred to of Ukraine I hereby Yanukovych’s request.
Navalny is the best example of cative and criminal actions of ultranationalists” who were how a dominant narrative can “set the boundaries of the supported by the authorities in Kyiv and spoke about “a real legitimate” and limit what political actors threat to the lives and health of Russian citizens and the many can publicly argue.
The Euromaidan revolution now began to be pic­ appealed to President Putin for the admission of Crimea to tured as a threat to Russians and the Russian-speaking popu­ the Russian Federation.
In response to these enough for Russian authorities to change language and start appeals, the State Duma adopted legislation that enabled using the “threat to compatriots” narrative.
In the aftermath of The protests in Kyiv were initially used by the Kremlin for Crimea’s independence referendum, Crimean authorities for­ internal purposes to show the Russian public that revolution­ mally applied to join Russia.
Furthermore, Russian analysts have pointed dence of the Republic of Crimea, while the next day he signed out that among the Russian leadership a simplified picture of a document confirming its admission into the Russian the situation in Ukraine distorted their analysis and prevented Federation.
Trying to account for this decision, it is worth cooperation with the moderate Ukrainian opposition (see reexamining how the arguments about threats to compatriots Lukyanov, Gelman and Pavlovsky in Surnacheva, Gabuev, were perceived by public opinion.
Against this background, the narrative request, 43 percent—the largest share of respondents—agreed used by the opposition, which presented the events in Ukraine that Russians in Ukraine were really threatened by “national­ as a revolution of nationalists and fascists, emphasizing the ists and bandits” and that only Russian troops could protect hostility of the pro-Maidan camp and the threat to the them from the threat of violence.
Likewise, 43 percent con­ Russian minority in Ukraine, worked in favor of the autho­ sidered the secession of Crimea (and possibly eastern regions rities as it further delegitimized the protesters and their of Ukraine) and the formation of an independent state (with actions.
Indeed, despite many decisive actions after the climax in Kyiv could have been messages suggesting this, it is very difficult to say, without synonymous with leaving Russian compatriots at the mercy interviews with Kremlin insiders or transcripts of high-level of Ukrainian nationalists.
In addition, failure to adopt the meetings, whether the Russian authorities actually thought “threat to compatriots” narrative could have signified accep­ that there was a real threat to the Russian-speaking popula­ tance of the forceful change of power in Ukraine, a scenario tion in Crimea and eastern Ukraine.
What the article demon­ that the Russian leadership had been particularly afraid of strates, however, is that the leadership did not use the domestically since the protests in 2012, and one that they narrative speaking about the need to protect Russian compa­ would like to avoid at all costs.
As such, after the external triots from the beginning of the upheavals in Ukraine.
In shock, the Kremlin was not well positioned to reverse this addition, it indicates that after the external shock, when narrative, and so decided to adopt it and follow the logic their room for maneuver was reduced, its adoption turned arising from it.
Countering this narrative would have been out to be the most viable solution.
As such, the taking up of politically risky and probably unsustainable in the contem­ the “threat to compatriots” narrative after the breakthrough porary rhetorical environment. events of February 2014 is likely to have played an important Furthermore, the public perception of the events in role paving the way for the decision to annex Crimea.
The Ukraine and its support for the “threat to compatriots” nar­ analysis also implies that the importance of external shock rative indicate that as a result of the February 2014 events, the was even greater in the light of the dominant negative image Kremlin, in a certain way, might have fallen into a trap of of the events (see Hansen 2015 for an argument about the negative presentation of the Euromaidan.
Indeed, the climax in Kyiv and the adoption of the took place, the incorporation of this narrative became the “threat” narrative not only enabled but might have been most politically efficient and the most viable choice, from conducive to making an opportunistic decision that allowed a domestic perspective, for the Kremlin.
In addition, the the leadership to realize domestic and geopolitical goals. embracing of this narrative allowed Russian authorities to give meaning and an explanation to the public of the surpris­ Conclusions ing and sometimes shocking events that had taken place in Ukraine.
As Crimea is still a disputed territory and the prospects of Consequently, the adoption of the “threat to compatriots” a quick and sustainable solution are vague, understanding narrative combined with the huge public support for it what led to its annexation and how it was legitimized is of required certain actions from Russian authorities and is likely great importance.
This paper aimed to demonstrate how an to have contributed to the decision to annex the Crimean external shock can contribute to the authorities’ acceptance of peninsula.
At the same time, the narrative served as a narrative that previously seemed secondary and was used by a convenient justification for the annexation.
However, the above findings also have did not appeal to the international public but it worked well some potentially broader implications for the analysis of RFP. domestically, as the narrative made it clear to the audience First, they speak to the argument presented at the begin­ who was guilty and who was a victim, and it described the ning of this paper, which says that there is no great interna­ main motivations and characteris­ tional plan behind the Kremlin’s actions and that Russia’s tics of the villain. decisions are opportunistic and reactive to circumstances.
Furthermore, the immanence of the threat in the narrative Second, they point to the complexity of processes shaping implied that in the existing circumstances and in the face of RFP and indicate that its analysis should not be limited to such an enemy, it was right for the Russian Federation to the president, that there are other actors who may have an respond in order to protect compatriots living in Ukraine. indirect impact on Moscow’s international behavior.
As such, A potential reservation about this argumentation could be it points toward the parliamentary opposition as an actor that, that narratives are epiphenomenal to preferences.
Furthermore, and related, the analysis indi­ cates the importance of the public for Russia’s international Acknowledgments actions.
It implies that the Kremlin on the one hand, tries to shape public opinion, but on the other, follows public moods For helpful comments and feedback, the author would like to thank two and expectations.
As such, it points to the importance of anonymous reviewers, discussants on a panel at the 2019 ISA Annual Convention, and participants of a workshop at the 2019 Foreign Policy public consensus not only in the domestic sphere but also in Conference in Edinburgh. the area of foreign policy.
Kievskii tsentr politiches­ potential consequences) speaks to the realist arguments kikh issledovanii i konfliktologii.
First, an initially unsettled Press. narrative situation, which, as during the Ukraine crisis, Barthes, R 1975.
New Literary History 6 :237–72. doi:10.2307/468419. not only facilitates different interpretations of events and BBC. 2014a.
Crimea Leader Appeals to Putin for Help.” the emergence of competing narratives, but also allows the BBC News, March 1.
The narrative proposed by Zhirinovsky and Zyuganov Biersack, J., and S O’Lear.14.
Eurasian Geography played on Russians’ fears and set the debate for the coming and Economics 55 :247–69. doi:10.1080/15387216.2014.985241. months.
Communist and Post-Communist February 2014 and paved the way for interference in Studies 47 :281–90. doi:10.1016/j.postcomstud.14.09.002.
The Foreign Policy cism) and stereotypes (Western-backed anti-Russian radi­ of Russia.
An Elaboration.” a narrative and lead to its adoption by the authorities.
Russian Politics 4 the death of people on the streets, removal of the president :211–41. doi:10.1163/2451-8921-00402004.
How It Rose, How It Is Federation of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation, Maintained and How It Might End, edited by L Aron, 8–21.
American Enterprise Institute. icy/news/-/asset_publisher/cKNonkJE02Bw/content/id/83458.
International Studies Quarterly 34 :3–21. doi:10.2307/ Lavrov, S 2014c.
Lavrov, and His Answers to Questions from the Mass Media during Hill, F 2014a.
Russian Politics 1 :291–315. doi:10.1163/ putin-and-the-art-of-the-offensive-defense-approaches-to-foreign2451-8921-00103004. policy-part-two/#cancel Levada.13a.
International V EC [Agreement on Associate Membership of Ukraine in the Relations 30 :227–55. doi:10.1177/0047117816645646.
Press Conference with the Belorussian Foreign Minister Uladzimir Lewis, P., I Traynor, and L Harding 2014.
The Return of Great Power /asset_publisher/cKNonkJE02Bw/content/id/83146.
Summarizing the Results of the Session of the NATO-Russia Taylor & Francis Group.
A Conversation with Mikhail Journal 72 :28–55. doi:10.1177/0020702017692609.
Zyuganov, G 2013a “Fraktsii GD podderzhat prizyv k Zapadu ne oka­ Shenhav, S 2015.
The Zyuganov, G 2014c “Stop the Ukrainian Tragedy (Statement by the Drivers of Putin’s Course.
Post-Soviet Affairs 31 :279–303. of-the-cc-cprf/. doi:10.1080/1060586X.2015.1005903.
