ByBill Hutchinson and Patrick ReevellMarch 04, 2022, 5:08 AM3:24A Ukrainian serviceman stands at his position at the line of separation between Ukraine-held territory and rebel-held territory near Svitlodarsk, eastern Ukraine, Feb., 2022.
Those two regions have a lot of people who are not just Russian citizens, but also sympathetic to Russia still, unlike most of the country,"" said ABC News contributor Steve Ganyard, a retired United States Marine colonel and former deputy assistant secretary of state.
Photos: Ukrainian forces put up fierce fight against Russians""Russia sent operatives in, both military and political, to create the appearance of separatist movements, and then they sort of brought them to life.
An international investigation determined the jet was hit by a Russia-supplied missile fired from the rebel-controlled territory in Ukraine.
Minsk agreements'The 2015 Minsk agreements called for Ukraine to reintegrate the separatist regions by giving them broad autonomy enshrined in its constitution.
The Kremlin hoped that by doing so it would create a permanent pro-Russian lever of influence within Ukraine’s government that would act as a veto on the country joining the European Union or NATO.Ukraine refused to fulfill that part of the Minsk deal while Russian troops remained on the separatists’ territory, seeing the separatist governments as puppets of the Kremlin.
And he's used that term New Russia before,"" Schmidt said.But the Ukrainian government counters that Donetsk and Luhansk have been legally recognized as part of Ukraine dating back to 1917.
What to know about economic sanctions and how they will affect RussiaThe separatist authorities also ordered mass evacuations of civilians to create the illusion of a large-scale humanitarian crisis.After Russia recognized the ""republics,"" the puppet governments appealed for help from Russia, creating a false pretext for the Kremlin to invade.
Putin accused Ukraine of failing to implement the Minsk agreements to justify Russia recognizing the separatist ""republics"" as independent.
Militants of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic stand in front of an apartment building, which locals said was damaged by recent shelling, in the separatist-controlled town of Yasynuvata in the Donetsk region, Ukraine, Feb., 2022.
Alexander Ermochenko/ReutersBy recognizing Donetsk and Luhansk as independent republics, Putin is saying that ""Ukraine is illegitimate in claiming them,"" Schmidt said""And when he claims them as independent republics, then they are -in his mind and in Russian legal theory at that point -capable of asking a neighboring country to assist,"" Schmidt saidWhen the fighting stopped in 2015, the separatist ""republics"" only held around a third of the territory of Donbas that they claim should belong to them.
As part of Russia’s invasion, it has launched a full-scale offensive from the separatist areas that it claims is to retake that territory.
Many experts say Russia is using the separatist conflict as a pretext for forcing Ukraine to concede to Russian demands that it never join NATO and remain part of Moscow’s orbit.The two separatist regions -likely enlarged -could be important in any eventual peace agreement to end the fighting.Ganyard said that while Donetsk and Luhansk have been key to the start of the Russian invasion, they are also a vital ""piece of the puzzle"" to ending it.
If you’re interested in participating in this study, please take the survey from our recruiting partners so we can contact you about participating.
Russia denied any involvement in the incident.</p><p><inline5></p><p>In early 2015, with Russian troops inflicting heavy damage on Ukraine, Kyiv agreed to a peace deal known as the \""Minsk agreements.
The Kremlin hoped that by doing so it would create a permanent pro-Russian lever of influence within Ukraine’s government that would act as a veto on the country joining the European Union or NATO.</p><p>Ukraine refused to fulfill that part of the Minsk deal while Russian troops remained on the separatists’ territory, seeing the separatist governments as puppets of the Kremlin.
