The interview will come to Sraer, I just want to make a few brief remarks before we get Started, This is the first witness interview as part of the impeachment inquiry.
Once my colleague makes some prefatory remarks you'll be given as much time as you'd like to make an opening statement.
This is a transcribed interview that is conducted by the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, pursuant to the impeachment inquiry announced by the Speaker of the House on September 24th.
Before we begin, if you could just please state your full name and spell your last name for the record.
Pe 10 1] 12 19 20 21 22 23 24 za This interview will be conducted entirely at the unclassified level.
It is the committee's expectation that neither the questions asked of you, the witness, nor answers by you or your counsel would require discussion of any information that is currently or at any point could be properly classified under executive order 13526.
Moreover, EO 13526 states that, quote, ""In no case shall information be classified, continue to be maintained as classified, or fail to be declassified,"" unquote, for the purpose of concealing any violations of law or preventing embarrassment of any person or entity.
Today's interview is not being taken in executive session, but because of the sensitive and confidential nature of some of the topics and materials that will be discussed, access to the transcript will be limited to the three committees in attendance, the Intelligence Committee, Foreign Affairs Committee, and Committee on Oversight and Reform.
In advance of today's interview you voluntarily produced certain documents to the committees, which you have marked as confidential, and they have Bates numbers KV1 through KV65.
Thank you. 16 17 18 19 20 21 pe: 23 24 an The record will reflect that the witness has been duly sworn.
Allow me to begin by stressing that you and the American people can be reassured and proud that the Department of State and the Department of Defense and the professionals working there, civil and Foreign Service and military, have conducted themselves with the highest degree of 20 21 oe 23 24 25 professionalism, integrity, and dedication to the national interest.
As a former member of the senior Foreign Service and in conducting my role as United States Special Representative for Ukraine negotiations, I have similarly acted solely to advance United States national interests, which included supporting democracy and reform in Ukraine, helping Ukraine better defend itself and deter Russian aggression, and leading United States negotiating efforts to end the war and restore Ukraine's territorial integrity.
Throughout my career, whether as a career diplomat, United States Ambassador to NATO, or in my other capacities, I have tried to be courageous, energetic, clear-eyed, and plainspoken, always acting with integrity to advance core American values and interests.
I would not have been true to myself, my duties, or my commitment to the people of the United States or 19 20 21 aa ao 24 25 Ukraine if I did not dive in and try to fix problems as best 1 could.
Caring deeply about supporting Ukraine, recognizing that it stands for all of us in building a democracy and pushing back Russian aggression on their soil, and seeking to make sure American policy is in the right place, I agreed to take on these responsibilities.
Then Secretary of State Tillerson and I agreed that our fundamental policy goals would be to restore the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine and to assure the safety and security of all Ukrainian citizens, regardless of ethnicity, nationality, or religion.
I did this on a voluntary basis, with no salary paid by the United States taxpayer, simply because I believed it was important to serve our country in this way.
We coordinated closely with our European allies and Canada to maintain a united front against Russian aggression and for Ukraine's democracy, reform, sovereignty, and 20 21 pies 23 24 2 territorial integrity.
Second, in May of this year, I became concerned that a negative narrative about Ukraine fueled by assertions made by Ukraine's departing prosecutor general was reaching the President of the United States and impeding our ability to support the new Ukrainian government as robustly as I believed we should.
After sharing my concerns with the Ukrainian leadership, an adviser to President Zelensky asked me to connect him to the President's personal lawyer, Mayor Rudy Giuliani.
Third, at no time was I aware of or took part in an effort to urge Ukraine to investigate former Vice President Biden.
As you will see from the extensive text messages I am providing, which convey a sense of real-time dialogue with several different actors, Vice President Biden was never a 10 1] 12 16 IF 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 topic of discussion.
Moreover, as I was aware of public accusations about the Vice President, Vice President Biden, several times I cautioned the Ukrainians to distinguish between highlighting their own efforts to fight corruption domestically, including investigating Ukrainian individuals, something we support as a matter of United States policy, and doing anything that could be seen as impacting United States elections, which is in neither the United States' nor Ukraine's own interest.
To the best of my knowledge, no such actions by Ukraine were ever taken, at least in part, I believe, because of the advice I gave them.
Notably, I did not listen in on the July 25th, 2019, phone call between President Trump and President Zelensky and received only superficial readouts about that conversation afterwards.
In addition, I was not aware that Vice President Biden's name was mentioned or a request was made to investigate him until the transcript of this call was released on September 25th, 2019.
Fourth, while executing my duties, I kept my colleagues at the State Department and National Security Council informed and also briefed Congress about my actions.
This included in-person meetings with senior United States officials at State, Defense, and the NSC, as well as staff briefings on 16 17 18 19 20 21 ee. 23 24 on Capitol Hill and public testimony in the Senate on June 18th, 2015.
I have an extensive record of public commentary about our Ukraine policy.
As a matter of practice, I did not edit or clear on these messages but told the reporting officers just to report as they normally would.
Fifth, and finally, I strongly supported the provision of United States security assistance, including lethal defensive weapons to Ukraine, throughout my tenure.
I was confident that this position would indeed be reversed in the end because the provision of such assistance was uniformly supported at State, Defense, the National Security Council, the House of Representatives, the Senate, and the expert community in Washington.
As I was confident the position would not stand, I did not discuss the hold with my Ukrainian counterparts until the matter became public in late August.
A I think the last conversation I had with him would have had to have been Tuesday of this week, which today is the 3rd, so it must have been the 1st of October.
I became aware of the President's interest in -well, let me take that back.
I don't recall ever hearing that the President was interested in investigating Burisma.
The four of us, who had been part of the Presidential delegation, had requested the meeting in order to brief the President after our participation at the inauguration of the new Ukrainian President, and meeting with the new President, an hour-long meeting that we had with him. 17 18 ihe, 20 ol pits pz 24 23 And we had a very favorable impression of President Zelensky.
And we wanted to convey this to the President and urge that the United States and that he personally engage with the President of Ukraine in order to demonstrate full United States support for him.
We thought that he would -that he, being President Zelensky, would face a lot of challenges, that going after oligarchs and corruption in Ukraine is not going to be easy, and he's going to need support.
In response to that, President Trump demonstrated that he had a very deeply rooted negative view of Ukraine based on past corruption.
That's why it was important that we wanted to brief him, because we were saying, it's different, this guy is difterent.
Q Lutsenko. 10 1] 12 19 20 21 2d 23 24 25 A Yuriy Lutsenko, L-u-t-s-e-n-k-o.
Q Because I believe we'll probably be discussing multiple prosecutor generals today.
My opinion of Prosecutor General Lutsenko was that he was acting in a self-serving manner, frankly making things up, in order to appear important to the United States, because he wanted to save his job.
And so by making himself seem important and valuable to the United States, the United States then might object or prevent him from being removed by the new President.
A There is clear evidence that Vice President Biden did indeed weigh in with the President of Ukraine to have 37 20 21 22 pe 24 20 Shokin fired, but the motivations for that are entirely different from those contained in that allegation.
A It was a White House visit, so, yes, it would have been an Oval Office meeting.
A So the issue as I understood it was this deep-rooted, skeptical view of Ukraine, a negative view of Ukraine, preexisting 2019, you Know, going back.
When I started this I had one other meeting with President Trump and President Poroshenko.
And my understanding at the time was that even though he agreed in the meeting that we had with him, say, okay, I'll invite him, he didn't really want to do it.
And we ended up at a point in talking with the Ukrainians -who we'll come to this, but, you know, who had asked to communicate with Giuliani -that they wanted to convey that they really are different.
Q Why did you single out those two specific allegations -20 21 22 23 24 pie) A Right.
And that was, 20 21 22 23 24 25 yes, you know, that is what we were talking about.
And in that conversation with Andrey and a subsequent conversation I advised him, this is not a good idea.
Prosecutor General Lutsenko was at this time still in office, and so the one who's making these allegations, which, you know, there is 45 20 21 22 23 24 Zz no -no evidence was brought forward to support.
For the reason that you highlighted earlier, 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 pa) which is that it was known that Hunter Biden was a board member of Burisma, so it could be interpreted that way.
So I do want to go through the text messages because I believe that they're a good anchor for some of the other topics that we've been discussing that I do want to 18 19 20 Zl 22 ao 24 20 discuss.
Q So I'd like to first turn to page 36, and we're going te mark, as exhibit 2, 36, 37, 38, dfhd 39.
The date for the visit is urgent, The NSC has not been able to get a date.
Two years ago, Secretary Ne 18 19 20 Al ew) 23 24 25 Mattis came for Independence Day.
A Let's have an internal call Friday, three of us plus Secretary Perry.
A George Kent is the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State responsible for Ukraine, Georgia, and this part of the world.
He's formerly the Deputy Chief of Mission in Ukraine. 20 21 pas 23 24 25 Q Okay.
Got it. 10 1] 19 20 21 pu) Ze 24 the Bill Taylor: Kurt had a good meeting with Zelensky, I Neal This is now July 3rd.
A He took a strong interest in Ukraine at the EU. wanted to strengthen EU support for Ukraine.
And then he was part of the Presidential delegation in May for the President's inauguration.
And we -various different times, you know, we'd weigh in with the National Security Council staff, with -I Know that Gordon Sondland called the chief of staff once.
And one that I did not use very much, but I ie think Gordon and Bill did call him a few more times than I 13 did.
A And I believe the meeting in question with Bolton -waiting for the Bolton meeting I understand to be 16 17 18 20 21 ne 28 24 25 Q Is that the meeting that -I apologize for interrupting, but is that the meeting that later took place on July 10th -A That is correct.
He's 63 20 21 22 a3 24 Zo the chief of staff of the Presidential administration.
And I said that RG, Rudy Giuliani, is a 20 21 22 ao 24 25 private citizen.
And then Bill Taylor briefs that to 20 21 oe, 23 24 25 Counselor Ulrich so that Ulrich can inform Secretary Pompeo. l@ that Tairr A Yes.
A Because Alex Danylyuk led the meeting and was talking really very bureaucratically.
Eager to hear if your meeting with Danylyuk and Bolton resulted in a decision on a call. 20 21 2a 23 24 And the reason we were now seeking a phone call was because it had been so long since the letter inviting the President of Ukraine to the White House without scheduling the visit that we thought it would be a good idea for President Trump to call him again.
Q And you mentioned that the President was skeptical, had a deep-rooted view of the Ukraine.
So I sent that back to Andriy, conveyed the conversation with him -because he had spoken with Rudy prior to that, not me -conveyed the conversation, and Andriy said that he was not -he did not think this was a good idea, and I shared his view.
Q You had testified from the beginning you didn't think it was a good idea to mention Burisma or 2016.
The target is getting Ukraine to be seen as credible in changing the country, fighting corruption, introducing reform, that Zelensky is the real deal.
You may remember that there was a statement that Rudy Giuliani made when he canceled his visit to Ukraine in May of 2019 that President Zelensky is surrounded by enemies of the 73 20 21 22 23 24 2a United States.
Q I guess what I'm trying to get to, though, is that there was a point where you tweaked -A Oh, yeah.
Q -the draft statement and you sent it back, even though you weren't really in favor of -A Well, I wanted to do that because I was trying to communicate clearly.
And there is an important distinction about Burisma that I think I made earlier, but I want to repeat it again.
Saying investigating Vice President Biden or his son, that is not fine.
Q And you said earlier today that that was never part of any conversation -A Correct.
Q And are you confident that the United States Ambassador to Ukraine also never ever advocated for the investigation of -A Yes.
Q Do you have any awareness, given your deep understanding of the area, whether -A I don't.
And that's the way anticorruption was played out in Ukraine for decades, that it wasn't about just fighting corruption; it was about who are my enemies and who are my friends and back and forth.
Q Was Shokin regarded -16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 Za A His reputation, as I know it -I was not involved in policy at this time, but his reputation 15 ore of a prosecutor general who was protecting certain interests rather than prosecuting them.
So very anxious to see whether he would be able to 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 ae stay on.
Q But in your career as a Foreign Service veteran, you've seen these -A I've seen that happen.
Q And sometimes doesn't happen. 20 21 eae om 24 25 And the same with the issue of the aid, the foreign assistance.
I agree with you in saying that assistance gets held up for a variety of reasons at various Limes.
It came from OMB, so I immediately thought about budgetary issues, that, for whatever reason, there's a hold placed.
And I tried to avoid talking to Ukrainians about it for as Long as I could until it came out in Politico a month later because I was confident we were going to get it fixed internally.
And, you Know, basically, you're just -you're -I have to verbalize this.
And you assured them that -I told them that is absolutely not the case.
But, because I cared about the issues and I knew that we had a gap, that we were not in the game on Ukraine in early 2017 the way we should be, I wanted to help.
I also had some other personal reasons that I'd rather not dive into, but I did not want to be joining the administration full time at that point.
A COFFeet, €Orreets Q And now you have, as a result largely of this firestorm, you've been -you had to resign.
There I would say quite unfortunately 19 20 Z1 Ps 23 24 25 because I think we were in a very -we had developed a very strong Ukraine policy.
Q So, I mean, is it fair to say you're a little bit of a victim here of this political -A I don't characterize myself as a victim.
A Generally speaking, I take a view that we need to protect the conversations of our foreign interlocutors.
And you could -as far as the impact on U.S.-Ukraine relations, I believe that the substance of those relations is pretty strong right now, and I don't see it changing.
The argument against this assistance being provided, the lethal defensive assistance, was that it would be provocative and could escalate the fighting with Russia.
So I argued very strongly from the time I was appointed by Secretary Tillerson that the rationale for why we were not providing lethal defensive assistance to me doesn't hold 17 18 19 20 21 22 Za 24 25 Water and that is a much stronger rationale that we should be doing it.
Decisionmaking about this really -I started in July, and I think we had the decisionmaking beginning around September and then finalized a little bit later in the autumn.
So, if you're 87 20 21 ee 23 24 2 being fired on with mortar or artillery, you can calibrate where that's coming from better with a counter-battery radar, and that enables you to then fire back more accurately.
A Well, without commenting on the merits of it, it is 20 21 pe, 23 24 25 absolutely the right of the President to determine who his Ambassadors are in the world.
Q The recall of the Ambassador has provoked some I'd even say emotion on the part of her allies.
A I would agree that she feels that it was improper and that she should not have been removed early, and there has been an emotional response to that.
A Yes, that is an allegation, and it was an allegation that made its way into media in the United States A I know that that -well, let me say it this way.
President Trump would understandably be concerned if that was true because you want to have trust and confidence in your Ambassadors.
A Uh-huh. 91 16 17 18 i 20 21 22 2a 24 25 Q I mean, is it fair to say that -I guess part of the trouble that some of my Republican colleagues are having with the emotion connected to her recall is, granted, anything that besmirches your character and integrity, anybody would be upset about that, to a degree a little bit emotional.
Q There have been allegations that, from time to time, not just on one occasion, that officials from the Embassy in Ukraine, whether it be Ambassador Yovanovitch or 16 6 18 19 20 a1 22 23 24 25 Ambassador Pyatt, communicated to the prosecutors general in Ukraine, both Shokin and Lutsenko at various points in time, that there were certain entities or individuals that should not be prosecuted.
A Well, this -there's more of a record on that, 93 20 al 22 23 24 2s where it was a matter of United States policy to investigate corruption in Ukraine, disappointment with him in not doing that, and then a push to remove him for those reasons.
Q So to the extent when that has been reported, given your knowledge of the area, your impression of that allegation is it's not -A Yeah.
The interagency community in Washington vets it, gives you an 97 10 1] 12 13 14 Be 16 18 he 20 21 Pw aa 24 2 answer.
Another is that it 1s difficult to put together information of the right quality for a committee like this in such a short period of time.
So we'll correct those in what we give 20 zl De 2 24 25 And there's probably more that the State Department has that I have not had a chance to review, because I'm only going based on what my personal recollections and knowledge and what I can find from reviewing these text messages, and so there's probably more that would be in the State Department official reporting that I've not had a chance to review.
Q -and the State Department's activities trying to block your testimony, that's -A Yeah.
It was only the 27th -27th of September is when I resigned, and then -and that is a date when I spoke with Marik String.
I may have called him over the weekend as 20 21 22 23 24 25 well, and then October list.
He got some facts wrong, but I thought that trying to do damage limitation -I wouldn't have used 20 21 Pe, Za 24 25 the word ""damage limitation,"" but I under -I kind of get what he's talking about.
I did not want to show up in Ukraine during an election campaign, 16 17 18 20 eal 22 23 24 Oe) because all they do is ask you, do you like this candidate, do you like that candidate, did you talk to these -so I just avoid going during election seasons.
I don't know any of Char, I do know from the Ukrainians that they viewed him as someone who communicated with the President and, therefore, they wanted to tell their story to him.
I don't think Mr Giuliani ever -ever suggested that he's in a position te do thats.
And so I think in -Congressman, what I hear you suggesting, if I understand correctly, is Rudy Giuliani seeing these as synonymous. 15 16 17 18 12 20 el ae 23 24 on THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.
Just as a matter of prudence, you don't 20 21 22 23 24 25 mention a particular company.
They 20 21 ee. 23 24 as didn't express that to me, and, of course, I didn't know that was the context at the time.
And you would agree, Ambassador, that if 20 the President makes a request of a foreign power that is mil dependent on the United States for military support, that pay) request is going to carry enormous weight with that foreign pe leader.
We're getting now into, you know, a conflation of these things that I didn't think was actually Chere, THE CHAIRMAN: Well, you weren't Knowledgeable about the request at all at the time, but you are now.
To my knowledge, the news about a hold on security assistance did not get into Ukrainian Government circles, as indicated to me by the current foreign minister, then diplomatic adviser, until the end of August.
Q What -Ambassador, with all due respect, Bill Taylor, your fellow diplomat here, is saying that there is a linkage between those two things.
A Well, my -well, about the nightmare, again, I said there's no linkage here.
We had a letter from several members of the Senate to OMB pushing to get that lifted, and I was confident that it would.
Let me read that again for meaning now that I understand The message to the Ukrainians we send with the decision on security assistance is key.
Q Bill Taylor said: I think it's crazy to withhold security assistance for help with a political campaign.
Before that call, is it true -is it accurate that you set up a meeting between Rudy Giuliani and Andriy Yermak, 20 21 De 23 24 Fan President Zelensky's assistant.
I reached out to 16 Rudy to see whether he could get together so that I could ask ly him whether he wanted to be connected to Yermak.
And it was literally, you 20 21 pa) 23 24 Ae) know, let me introduce, you know, Mr Giuliani, let me introduce Mr Yermak.
Assuming President Zelensky convinces Trump, he will investigate slash get to the bottom of what happened in 2016.
Please 20 pa 22 23 24 29 remind Mr Mayor -that's Rudy Giuliani -to share the Madrid dates.
So this is after the meeting between Giuliani and Yermak -A yes; Q -in Madrid.
Q And we talked about some of the issues that Mr Giuliani brought to his attention.
And so businessmen generally don't want to invest in Ukraine, even to this day, because they just fear that it's a horrible environment to be working in, and they don't want to 20 21 pw 23 24 put -expose themselves to that risk.
And it was introduced publicly by an investigative 20 21 22 2 24 Pe journalist who became a member of Parliament named Sergei Leshchenko, L-e-s-h-c-h-e-n-k-o, Sergei, S-e-r-g-e-1.
And he was believed incorrectly to be close to President Zelensky and even in Ukraine, because he was campaigning, you know, or speaking publicly on behalf of President Zelensky's campaign, but he was never really part of President Zelensky's inner circle.
When he arose kind of meteorically, as an outside figure and a popular candidate, I think it did take everybody by surprise.
Q You Know, a lot has been made of the discussion of Biden on the call.
And the passage we're reading this morning, on the same page, page four, it begins with a transitional phrase.
A Uh-huh. 20 a1 22 23 24 25 Q I mean, Biden doesn't show up a ton in this Interview transcript.
Q We were discussing on text message chain, I think it was exhibit 5, and Bill Taylor was, you know, mentioned he 1 might resign.
And he should know that pe) nobody in any of the policy agencies would sit still for 23 suspending this.
And I -as the special representative, there's a lot of public role with that, and so you meet with a lot of people, you communicate with a lot of people, you try to bridge-build, and problem-solve.
I've had meetings with American citizens who have had problems in Ukraine and that wanted to tell me about them, you Know, all kinds of things.
To elaborate on that point, it was 24 clear to me after, say, the spring of 2018 that the Russians 25 were not going to move out of eastern Ukraine; they were 14 15 20 21 ae 23 24 25 content to keep the war going.
In the last round, you were asked to read a portion of the conversation between the President of the United States and that of Ukraine on page four.
In this context, sincé the President of Ukraine is new, and, quite honestly, new to politics and new to elected office, as I understand, would it be appropriate -because he talks very specifically about the 1] 12 13 14 20 zl 22 23 24 25 Attorney General.
In that context, is it appropriate to say -have the conversation, based on our shared interest and under the agreement we have, this is my Attorney General.
So you had said that you get the readout from the call that was basically congratulations, fighting corruptions, and then initiation to a White House visit, so 20 21 22 2 24 ae to speak.
My view -just an American citizen here; it doesn't have anything to do with being a special representative to Ukraine -but my view is that we do not want foreign countries interfering in American elections, 20 zal 22 23 24 pa period.
And your testimony here today has 2 given me such great encouragement that, regardless of the A outcome of what you believe or didn't believe, you've come 4 across in an unbelievably transparent and authentic way, and 5 I just want to thank you for that.
But I want to say thank you for sticking to the facts 19 20 21 +) 23 24 25 and allowing us and, more importantly, the American people to see exactly the kind of career diplomats that we have servicing and sacrificially serving our country.
As I told you earlier, I had my own views about Lutsenko and what the value of that engagement would be, but I was not aware of that and didn't 20 Al pas 23 24 engage in that.
As I said, there are a few sensitive exchanges that I think would be detrimental if made public, but those are not classified information.
You mentioned that, I think to Mr Perry, that it is not unusual for countries to have an investigation 20 21 22 23 24 pas cooperation agreement, you know, as far as law enforcement goes, but you said it would be unusual to discuss specific investigations.
I have to say, the evidentiary record that has emerged, in part those text messages that you have provided, as well as the phone call record that the White House produced, is abnormal, highly unusual, and raises profound concern, at least among many Members of Congress as well as staff, that the use of the Office of the President -that the Office of the President may have been used to advance personal political interests of Mr Donald Trump rather than the national interest.
I just want to level set here because I think, like you, I've seen how diplomacy works, and having seen that in action, it's possible to also identify when it deviates 9 significantly.
He or she will look into the situation, 18 19 20 21 ya Bo 24 pa specifically to the company that you mentioned in this issue.
So I was very pleased that Morrison was 20 21 22 23 24 Za going to get dates for a visit, because we had been trying and trying and trying and not getting anywhere.
We inform about date of visit and our expectations and our guarantees for future visit.
Q And if you could jump down to kind of the bottom quarter of the page, August 10th, 2019, at 4:56m., from Mr Yermak.
A That is -I'd have to check the timeline here, That is clearly what he heard from either Rudy or from Gordon, that those were important additions.
Because I have to check the ] timeline, because if you remember, Rudy discussed, Rudy 2 Giuliani and Gordon and I, what it is they are looking for.
A We discussed the Ukrainians' intention to make that 20 21 22 23 24 25 statement.
And when I say we will work on official request, Andriy asked whether any request had ever been made by the United States to investigate election interference in 2016.
A He said that if they did not mention Burisma and 2016 elections that he did not feel such a statement would have any credibility, that there's still no commitment to finding out what happened in the past.
Q In your mind, though, you knew -A And it would, therefore, be no different from the previous Ukraine governments.
Q Skipping down to August 19th -A And when I say that's the clear message so far, I 22 23 24 Za just Literally mean that.
You said you were concerned that it would go down the wrong road -A TSS, Q -if there was not an official Department of Justice request, although even if you didn't know there had been an official request from President Trump to President Zelensky.
And so I thought, you know, before going down this road with the Ukrainians, I should check to see 16 17 18 20 21 A) 23 24 25 whether there has ever been an official request about that.
Because it seems that in this context, although the President made a personal request, it appears that Rudy Giuliani is personally involved in crafting and ensuring that this public statement by the Ukrainians has the right words in them that refer back to what the President said, which includes Biden, because I think one thing that you've distinguished, which the record doesn't really 20 21 22 23 24 23 support, is that Burisma and Biden are somehow different.
I want to take a step back, because I think 25 you testified earlier that President Zelensky was, in your 10 1] [2 20 21 22 a 24 25 mind, the best hope in 20 years to root out corruption in Ukraine.
But I'd say for the vast majority of diplomats, especially those in the Embassy who were there soaking up the environment, they were certainly of that point 20 21 22 23 24 phe) of view.
Our own company and whether they 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 were trying to influence the United States in an inappropriate way, we can look into that.
A As I undérstood it at the timé, we were all convinced, Rudy -not Rudy -Gordon Sondland, myself, Rick Perry, Bill Taylor, that this is someone we very much need to support in Ukraine.
Rudy Giuliani was not convinced of that and was no 20 4 | 22 23 24 25 doubt, therefore, continuing to convey a negative assessment to the President through his own contacts with the President.
So I'm trying to figure out what would be convincing to you, Rudy, so that he would be conveying a more positive message to the President.
Q I understand what you were trying to do and I understand you're trying to protect yourself.
A Well, that's where I'm trying to differentiate and 20 21 oe 23 24 25 saying, no, don’t get out there.
That's the time, so I think a S-minute bathroom break, if that works for you.
I think -or even if he's asking them to investigate the Bidens, it is to find out what facts there 18 Ly 20 21 22.
After that conversation, he never brought up Biden or Bidens with me again.
So I know that as we look in hindsight, we can see what he's saying and thinking, but I drew from the beginning a very clear distinction.
Why, other than the fact that his father is a prominent United States official, does he get the 20 Al 22 a 24 25 Opportunity to draw this type of -A Right.
I'm sure there are lots of examples of things like that where famous names 12 i 14 20 21 pe 23 24 25 get paid just for their name.
And if I can direct your 20 21 oa) Zo 24 22 attention just to the bottom of the page there, that's a text message on September 22nd, 2019, and I believe this is from Mr Giuliani to you.
A Well, yes, the scene is that, in the days prior, Rudy Giuliani went very public on television, talking about my connecting him with Andriy Yermak, and he was I think -well, let me not speculate on that, but he was asserting that he was doing these conversations and having these meetings at the request of the State Department and reporting back, and he was being directed by the State Department, so he's not 20 21 om) 23 24 2s just off out there on his own.
He tried to call twice on the 20th of September, probably from the green room.
I did speak the next day with Ulrich Brechbuhl, the counselor of the State Department, to say that, you Know, Rudy's way out there.
Sunday morning, I get all these text messages, this long stream of text messages from Rudy.
And then he's forwarding old messages that I had sent to him to demonstrate to me that he has these text messages, which, of course, I Know, he's got them on television.
Yermak has talked about this to 10 1] 12 16 17 18 20 21 22 23 24 press, so it's now public information.
Then he said that he had spoken with Rudy himself, gotten a call or called him, I don't know which.
It was 20 21 22 23 24 2 not -there was no briefing that day, I believe, or if it was, this was not included in the briefing.
So I had learned through the media that he was going to 20 21 od 23 24 25 go to Ukraine and he was intending to pursue these allegations that Lutsenko had made, and he was going to go investigate these things.
And, to my surprise, both -Parnas basically was very knowledgeable about people in Ukraine and events, largely agreed with that.
Q And on page 26, I'd like to direct your attention ta the Tifst entry for May 26, 2019.
I had the meeting in the Oval Office with the 19 20 al td) 23 24 23 President.
I had been fighting for this every day and we had, I think, a very strong policy, but he was just worried it was going to get undermined at some point.
Z3 A It did strike me as problematic, and therefore, I 24 acted immediately to argue that this has to be reversed and 25 we have to keep the assistance going.
It was OMB that announced in the interagency meeting that there was a hold -Q Okay.
A He did decide to take the job, after we had a meeting with Secretary Pompeo and Ulrich Brechbuhl and Bill and myself to discuss our policy.
Q And later in this text message exchange, you tell Bill Taylor, this is 5/26719 at 11°23, “Let's see how 1t looks on Tuesday.
Q You were discussing whether Bill Taylor -A Yes, Q -should take the job.
It's a much broader range of things that you can do from there, rather than being 20 zl 22 ad 24 Pes on the ground in Ukraine.
A So I had a phone call briefing with John Bolton before his trip to Ukraine to just make sure he was 16 Le 18 Ly 20 21 Z2 23 24 a up-to-date, because he was going to be visiting there.
And Kolomoisky had a bank called Privat Bank , and that bank made a number of bad loans, $5 billion worth, to -it disappeared and -basically to him and his other leaders of the bank, and it was nationalized.
Because the IMF provides budgetary support to Ukraine, we actually ended up bailing out this bank.
After Zelensky was elected, he returned to 12 Ukraine, he visited some of his businesses, he gave media 13 Tnhterviews, he played a very Visible public role.
I'm trying to work with Ukrainians, and they are trying to communicate a message back to Bolton to convey that they 14 15 16 18 19 20 21 22 as 24 Pi are actually a different crowd, not from 2016, not corrupt, so that positive message gets back to the President.
And in terms of advice, I suggested that he called Secretary of Defense Esper, that he's a brand-new defense minister.
And I also suggested that he plan an early visit to Washington when Congress is in session, so that he could meet both with Esper, or if Esper's not in town, whoever is there from the Pentagon, but also have a chance to meet with Members of Congress.
Senator Shaheen, Senator Durbin, Senator Blumenthal, Senator Portman, and Senator Johnson, and it was addressed to the Director of OMB, Mick Mulvaney, in that capacity and copied to Secretary Pompeo and Secretary Esper.
Q You were still, and the Ukrainians were still 20 21 22 23 24 Za pushing for a White House meeting.
I mean, no one -once we started seeing a tempo of engagement with Ukraine, we had first the sense that Rudy was not going to be convinced that it meant 10 1] 12 20 21 22 23 24 anything, and, therefore, convey a positive message to the President if it didn't say Burisma and 2016.
I agreed with the Ukrainians they shouldn't do it, and in fact told them just drop it, wait till you have your own prosecutor general in place.
And -so by this time, there's -I'm not actively discussing that with anybody anymore.
A Around -once the government -so the parliament had to be seated, which took place, I believe, on September 1st.
So I was not as negative about getting a White House visit scheduled as Prystaiko believed I should have been.
And he thought I maybe sugarcoated it when I should have been more negative in my way of presenting it with President Zelensky.
Q -""and whether he will really pursue reforms he 20 21 22 23 24 29 says.
Well, the meeting in Warsaw with Vice 14 President Pence was September lst.
Q Now, from July 18th up until September 1st, during that period of time, you became aware of an effort by Rudy 20 21 al 23 24 23 Giuliani, at a minimum, to influence Ukrainian to open these two particular investigations.
It's a little different than saying Burisma and 2016, but the call record T& Tnere.
A I thought that's good; that that was the whole idea, is for President Zelensky to convince President Trump he is serious about fighting corruption, he's going to prevent things from happening in the future.
We've had enormous issues of pressing Ukraine to fight corruption under previous governments in Ukraine, getting an anticorruption court established, setting up a special prosecutor's office for corruption cases, special investigatory office of corruption.
A You mean a readout -Q There was no official readout from the White House OF LHS €all.
Q So that's a very nice gloss on the call and which he read in this readout, but let me take you back to the text message that you wrote to Andriy Yermak right before this call where you said, ""Heard from White House.
So this is looking backward at whether there was any election interference.
A The connection between Andriy Yermak and Rudy Giuliani, I believe, is the 22nd of July.
Do you Know whether Rudy Giuliani had any role in I don't know whether he did.
A That*s COrrecr, Q So you don't really have firsthand knowledge as to what messages were relayed to the Ukrainians.
I see a few things that infer corruption, but I do not see the word “corruption.
A -corruption in Russia, in the same conversation, like they're all terrible.
A But we're talking about corruption, and I think we're talking really, you know, business climate there.
I had pushed back on that and separated it, and said, one thing about corruption in Ukraine, whether Ukrainian officials may have done improper things, Burisma, or otherwise, and that -and so every time that came up after that I felt I had already put up that marker.
A I don't know. l Q So I would like to go through and talk about some 2 of the other conversations between United States officials and 3 Ukrainians, and I'm going to do this in chronological order.
Q It's our understanding that the White House had put the inauguration for President Zelensky on Vice President Pence's calendar, but at some point President Trump instructed Vice President Pence not to attend the jnauguration.
A That refers -I don't use that phrase either because I think of three other people as the three amigos.
A But that refers -Gordon Sondland usually uses that, and he was referring to himself and to Rick Perry and to me.
A Senator Ron Johnson was there as well and our Charge d'affaires at the time Joe Pennington.
But from what I understand, you're answering the questions, sticking to the facts, and I appreciate your willingness to come in on your 20 21 22 23 24 25 own and testify before the committee here.
Q Appreciate you sticking to the facts that you have firsthand Knowledge about.
Q -you know, for what reason Vice President Pence didn't lead the delegation.
I'm not certain the word ""corruption"" appears, but, you know, if you turn to page three at the bottom -A Yes Q -the President says some very bad people.
And you have been with the President and you've had Uh-huh. about Ukraine.
Exhibit 12 earlier was the -Oh, yes, the statement from the President's OPT 1ce of Ukraine, yes.
You had a readout from your Ukrainian folks -Right. -that you have a rather sophisticated relationship with -A Q Yes.
President Zelensky was elected in May of 2019, and we had meeting in September of 2019.
Ambassador, in the last series there was a lot of time spent on the fact that the funds weren't forthcoming and you didn't know why, nobody seemed to know why, but you were going to have to address the officials in the Ukrainian Government in your normal course of your business.
And it was implied that surely they knew because of Mr Giuliani's statements, things in the press, that there could only be one thing, right.
Now, previously in another round you had talked to me about the trust that the same officials from Ukraine had in you personally.
A ~~ {t's @ terrible place, sll corrupt, terraole people, just dumping on Ukraine.
And each of us took turns from this delegation giving our point of view, which was that this 15 a new crowd, it's a new President, he is committed to doing the right things.
He knows all of these things, and they've got some bad people around him.
A Yeah, the President sitting at his desk, the delegation facing him, and I could not see what was happening behind.
Can you just describe kind of the course of events for the Ukrainians visit to Washington, D.C., who they met with, the sequence of meetings that you participated in, just give us the lay of the land.
So that would include Poroshenko, who has his own party; Tymoshenko, who has her own party; Slava Vakarchuk , who has a new party called The Voice; a representative of the United Opposition Block, which tends to be more Russian leaning, that was Boyko.
On the 26th I had -I guess that's when I had the breakfast with the humanitarian organizations.
Can I also add -Q sure, A -the principle topic of the meeting with Zelensky at the time was what was going on in Stanitsa Luhanska with the disengagement of Ukrainian forces, what the Russians were doing, and how the Ukrainians now saw the next steps of how to improve the ceasefire, work towards Minsk implementation.
So did you help prepare the Secretary for Lita Gault A In the sense that I would meet with the Secretary periodically to update him on what I was doing and things with Ukraine.
And so I did not speak to the ] Secretary specifically before that phone call in a narrow p time window, but I was pretty sure he was up to speed on So things happening with Ukraine.
And I believe that this phone call was the Vice President getting back to 19 20 21 22 ao 24 25 President Zelensky to follow up on those things, saying security assistance is moving, and we are moving ahead with a White House visit -with a bilateral meeting.
And, you know, I had several things that -one of them is, Ukrainians, if you're going to release the transcript of the call, the Ukrainians want to see it first.
And also there's -in their minds this is also a little bit of respect, that if -you know, they first off, don't want a transcript involving their leader to be released, but if it's going to be released, at least do the courtesy of sharing it and talking about it first so that it can be seen to be something that they agreed or Father Thal 7USt Letting 1t go.
A I believe that Secretary Pompeo spoke with 19 20 21 22 23 24 ae President Zelensky and informed him that we felt we had no choice but to release the transcript.
A I think it was just the public buildup of, you know, expectation from the whistleblower report or from the knowledge of the whistleblower report -it wasn't released yet -but from the knowledge of the whistleblower report, we've got to release this phone call transcript.
A Well, I'm not -having read the transcript, it's a lot of information that I wasn't aware of.
They felt that they were being a little bit -that their interests were being disregarded or subordinated to United States domestic political activity.
A I spoke with Andriy Yermak in advance, and we were talking more about -one of them he was raising a concern about the release of the transcript.
And then we talked about what some of the substance and followup of the meeting could be, how do we build on this, and that was the conversation I had with Andriy the night before.
A No, because by that point it had been lifted, and so it was all moving, and I think there was a satisfaction that that's behind us.
A I believe that the letter from the Senators, the one that I shared with the defense minister in a text message, I believe that had an impact on the White House.
A No, I don't know why it was put in place and I don't know why it was lifted.
We can try to infer about just the President's general attitude, but I believe the reason it was Lifted overall was just as I had anticipated from the 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 beginning, everybody who knows Ukraine and knows the policy thinks this is a good idea.
A To my Knowledge -well, I shouldn't answer it that way, because I'm now out of the information loop, so I don't know whether one has been scheduled.
So I know Dan Hoffman, and so I offered to both Danylyuk, as the head of the National Security Defense Council, and also Yermak, he's going to Ukraine.
I know they got in contact or both of them said they wanted to meet, but then I don't know what the followup was.
Q Ambassador Volker, on that topic, you mentioned earlier that the first 6 months of President Zelensky's Presidency were very important.
He's going to have defectors from his party who are 19 20 Zl 22 23 24 25 either bought off by corruption or supporting Kolomoisky or unwilling to stick with the legislation.
And he's got a limited window in which to seize the reins of power, get real legislation passed, and push through a fundamental reform of all the different systems in the country and to fight corruption.
A It is seen by others in Ukraine as validating and will convince them to stick with him if he has United States support.
A It enhances his stature, that he is accepted, that he is seen at the highest level.
A I was referring to that and anything else that might have involved corrupt activity from the company.
Q And I believe you said that -you testified earlier that there's no doubt in your mind that Vice President Biden was acting completely on the -I'm paraphrasing, but on the up and up, in terms of his recommendation to get rid of Prosecutor General Shokin.
He was executing United States policy at the time and what was widely understood internationally to be the right policy, Pent.
Q And so the allegations that there may have been some improper conduct by Vice President Biden at the time have been debunked, correct, and there is actually no evidence that that is the case.
You understand he doesn't actually care whether the Ukrainian Government investigates a Ukrainian company for corruption, Corrects A What Rudy said to me once was, all I want is for Ukraine to apply its own laws, and investigate and apply its own laws, no political interference in investigation.
To your knowledge, 20 ZI 22 oo 24 25 there was never an investigation of that.
They're going to 10 1] 12 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 ze ed 24 take, you know, a little sentence and suggest that it means something other than the context of the 8 hours that we've had.
Because despite everything that has led to this testimony today, as impossible as it may be to do, if you just put that out of your mind for a moment, we've had a 20 21 22 23 24 25 lifting of this hold on security assistance that's going forward.
And there was a reference to the Biden phone call that, you Know, you I think acknowledged in answering one of the questions from our Democratic counterparts the Biden phone call, and that was -I just want to clarify that to the extent we're referring to President Trump's call with Zelensky and that readout, that wasn't a Biden phone call.
And so I think it's probably inaccurate to give credit to the administration that none of that was going on in the 16 17 18 19 20 21 pa 23 24 25 background.
So just trying to give them as 10 1] 12 ios, 20 21 ow) 23 24 23 much background as possible.
A The problem, as I said, was that he was amplifying 20 21 De 23 24 25 a negative narrative about Ukraine that was impeding our ability to advance the bilateral relationship the way we wanted.
A Well, referring -asking the President of Ukraine to work together with the Attorney General and to look into this, you can see, as it has now happened, this becomes explosive in our domestic politics.
I think you can also understand that some of this information is very sensitive from a diplomatic standpoint, particularly his conversations with other diplomats, foreign diplomats as well.
I'd also like to add that, as you can see in the letter from the State Department to me that is now part of the record, the State Department has concerns about the privileges and the classification level of these materials and has stated that it would need to conduct a legal and classification review prior to the release of any of these materials publicly.
I understand that the deposition rules of the committee require Ambassador Volker to have an opportunity to review the transcript before its release.
