The passing week, like a catapult, has thrown all Ukrainians into the election campaign.
We observed the shortest political career of Dmytro Hnap, who in two days from a democratic hero, turned into the ultimate villain of the upcoming elections.
But the same processes forced the deputies to vote for the enshrining in the Constitution the course towards EU and NATO membership.
Whether positive energy prevailed or everything was as it usually is – read in the traditional digest of Opinion.
For the visual accompaniment of the text, The show within the show exhibition, which was held in Mystetskyi Arsenal in April 2014, was chosen.
The country then survived the Revolution of Dignity, the annexation of Crimea and the beginning of the war.
The artists’ vision then wasn’t “blurred”, and the ideas were not biased.
Verkhovna Rada has enshrined Ukraine’s course towards EU and NATO membership.
Thus, the Law №9037 “On Amendments to the Constitution on the strategic direction of the state on the acquisition of the full-fledged Membership of Ukraine in EU and NATO” was adopted.
In addition, after the return of Crimea to Ukraine, the Black Sea Fleet will have to automatically leave the peninsula.
Also, the provisions of the non-aligned status of Ukraine should be excluded from the basic law.
How will it work in the event of joining NATO and planning for the deployment of their bases in Ukraine – it is unknown.
While making a speech in the Parliament, President Petro Poroshenko explained why this happened.
You will not get it, and the Verkhovna Rada today will demonstrate the unity that has been demonstrated for the last 4 years,” Poroshenko said.
However, in the end, the election slogan of Ihor Hryniv “Poroshenko or Putin” worked again.
None of the pro-European political forces in the pre-election period wanted to become “Kremlin’s agent”, and therefore the presidential law was supported even by those, who did not really want to play for Poroshenko.
There is a small number of records in the Constitution if the military budget is not transparent if weapons are not renewed if there is no missile or aircraft on the armament.
In Moscow, Viktor Yanukovych, sentenced in absentia to 13 years of imprisonment for the high treason, made a press conference.
Or, as ‘modern Ukrainian politicians’ say, scammed,” Yanukovych said about European politicians who signed a “peace treaty” with him during EuroMaidan.
After that, according to the “legitimate” president, the above mentioned “betrayers” did not respond to any of his letters.
Viktor Yanukovych, who was sentenced in absentia, also assures that he still lives in Rostov, as well as thousands of people from Donetsk.
Meanwhile, the escapee president was given the state protection in Russia by the orders of Vladimir Putin.
So that “familiar faces from Donetsk” did not mess up Mr Viktor’s face.
Meanwhile, Putin’s friend Viktor Medvedchuk is finally suspected of treason and violation of the territorial integrity of Ukraine.
And which, according to the instructions of the Presidential Administration, made Medvedchuk a member of the Minsk Group.
Unlike Medvedchuk, the political career of the ex-journalist Dmytro Hnap was almost ended after he got 2. million hryvnias from the Internet to pay his fee for the presidential campaign.
His ex-colleagues from the Slidstvo.Info accused him of misuse of the funds received by the team of journalists as an international prize a few years ago.
According to Anna Babinets, the head of the project, this became clear only now, after submission of documents to the CEC, when colleagues from other mass media asked for a comment.
The journalist denies the connection of her statement with the election campaign, saying that she reported just after she had found it out.
Then the ex-leader of Slidstvo.Info Dmytro Gnap, on behalf of the team, stated that the money will be spent on the army.
Recently, colleagues from other media asked me about the fate of that money.
It appeared that the prize was transferred to Dmytro’s bank account ,” Babinets wrote.
Hnap states, that since 2015 that money has been kept on his bank deposit.,000 euros out of these 15, he said, were transferred to the army, 3,917 euros were spent due to a lack of funding for the project, and another 9,087 soon will be transferred to the bank account of Slidstvo.Info.
He promised to show the receipt, and the editorial board promised to send the money to the army.
