This report investigates the claims of Russian involvement in the attacks leading up to and during the assault on Novoazovs’k between 23 and 27 August 2014.
The report analyzes open source evidence to determine the source of artillery fire on Ukrainian units, as well as the origin of armored vehicles sighted inside Ukraine in the Novoazovs’k area.
Two artillery attacks on 23 August 2014 came from Russian territory, and two T-72Bs and one 2s19 Msta-S sighted in Novoazovs’k after its capture were transported from Russia.
The report also provides analysis of other attacks in the Novoazovs’k area during July / August 2014, several with some evidence suggesting attacks from Russian territory.
Red solid lines indicate the trajectory of artillery fire that has been matched to a firing point found from satellite or social media evidence.
Orange lines indicate a trajectory estimated from photo or video at the attack site – the firing point is unknown.
The green line indicates the movement of attacking forces after advancing across the border on 25 August 2014.
In mid-August 2014, Ukrainian armed forces had pushed back the Russian-armed separatist forces to the areas close to the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk.
Until this time, the area of the Donetsk region close to Novoazovs’k and Mariupol, overlooking the Sea of Azov, had been spared the worst of the fighting.
Before 23 August 2014, Ukrainian forces had sporadically come under artillery fire ; however, there were no clear signs of forces massing in the area at the time to threaten a large-scale attack.
This changed on the morning of 23 August 2014, with large-scale and frequent artillery attacks on Ukrainian positions close to Novoazovs’k border crossing point , which continued over the next few days.
By the morning of 25 August 2014, it was clear that towns along the Azov coast were now targets of the Russian-armed separatist forces.
Using evidence from social media and satellite imagery, primarily from Yandex maps images from 31 August 2014, Google Earth images from October 2014 and TerraServer images from 2014 – 2015, we show that artillery attacks and armored vehicles sighted in the area of Novoazovs’k in July / August 2014 came from Russia.
On 23 August 2014, Multiple Launch Rocket System fired from Russian territory struck a Ukrainian military base close to the town of Kholodne; more than 30 kilometers from the nearest position of the Russian-armed separatist forces within Ukraine.
Soon after, another artillery system within Russia struck the same position.
Later, two Ukrainian checkpoints on the road from Novoazovs’k border crossing point to Novoazovs’k town were attacked by MLRS fire from a firing position less than one kilometer from the Russian border, with visible tracks leading back to a crossing point into Russian territory, and/or from a position within Russia.
On 25 August 2014, satellite imagery evidence supports media reports and witness testimony that Russian-armed separatist forces crossed into Ukraine through a crossing point north of Novoazovs’k BCP, and attacked Ukrainian forces to the east of the town of Novoazovs’k.
The report also investigates the origin of T-72B armored main battle tanks and howitzers that were filmed or photographed close to Novoazovs’k after the town was taken.
These two specific T-72Bs and the 2s19 Msta-S were sighted earlier inside Russia, demonstrating that these vehicles were of Russian origin.
In summary, open source evidence shows that attacks on Ukrainian forces around Novoazovs’k came from Russia, and vehicles used in the conflict in the area were transported from Russia.
This report adds to the growing body of evidence showing that Russia was directly involved in the Ukrainian conflict of 2014-2015.
Self-propelled artillery shelling of Kholodne 23 August 2014 Russia Video of artillery firing site.
Mortar shelling of Novoazovs’k border crossing point 25 July – 24 August 2014 Russia Potential firing site located on satellite images.
MLRS and artillery shelling of checkpoints on road to Novoazovs’k 21 July, 23 – 27 August Inside Ukraine, Within 1 kilometer of Russian border Firing site located, and vehicle tracks leading back to Russia.
Armored assault from Russia on Novoazovs’k area 25 August 2014 Crossed border from Russia between Markyne and Shcherbak, advanced on Novoazovs’k Witness reports.
Border crossing point, route of vehicle convoy and subsequent battle identified on satellite images.
MLRS attack on Sedovo – Novoazovs’k road 26 August 2014 morning Ukraine or Russia northeast of Novoazovs’k – unknown Videos / photos of the attack site shortly after the attack.
Bread factory northeast Novoazovs’k artillery strike 26 August 2014 morning Ukraine or Russia northeast of Novoazovs’k – unknown Videos / photos of the attack site during and shortly after the attack.
Northwest Novoazovs’k artillery strike 26 August 2014 afternoon Ukraine – northeast of Novoazovs’k in are southeast of Rozy Lyuksemburh Videos / photos of the attack site during and shortly after the attack.
This report was written by Sean Case and Klement Anders, with significant contributions from Aric Toler and Eliot Higgins.
Thanks to Pavel Aleshin and Dmitry Bochkov for assistance with the translation to Russian.
Censorship and repression of free speech are more active in Ukraine than ever before.
I had actually never heaard of Bandera before last year, but I did know many Ukrainians volunteered to be SS guards in concentration camps.
It makes no sense…if your only chance of getting money is to do a bad thing MANY poor and badly instructed peoples will do it if is the only way to survive.
Then there was Bandera and his O United Nations gang which was involved in the genocide of Jews, Poles, and Russians.
We all know that Russia puts nonviolent solo protesters in jail for 3 years.
People can’t protest in Russia with more than one person without a license.
Russia puts bloggers against the invasion of Ukraine in jail for 5 years.
Mention the reasons for suicide, since many pensioners commit suicide for lack of medical care.
Your post here just confirm to the average reader, that the Russian propaganda machine really exists.
They are not well-built tanks and cannot withstand TOW missiles, they have some reactive armour; but it’s USSR built armour; therefore high chance of the armour fail.
Ukraine cannot be trusted with any advanced weapons, which is why the USA has supplied Ukraine with only non functioning junk.
Middle East seems far away, but not the eastern Europe – Europe would not allow US’ TOWs, Abrams and other scrap metal in the hands of Ukraine.
Obama would not risk to ruin relationships with EU on the eve of elections.
When would you reccomend “escalation” w/regard to Putin, who escalates on us constantly, while the West plays pick-up.
I meant more the current situation in Ukraine, and possible military escalation not only in Donbass but also against Crimea.
That’s why the west doesn’t want to grant weapon, it is more than enough weapon already.
The INF Treaty was signed in 1987 during US-USSR nuclear chase over Europe.
Both agreements can be logically understood only the context of that times and strategies.
When USSR voluntary left Eastern Germany and the Berlin wall was destroyed, NATO promised Gorbachev personally not to extend to the east.
Actually Gorbachev used to say that and then denied himself, so it is not very clear.
In 2001 United States withdraws with ABM Treaty and announces the deployment of anti-missiles in Poland and other eastern European countries.
Officially it was claimed to protect from Iran, but it was understood that Iran doesn’t have such missiles and in the first turn it was implied to Russia.
From strategic prospective that would ‘change the balance’, also who knows what those missiles would be actually capable of, anyway it was not considered as a friendly step.
In the response Russian officials several times stated that Russia MAY withdraw with INF Treaty.
The nearby countries India, Pakistan, Korea, China, Israel are not limited by such treaty and actually have middle-range missiles.
Russia also claimed that United States is actually developing such missiles and particularly unmanned planes can be considered as eligible.
Nevertheless as far as I know Russia is not going officially to leave the treaty.
And no foreign investors are going to invest any money in Ukraine either.
Actually Russia just had a record month for foreigners buying Russian shares.
Capital flight from Russia by the Russian elite remains high, it’s just business, simply where they see the best future for their money.
German Panther tanks were just as unreliable, they constantly broke down due to inadaquate final drive gears.
No consequence at all, waste of time and precious energy, and as a bonus gives people a forum that in real world might not even succeed in Speakers’ Corner, let alone some serious place.
Ukrainian fascists and government involved in the theft of Old Master paintings, says The Netherlands. we all know full well that the Ukrainians hated the Soviets for what terrible things they did to them.
Anyone joining the German army probably had good reason to do so, just as many other Eastern Europeans did.
One of the reasons many Polish troops surrendered to the Nazis instead of the Soviets in 1939.
Of course, they were choosing between two evils, but one side was already well known for the brutality they could and did unleash.
So, condemn the Ukrainians all you like Randy, but if you had seen your little sister or brother die of starvation, your parents reduced to cannibalism, your daily meal reduced to tree bark, grass and stones, perhaps you too would have seen the Nazis as saviors.
However, in the mind’s eye of Markist/Leninists, this matters little at all since they feel things like the Gulag were justified.
Ukrainians volunteered for the SS, including concentration camp duty, not the German Army.
They ethnically cleansed western Ukraine of most of its Jewish and Polish population, by murdering them.
The ethnical question was major for nasi Germans, that was the clear difference with soviets.
Soviet policy has never been against Ukrainians, in fact Ukrainians were those who conducted those policies in Ukraine.
We should not forget that majority of Ukrainians fought against Hitler in soviet army, partisaned at occupied territories ) and together with others shared and deserved that victory.
However, many ‘volunteers’ hated the Soviets for several reasons, including, but not limited to the Holodomor.
However, you are wrong in saying they only volunteered for the SS, since they were in German Army units as well, and although members of the SS, they mainly fought in the Eastern Front and none were ever accused of a war crime.
Just cannot agree that hitler came to liberate from soviets as well as the interpretation of femine of 30th as golodomor.
You are more than welcome to start a interesting topic and sustain a civil discourse and I’m sure it will attract the right people.
Western nations here are all in formal agreement; sanctions on USSR now extend well into the future.
With oil &@ its lowest price in decades, 38US$/barrel, can we sit back and watch as a Palace coup unseats Putin, who as having too extreme an attitude to the West.
BTW do you think that United States indirectly is responsible to what happened in Ukraine by supporting the coup against the legally-elected former president mr.
Kind of reminds me of yanukothiefs pads that he got working on a manager salary down in Donetsk of about 30k a year, oh and 3 years as democratically elected President whose elections were also surrounded by voter fraud and bribed voters and over 300k voted who were not registered to vote in Ukraine.
Stranger in my opinion when yanukotheif fled to avoid prosecution in Kyiv, he resigned his seat.
But he was not democratically elected any more then vova was elected in the last election cycle.
The responsibility for his ouster was the crimes he committed, the USA did not force him to do that.
Although one could say the Kremlin did. yanukothiefs homes, one can be seen by going to yanukovychleaks site.
Also one need to take into account a historical separation of western and eastern Ukrainian regions, not enough for a war of course.
But Yanukovich was eastern candidate, while all Ukrainian nationalists including Yushenko – from the west.
The revolution was made mostly by the west, the east felt their interests were not honored.
Joe Biden recently visited Ukraine and talked from parliament, rada, as a master, accusing current Ukrainian government in corruption and calling not to loose the last chance to change.
I agree Biden may know more then I do and Ukraine might be reverting to its old oligarchical ways.
He has the USA treasury and other departments keeping a very close eye on Ukraine.
Whether or not it is just a warning for them to keep combating corruption, or that organized crime is again already getting a bigger foot in the door, I do not know.
Many Ukrainians feel it is getting better, but the white collar crime is still prevalent and the lack of results of Maidan shootings and Odessa investigations is alarming.
That is one difficult thing about democracy, the victim rights side of the equation…no matter how guilty everyone knows they are.
He accepted the Kremlin loan and signed off on it regardless of everyone screaming no and voting it down.
He signed the EU agreement initially, then the RF agent refused to recognize his signing and then stated himself after a consolation with the RF representative that he never signed it, even though he had many other witnesses there.
So no, I would not say a true democracy and will of the people expressed in the voting prior to Poroshenko’s election.
Previous elections were which group could corrupt more of the election board.
Maidan was an advance of democracy and an establishment of the will of a majority of citizens against the past corruption.
I think Western criminal elements jumped on that bandwagon hoping to hide under the shroud of democracy and get their people into as many positions as possible.
Which can be seen by the acceptance of smuggling between groups on the frontline.
Eastern crime groups are wide scale taking advantage and stealing everything that is not tied down and running to Moscow.
Especially when they say we are going to steal Eastern Ukraine and run away to Russia with it, the same way they did in Crimea.
That was mostly a RF Kremlin action, not a true representation of the will of the people in the East.
We saw both types of demonstrations in Donetsk and Luhansk, for and against unity.
Then booom, FSB and GRU agents broke into police stations, freed jailed Russians, broke into banks, broke into government offices, and broke into military bases and stole everything they could to escalate the crisis.
Sure there were a few organized crime families supporting that action, a handful of Ukrainians, but by and large it was a Moscow led operation.
The demonstrations for Unity should largely the will of Eastern Ukraine.
To deny it, you just have not looked hard enough or turn off the channel when the facts stare at you.
You really have a lot of nerve if you supported the Crimean referendum and its results – all blatantly illegal, rife with fraud and against international norms – and you are pointing out they should have thrown him in jail, impeached him, then hung him…or just waited 1. years.
The changes that he implemented to the constitution of Ukraine made that removal of him from power more difficult and his prosecution as well.
I wish they would have caught him as he ran away and gave up office, I really do.
I wish Ukrainian military and the Interior Ministry itself would have stopped yanukothief and arrested him in his first year.
Because corruption has always been in eastern countries, Georgia, Ukraine, Russia.
Hardly, will see how you would manage to help Ukraine, instead of pushing down Russia.
IMF has already changed their rules to allow Ukraine not to pay sovereign debt 3bil to Russia, a good start, will see if it helps.
