Long before Paul Manafort served as Donald J Trump’s presidential campaign chairman he worked for Viktor Yanukovych, the pro-Russian former president of Ukraine.
It was in this role that Anders Åslund, a resident senior fellow in the Atlantic Council’s Dinu Patriciu Eurasia Center, first met Manafort.
A Bloomberg piece in October titled “Why Catalonia Will Fail Where Crimea Succeeded” by Russian writer Leonid Bershidsky is an example of moral equivalence run amok.
He compares two completely unrelated events—referenda in Crimea and Catalonia—as though they bear any similarity, and as though they carry the same moral weight.
The United States must seize the opportunity presented by a Chinese initiative that envisions the creation of land and sea routes that will span three continents and link more than sixty countries, according to experts who participated in a panel discussion at the Atlantic Council on October 4.
While analysts agree that diplomacy is the ideal route to ending the conflict in eastern Ukraine, they disagree on whether the United States sending defensive weapons to Ukraine will achieve that end.
The divisive prospect of sending United States weapons to Ukraine as further defense against Russian aggression in the Donbas could, according to those in favor, defend United States interests on the world stage.
Alternatively, countered those opposed to the idea, it could escalate the conflict in a manner detrimental to United States national security.
Analysts both for and against sending weapons to Ukraine argued that a decision must be predicated on a consideration of what is in the best interests of the United States, yet the opposing sides diverged on how to achieve those ends.
The United States is seriously considering giving Ukraine lethal defensive weapons, and this is the right move.
Over the last month, Michael Brendan Dougherty and I have debated this issue here and here.
The use of the word “even” shows that we think a worldwide conflagration is a longshot.
Second, Dougherty’s understanding of international timing is superficial.
Bloomberg View columnist Leonid Bershidsky is unhappy and he has been tweeting.
Specifically, he demands a correction to my August 8 post that criticized some of the points in his opinion piece arguing against sending defensive lethal weapons to Ukraine.
He claims that he “did not argue” what I said; he has “no idea how” I could have “read that stuff into” his piece; and he politely requests that I “either change that paragraph or remove the inaccurate reference to” his column.
The Kremlin’s reaction to the new United States sanctions indicates that Russian President Vladimir Putin is in a “lashing-out mood,” that, while unsettling, will be short-lived, according to Daniel Fried, a distinguished fellow at the Atlantic Council’s Future Europe Initiative.
While “it works in the short run; it doesn’t work in the long run,” he said.
