The Obama regime’s February 2014 coup in Ukraine replaced democratic governance with fascist tyranny in Europe’s heartland.
A Russophobic puppet regime was installed to serve United States interests.
On November 25, three Ukrainian vessels entered Russian waters without requesting permission as required.
They failed to respond to legitimate demands, forcing Russia to respond defensively against their hostile action.
Under a bilateral 2003 treaty, Russia and Ukraine have freedom of navigation rights in the Kerch Strait – providing defined rules are followed through the narrow waterway.
The same goes for all foreign vessels, wishing to enter territorial waters of another country.
Kiev acted extrajudicially, an indisputable fact, Russia wrongfully blamed for its action.
Did the US-installed Poroshenko regime act on its own or on orders from a higher power.
Kiev flagrantly breached Minsk I and Minsk II agreements to resolve war in Donbass likely on direct orders from Washington, wanting a perpetual state of war on Russia’s border, not peace and stability.
Key is the following United States statement, “condemn Russia’s aggressive actions against international shipping transiting the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait to Ukrainian ports” well before Kiev’s November 25 provocation.
No evidence suggests Russia obstructs or otherwise interferes with foreign vessels sailing through the Kerch Strait into or from the Sea of Azov provided UNCLOS provisions and bilateral Russia/Ukraine navigation requirements are observed.
Accusing Russia of a Kerch Straight incident before it occurred suggests the November 25 provocation was perhaps made in the USA, maybe jointly orchestrated by the Trump and Theresa May regimes their latest hostile action against the Kremlin.
Falsely accusing Russia of “aggressive activities in the Sea of Azov” on November 16 raises obvious red flags.
The State Department affirmed continued Trump regime support for Ukraine militarily.
The illegitimate fascist regime is a dagger pointed at Russia’s heartland.
Ukraine and Syria are the world’s leading hot spots, flashpoints for potential East/West confrontation if neocons in Washington go this far.
Over a decade ago, NATO vowed Ukraine and Georgia would eventually be granted alliance membership.
Russia reserves the right to protect its national security by whatever means it considers necessary.
NATO membership for Ukraine and Georgia would pose unacceptable risks it would take steps to counter.
The three vessels were detained on November 25 after they spent hours in Russian territorial waters, ignoring requests of officials to stop.
Two of the vessels, gunboats 'Berdyansk' and 'Nikopol', were mounted with “weapons and ammunition exceeding the standard loadout,” Deputy Head of the Russian Coast Guard, Aleksey Volsky told reporters on Saturday.
Citing a document obtained on board one of the Ukrainian gunboats, Shishov said that the ships were given instructions to “concentrate the efforts on a stealth passage” of the strait that separates mainland Russia and Crimea.
Flashpoint conditions in both countries risk greater conflicts than ongoing ones in the Middle East and Central Europe, including near Russia’s border.
Washington’s imperial agenda bears full responsibility wanting puppet fascist rule in Syria like its installed Kiev regime in Europe’s heartland.
In September, Poroshenko signed a decree the regime’s parliament approved on Thursday, Moscow notified about the move signifying nothing.
Complicit with the US, UK and other NATO countries, Kiev is militantly hostile toward Russia, waging intermittent war along its border with Donbass freedom fighters.
The November 25 Kerch Strait provocation was likely prelude for similar stunts to follow.
Nothing will change as long as Ukraine’s US-installed war party runs things.
The terminated treaty affirmed a strategic partnership between both countries, sharing a common border, pledging to respect their territorial integrity, doing nothing to jeopardize each other’s security an arrangement ending after the Obama regime’s February 2014 coup.
Until termination on April 1, 2019, the treaty was automatically renewed every 10 years.
Poroshenko’s announced termination came at the same time legislation was drafted to declare war on Russia with full US/UK support and encouragement.
On the day Ukraine’s parliament approved termination of the treaty, United States warplanes conducted a provocative Open Skies flight over its territory, coming close to Russia’s border, showing support for the illegitimate fascist regime Obama illegally installed.
Ultranationalists under him, allied with Waffen SS and other Nazi forces, were responsible for slaughtering half a million or more Ukrainians, Poles and Russians, many of them Jews.
According to historian/political scientist Ryszard Szawlowski, Banderites were unapologetic about genocidal crimes committed during WW II, their barbarity exceeding Nazi and Soviet atrocities torturing and mass murdering with zeal, including use of excruciating methods to kill.
He lied saying Ukrainian forces need to be ready to resist a nonexistent threat of “large-scale ground invasion” falsely claiming Moscow intends to seize Ukrainian territory.
He urged US-led NATO to send warships to the Black Sea to confront Russia provocatively.
He’s crazy enough to try anything, believing Washington will bail him out.
His declaration of martial law in areas along Russia’s border risks confrontation by accident or design.
Given Trump regime hardliners’ rage for endless wars and dominance, anything ahead is possible.
Russia was ordered to ""immediately return to Ukraine the seized vessels and detained Ukrainian crews"" involved in last month's naval provocation and to allow Ukrainian ships to freely navigate the Kerch Strait and the Sea of Azov in Friday's statement from deputy State Department spokesperson Robert Palladino.
The financial decision was made ""in solidarity with"" Lithuania and the UK, which also plan to step up their funding of the Ukrainian military, he added.
The State Department's announcement follows hints from Ukraine's National Security and Defense Council head Alexander Turchinov that the country might send more ships through the Kerch Strait soon, despite the tension.
HMS Echo was sent into the Black Sea earlier this month, after Russia seized three ships belonging to Ukraine's navy and their crews.
Defence Secretary Gavin Williamson has visited the ship in the port of Odessa.
He said the presence of the British ship shows support for Ukraine in the face of increased Russian aggression.
It will be followed by other warships as part of a more constant British presence, he said.
There are increasing tensions between Russia and Ukraine over access to the area off the coast of Crimea.
Crimea used to be part of an independent Ukraine, but it was annexed by Russia in 2014.
