Comic actor Volodymyr Zelensky, who has no political experience but has played the Ukrainian president on television, is leading in the polls ahead of Ukraine’s presidential election on March 31.
At the same time, last weekend marked five years since Russia annexed Crimea, and fighting in eastern Ukraine, which has killed thousands, continues to this day.
Steven Pifer, a former United States ambassador to Ukraine, joins Deep Dish to explain the latest developments and what to expect next.
This is Deep Dish on Global Affairs, going beyond the headlines on critical global issues.
I'm Brian Hanson, and today we're talking about Ukraine, five years after Russia's annexation of Crimea and on the eve of an important presidential election.
On March 31st, Ukrainians will vote for the next president, and among the candidates are some familiar faces, such as current president Petro Poroshenko, but there's also a surprising leader in the poll who is a newcomer, Volodymyr Zelensky.
He is a 41 year old comedian with no political experience other than, and I'm not making this up, playing the Ukrainian president on a popular Ukrainian TV show.
At the same time, this past weekend marked five years since Russia annexed the Crimean peninsula from Ukraine, an occasion Russian president Putin observed in Crimea this week.
Neither Crimea nor the conflict in Donbass, which has killed thousands, seems any closer to resolution.
Joining me to help us understand what's going on in Ukraine today is Steven Pifer.
He served more than 25 years with the State Department, where he focused on United States relations with the former Soviet Union and Europe.
He also was the United States ambassador to Ukraine between 1998 and 2000.
Help us understand why the polls show so much support for this comedian Zelensky.
Second, it reflects, I believe, a significant degree of frustration on the part of a significant segment of the Ukrainian electorate that more progress has not been made since 2014 and the Maidan Revolution.
Talk to us about corruption, because this was a big issue in 2014, as people may remember.
To its credit, Ukraine has accomplished a lot in the last five years, particularly from 2014 to 2016, but many Ukrainians still feel that the corruption picture hasn't changed.
You still have lots of reporting about senior officials who owned houses, who own cars that are far beyond the reach of their incomes.
But also, it's the question of Ukraine's oligarchs, people of great wealth who wield political influence.
For example, they use that to work with the government to keep potential competitors out.
I believe that this has been a big factor behind the polls for Mr Zelensky, who now polls between 20% and 25% in most polls.
I think almost every poll now has him as the leading candidate for the March 31st election.
I understand that in Ukraine they have a two round process for the presidential election.
It's actually a lot like the mayoral election in Chicago, whereas there's the poll that will take place at the end of March, here on the 31st, and then if no candidate receives an absolute majority, there is a run-off election at that time.
Under Ukrainian law, in order to win the election outright you have to get 50 percent of the vote plus one.
I think Mr Zelensky's going to make it and then either the current incumbent Petro Poroshenko, the president, gets in or Yulia Tymoshenko, the former prime minister gets in.
If I could add, this is actually one really good thing about Ukrainian democracy, is we are less than two weeks from the election, less than five weeks from the runoff, and nobody can really predict who's going to be the president.
You can contrast that with Ukraine's neighbor Russia, where in 2013 we all knew who was going to be the president in the 2018 election.
So, this is a good thing that we don't know this, but it really does leave things open and it makes predictions very difficult.
You were talking about the protest or pushback against the incumbents, against the oligarchy.
For example, Mr Zelensky himself, he really is running on the basis of being a new face and the fact that for three years now he's portrayed a Mr Common Man as president of Ukraine on television.
But, he hasn't really outlined much in the way of policy and he seems to be someone who has a lot of confidence but also may be inclined to go with his instincts.
It's not yet clear who he has in mind for his team were he to be elected, so there's a blank slate there.
On the other hand, another candidate, Yulia Tymoshenko, has adopted a program that many folks have called populist.
For example, she's called for lowering the price of energy that's provided to households and utilities.
That's a tricky question, because raising those prices to at least cover the cost of producing electricity and household heating was a big demand of the International Monetary Fund.
She's adopted an approach that's trying to say look, we can walk back some of the reforms the last several years to make it easier for people.
That would put her though, if she were to be president, immediately in a difficult situation vis-a-vis the International Monetary Fund.
So, you do see some of these trends as candidates are trying to identify the best path to receiving a winning majority in the election.
Let's just pause on her for just another moment, because she's a long time figure in Ukrainian politics.
Her party was part of the pro-government coalition in 2014, but they've separated themselves over the last three years and been critical of things, including some of the reforms that the government has adopted, some of which were in compliance with agreements and commitments they made to the International Monetary Fund in order to secure low interest credits.
Miss Tymoshenko in some ways may be the smartest political actor in Ukraine, but she also probably labors under the fact that she has been in Ukrainian politics now for some 20 years and many of the voters may see her as part of the old guard.
One of my favorite parts in preparing for this conversation was that I noted that there is someone with her same name that has been put on the ballot as well in order to divide the vote even further.
It's an effort to have people make mistakes and take votes away from her.
This is one of the things where Ukrainian democracy, at this point, is not yet close to perfect.
One of the big dividing issues back in 2014 was Ukraine's orientation in the world.
Fundamentally, to over simplify, whether Ukraine was going to align more closely with the EU and Brussels or more closely with Russia and Putin.
What you saw in the Maidan Revolution back in 2014 was people basically, what drew them out in the streets originally, was a protest when then President Yanukovych decided he was not going to sign an association agreement with the European Union.
That feeling has only intensified in the last five years as the result of Russia's seizure of Crimea and in the war that Russia has conducted against Ukraine and the eastern region of the Donbass.
In fact, last month, Ukraine's parliament, by a huge majority, adopted a constitutional amendment that makes membership in both the European Union and NATO strategic goals for Ukraine.
And I think this has really been a direct result of the conflict that Vladimir Putin has conducted against Ukraine over the last five years, including 13,000 dead in the Donbass region.
Russia of course has, and under Putin's leadership, has been interfering with elections throughout the world.
There's certainly a lot of attention being paid to that whether Russia uses social media or cyberattakcs, there's concern in Ukraine for example about the ability to protect their electronic voting systems from a cyber attack.
But it's also a difficult question for Russia because, believe me, no candidate running for President on March 31st wants to be seen as Moscow's favorite.
And what the Russians have done is they've made very clear they don't wanna see Mr Poroshenko be reelected, but they've also been careful not to do anything that would look like endorsing someone because they know that would be a huge blow to that person's prospects.
As I'd mentioned up top, this is five years after Russian annexation of the peninsula.
I wanna ask you a question that was suggested by Deep Dish listener Yuriy Makar, who asked on our Facebook group, and you'll see it's a pretty sophisticated question.
It's hard to see how Ukraine musters the political, the economic, the military leverage to draw Crimea back.
I think the one option I could see would be if Ukraine really did fully embrace the new economic reforms, pushed back against corruption, drew in foreign investment and had a booming economy and all of a sudden people in Crimea begin to say, ""Hey, our economic lot in life would be better back as a part of Ukraine,"" but absent that it's hard to see how Crimea does that.
But having said that, I still think it's important that the West maintain the policy of nonrecognition of Crimea's illegal annexation, and it's important to maintain the sanctions, if for no other reason than to signal to Russia that these kinds of land grabs are not acceptable in 21st century Europe.
Before I go there, another Deep Dish listener, Christina Irene Collins asked on our Facebook group something I think a lot of folks would probably admit to.
She says, ""I'm wondering whether there is still a way underway in eastern Ukraine.
It's not a frozen conflict because virtually every day the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, it's monitors report firing across the land of contact.
And every week the Ukraines report one or two soldiers killed and a number injured.
The fighting is going on, albeit at a low intensity, and what you're seeing, I believe, is an effort by the Kremlin to keep that conflict simmering as a mechanism to put pressure on Kiev to distract it, to destabilize it, to make it harder for the Ukrainian government to pursue both needed domestic reforms, but also to make it harder for the Ukrainians to draw closer to Europe.
And in terms of the reaction in Russia, this was of course a war that Putin first tried to deny even existed, including to his own people.
There's a huge difference between Crimea and the simmering conflict in Donbass.
Crimea was hugely popular, or the seizure of Crimea was hugely popular with the Russian people, in part because Russia had a historical claim to Crimea, but it was also relatively quick, it was relatively bloodless.
You're not seeing that level of support for the quagmire that's now going on in Donbass and the Russian government does things like, it hides the fact that Russian soldiers are dying in Donbass.
The Russians are trying to keep their level of involvement as low as possible.
They say that there are volunteers in Ukraine, but they continually deny that there's any part of the Russian army there, although most analysts say at least at the command levels, it's a Russian military operation.
I'm not sure that Donbass is going to be the issue that pushes things over the edge.
You have seen, over the course of the last year, an erosion in Putin's popularity that reflects I believe a number of factors.
But I think it also reflects unhappiness that the economy is not doing better.
For the last several years you've seen stagnant growth at one to one-and-a-half percent.
The Donbass and then sanctions that are a result of Russian involvement in Donbass are a part of that.
But it's a combination of factors, and I'm not sure that the fighting in Donbass itself is going to push Putin over the edge.
You get the Russians to the point where they really are trying to find a way to get out of Donbass.
That's a perfect transition for where I wanted to go, which was to the question of sanctions.
Or course, the United States is imposing sanctions on Russia, not only for the Crimea annexation but also back in November, the recent Russian attack on Ukrainian ships.
The United States, the European Union and other countries, for example Australia, have applied a range of sanctions on Russia that are related both to the seizure of Crimea, but the heavier sanctions really are related to Donbass.
They involve sanctions, visa sanctions and financial sanctions on Russian individuals, but they also involve sanctions on Russian entities and on certain areas of the Russian economy.
Most economists assess that the effect of the sanctions is probably somewhere between three-quarters and one percent of Russian gross domestic product.
In an economy that's only growing about one-and-a-half percent a year, that's a fairly sizable impact.
Those sanctions have not yet pushed Russia to either end the war it's conducting in Donbass or to give back Crimea.
But I would argue that the sanctions probably have kept the Russians from doing other things.
There was for example, in 2015 a lot of concern that Russian and Russian proxy forces might move to seize the port city of Mariupol in eastern Ukraine, which is the logical export port for Donbass.
And it didn't happen, and my guess is that one factor was the Russians understood that that kind of operation, which would have required direct Russian military participation, would have provoked much heavier sanctions.
For all the sanctions that have been imposed over five years, on a scale of one to 10, we're probably somewhere just around three or four.
One of the things that you advocated for with Ivo Daalder back in response to the Russian aggression was to provide defensive arms to Ukrainian troops, which my understanding is this administration had done in a way that the Obama administration had not done.
The Trump administration has continued the sanctions and as you said, they took a step that the Obama administration was not prepared to do, which is they have provided lethal military assistance in the form of Javelin anti-tank missiles to Ukraine.
When I look at the administration policy overall, I think what you've seen over the last two years is really a continuation of the toughening policy that you saw in the last couple of years of the Obama administration.
It's very much what one might expect from a mainstream Republican approach.
It's supportive of Ukraine and it's very worried and skeptical about Russia.
The only asterisk I would attach to that assessment is I'm not sure that the President believes in this whole approach.
You've seen, for example, efforts by Congress really to have to lock the president in on additional sanctions.
I'm not sure, if left to his own devices, he would have pursued the policy that we've seen over the last two years.
Yeah, and turning to cooperation with Europe, some have been concerned with increasing discord between Europe and the United States and Trump administration's words and attitudes toward Europe, that cooperation could be more difficult on areas where there's potential shared interests.
As you point out, there's been a tightening of sanctions in the Trump administration.
There seems to be pretty good coordination between Washington and Brussels on continuing the sanctions.
First of all, we in America have to remember that when we adopt sanctions, Europe probably had 10 times as much trade with Russia as the United States did.
So these sanctions are having a heavier impact on European companies than on American companies.
The second point I would make is that, had you asked analysts back in 2014 where Europe would be on sanctions five years down the road, that is today in 2019, my guess is not many would have predicted that Europe would have held steady on the sanctions.
She really has steered the European Union on this path of maintaining sanctions, even though you can see in countries such as Hungary and in Italy a desire maybe to move past sanctions and get back to something like business as usual with Russia.
But so far the Europeans have stayed committed on the sanctions question.
That's a really good question, and I'm not sure I feel comfortable about the answer because you are beginning to see more, as I said in places like Hungary, in Italy, I'd put Greece in that same category, saying these sanctions haven't worked.
I would disagree with that, but they say maybe it's time to get back to a different approach.
You can conduct a war in Europe with now 13,000 dead, and the price for it is not that high.
That's not a calculation we want the Kremlin to make, and I hope that the Europeans will continue to see that.
So on the other side of this, you've made the point that sanctions are to put pressure on Russia in order to stop its actions in eastern Ukraine, in particular.
My guess is that in Moscow they're going to wait and see what happens in the presidential election, and then Ukraine also has parliamentary elections at the end of October.
There may well be a hope in Moscow that as a result of these elections there's a political alignment and Kiev that somehow becomes more amenable to what the Russians would like to work out.
My own sense is that's wishful thinking, but I don't think you're going to see real movement or a readiness in Russia to consider a change in policy course until the end of the year.
At that point, if the Russians are still confronted with a Ukrainian government that is prepared to resist Russia, that continues to focus on moving towards the West, perhaps there is a reassessment in the Kremlin about whether this policy is working or not.
There have been some ideas out there that might offer a path; for example, the introduction of a United Nations peacekeeping force.
So, Steve, as we close, I want to ask you to do something that's incredibly hard, which is look into the future.
I'm optimistic in that I think Ukraine has the potential to change, but it requires that in the elections or at these elections there's a leadership that really is prepared to do the critical mass of reforms.
That means coming to full terms with the corruption problem and reducing the outsized political influence of oligarchs.
They have to do that, and that opens up the potential, I think, of the economy, which is growing at maybe 2 1/2 to 3 percent a year now, but for a country in Ukraine's place should be growing at, say, 5 to 6 percent a year.
Then there's the very difficult issue where are the Russians going to go.
But Russia then seems to be determined that if it can't have Ukraine in its orbit, to hold the country back, to basically try to destabilize it and disrupt it.
At least, can you move to end the bloodshed and try to restore some measure of normalcy in the Donbass, although Crimea is going to be a burden to both the Ukraine-Russia relationship and the West-Russia relationships for years, if not decades, to come.
U.S.-Ukraine Relations in Turbulent Times,"" thanks so much for being on Deep Dish and giving us a sense for what's going on in Ukraine, a place that many folks have kind of lost touch with, as was indicated by our Facebook listeners.
Thanks for helping bring us up to date and understand the dynamics in play there now.
If you like the show, join us at the Council on Thursday, March 28th, for a special event on Russia.
I'd also invite you to join our Facebook group, Deep Dish and Global Affairs.
There you can ask our guests follow-up questions on anything you've heard today or submit questions for upcoming guests.
As a reminder, the opinions you heard today belong to the people who expressed them and not the Chicago Council on Global Affairs.
I'm Brian Hanson, and we'll be back soon with another slice of Deep Dish.
