When pressed further about the purpose of the Kremlin’s agitation in the region, Lukin responded that one should “forget the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics.
When asked how long the violence would continue, Lukin explained, “We’re in no hurry. is the one who needs to hurry.
Or else the girl with the braid” -former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko -“will eat him up.
First, they provide an answer to the question of why Putin didn’t seize the opportunity to invade Ukraine earlier in the conflict.
The Ukrainian government and army were completely disorganized after the Maidan revolution, and a quick strike could have won Putin Kiev.
Instead, Putin may have placed his hopes on the secessionist movements that formed the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics as a way to get him what he wanted at lower cost.
When those failed to win a decisive victory and to prevent a Ukrainian rollback, Putin intervened.
In the last few days, he seems to have halted and partially reversed the Ukrainian advance. googletag.cmd.push { googletag.display; }); Second, Lukin’s talking points explain the mass destruction.
As a result of separatist rule and the ensuing war, several thousand civilians have been killed and wounded, and hundreds of thousands have fled their homes.
In addition, industrial production in Donetsk Province has fallen by 29 percent.
Taken together, both provinces have experienced a 46 percent decline in light industry, a 41 percent drop in the chemical industry, a 34 percent crash in machine building, a 22 percent fall in construction materials, a 19 percent decrease in pharmaceutical production, a 13 percent loss in metallurgy, and a 13 percent drop in the coal industry.
But if, as Lukin suggests, the goal was to ensure that the Donbas remains within Ukraine to thwart integration with NATO and to provide Russia with leverage over Kiev, then maximal devastation would go a long way toward promoting Russia’s political goals.
A devastated region would be an economic drain on Kiev’s scarce resources and a source of never-ending political instability.
It would also invite continued Russian offers of humanitarian aid, particularly for the region’s reconstruction, which would enable the Kremlin to continue influencing politics in Ukraine without having to try to swallow the whole country.
Seen in this light, defeating the pro-Russian rebels and the Russian regular forces could be impossible, and accommodating them would be counterproductive.
If that is the case, then Kiev’s best way out of Putin’s trap may be to withdraw from the Donbas territories controlled by Russian troops and separatists.
The goal would be to turn them not into autonomous federal units within a weak Ukraine, as Putin desires, but into an independent entity, as he pointedly does not.
Having turned the tables on Putin, Kiev could then request Western assistance for enhancing its military’s defensive capacities, including building fortifications along its new frontier with Russia and the rump Donbas.
Russia and its proxies would then have to clean up the mess they made in the Donbas, Ukraine would be free to pursue integration with the West and the world, and the United States and Europe could breathe a little easier, knowing that the bloodshed had come to an end.
Of course, all this assumes that Lukin really does know Putin’s mind and was honest in his exchange with Gelman.
On August 31, Putin called on Kiev to begin “substantive, content-filled negotiations about the . . . political organization of society and the state in southeastern Ukraine,” suggesting that the goal of the recent Russian invasion of eastern Ukraine was to lure Kiev into agreeing to some form of federalization for the Donbas.
But even if Lukin’s account was inaccurate, Kiev would still have to realistically assess its chances of retaking those parts of the Donbas controlled by Russia -and of trying to rule those territories afterward.
If it decides that its chances of success are small and declining, and that the territories would be impossible to manage, formally abandoning the Donbas and attempting to rebuild a Western country may permit Ukraine to snatch victory from the jaws of defeat.
By the same token, saddling Putin with two economic sinkholes -Crimea and the Donbas -could only hasten his regime’s decline.
Understandably, Ukrainians -and especially their ambitious political leaders and courageous volunteer battalions -will be unwilling to accept such a solution, arguing that soldiers’ and civilians’ lives weren’t sacrificed for the satisfaction of Putin’s imperial designs and that calls to withdraw from the Donbas enclave controlled by Russia are tantamount to treason.
And Putin, no doubt, is banking on such morally uncompromising views to influence Ukrainian policy as well.
Considering the alternatives, however, Ukrainians might be wise to refuse to play the game on his terms and focus only on what is best for them and their country.
If they come to believe that the choice is between constant war, a return to things as they were “under Yanukovych, but without Yanukovych,” or genuine independence within manageable frontiers, they may decide that abandoning an ungovernable stretch that was always Ukraine’s odd man out would actually be a stunning example of Ukraine’s commitment to real sovereignty.
When Putin eventually exits the political stage and Russia tires of Putinism’s misdeeds, the Donbas and perhaps even Crimea may come knocking on Ukraine’s door.
If they do, Ukraine could readmit them on its own terms, not on the Kremlin’s.
