After the orange revolution, the Euromaidan protests and Russia’s annexation of Crimea, Ukraine is now caught up in a war that both Europe and the major world powers would rather ignore.
From its Capital to the small towns devastated by bombing, Ukraine looks more and more like a country left on its own.
Kiev tries to move on its road toward progress, but Euromaidan protests, colliding against the strong Ukrainian systemic resistance, were not enough to raise hope for a tighter closeness to Europe.
The UN estimates that 80% of Ukrainians is now living with less than 5 dollars a day.
From 1991, the year of its independency, the former soviet land had to rebuild its identity, in a precarious balance between a European Future and the massive shadow of its Russian past, fighting sometimes against its own shape, not only because it geographically represents the central crossroad of the European continent, but also because right there, in that land, Russian history began.
The umbilical cord that ties Kiev to Moscow has maintained, with some struggle, its integrity in the 2004 orange revolution, but it risked its breaking with the wild protests in Maidan Square, the city’s main square that in 2014 gave name to “Euromaidan”, where more than 70 people died, leading to the removal of the former president Viktor Yanukovych.
Russia refused to acknowledge the new interim government and directed its political influence on some historically disputed lands between the two countries.
Crucial actions were undertaken by Moscow to facilitate its control over Crimea.
These measures included a referendum in the peninsula on self-determination, the shipping of military and economic aid to local civilians and troops, and supporting the separation of the Donbass from Ukraine.
Ukraine, with its policy of shifting alliances, now governed by Petro Poroshenko, once again does not allow its citizens to understand which forces are really involved in the ongoing conflict, beside the obvious Russian interference.
In this apparently far away universe, suspended in a distant Europe, the Minsk Protocol was not enough to stop the war at the borders of Donbass and Luhansk, marking, since the begin of the conflict, more than 9.300 deaths, countless casualties, a spread of violence, unpunished rapes and attacks on journalists.
It became, in the technical definition, a low intensity conflict, and the support of an extensive network of volunteers and veterans has become essential to take daily care of the soldiers in the regions affected by the war.
Europe has, more than ever before, no desire to start an open fight with Russia, meaning that it will be very difficult for the Ukrainian army to affirm itself to a point where Moscow stops invading their country.
In Brussels, despite Angela Merkel’s interest in Kiev’s fate, it is now clear that the Ukrainian problem is, at this time, unmanageable, and that it could possibly be controlled only in the future.
Luhansk region, Ukraine – May 2017 – One of many Ukrainian check-points in the Anti-Terrorist Operation Zone.
Luhansk region, Ukraine – May 2017 – Petro Yablinchuk, 22, Driver, 1-st tank platoon, 1-st tank company of the tank batallion of the 24-th armored cavalry brigade, Operational Command “West” of the Land Forces of Ukraine.
Luhansk region, Ukraine – May 2017 – A woman from the village Novotoshkovskoe in front of her destroyed home.
Novotoshkovskoe, Ukraine – May 2017 – In winter 2015 this school was destroyed by powerful artillery Tire, now 84 children are studying there.
Kyiv, Ukraine – May 2017 – A priest who provides services to military camps to the front.
Kyiv Military Hospital, Ukraine – May 2017 – Dmytro Kotov, 41, he was injured by a mine in 2014.
Severodonetsk, Luhansk region, Ukraine – May 2017 – In Severodonetsk it is not uncommon to Tind soviet missiles of the years before Ukrainian’s independence.
Luhansk region, Ukraine – May 2017 – Tank batallion of the 24-th armored cavalry brigade, Operational Command “West” of the Land Forces of Ukraine.
Born in 1988, I'm an independent documentary photographer and video maker.
I am interested in the use of photography as a way to tell stories focusing on human rights issues, identity and health from around the world and the geopolitical changes of recent years to the subjects of minority, conflicts and marginality.
