Wolfgang Koeth, Senior Lecturer, EIPA Maastricht 23 Ten years after it was set up, the European Neighbourhood Policy has not lived up to its expectations.
Initially copied from the model of the EU’s enlargement policy, it was supposed to lead to privileged relationships through closer political and economic integration between the EU and its neighbours in the east and south.
The lack of interest from most partner countries in engaging in meaningful reforms, the Arab uprisings, and the growing assertiveness of Russia had all forced the Union to revise its approach and to propose more concrete measures rather than lofty laundry lists of well-meaning policy objectives.
In line with its revised approach to trade policy – which no longer relies on the WTO, but focuses on striking bilateral agreements – the EU has started putting trade relations at the core of its relations with the countries of the Neighbourhood.
The ‘Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreements’ are hence promoted as a template for substantial reforms leading to closer regulatory integration between the EU and its partners.
The European Neighbourhood Policy was set up a Initially, the ENP applied the same policy and instruments to decade ago with the aim of surrounding the EU with a ‘ring the post-Soviet republics in the east, and the Arab countries of friends’ with whom it would eventually share ‘everything plus Israel in the south.
The enlargement process successfully managed to both regions could not be more different.
Although most countries in both neighbours did not bring about the anticipated results.
Russia, east and south still frequently rely on heavily regulated and the most important of the EU’s neighbours, decided to stay non-competitive industries, the existing southern model of out of the ENP, since Moscow deemed it inappropriate to be state paternalism is not entirely unfamiliar to Europeans, as it treated as a mere object of EU policy, and regarded on the same mirrors systems and structures of the last century.
Belarus, the ‘last European however, the chaotic demise of a former centrally planned dictatorship’, showed no interest whatsoever in embracing the economy, mostly relying on heavy industry, engendered discourse on common norms and values.
Although the policy a caste of oligarchs who acquired control of key economic could be assessed rather positively for the small republics of sectors through their political connections.
The ENP can hardly be assessed unfamiliar to Europeans. instruments proved inas being successful. adequate and showed At best, the actual results of the ENP in this region have little added value compared to other forms of more traditional been negligible.
The ‘mutual commitment to common miscalculation, that may have tarnished the credibility of values’ referred to in the 2004 ENP strategy, 3 hardly reflected the EU’s discourse in the Arab world; rather than supporting the mind-set of the mostly authoritarian rulers in the south, democratic forces and actors of change since they did not share the EU’s view on the rule of law, good until after the so-called Arab spring, the Union frequently governance and respect for human rights.
The joint common associated with authoritarian rulers, in the hope that they declaration at the funding summit of the UfM therefore fails could be nudged, over a longer period of time, into observing to mention these common values.
Arab uprisings and its aftermath swept away a number of the signatories of the Paris summit, the EU and its members In order to try and bridge the gap between aspirations and found itself in the difficult position of having to explain why concrete measures, the EU has over recent years shifted the it had established such close links with authoritarian regimes focus of the ENP towards trade policy, as the most effective that had demonstrably held the EU founding principles of part of the EU’s foreign democracy and human rights in such low esteem. policy.
It was For its Eastern Neighbours, the situation was quite different. unveiled first in the east, and later in the south.
Until then, the EU had been a strict defender of would contest the essence of the common values as a matter of multilateral trade liberalisation led by the WTO, and therefore principle.
There was some reasonable hope in Brussels that the refrained from concluding bilateral trade agreements.
But ENP methodology – cut and paste from the enlargement policy – given the ‘deep coma’ of the Doha Development Round by the could be repeated.
After all, the desire to belong to the club mid-2000s, the EU started in the second-half of the first decade of wealthy and well-governed European states had triggered to follow the United States by striking regional and bilateral trade deals deep and structural home-made as a second best option.
Campaign for the Referendum on financial crisis from 2007 onwards reforms in other former socialist the Independence of Crimea, March 2014 strengthened the assumption countries in Central and Eastern that trade, rather than internal Europe.
But Moldova, Georgia, Armenia, and, with interruptions, the Ukraine, felt At the 2009 Prague summit, the EU proposed to use the that they should be part of the European family.
Whereas economic benefits and incomes from new sources (VAT The ‘Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreements’ or income tax) are expected to materialise only over time, the partner countries are likely to lose access to the Russian The DCFTAs perfectly integrate themselves into the new market (which accounts for 25% of Ukraine’s exports, on par approach to EU trade policy.
Prompted by the failure of with exports to the EU) in the short term and face immediately the WTO member countries to reach a comprehensive disappearing income from customs duties.
The envisaged value added would therefore need to offer any compensation for a lack of membership come from the ‘behind the border’ provisions of the DCFTA perspective – one of the motivations behind offering DCFTAs (like regulatory issues, investment protection, intellectual to its eastern neighbours.
It proposed no new instruments and thus increase existing trade deficits with the Union. and only referred to existing Agreements.
Whereas the Paris Highly regulated areas such as telecoms and air declaration made a general mention of an unspecified ‘Deep transportation are still a convenient source of income Free Trade Area’ in the Euromed region to be set up by 2010, for many governments in the south, which they are no mechanisms to achieve this aim were set up. wary of opening up to competition.
The degree of enthusiasm of most Southern countries to negotiate such After the Arab revolutions in 2010-2011, which swept away a agreements has been, as a consequence, rather limited number of autocratic regimes in the Southern Mediterranean (at the time of writing, only Morocco is actually negotiating , a DCFTA). the cleavage between the rhetoric of the UfM and reality became even more obvious.
In fact, the EU and its Member The muted enthusiasm for the DCFTAs in the south contrasts States had repeatedly closed their eyes to the numerous with that to the east.
In spite of frequent signals from the EU that this was not a realistic perspective, the Ukraine (with Realising that it had undermined its own credibility in the the notable exception of the Yanukovych government) and region by clearly favouring its own security concerns and Georgia made EU integration a strategic priority.
Moldova commercial interests over its commitment to EU values,13 the and Armenia have also publicly asked for a membership EU tried to adapt to the new situation by adopting a number perspective.
Initially, European v Eurasian Union it seemed as if Russia’s approach would also work in Ukraine.
But the decision of the Yanukovych government in late 2013 The Eurasian Customs Union had until recently not figured to suspend preparations for the signing of Ukraine’s AA/DCFTA prominently on the Brussels radar.
However, the growing a quarter of a century ago, and to support separatist forces in Eastern Ukraine.
When the DCFTA economic power of Russia and its matching geopolitical ambitions the EU has been living with was finally signed by the proEuropean Yatsenyuk government over the last decade had changed this basic parameter.
For Russia, the conviction that it had in September 2014,22 Ukraine had lost control over large parts of the DCFTAs with the countries of what it considers its ‘near abroad’ no enemies; security threats its territory and suffered several thousand casualties among its or special zone of influence, are perceived as a direct challenge to would come from non-state soldiers and civilian population.
Ukraine had finally made its pro27 its regional ambitions for political and economic leadership. actors.
In fact, since the end of the Soviet Union as the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the cold war a quarter of a century ago, the EU has been living with 20th century is still well remembered in the region.
Therefore, a possibility mentioned as a potential the argument that Russia’s opposition risk in the Impact Assessments that to the DCFTA was prompted mainly were carried out on behalf of the by economic concerns – due to the Commission.
This was something that was Neighbours’ to the DCFTAs thus hit already apparent with its military the EU by surprise.
The signing of the AA/DCFTA was thus interpreted nothing would be standing in the way of free trade between by Russia as a direct challenge to its geopolitical aspirations, the Eurasian Customs Union and the EU’s Eastern neighbours, which thus demanded a harsh response. it was nevertheless clear that once the DCFTA was signed, no signatory would be able to become a member of the Customs As often happens, it was an event outside its borders that Union, as commitment to this body (loss of ability to decide pushed the EU towards a common position.
The imposition on its own customs tariffs) would be incompatible with the of sanctions on Russia, following the annexation of Crimea obligation to reduce customs tariffs with the EU. and Russia’s role in destabilising Eastern Ukraine, has shown that the Union is, in principle, ready to stand up As the question of trade integration in the eastern region turned for its values, even if this comes at a high price.
The fact that few would divert their energies away understood the content of the rather from internal struggles to a common technical agreement allowed Russia objective.
On the other hand, if the to manipulate Russian speakers rather technical AA/DCFTA proved in Ukraine via the widely received to be so divisive that it led to a civil Kremlin-sponsored audio-visual war and later to a Russian incursion, media, by presenting this agreement would a fully-fledged accession as detrimental to their interests.
There was little doubt that many Russians in EU markets, funds and programmes) are widely acknowledged Crimea and in Eastern Ukraine would welcome a Russian even in Eastern Ukraine.
Economic This would have raised the wellbeing therefore substituted to legitimise their autocratic opportunity cost of intervention for democratic process as a and reduced the leverage of source of legitimacy.
This minorities and Russia’s claim to act as a protector of Russian chance has been missed.
But for what remains of Ukraine speakers throughout the region further increased the and the other Eastern partner countries, a clear perspective legitimacy and attractiveness of the Russian State to its is still likely to drastically increase the political will of these diaspora. countries to engage in deep reforms and to overcome the divisions within their societies.
In times where a number of Whereas a clear accession perspective would not in itself current candidates and potential candidates have put EU have diminished the attraction of Russia to ethnic Russians accession on the backburner, and where the UK is considering across the border, it would most likely have stopped Ukraine leaving the Union, would it not be fair to give a chance to from further pushing native Russian speakers into the those European countries that are willing and committed to same direction.
This seems to be the case for a number of countries in the east, but far less so in the south.
But without joint ownership and commitment, the traditionally sought for closer integration with the EU, the degree DCFTAs would have little added value. of interest of countries as Algeria, Syria and Libya in the ENP and in closer relations with the EU had been negligible.
The EU seems to have been pushed by events to 4 Joint Declaration of the Paris Summit for the Mediterranean.
Paris, use this tool in the absence of any other more suitable and 13 July 2008. meaningful instruments.
By getting too closely involved, the in both the EU and its partner countries.
The PCAs refer to the EU did not change its neighbourhood, but compromised its partner countries as ‘countries with an economy in transition’, own values.
The suspicion that the the level of bilateral cooperation has gradually extended beyond EU uses concepts such as human rights, democracy and the the scope of the PCAs, for example in the field of police and rule of law in an opportunistic way, as a vehicle to fulfil its judicial cooperation in criminal matters. own strategic ambitions and interests, won’t go away easily.
Moldovan no external enemies and that its basic values are, in principle, Prime Minister Iurie Leanca, 29 April 2014.
The whole remaining should never leave the path of European integration.
If EU energy efficiency rapid/press-release_MEMO-11-23_en.htm. standards were applied to Ukraine, the country could be largely 14 Defined in the strategy as ‘the kind that lasts because the right to energy self-sufficient. vote is accompanied by rights to exercise free speech, form 25 Such as the attempted repeal in February 2014, of the 2012 competing political parties, receive impartial justice from language law.
This law had given the Russian language the status independent judges, security from accountable police and army of an official language in a number of majority Russian-speaking forces, access to a competent and non-corrupt civil service – and regions.
Its repeal provoked a backlash against the Euromaidan other civil and human rights that many Europeans take for movement in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, which ultimately granted, such as the freedom of thought, conscience and religion’. culminated in the annexation of Crimea by Russia.
However, 15 These two countries are not eligible to sign DCFTAs due to their after being internationally criticised (among others by the OSCE non-membership of the WTO, a basic conditionality put forward High Commissioner on national Minorities), the repeal bill was by the EU, as well as the poor state of democracy and human finally withdrawn. rights.
Russian state media tend to heavily focus on the more negative 16 The Eurasian Customs Union, set up in 2010 as a successor of the effects of EU integration.
