The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30m. in Room SH-216, Hart Senate Office Building, Senator John McCain (chairman) presiding.
Senators McCain, Inhofe, Sessions, Wicker, Ayotte, Fischer, Cotton, Rounds, Ernst, Tillis, Sullivan, Lee, Reed, McCaskill, Manchin, Gillibrand, Blumenthal, Donnelly, Hirono, King, and Heinrich.
The Senate Armed Services Committee meets this morning to receive testimony on Russian Strategy and Military Operations, obviously a pretty important time to have this discussion.
General Jack Keane, of the Institute for the Study of War; General James Jones, of the Atlantic Council; Ms.
Heather Conley, of the Center for Strategic and International Studies; and Dr.
Last year, Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea forced a recognition, for anyone who is not yet convinced, that we’re confronting a challenge that many had assumed was resigned to the history books, a strong militarily capable Russia that is hostile to our interests and our values, and seeks to challenge the international order that American leaders of both parties have sought to maintain since the end of World War 11.
Today, Russia continues to destabilize Ukraine and menace our NATO allies in Europe with aggressive military behavior.
For more than a year, an overwhelming bipartisan majority in Congress, as well as many of the President’s top advisors, have warned that failure to offer greater support to Ukraine, especially defensive lethal assistance, would send a message of weakness that would invite the very aggression we seek to avoid.
As the old saying goes, Mr Putin’s appetite is growing with the eating.
Now, in a profound echo of the Cold War, Russia has intervened militarily in Syria on behalf of the murderous regime of Bashar alAssad.
In all 2 of its Soviet and post-Soviet history, Russia never intervened overtly militarily beyond its so-called near abroad.
Now Vladimir Putin is doing so, and it has become the latest disastrous turn in the Middle East as well as another humiliating setback for the United States.
A few weeks ago, the administration warned Russia not to send its forces to Syria.
The administration then tried to block Russia’s access to airspace en route to Syria.
United States defense officials rushed into talks with Russia’s military to, quote, “deconflict” in Syria.
And President Obama acquiesced to his first formal meeting in 2 years with Vladimir Putin, undermining international efforts, post-Crimea, to isolate Russia, exactly as Putin desired.
President Obama is fond of saying there is no military solution to this or any other crisis.
This ignores the reality that there is a major military dimension to the problem.
Most civil wars actually do end when one side wins and the other side loses.
That is Putin’s military solution, and he is now imposing it with Russian airpower in an anti-American coalition of Syrian, Iranian, Hezbollah ground forces.
We should also not be surprised if Putin expands his antiAmerican coalition’s operations into Iraq, where they have already established an intelligence partnership with Baghdad.
However this conflict ends, it must not involve Vladimir Putin shoring up his partners, crushing ours, destroying our remaining credibility in the Middle East, and restoring Russia as a major power in this vital region, as Putin wants.
His intervention has raised the costs and risks of greater United States involvement in Syria, but it has not negated the steps we must take.
As everyone from David Petraeus to Hillary Clinton has advocated, we must rally an international coalition to establish enclaves in Syria to protect civilians and our moderate partners, and do what is necessary to defend them.
If Assad continues to barrelbomb civilians, we should destroy his air force’s ability to operate.
And if Russia continues to attack our opposition partners, we must impose greater costs on Russia’s interests; for example, by striking meanin^ul Syrian regime targets.
We must look to impose costs on Russia more broadly, including the provision of arms to Ukraine, the increase of targeted sanctions, and steps to deepen Russia’s international isolation.
We must also recognize the growing challenge that Russia poses in other areas and domains.
According to public reports, Russian actors are behind a growing and increasing blatant campaign of 3 cyberattacks against the United States, including the recent attack on the Joint Staff at the Department of Defense.
Along the eastern flank of NATO, Russia is moving back into old military bases it abandoned long ago and deploying growing numbers of its modernized military forces, especially anti-access and area-denial weapons designed specifically to counter the United States in asymmetric ways.
Russia’s challenge even extends to the Arctic region, where Russia is involved in a significant military buildup of its air, ground, and naval forces, and has recently conducted a series of massive military exercises.
These are just some of the reasons why our military leaders, including the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, have recently testified to this committee that Russia represents the greatest threat to the United — that the United States faces.
Whether we agree with that assessment or not, it is a striking wake-up call about the threat Russia poses.
In response to the challenge that Russia poses in Europe and in the Middle East and in the Arctic, it is not that the United States has done nothing.
The problem is, nothing we are doing appears to be deterring Russian aggression.
None of us want a return to the Cold War, b^ut we need to face the reality that we are dealing with a Russian ruler who wants exactly that.
As such, we must revisit the question what it’ll take to deter the conflict and aggression while confronting a revisionist Russia.
We look forward to the thoughts and recommendations from our distinguished witnesses on these questions.
Let me first welcome the witnesses, thank them not only for their testimony but for their service to the Nation over so many years and in so many ways.
This morning, our hearing focuses on developments in Russian strategy and military operations which are causing fundamental shifts in the security environment, not only in Europe, but in the Middle East, the Arctic, and elsewhere.
The United States and its allies are facing an increasingly aggressive and revanchist Russia and a Putin regime that is willing to use all tools at its disposal, including its military power, to achieve its goals.
Putin’s goals appear to be, first, regime survival in the face of Russia’s economic, political, and social decline; second, securing Russia’s periphery by pressuring its neighbors against integrating with the West; and third, exploiting opportunities to weaken Western unity by dividing member states within the EU and NATO against each other.
Yet, Russia’s provocative and dangerous aggression often appears opportunistic and potentially harmful for its long-term interests.
Last month, I had the opportunity to visit the Ukraine, where the nascent democratic government in Kyiv is struggling to defend its sovereignty against aggression from Russia and Russian-backed 4 separatists.
Russia has demonstrated, in Crimea and in eastern Ukraine, its willingness to use military force to violate Ukraine’s territorial integrity and intimidate its neighbor.
It is clear that President Putin sees a functioning democratic westward-oriented Ukraine as a threat to his regime’s survival domestically and to Russia’s broader regional security strategy.
Recently, Russia has shifted its tactics in Ukraine from an emphasis on territorial gains to hybrid warfare and proxy forces to an expansion of his activities aimed at destabilizing the Ukrainian government and economy.
This shift in Russian tactics is a result of several factors, including the determination of the Ukrainian forces and people to resist Russian aggression, international sanctions that are proving costly to Russia, the difficulty of disguising casualties from the Russian people, which is engendering some opposition within Russia, and, most recently, a possible desire by President Putin to shift the focus away from Ukraine and toward the conflict in Syria.
Russian military operations in the Donbas have been a proving ground for its hybrid warfare technologies, which continue to evolve with increasing sophistication.
The United States needs to be firm in its support of Ukraine, right now, or else the United States and NATO will have a bigger problem in the future.
If Ukraine does not weather the current crisis, then Russia’s aggressive behavior will be repeated elsewhere, potentially threatening NATO members.
The United States needs to act in concert with our allies to assist Ukraine.
One immediate need is for the international community to press Russia not to support the illegitimate local elections called by the separatists which violate the specific terms of the Minsk agreement in Ukrainian law.
The outcome of the local elections of the Donbas threaten to further undermine the prospects for negotiations as part of the Minsk peace process.
I understand that just recently the elections in the conflict area have been postponed until February.
The United States and its allies and partners must immediately agree on an approach that supports Ukrainian efforts to hold elections under Ukrainian law, pressures Russia to uphold the terms of the Minsk agreements, and makes clear that any separatist victors in sham elections will not be accepted in participants — as participants in future talks under Minsk.
The United States and its partners should take other steps to counter Russian aggression in Ukraine, as well.
Ukraine’s need for defensive weapons, including counter-artillery radars and anti-tank weapons, remains critical.
Other action to help Ukraine include expanding the training in Ukraine of units of the Ministry of Defense, training Ukrainian forces at facilities outside Ukraine on key defensive weapon systems should a decision to be made to transfer those systems, and exploring options for developing Ukraine’s capability to produce domestically much needed weapons, such as antitank weapons and vehicles.
In Syria, much as it did in Ukraine, Russia has hidden its true intentions, using the ruse of joining the fight against ISIL to provide a cover for Russia’s military intervention to prop up the Assad regime.
Instead of focusing on targeting ISIL, Russian airstrikes have predominantly occurred in Homs and Hama, areas controlled 5 by moderate Syrian forces challenging the Assad regime.
Russia is providing broader enabling support to the Assad regime’s forces against the moderate opposition.
These Russian missile attacks and enabling support were apparently conducted in coordination with a new ground offensive by the Syrian army, Iran’s terrorist proxy, Hezbollah, and other Iranianaffiliated forces.
Russia’s open military intervention in a conflict well beyond its borders marks a significant departure from how Russia has operated in the past and suggests that President Putin may be attaching particular strategic importance to Russia’s access to bases in the overall relationship with Syria.
And I hope our witnesses will provide their assessment of the strategic significance of Russia’s decision to deploy its military forces to Syria.
Russia’s unilateral and belligerent efforts are not helpful to the efforts of the unified coalition of 60-plus countries fighting ISIL and create a dangerous risk of unintended consequences.
President Putin has chosen not to join the international anti-ISIL coalition; instead, Putin has chosen to align with Iran and Hezbollah to attack Syria and is seeking to end the brutality of the Assad regime and establish a better Syria.
Russians’ actions are likely to only prolong and further complicate this conflict.
Russia appears to be seeking to keep Bashar Assad in office and maintain Syria as a client state.
In addition, Russia, Iran, and Iraq have concluded an intelligence-sharing agreement, and Iraqi Prime Minister Abadi has suggested that Iraq would welcome Russian airstrikes against ISIL in Iraq, adding to the concerns over unintended consequences.
Once again, the witnesses’ perspective on these issues would be absolutely critical.
Finally, Russia is staking a claim in the Arctic, expanding its military presence, including coastal defense in the north to be able to control movements to a northern passage.
STATEMENT OF GENERAL JOHN M KEANE, USA , CHAIRMAN, INSTITUTE FOR THE STUDY OF WAR AND FORMER VICE CHIEF OF STAFF OF THE ARMY General Keane.
Chairman McCain, Ranking Member Reed, distinguished members of the committee.
I’m honored to be back testifying before this great committee who means so much to our national defense and security.
It’s a privilege to be here with my panel colleagues, particularly General Jones, who I’ve served with in the Pentagon and have known for years.
As to Russian strategy and military operations in Syria, establishing an out-of-region airbase in Syria that is isolated from the heartland of Russia in a war zone is quite unprecedented, particularly for a non-expeditionary military.
You can see, on the map labeled “Russian Deployment to Syria,” the air-bridges routes over Iran and Iraq, and a sea-bridge route through the Black Sea.
The airbase consists of combat aircraft, helicopters, drones, logistics, support infrastructure, and a battalion-plus of armor infantry, artillery, and air defense for protection of the base.
Approximately 2,000 to 3,000 personnel make up the base, which also houses a joint operations center consisting of Russian, Syrian, Iranian, and Hezbollah military personnel, largely now for targeting.
While one can only speculate about the reason for this brazen military aggression, some realities in Syria are insightful.
As you can see, the regime control area, in orange, which is now only about 20 percent of Syria.
Note the opposition control area to the north and south, in yellow, as the regime is quite confined.
Not labeled on the map, in the gray zone, to the east of Homs and Damascus, in central Syria, ISIS seized Palmyra City, the famed ancient city, and a nearby regime airbase, opening up the east-west transportation corridor from Homs to the Iraq border.
Syria is Russia’s foothold in the Middle East, and, as such, the Tartus Naval Base is a strategic asset.
It seems apparent that Russia believed the Assad regime’s survival was in a more precarious position and needed to be propped up.
As such, if you look at the map labeled “Russian Airstrikes,” you can see the focus of the airstrikes are against the opposition forces threatening the regime from the north in Idlib, Hama, and Homs Province.
The moderate opposition forces, many trained by the CIA, and Jabhat al-Nusra, an al-Qaeda affiliate, are the main focus with ISIS strikes at Raqqa and near Palmyra are far less significant.
Russian cruise missiles were introduced yesterday, striking 11 targets in northern Syria, northwestern Syria, and northeastern Syria.
One is to stop the advance of the opposition forces threatening the regime.
And, two, to begin to set conditions for a ground counteroffensive to retake lost territory, with the main effort in the north in southern Idlib and northern Hama Provinces.
The Syrian army began limited ground operations yesterday in Idlib Province, obviously supported by Russian airpower.
A supporting effort may also be launched to retake Palmyra and the military airbase if the regime can generate sufficient forces.
Even more significant than Russia entering a civil war is their recent strategic alliance with Iran, which will impact every country in the region and further diminish United States influence and United States interests in the region.
Russia has been leveraging this reality to their own advantage by entering into arms deals with Saudi Arabia, UAE, Kuwaifi and Egypt.
Russia is also in preliminary discussions to build nuclear powerplants in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt, and Tunisia.
The relationship with Iran and its proxies matters to Russia because it provides them greater influence in the Middle East while also acting as a strategic buffer against radical Islam, a threat which is of great concern to Russia.
Secondly, Russian strategy and military operations in Ukraine and Europe.
Putin has put Russia on a path to be a world power with global influence.
Most historical world powers have strong economies and strong militaries.
Russia — the former Soviet Union was never prosperous, but certainly had a very strong military.
Putin was on a path to do just that again with his military when the economy tanked.
But, about a third of his military are good units with some select excellent capabilities.
This is a land-centric force with good combat aircraft, bombers, and submarines, and a limited power-projection navy with only one aircraft carrier.
Russia’s strategy in Europe, I think, is influenced by the Napoleonic and Nazi invasions and the strategic buffer that existed in Europe as part of the Warsaw Pact protecting the heartland of Russia for almost 50 years.
These buffer countries are now a part of NATO, which Putin sees as a security risk.
After Putin lost his political stooge, Yanukovych, who he thought would stop the Ukraine movement to the West, he immediately annexed Crimea, correctly believing the Europeans and Americans would be stunned into compliance, thus recovering at home from the embarrassment of Yanukovych’s forced departure.
Encouraged by their success, Putin moved on eastern Ukraine, introducing hybrid warfare, a combination of special operations forces and intelligence security officers to help create public unrest, then arm and organize that unrest into fighting units, and, when the host country army moves to put the movement down, bring in Russian-disguised conventional military to defeat the army.
Russia’s use of military force in Ukraine is very revealing, as it relies heavily on drones to detect Ukrainian military units, with target information relayed immediately to artillery batteries and, within a few minutes, massive artillery is landing on a target, some with thermobaric shells creating a fire incendiary on the unit which is quite devastating.
As such, the separatists, supported by Russian military, have consolidated Luhansk and Donetsk Provinces, but denied the land bridge to Mariupol.
Putin wants the Kyiv to fail and be replaced by a more friendly Russian government.
And see the map labeled “Current Proposed Russian Bases” with the two new permanent ground force bases that are under construction across from the Ukrainian border, the — obviously in Russia — and the airbase Putin has muscled into Belarus which is also now under construction.
United States strate^ should be to assure our allies and friends, deter Russian aggression, defeat ISIS, and, long term, as a part of a global alliance, defeat radical Islam.
Putin is counting on the United States fear of escalation and fear of confrontation to stop any thought of retaliation.
As to Syria options, recognize the anti-ISIS strategy in Iraq and Syria is failing.
We are certain to lose the war unless there is major and comprehensive change to build an effective and decisive ground force in Syria while removing restrictions on the air campaign to dramatically increase airstrike effectiveness.
We need to continue the United States policy to force Assad from power, but let’s be realistic.
Understand that Russia, as Assad’s protector, will now play the decisive role.
Putin has begun a proxy war with the United States when Russian combat aircraft struck continuously moderate rebel forces trained by the Central Intelligence Agency.
United States military should have been given the mission to retaliate.
Also, advise Russia that the United States and the coalition will conduct air operations anytime, anywhere in Syria, and the Russians should stay out of our way if they want to avoid confrontation.
Unfortunately, United States aircraft are rarely flying now against ISIS targets in Syria, and focusing their efforts in Iraq.
If we continue to wring our hands and continue to be dominated by fears and opposed to instilling fear, then Russian aggression will not just advance in the Middle East, it will, with certainty, escalate in the Baltics and in eastern Europe.
As to Ukraine and Europe’s options, recognize further that Russia is not finished in Ukraine, as the new military bases across the border suggest.
The Atlantic Resolve, the name for the United States -NATO rotational troop deployments to the Baltics, Poland, Romania, and Hungary, are helpful but a small deterrence to Russian aggression.
Russian aggression has already begun in the Baltics — that is, it’s pounding the Russian-speaking minorities in the Baltics with continuous propaganda to create unrest and to foment a split with the nation’s majority, coupled with continuous airspace violations that obviously are harassing the host governments.
Department of Defense must reevaluate its stationing plan for the combatant commands, in view of a revisionist and aggressive 9 Russia.
The Pacific is the largest combatant command, with over 400,000 troops, while Europe is considerably smaller and less than adequate, now down to around 50,000.
The assumptions that drove the downsizing of the United States military positions in Europe have obviously changed, and we need a relook.
In conclusion, Russia is clearly challenging United States influence and interests in the Middle East as the dominant outside regional country while also seeking to challenge NATO in eastern Europe and possibly NATO’s very existence.
Our allies in both regions must be convinced that the IJnited States stand behind them.
Now is the time for a firm hand, but the United States should not close off communications with Russia and continue to pursue opportunities where there is mutual interest.
Prepared Statement by General John M Keane Chairman McCain, ranking member Reed, distinguished members of the committee, am honored to be back testif 3 dng today on Russia and the crisis in Syria and the Ukraine.
It’s a privilege to be here with my panel colleagues, particularly General Jones, who I served with in the Pentagon and have known for years.
Please refer to the maps provided by the Institute for the Study of War which I will reference in my remarks.
Russia began air strikes in Syria about a week ago after rapidly establishing a forward operating air base at Al Assad airfield in Latakia province, some 36 miles north of their Naval base at Tartous.
Establishing an out of region air base, that is isolated from the heartland of Russia, in a war zone, is quite unprecedented, particularly for a non expeditionary military.
To establish and sustain this airbase you can see on the map labeled ‘Russian Deployment to Syria’, the air bridge routes over Iran and Iraq and the sea bridge route through the Black Sea taking approximately 4 days to transit.
Approximately 2K to 3K personnel make up the base which also houses a joint operations center consisting of Russian, Syrian, Iranian and Hezbollah military personnel.
The Army is beset with low morale, desertion and equipment problems with the Air Force losing about 1 to 2 aircraft per month due to combat or accident.
During the last year the opposition force has gained steadily on the regime forces with some gains operationally significant.
Please look at the map labeled ‘Control of Terrain in Syria’ and you can see the regime control area in orange which is now only about 20% of Syria.
Note the opposition control area to the north and south of the orange as the regime is quite confined.
In the last several months there has been some erosion of this Alawite support.
To the east of Homs and Damascus in central Syria ISIS seized Palmyra city and a nearby regime airbase opening up the east-west transportation corridor from Homs to the Iraq border.
We at ISW suspect that the Iranians who are in Syria in far greater number than the Russians and have very good situational awareness, raised the alarm to the Russians during multiple visits to Moscow by Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps leaders to include a much reported visit by Qasem Soleimani.
Russia has a 60 plus year relationship with Syria dating back to post WWII as the former Soviet Union.
Syria is Russia’s foothold in the Middle East and as such the Tartous Naval base is a strategic asset that is much valued.
It seems apparent that Russia believed the Assad regime survival was in a more precarious position and needed to be propped up.
As such if you look at the map labeled ‘Russian Airstrikes in Syria’, you can see the focus of the airstrikes are against the oppo10 sition forces threatening the regime from the north in Idlib, Hama and Homs province.
The moderate opposition forces, many trained by the CIA and Jabhat al-Nusra, an AQ affiliate, are the main focus with the ISIS targets at Raqqah and near Palmyra are far less significant and likely mere ‘window dressing’ for the exaggerated narrative that ISIS is the major reason for the Russian presence.
Russian cruise missiles were introduced yesterday striking 11 targets in western and eastern Syria.
Syrian Army limited ground shaping operations began in Idlib province yesterday supported by Russian air.
A supporting effort may be launched to retake Palmyra and the military airbase if the regime can generate sufficient forces.
Recapturing the ancient city would be a PR victory for Syria and Russia.
The counter offensive would likely be jointly planned by Syria and Iranian generals and consist of the Army, the National Defense Force, which are local militias, some actually led and most advised by the IRGC, and the Hezbollah and Iraqi Shia militia.
Of course Russia and Syria air power will play a large role in supporting the ground offensive.
Even more significant than Russia entering the Syria civil war is their recent strategic alliance with Iran which will impact every country in the region and further diminish United States influence and United States interests in the region.
Russia certainly recognizes that the M.E. is experiencing one of the most tumultuous periods in its history with the old order challenged by the aspirational goals of the Arab Spring, Islamic terrorists taking advantage of the political and social upheaval and Iran using proxies to gain influence in Lebanon, Syria, Iraq and Yemen.
Furthermore, Russia observed, probably somewhat in disbelief, as the United States abandoned Mubarak in Egypt, abandoned Iraq and retreated from Yemen and Libya as part of an unstated policy to disengage from the M.E. to avoid the strategic mistake of another M.E. protracted war.
For a year now, Russia has been leveraging this reality to their own advantage by entering into arms deals with Saudi Arabia, UAE, Kuwait and Egypt.
A country the United States had a mil to mil relationship with for 35 years.
These countries purchasing Russian weapons who normally buy United States and European weapons are not driven by the desire to have Russian equipment but by the harsh reality of the changing geopolitical landscape and their desire to have a relationship with Russia as leverage against their strategic enemy, Iran.
Iraq is also purchasing Russian weapons as the promised United States flow of weapons has been slow to nonexistent at times and have recently welcomed Russian generals and their staff to join their coordination center in Ilaghdad to share intelligence with the Iraq Army, the IRGC and the Iraq Shia militia.
Russia is also in preliminary discussion to build nuclear power plants in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt and Tunisia, with all their inherent problems of corruption, fraud, criminality to say nothing of the major security challenge of nuclear power plants.
The relationship with Iran and its proxies matters to Russia because it provides them greater influence in the M.E. while also acting as a strategic buffer to their south against radical Islam, a threat which is of great concern to them now in southern Russia.
Vladimir Putin came to power after the economic, political and social chaos of the 1990’s following the collapse of the Soviet Union and ending the decade with their own military in shambles and suffering the public humiliation of his Serbian ally, Milosevic, not only losing all 4 wars he fought but being bombed into oblivion by the Americans in a 78 day air campaign.
Putin certainly shaped, in part, by these events and his life as a KGB officer tightens internal security and control, crushes the Chechens, represses political opposition, takes control of the media, and puts Russia on a path to be a world power with global influence.
Most historical world powers have strong economies and strong militaries, Russia, the former Soviet Union was never prosperous but certainly had a strong military.
Putin was on a path to do just that again with his military when the economy tanked, leaving him with a military that is no match to the United States and NATO but with about l/3rd good units with some select excellent capabilities.
This is a land centric force with good combat aircraft, bombers, submarines, and a limited power projection Navy with only one aircraft carrier.
Russia’s strategy in Europe is influenced by the Napoleonic and Nazi invasions and the strategic buffer that existed in eastern Europe as part of the Warsaw Pact, 11 protecting the heartland of Russia for almost 50 years.
After Putin lost his political stooge, Yanukovych who he thought would stop the Ukraine movement to the West, he immediately annexed Crimea, correctly believing the Europeans and Americans would be stunned into compliance, thus recovering at home from the embarrassment of Yanukovych’s departure.
Encouraged by success, Putin moved on eastern Ukraine introducing hybrid warfare, a combination of SOF and intell officers to help create popular unrest, organize sympathizers into fighting units and when the host country Army moves to put down the movement, bring in Russian disguised conventional military to defeat the Army.
Russia’s use of military force in Ukraine is very revealing as it relies heavily on drones to detect Ukrainian military units with target information relayed to artillery batteries and within a few minutes, massive artillery is landing on the target, some with thermobaric shells creating a fire incendiary on the unit, which is quite devastating.
Putin wants the Kiev government to fail and be replaced by a more friendly Russian government.
Putin will continue the pressure, see the map labeled ‘Current/Proposed Russian Bases Near Ukraine,’ with the two new permanent ground force bases that are under construction across from the Ukrainian border in Russia and the air base Putin is building in Belarus.
United States strategy should be to assure our allies and friends, deter Russian aggression and defeat ISIS initially and, long term, as a part of a global alliance to defeat radical Islam.
Putin believes that European and American leadership is weak and has consistently out-maneuvered and out bluffed the United States and its allies.
Recognize the anti ISIS strategy in Iraq and Syria is failing and we are certain to lose the war unless there is major and comprehensive change to build an effective and decisive ground force in Syria and Iraq while removing restrictions on the air campaign to dramatically increase airstrike capability.
This was no accident, targets were provided by the Syrian re^me and they were accurate.
Believe United States aircraft are rarely fljdng now against ISIS targets in Syria. If we continue to wring our hands and continue to be dominated by fear and opposed to instilling fear, the Russian aggression will not just advance in the M.E. but most likely it will escalate in the Baltics and eastern Europe.
Deter: Recognize further that Russia is not finished in Ukraine as the new military bases across the border suggest.
There is still time in addition to the United States military, training Ukraine battalions, which is an effective program and providing non-lethal aid, to provide defensive weapons and capabilities that would definitely make a difference.
Russia is pounding the Russian speaking minorities in the Baltics with continuous propaganda to create unrest and to foment a split with the nation’s majority.
Larger force commitments permit larger unit rotational deployments and a permanent base structure in the Baltics and eastern Europe.
All deployed forces assigned to bases in central Europe no longer makes sense.
Obviously, NATO must adjust its priorities as well as the United States In conclusion, Russia is clearly challenging United States influence and interest in the M.E. as the dominant outside regional country while also seeking to challenge NATO in eastern Europe and possibly its very existence.
While at times this demands a firm hand the United States should not close off communications with Russia but continue to pursue opportunities when there is mutual self interest.
Russia was and is consumed with radical Islam and its threat which is the primary reason for the war in Afghanistan and prior to 9/11 it fought two major battles with the Chechens.
The United States and Russia could partner on this issue as both countries have the most experience and could help organize together a global alliance.
Another area is partnering on nuclear power plant development and security in the M.E. to the economic benefit of the M.E. while controlling uranium enrichment and plant security.
Clearly Russia and the United States are in a renewed strategic competitive relationship which still has opportunities for positive engagement for mutual benefit.
STATEMENT OF HEATHER CONLEY, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR EUROPE, EURASIA, AND THE ARCTIC; DIRECTOR, EUROPE PROGRAM, CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES Ms.
Chairman McCain, Senator Reed, members of the committee, thank you so much.
It is a privilege to speak to you this morning, as well as join with my fellow panelists to discuss the evolving nature of Russia’s growing military threat, which geographically stretches from the Kola Peninsula in the Arctic to the Mediterranean coast of Syria.
In my view, the Kremlin is reconstructing a 21st century version of the Iron Curtain.
As General Keane mentioned, they’re recreating a strategic buffer which is designed to achieve a new grand international bargain with the West, a Yalta 2.0, if you will, that assures a Russian sphere of influence in Europe and the Middle East.
This curtain, like its 20th century predecessor, seeks to block the perceived contagion of democracy and reform while returning Russia to internationally recognized great-power status.
It is designed to ensure the continuous exercising of air, land, and sea capabilities at full combat readiness.
It rapidly mobilizes substantial Russian forces in a very short period of time.
It’s designed to deploy a variety of hybrid eco15 nomic and political tactics which are at its disposal.
And, finally, it employs an extremely effective counter-factual strategic communications campaign.
Now, this 21st century curtain also has a built-in Kremlin-controlled thermostat.
President Putin can turn up the heat when and where he wants, as he’s done in eastern Ukraine; and when it is needed, he can turn down the heat, as we’re seeing right now.
And then he can shift to a different portion of this curtain, as he is doing in Syria.
The West will continue to react to the Kremlin’s actions rather than proactively shape and deter them.
Russia’s military modernization in the Arctic is the perfect example of how this new curtain, or, as I suggest in a new CSIS report, an “ice curtain,” has been constructed.
Russia has held three major military exercises in the Arctic over the last 24 months.
The first exercise was part of a larger Zapad 2013 military exercise, which focused on Russia’s western military district, and it demonstrated a more streamlined command structure, more efficient tactical units, and the ability to deploy a large-scale complex military operation coordinated with other areas of operation.
This exercise fully demonstrated that Russia has a much larger spatial definition of its theater of operations, which extends from the Arctic to the Black Sea.
The second exercise, in September of 2014, was the largest postSoviet military exercises that we have seen.
It was held in the Russian far east, and it was preceded by a snap military exercise.
Vostok 2014 involved over 100,000 servicemen and demonstrated a complex display of air, maritime, and land components.
And this exercise was partly conducted on new military bases in the Russian Arctic, New Siberian Islands, and Wrangel Island, which some believe simulated an exercise to repel United States and NATO forces.
And then, finally, in March of this year we saw the third and most culminating exercise, which was a snap military exercise in the Arctic which consisted of 45,000 Russian forces, 15 submarines, and 41 warships at full combat readiness.
So, this extraordinary exercise tempo, the threefold increase in Russian air incursions over the Arctic, Baltic, and North Seas over the past 12 months, as well as Russia’s announcement that will — it will have a total of 14 operational airfields in the Russian Arctic by the end of this year, 50 airfields by 2020, and a 30-percent increase in Russian special forces deployed to the Arctic, all underscore that the Arctic is becoming a major theater of operations for Russia.
The Arctic region has now been included in Russia’s amended military doctrine, as of December of last year, and in its new maritime doctrine, which was just released in July.
And it is under a new command, the Russian Northern Fleet United Strategic Command for the Arctic.
Now, the conclusions that we draw from Russia’s military behavior is that it is increasingly able to project significant anti-access, anti-denial capabilities in the Arctic, the north Atlantic, and, increasingly, the north Pacific, which demonstrates the ability to rapidly deploy both conventional and unconventional forces.
What is perhaps the most disturbing has been Russia’s focus on enhancing its nuclear deterrent in the Arctic, where it has simulated massive 16 retaliatory attacks in the Barents Sea.
Our Norwegian and British allies — and I know, Senator McCain, you were recently in the region — have witnessed a surge in Russian submarine activity in the north Atlantic.
So, let me just very briefly describe the remaining geographic contours of this 21st century curtain.
The curtain proceeds from the Arctic, south to the Finnish-Russian border.
Russia has returned to an abandoned military base 50 kilometers from the Finnish border, where the 1st Russian Infantry Brigade has arrived with 3,000 soldiers anticipated.
The curtain proceeds to the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad, home of the Russian Baltic Fleet, where vessels from the fleet have delivered fighter jets and Ascender missile launchers capable of launching both conventional and nuclear missiles.
Russia has recently installed new S-400 missile batteries and has increased its force presence.
The curtain then transitions from ice to steel on the PolishBelarusian border, where President Putin has just ordered Russian officials to construct, with its Belarusian counterparts, a new military base in Belarus.
This is the first time a newly constructed military base will be outside of Russia since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
The curtain, of course, extends fully to Ukraine, where Russia has an estimated 29,000 soldiers in occupied Crimea, a substantially increased Baltic Sea fleet, which it plans to augment with 30 additional vessels by 2020.
The curtain then continues, going, of course, as General Keane explained, through eastern Ukraine and extremely capable forces on the Russian-Ukrainian border, in fact, commencing construction of new installations that will potentially contain significant munitions ordnance facilities.
Ukraine, of course, we move to Transnistria and Moldova, where there are 1500 troops — Russian troops stationed as peacekeepers.
And, of course, from Russia’s invasion of Georgia in 2008, we have Russian military presence in South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
And, as we’ve seen extensive — this curtain continues, then, to Armenia, where Russia is further augmenting its forces, and then, as we know, from — to Syria.
The National Defense Authorization Act is a really great point of departure.
And I commend the bipartisan resolve to seek to assess these challenges and identify critical gaps.
For far too long, we’ve discounted Russia’s military capabilities and did not take their threats and pronouncements seriously.
We cannot reset this challenge away, and we cannot get back to business as usual.
The West has forgotten how to conduct effective deterrence in the Modern Age against a sophisticated adversary.
The strong bipartisan support for the European Reassurance Initiative was another important signal of United States resolve.
This act strengthened United States and NATO’s Article 5 credibility, but these actions were viewed as temporary measures to change President Putin’s behavior in Ukraine.
This has not achieved its objectives, and now we need a more durable deterrence posture.
United States and North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces, accompanied by significant air and maritime components, must increase their presence on NATO’s northern and eastern flanks.
The United States should seriously consider sending a third combat brigade to Europe to reinforce both flanks while strongly encouraging our European allies to increase their force presence, as well.
NATO must initiate the pre-positioning of military equipment in the region, not simply for exercise purposes only, and immediately address identified shortcomings in secure communications and infrastructure needs that were identified during Operation Atlantic Resolve this year, as well as continue to increase the number of regional exercise.
It is time, to echo General Keane’s comments, for a comprehensive review of United States force posture in Europe for the next 5 to 10 years.
It is for this reason that the outcome of next year’s NATO summit in Warsaw is absolutely critical.
If NATO simply decides to review the decisions it reached at its last summit, the alliance will have failed to address its most significant security challenge since the end of the Cold War.
The summit must launch a longterm strategic adaptation to what will be a long-term and highly destabilizing challenge.
Mr Chairman, on one final note and a word of caution, as much as the United States and NATO must do more to deter future Russian military aggression, we must also be fully cognizant of the devastating impact of Russian influence inside NATO that inhibit allies from taking collective action against Russia.
As Russia dominates the media, financial, and energy markets of some of our NATO allies, we will find NATO collectively less able to respond.
This requires as much policy attention by the United States and NATO as it does to militarily deter the Kremlin.
Russia Testimony to Senate Armed Services Committee October 8, 2015 2 Chairman McCain, Ranking Member Reed, Members of the Committee, it is a privilege to speak to you this morning as well as join with my fellow panelists to discuss the evolving nature of Russia’s growing military threat which geographically stretches from the Kola Peninsula in the Arctic to the Mediterranean coast of Syria.
After experiencing a period of relative peace and security in Europe over the past 25 years and with the exception of the brutality of the conflicts in Bosnia and Kosovo in the 1990s the transatlantic community believed that these twenty-five years were the new, post-modem norm.
Unfortunately, I believe we will come to view this post-Cold War period as an exceptional moment of security that has now passed.
We have returned to balance of power politics where Russia with increasing frequency uses military means to achieve its political objectives.
The transatlantic community’s response to Russia’s invasion of its neighbors and indeed its first talking point is to take the military option immediately off the table.
The West then seeks to establish a diplomatic course guaranteed to ensure the intractability of the very problem that Russia has created, eventually hoping to “reset” its troubled relationship and achieve agreements on broader strategic issues.
The Kremlin is reconstructing a 2 1 Century version of the Iron Curtain which is designed to achieve a new grand international bargain with the West Yalta 2. if you will that assures a Russian sphere of influence in Europe and the Middle East.
This curtain, like its 20*’’ century predecessor, seeks to block the perceived contagion of democracy and reform while returning Russia to internationally recognized great power status.
This curtain denies military access to the West through the construction of new and a revitalization of former Russian military bases; ensures the continuous exercising of air, land and sea capabilities at full combat readiness; rapidly mobilizes substantial Russian forces in a short period of time; deploys a variety of hybrid economic and political tactics which are at its disposal; and employs an effective counterfactual strategic communications campaign.
President Putin can turn up the heat as he has done in eastern Ukraine, and, when it is needed, he can turn down the 20 Conley: Russia Testimony to Senate Armed Services Committee October 8, 20 1 5 3 heat and shift to a different portion of the curtain as he is now doing in Syria.
Russia’s military modernization in the Arctic is a perfect example of how this new curtain or, as 1 suggest in a new CSIS report an ice curtain has being formed.
Russia has held three major military exercises in the Arctic over the past 24 months.
The first instance was a simultaneous exercise around the Kola Peninsula which was part of the larger, Zapad 2013 military exercise, which demonstrated a more streamlined command structure, more efficient tactical units and the ability to deploy a large scale, complex military operation that is coordinated with other areas of operation.
This exercise demonstrated that Russia has a larger spatial definition of its theatre of operations, extending from the Arctic to the Black Sea.
The second exercise, in September 2014, was the largest post-Soviet military exercise and was held in the Russian Far East.
Preceded by a snap military exercise, Vostok-2014 involved over 100,000 servicemen and a complex display of air, maritime and land components.
This exercise was partly conducted on a new military base in the Russian Arctic New Siberian Islands and Wrangel Island which some analysts believe simulated Russian forces repelling a United States or NATO invasion.
This exercise focused on rapid mobilization, combined operations and demonstrated use of both conventional and unconventional forces.
The third and culminating exercise occurred in March 2015 when President Putin announced a snap military exercise that consisted of 45,000 Russian forces, 15 submarines and 41 warships at full combat readiness in the Arctic.
This extraordinary exercise tempo, the three-fold increase in Russian air incursions over the Arctic, Baltic and North Seas over the past twelve months and Russia’s announcement that it will have a total of 14 operational airfields in the Russian Arctic by the end of this year, 50 airfields by 2020 and a 30 percent increase of Russian Special forces in the Arctic suggests that the Arctic has emerged as a major theatre of operations for Russia.
Defending against future military threats, the Arctic region has now been included in Russia’s amended military and maritime doctrines and will be coordinated by a new Russian Northern FleetUnited Strategic Command for the Arctic.
Russia Testimony to Senate Armed Services Committee October 8, 20 1 5 4 The conclusions that we draw from Russia’s military behavior in the Arctic over the past 24 months are that Russia is increasingly able to project significant anti-access/anti-denial capabilities in the Arctic, the North Atlantic and increasingly in the North Pacific while demonstrating the ability to rapidly deploy both conventional and nonconventional forces throughout the theatre.
What is perhaps most disturbing has been Russia’s focus on enhancing its nuclear deterrent in the Arctic which it has simulated massive retaliatory attacks in the Barents Sea.
Our Norwegian and British allies have also witnessed a surge in Russian submarine activity in the North Atlantic.
From the Arctic, Russia’s military presence increases along the new ice curtain south to the Finnish Russian border.
Russia has returned to its abandoned military base 50 kilometers from the Finnish border where the first Russian infantry brigade has arrived with 3,000 soldiers anticipated at the base.
The curtain proceeds to the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad, home of the Russian Baltic Fleet, where vessels from the fleet have delivered fighter jets and Iskander missile launchers capable of launching both conventional and nuclear missiles.
Russia has recently installed new S-400 missile batteries and increased its force presence.
The curtain transitions from ice to steel on the Belarussian-Polish border where, despite recent protests and opposition from Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko, President Putin has ordered Russian officials to work with their Belarusian counterparts to construct a military base in Belarus.
Russia already has functional radars and a navy communications facility in Belarus, as well as a number of fighter jets, but this would be the first military base constructed since the end of the Soviet Union.
The curtain has been fully constructed in Ukraine where, in March, Russia had an estimated 29,000 soldiers in occupied Crimea and has substantially increased its Black Sea Fleet, adding a new base in the city of Novorossiysk and plans 30 additional vessels by 2020.
Russia Testimony to Senate Armed Services Committee October 8, 2015 5 command structure.
Russia has also commenced construction of a new installation on the Russian-Ukrainian border near the town of Soloti, which is expected to contain munitions and ordnance depots, training facilities, as well as barracks capable of housing several thousand troops.
The curtain then extends to the rest of the Caucasus through Armenia where Russia has reinforced its position with nearly 5,000 troops, S-300 missile batteries, tanks, and a fleet of fighter jets and attack helicopters.
And, in real time, we are currently witnessing the Russian military build-up in Syria and the first use of Russian cruise missiles in combat.
The National Defense Authorization Act is a very good point of departure and I wish to commend the Committee’s bipartisan resolve to seek to assess this challenge and identify capabilities gaps.
For too long we discounted Russia’s military capabilities and did not take their pronouncements and threats seriously.
We cannot “reset” this challenge and we cannot get back to business as usual.
The West has forgotten how to conduct effective deterrence in the modem age against a sophisticated adversary.
United States redlines no longer have meaning following the use of chemical weapons by the Assad regime and the constant diminishment of our negotiating position over Iran’s nuclear program.
Moreover, the U.S did not support Ukraine by providing it lethal military assistance to defend itself despite the fact that the United States provided Ukraine with written bilateral security guarantees.
Yet these actions were viewed as temporary measures to change President Putin’s behavior in Ukraine.
This temporary posture has not achieved its objectives and therefore a new and more durable deterrence posture is required.
The U.S., along with our NATO allies, will continue to gain credibility by stating clearly and without hyperbole what we intend to do and then do it immediately.
When NATO talks tough about Russia’s actions in Northern Europe but halves its air policing presence in the Baltic region, we undermine our own credibility.
When we announce that NATO will deploy 5,000 soldiers in 48 hours, we do it; we do not explain why airlift is in short supply and why adequate forces cannot be generated.
United States leadership in NATO and bilaterally must create a long-lenn and durable response to Russia’s new ice and steel curtain.
United States and NATO forces, accompanied by significant air and maritime components, must increase their presence on NATO’s northern and eastern flanks.
The United States should seriously consider sending a third combat brigade to Europe to reinforce both flanks while engaging European allies to increase their force presence as well.
NATO must initiate the prepositioning of military equipment in the region , and immediately address shortcomings in secure communications and infrastructure needs as well increase the number of regional exercises to ensure the ability to rapidly deploy.
It is time for a comprehensive review of the U.S, force posture in Europe for the next five to ten years.
It is for these reasons that the outcome of next year’s NATO Warsaw Summit is so critical.
If NATO simply decides to review the decisions of its last summit, the Alliance will have failed to address its most significant security challenge since the end of the Cold War.
It is no accident that President Putin has turned down the temperature on the conflict in eastern Ukraine as he turns it up in Syria.
Russia Testimony to Senate Armed Services Committee October 8, 20 1 5 7 and migrants fleeing to Europe) continues to fuel divisions within NATO that the threat from the “south” fully aided and abetted by Russia is greater than the threat from the East for which Russia is fully responsible.
Finally, as much as the United States and NATO must do more to deter future Russian military aggression, we must also be fully cognizant of the devastating impact of Russian influence inside NATO countries that could inhibit allies from taking collective action against Russia.
As Russia dominates the media, financial and energy markets of some of our NATO partners, we will find NATO collectively less able to respond.
This requires as much attention by the United States and NATO as does militarily deterring the Kremlin.
The Kremlin rejects the international rules and of the post-World War II order, rules regarding territorial integrity and transparency that Putin’s Soviet predecessors accepted.
The question is will the United States and its allies accept Putin’s new rules and new curtain so President Putin can achieve his grand bargain, or is the West willing to challenge and fully reject this construct, like it did during the Cold War era.
NATO was bom in 1949 as a response to the building of an Iron Curtain; it is up to this generation of leaders to decide how they will respond to a new curtain of ice and steel.
STEPHEN SESTANOVICH, GEORGE F KENNAN SENIOR FELLOW FOR RUSSIAN AND EURASIAN STUDIES, COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY Ambassador Sestanovich.
Chairman McCain, Senator Reed, members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to join your discussion today.
I also disagree with the other thing he said, which was that Russia is an existential threat to the United States.
No matter how alarmed we are by Russia’s current behavior, we use the term “existential threat” only because of its large strategic nuclear arsenal.
And that’s a potential threat whether Russia’s relations with us are good or bad, or whether Russia’s behavior is reckless or wise.
Russia has acted recklessly of late, but that has not really increased the existential threat General Dunford spoke of.
It feeds a public mood in Russia that honestly borders on national hysteria.
These days, Russian officials routinely say things about the United States that are bizarre and incomprehensible.
Unfortunately, hearing that we see Russia as an existential threat — pretty extreme language, after all — tells many Russians that our countries are on a collision course toward war, and that we have accepted that idea.
I urge the members of this committee to take a different approach, to challenge responsible Russians to see how strange and counterproductive their country’s policies looks to the outside world, not to make ourselves look equally strange.
And we need to appreciate that — not only that it is alarming, but that it doesn’t come out of nowhere.
First — a few quick points on this — Russian actions in the Middle East and in Ukraine reflect the doubling and more of their defense budget in the past 10 years 50-percent increase just since the end of the financial crisis, in the past 5 years.
This program of modernization is still unfolding, and the biggest procurement projects are ahead.
As Russia’s capabilities have increased, so has its antiWestern rhetoric.
The official military doctrine of Russia identifies both NATO and the United States as threats to Russia.
Secondly, Russian actions reflect the new nationalism of Russian public opinion.
The seizure of Crimea and continuing attempts to fragment eastern Ukraine have given this nationalist mood an angrier, more embattled tone.
Russian decisionmakers feel they can count on public support for more assertive displays of national power.
And I think we should assume that they are just as worried, and maybe more worried, about casualties in Syria than they have been in Ukraine.
Third, Russian actions are a response, as President Obama and as General Keane has noted, to the weakness of the Assad regime in Syria, Russia’s oldest and now only real ally in the region.
President Putin has made clear, as he has in Ukraine, that he is prepared to make a significant military commitment to save embattled clients, no matter how shaky and illegitimate their position is.
In Syria, several years of policy confusion by the United States and Europe have encouraged him.
Had the United States imposed a no-fly zone in Syria 3 years ago, there would be no Russian intervention today.
Fourth, Secretary Carter may well be right that Russian policy is doomed to fail.
But, in the course of failing, it may do a great deal of damage, both in Syria and beyond.
It should, therefore, be a goal of the United States and its allies to limit and eventually reverse Russia’s intervention.
Continued confusion, merely calling on Russia to join the coalition against ISIS, will not achieve this end.
Fifth, anyone responsible for the national security of the United States, like the members of this committee, should worry about where Russia’s reckless behavior will lead next.
We should not, by any means, conclude that we face an endless, never-cresting wave of Russian activism.
To my mind, what Putin is doing now in Syria probably reduces the risks of near-term military provocations in Europe, especially against our NATO allies.
If I were a Baltic Defense Minister, I’d actually be sleeping slightly better these days.
But, we have to remember that most of us have been wrong in anticipating Russian actions in the past couple of years.
Just when we thought Putin had finally realized he had acted foolishly, he then acted even more foolishly.
Today, the ingredients of some future confrontation may already be coming together.
After what we’ve seen of Russian behavior, we can’t afford to be unprepared.
Mr Chairman, members of the committee, let me close as I began, by urging realism about the problems that Russian policy creates without making those problems worse than they have to be.
Many Russians understand that President Putin is damaging his own country’s security as well as others.
They should understand that the United States will protect itself, its allies, and its interests.
They should also understand that there can be a place for them in this effort if they want it.
Thank you for the opportunity to join your discussion today on Russian policy in Europe and the Middle East, especially actions taken by Russian military units in Syria in the last few days.
These Russian steps are not only unprecedented in the post-Cold War era, they have few antecedents in the Cold War itself.
Members of this committee surely remember how General Joe Dunford, the new JCS Chairman, described Russian policy in his confirmation testimony.
Its many nuclear weapon are a potential threat whether our relations with Russia are good or bad, whether Russian behavior is reckless or wise.
All statements of fact and expressions of opinion contained herein are the sole responsibility of the author.
These days senior Russian officials often say things about the United States that are bizarre and incomprehensible.
Unfortunately, hearing that we see Russia as an “existential threat” — pretty extreme language, after all — tells many Russians that our countries are on a collision course to war.
Worse, it is understood by some to mean that America’s leaders are preparing for this future conflict.
I urge the members of this Committee to take a different approach — to challenge responsible Russians to see how strange their country’s policy looks to the outside world, not to make ourselves seem equally strange.
We need to appreciate just how alarming it is, but we should not think it comes out of nowhere.
First, Russian actions in the Middle East reflect the doubling of their defense budget in the past 10 years.
This program of modernization is still unfolding; the biggest procurement projects are ahead.
The official military doctrine adopted late last year identifies both NATO and the United States as threats to Russia.
Second, Russian actions reflect the new nationalism of Russian public opinion.
Russian decision-makers surely feel they can count on popular support for more assertive displays of national power, but they cannot be any surer of this than we can.
There are in fact reasons to believe that Russian leaders worry about operations that might bring casualties down the road.
Third, Russia’s actions are a response, as President Obama has noted, to the weakness of the Assad regime in Syria, Russia’s oldest real ally in the region.
As President Putin has made clear in Ukraine, he is prepared to make a significant military commitment to save embattled clients, no matter how shaky and illegitimate their position.
But Putin acts this way in part because he thinks circumstances allow it.
Had the United States imposed a no-fly zone in Syria three years ago, there would be no Russian intervention today.
But even in the course of failing it may do a great deal of damage, both in Syria and beyond.
It should therefore be a goal of the United States and its allies to limit Russia’s intervention.
Continued confusion — including calls for Russia to focus its actions on defeating ISIS — will not achieve this aim.
Fifth, anyone responsible for the national security of the United States — and I certainly include the members of this Committee — should worry about where Russia’s reckless behavior will lead next.
We should not by any means conclude that we face an endless, never-cresting wave of activism.
If anything, what Putin is doing now in Sjria probably reduces the risk of near-term military provocations in Europe, especially against our NATO allies.
But we have to remember that most of us have been wrong in anticipating Russian actions of the past couple of years.
Just when we thought Putin had finally realized that he had acted foolishly, he acted even more foolishly.
Mr Chairman, let me close as I began — by urging realism about the problems Russian policy creates without making those problems worse than they have to be.
Thank you for convening this important hearing at this very challenging and consequential juncture in America’s relations with Russia and in world affairs, in general.
We are all witnessing the most recent and dangerous developments in Syria, where Mr Putin, under the guise of fighting ISIL, is using force to advance his highly cynical campaign to prop up Bashar al-Assad.
This action is merely the latest in a pattern of behavior emanating from Moscow that we had hoped ended with the Cold War.
Unfortunately, as I came to learn during my tenure as National Security Advisor, the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact was an outcome that was neither cheered nor welcomed nor accepted by the current Russian President.
I’ve submitted a full written statement covering three areas that will hopefully be of help to the committee.
And the third addresses some thoughts regarding what the United States and our allies could consider doing in response.
Mr Chairman, in 2009, as National Security Advisor, I attended a breakfast meeting in Moscow between the then-Prime Minister Putin and our President.
These three views are reflected not only in Russia’s revanchist foreign policy and adventures abroad, but also in the country’s lack of political and economic evolution during his tenure as President, all quite similar to Cold War behavior and priorities.
During President Medvedev’s tenure, we genuinely hoped that he aimed to integrate Russia into the Euro-Atlantic ark and was the kind of partner with whom we could work to achieve common goals.
President Putin reversed much of the progress we made during the Medvedev presidency, and is now taking Russia down a very different path.
The Russian President has proven he remains a cynical Cold War hero, needing an enemy to make himself look good and deeply nostalgic for a Moscow-centric sphere of influence.
His strategic objective is to reassert Russian power and prestige on his terms without regard to international principles and norms.
He is willing to use force to achieve his objectives, including overturning internationally recognized boundaries and disregarding state sovereignty illustrated by the illegal annexation of the Crimea in 2014.
Despite an anemic economy debilitated by low oil prices, cronyism, and corruption, and now in a full recession, he is nonethe29 less consolidating his power effectively.
He continues to subvert human rights, clamp down on media and free expression, fosters an environment of hostility for what is left of his political opposition, and takes intentionally stabilizing actions abroad, all the while operating a robust propaganda machine at home and abroad to make it appear that he is doing none of those things.
As outlined in my full statement, to pursue his ambitions he is employing a broad toolkit composed of major military, energy, and political elements.
A very high priority for Mr Putin, despite enormous domestic problems, is strengthening and modernizing the Russian military to reassert power on the world stage.
United States military leaders fear that the extensive new capabilities President Putin is accumulating are being used to pursue an antiaccess area-denial strategy against NATO, particularly in the Baltic Sea regions from Kaliningrad in the Black Sea region, from Russia’s buildup in the Crimea, now in Syria from its deployment of anti-aircraft capabilities, and the naval bombardment from the Caspian.
There was growing concern within the alliance that President Putin is using a series of capability deployments in these sensitive areas to raise the risk, or perceived risk, of United States or coalition military action in these regions.
We see this in Syria, where Russia’s deployments are geared not towards fighting the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant , but rather towards protecting the regime of Assad.
I believe that the Russian President’s deployment of combat aircraft and sophisticated air defenses, which are not needed to fight ISIS, are intended to deter the United States-led coalition from establishing a no-fly zone in northern Syria.
Russian military exercises, some conducted on very short notice and as discussed by the other witnesses, also pose a significant cause for concern.
Major military maneuvers in the Arctic, joined with China in naval drills near our Japanese allies, and held major — and major exercises, which included tens of thousands of troops, on NATO’s eastern flank.
Indeed, in March of 2015, Russia held an exercise intended to simulate the invasion of Denmark and the Baltic states.
In some cases, the guise of training has been used to mask long-term Russian troop deployments, such as in Syria last month and in eastern Ukraine, where the United States European Command has estimated there may be as many as 12,000 Russian troops.
Russia’s use of so-called “volunteers,” or “little green men,” which ostensibly offer Moscow plausible deniability, is another element of the Kremlin’s so-called “hybrid warfare” tactic.
We have been alerted by Moscow that such volunteers may find their way to Syria very soon.
There have also — we have — there have also — we have also seen the deployment of more aggressive and more capable Russian naval forces.
Finally, there are increasing reports that Russian military aircraft are violating NATO airspace with their transponders turned off, raising the risk of civilian aircraft accidents while violating the sovereignty of our treaty allies.
And, of course, just this week, Russia violated the sovereign airspace of our Turkish allies.
The members of this committee understand that Mr Putin’s incursion in the Crimea is, among other things, about exercising political power through the control of energy and about brandishing the threat of energy scarcity to intimidate and manipulate vulnerable populations.
Fortunately, Europe is now awakening to the threat and is investing in redundancies, gas storage hubs, and interconnectors that reduce Russia’s ability to hold countries hostage.
Thirdly, President Putin is working hard to sow division within the western alliance and undercut the cohesion of the Euro-Atlantic ark of economic and security cooperation.
He has built links to European party leaders on the far right and far left in order to foster close relationships at the political and financial levels, and made a habit of sustaining old and corrupt alliances, such as with Syrian President Assad.
President Assad noted the importance of the Russia, Iran, Iraq alliance that’s sustaining his regime.
So, before us is emerging one of the premier strategic challenges of the post-Cold War period, and that is doing what we can do to counter President Putin’s retrograde ambitions in favor of the peaceful and progressive order of the transatlantic community that the world had envisioned at the opening of the 21st century.
First, in the economic realm, to underline Mr Putin’s use of energy as a political weapon, the United States should support the European Union’s development of an energy, telecommunications, and transportation infrastructure corridor along a north-south axis from the Baltic to the Adriatic.
My full statement provides greater details on this major strategic initiative, and I ask permission to submit for the record a comprehensive plan for doing so.
There is much we can do, and must do, to support the development of this critical infrastructure to complete Europe and counter Mr Putin’s use of energy as a weapon.
So, I would ask your permission, Mr Chairman, to make the report a part of the hearing record.
These sanctions may not have altered Putin’s strategic calculus in the Ukraine, but they have raised a cost to his actions and left Russia partially economically isolated.
American leadership in this effort will be crucial in fostering a common vision for the alliance in the face of new and more challenging operating environments.
At next year’s summit in Warsaw, NATO should admit Montenegro, assuming it has met all political and military commitments.
Doing so would counter Russia’s growing influence in the Balkans and send a powerful signal that the vision of a united Europe whole and free remains viable.
A similar effort should be made by Washington to unlock the tragic political conflict within the alliance that has prevented Macedonia from taking its rightful place as a NATO member.
We must enhance NATO force presence in an eastern Europe to include American forces.
This will be controversial, because some allies now fear provoking Russia, which will require careful diplomacy.
Given Russia’s aggressive exercises and troop positioning on NATO’s eastern flank, I believe we run a greater risk of conflict by not increasing NATO’s presence in central and eastern Europe.
NATO, Mr Chairman, must become more proactive, more agile within the alliance in order to prevent future conflict.
I applaud the efforts of the United States Congress to fund the President’s $1 billion initiative to enhance the presence of United States rotational forces, air policing, and infrastructure in central eastern and southeast Europe.
This appropriation should continue, given the ongoing Russian threat to our allies, but United States political leaders should also press our allies to continue their own contributions to NATO’s readiness action plan.
The next summit in Warsaw will be critical to the future of the alliance.
They include making resilience a core task of NATO to complement the NATO’s — the alliance’s current core task of collective defense, cooperative security, and crisis management, enhancing NATO’s cybersecurity capabilities and responsibilities, empowering the Supreme Allied Commander to conduct rapid troop deployment in response to Russia’s reliance on strategic surprise and hybrid warfare, and providing robust and well-targeted assistance to the Ukraine.
I support the administration’s recent decisions on long-range counter-battery radars to Ukraine.
Mr Chairman, Senator Reed, and members of the committee, let me close by saying that we have all been deeply disappointed by Russia’s actions in Syria, the Ukraine, and in eastern Europe, and the negative effect these actions have had on our bilateral relationship.
I believe these actions merit careful considerations of the tough response that all of us have outlined.
The United States and our allies should continue to make clear to the Russian people that we believe that Russia has its rightful place in a united Europe whole and free and at peace, provided that Russia is willing to respect the sovereignty and the free will of its neighbors, demonstrate a commitment to democracy and human rights, and respect the rules of the road in the international system.
Mr Chairman, thank you for allowing me the opportunity to testify before you today, and I look forward to answering any questions you may have.
Prepared Testimony by General James L Jones, USMC Mr Chairman, Ranking Member Reed, and Members of the Committee, thank you for convening this important hearing at this very challenging and consequential juncture in America’s relations with Russia, and in world affairs.
We have all witnessed the most recent and dangerous developments in Syria where Mr Putin, under the guise of fighting ISIL, is using force to advance his highly cynical campaign to prop up Bashar al-Assad.
Unfortunately, as I came to learn during my tenure as National Security Advisor, the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact was an outcome neither cheered nor accepted by the current Russian president.
I would like to share with the committee my thoughts on three dimensions of the situation before us.
First, I will describe my view of Mr Putin’s primary motivations, which go a long way toward explaining his actions in the Middle East, Europe, and Ukraine; second, I will touch on the strategy he is employing to achieve his objectives; and third I will conclude by sharing my own recommendations for steps that the United States and our allies should consider in response to Mr Putin’s activities.
PUTIN’S WORLD VIEW AND DOMESTIC SITUATION In 2009, I attended a breakfast meeting between President Obama and President Putin.
Third, he clearly believes that NATO is a great evil and that his interests are best served by weakening the transatlantic alliance and destabilizing his western periphery.
These three views are reflected not only in Russia’s revanchist foreign policy, but also in the country’s lack of political and economic evolution under his tenure as President.
As national security advisor, we worked hard with President Obama and the Russian President at that time, Mr Medvedev, on advancing the United States-Russia relationship to a new paradigm.
I genuinely believed that President Medvedev aimed to integrate Russia into the Euro-Atlantic arc and was the kind of partner with whom we could achieve common goals.
We made important progress including the START II treaty; convincing Russia to withhold its delivery of S-300 surface to air missiles to Iran during a key period of time; and achieving their cooperation on a range of non-traditional security challenges on regional matters such as Afghanistan and transnational crime.
Unfortunately, upon returning to the Kremlin, President Putin reversed much of the modest progress we made during the Medvedev 33 presidency, and moved Russia down a very different path, away from Euro-Atlantic integration of his predecessor.
President Putin has proven he remains a cynical cold warrior, deeply nostalgic for a Russian-centric sphere of influence.
In addition, Russia’s recent military involvement in Syria and increased cooperation with Iran, combined with greater political engagement across the Middle East, indicates Mr Putin is upping its effort to increase Russian influence in that region as well.
International principles and norms of behavior are not in his calculus.
He is willing to use force to achieve his objectives, including overturning internationally recognized boundaries and disregarding state sovereignty, illustrated by the illegal annexation of Crimea in 2014.
Given his ambitions and actions, Mr Putin is far more interested in modernizing his military than reforming Russia’s dysfunctional and corrupt political and economic systems.
Low oil prices and western sanctions have negatively impacted the country’s already fetid business environment and placed great strain on the Russian economy.
While Mr Putin’s poll numbers ostensibly remain quite high in Russia, particularly after the annexation of Crimea — it is difficult to know if these numbers are credible given the lack of civil society, free media, political opposition and independent institutions in Russia.
It remains to be seen if his popularity can survive the kind of significant economic downturn which Russia is experiencing.
The World Bank forecasts Russia’s economy will shrink by 3. percent in 2015.
Russia’s political system and human rights situation has also degraded during Mr Putin’s return to the Kremlin.
The Russian state actively persecutes homosexuals, has clamped down on media and free expression, has fostered an environment of hostility to what is left of the political opposition and free media, and operates a robust propaganda machine.
PUTIN’S INTERNATIONAL OBJECTIVES AND MODUS OPEEANDI Russia’s aggressiveness abroad is not only a means of diverting attention from his domestic shortcomings; it emanates naturally from President Putin’s world view and his desire to project power and influence.
In my view, Putin aims to restore Russia as a major player in the international system; to leverage Russia’s strengths and enemies’ perceived weaknesses to his advantage; to harness a resurgent nationalism for his adventures; to sow division within the transatlantic alliance and on a larger scale, disrupt international order.
Military Action Strengthening and modernizing the Russian military has been central to Mr Putin’s ambition of reasserting Russian power on the world stage.
While President Putin has looked to protect the military from budget cuts due to low oil prices, there are signs the modernization process may be forced to move at a slower pace.
United States military leaders fear these new capabilities are being used to pursue an anti-access/area denial strategy against NATO, particularly in the Baltic Sea region from Kaliningrad; in the Black Sea region from Russia’s buildup in Crimea; and now in Syria from its deployment of anti-aircraft capabilities.
There is growing concern within the alliance that Putin is using a series of capability deployments in these sensitive areas to raise the risk, or perceived risk of United States or coalition military action in these regions.
We see this in Syria, where Russia’s deployments are geared not toward fighting ISIL but rather toward protecting the murderous regime of Bashar al-Assad.
In addition to investments in Russian military equipment, large-scale Russian military exercises, some conducted on very short notice are a cause for concern.
Russia has held major exercises in the Arctic, joined with China in naval drills near our Japanese allies, and held major exercises which included tens of thousands of troops on NATO’s eastern flank.
Indeed, in March 2015, Russia held an exercise intended to simulate the invasion of Denmark and the Baltic states.
There is real concern among allies in northeast Europe that a snap exercise could be used as the pretext for Russian forces to suddenly conduct a small-scale incursion into NATO territory that would create a fait accompli, or risk all-out war with Moscow.
This would be a direct challenge to Article V of the Washington treaty, and potentially end the principle of collective defense which is the very heart of NATO’s founding treaty.
Given the growing anti-access capabilities described above, that cost could be high indeed if we and our allies are unprepared for such an outcome.
There have also seen the deployment of more aggressive and more capable Russian naval forces.
As stated by the Commander of United States Naval Forces Europe, the Russians are constructing an “arc of steel from the Arctic to the Mediterranean.
As evidenced by recent Russian naval activity, Mr Putin is focusing his naval capability on addressing the perceived advantages of NATO navies.
Finally, there are increasing reports that Russian military aircraft are violating NATO airspace with their transponders off, raising the risk of civilian aircraft accidents while violating the sovereignty of our treaty allies.
And of course, just this week we saw Russia violate the airspace of our Turkish allies.
Russia’s advanced cyber capabilities are also a source of grave concern for the United States and its allies.
We have seen Russia employ its impressive cyber capabilities against Estonia, a treaty ally.
We must be alert to Moscow’s willingness to use this tool to achieve its political goals.
Energy Action Mr Putin’s strategy does not rely on military power alone.
He seeks to maintain European dependence on Russian gas and continues to use that dependence as a weapon; he deftly applies a ‘divide and conquer’ strategy to undermine Europe’s cohesion.
We see this in particular through the Nord-Stream pipeline, which connects Russia directly to Europe while bypassing Ukraine.
Also in Russia’s gas pricing tactics which reward its friends and punishes its opponents.
The greater the gap between global supply and demand, the more destructive the ener^ weapon will become.
While Russian troops occupy a sovereign country, including a major port, to stop Ukraine from receiving energy imports, Mr Putin’s rubles are being spent on campaigns to stop natural gas development in central Europe — all with a mind towards creating scarcity, dependence, and vulnerability among countries who are United States friends, allies, and trading partners.
Fortunately, Europe is awakening to the threat and is investing in redundancies, gas storage hubs, and interconnectors that reduce Russia’s ability to hold countries hostage.
Political Action An important part of Russia’s foreign policy is to sow division within the western alliance and to undercut the cohesion of the Euro-Atlantic arc of economic and security cooperation.
Moscow actively courts EU countries that are economically weak or dependent on trade with Russia in hopes of fracturing unity.
This past summer Putin unsuccessfully wooed the newly elected Syriza government in Greece in the midst of ongoing discussions with the Eurozone over its economic rescue package in hopes of convincing Athens to vote against EU sanctions on Russia.
Russia has also built links to European party leaders on the far right and far left in order to foster close relationships at the political and financial levels, such as with the National Eront in France.
President Assad noted the importance of the RussiaIran-Iraq alliance at sustaining his regime.
The Russian government deliberately lies about Russia’s activities in Ukraine and denies it has forces there, despite visual proof to the contrary.
It has also obfuscated the role of Russian-backed rebels in downing Malaysian airlines flight 17, and has outrageously blocked a UN tribunal to get the facts.
Yet Russia thumbs its nose at the international community by blocking simple fact finding a stunning example of how out of touch its behavior is with international norms and standards of justice.
More recently, Russian has lied about the fact that Russian the air force is currently bombing United States-backed opposition groups in Syria, claiming instead that they are striking at ISIS despite evidence to the contrary.
Actionable Recommendations for Countering Russian Aggression In the face of the strategic environment I have described, I believe the United States should lead its allies in developing a three-pronged approach that includes economic, political, and security components.
Invest in North-South Energy Infrastrueture in Europe: To undermine Putin’s use of energy as a political weapon, the United States should support the EU’s development of energy, tele-communications, and transportation infrastructure along a North-South axis from the Baltic to the Adriatic Sea.
This North-South corridor would constitute the most strategically viable alternative to Russia’s regional abuse of current energy supplies and supply routes; foster greater cohesion among Central and East European states; undermine Russia’s monopoly on energy pricing; and severely inhibit its ability to use energy as a weapon.
Along with my Polish colleague Pawel Olechnowicz, CEO of the Grupa Lotus, I have co-chaired an Atlantic Council report exploring this issue in greater detail.
It includes a set of recommendation receiving strong support in Europe and the United States.
There is much we can and must do to support the development of this critical infrastructure.
I would ask your permission to make the report a part of the hearing record.
Energy security is instrumental for a transatlantic growth, prosperity, and security.
Europe and the United States have the largest trading partnership in the world.
Strengthening it serves our mutual interests and reaffirms the centrality of the transatlantic alliance in the 21st century.
TTIP also affords the United States a unique opportunity to author the rulebook and roadmap for 21st century advanced economies, which would stand in stark contrast with Russia’s reliance upon crony capitalism.
The sanctions regime that was implemented in response to Russia’s illegal actions in Ukraine may not have altered Putin’s strategic calculus in Ukraine, but they have raised a cost to his actions and left Russia economically isolated.
Eurthermore, Russia’s full implementation of the Minsk II agreement shouldn’t necessarily result in ‘business as usual’ either; Crimea-related sanctions should remain in place until Russian forces evacuate the Crimean peninsula and return it to Ukraine.
Maintain transatlantic solidarity: A central tenet of a United States strategy for countering Russia should be to strengthen transatlantic solidarity and cooperation.
A key source of Russia’s influence is its predation of fragile governments and the exercise of corrupt practices.
The United States must continue to support ongoing political reforms in Europe, particularly in countries on the NATO/EU periphery 36 such as Moldova, Georgia, Ukraine, and the Balkan states that are currently seeking closer association with Euro-Atlantic institutions.
NATO must prevent Russia from shutting its long-standing ‘open door’ membership policy.
Enhance NATO force presence in Central Europe: The United States should rally allies around a permanent NATO force presence in Central and Eastern Europe, to include American forces.
This will be controversial because some allies fear provocation of Russia, which will require careful American diplomacy.
A key element of Russia’s strategy is the use of strategic surprise and hybrid threats to take advantage of weak states.
Adding resilience as a core task would complement NATO’s current core tasks of collective defense, cooperative security, and crisis management.
An important component of building greater resilience should be enhancing NATO’s cybersecurity capabilities and responsibilities.
Russia’s reliance on strategic surprise and hybrid warfare, illustrated by the seizure of Crimea, poses acute risks for our NATO allies such as the Baltic States.
They in turn fear a Russian snap exercise that could potentially result in encroachment on their territorial sovereignty.
To counter this threat, NATO must empower the SACEUR to employ his best military judgment and order rapid troop deployments in the interest of Alliance security.
With the Committee’s permission, I would like to submit two items for the hearing record containing proposals by the Atlantic Council for steps the United States government should consider in responding to President Putin’s actions and assisting our friends and allies in eastern Europe.
Mr Chairman, Ranking Member Reed, and members of the committee, let me close by sa3dng that I have been deeply disappointed by Russia’s actions in Syria, Ukraine, and Eastern Europe, and the negative effect these actions have had on the United States-Russian relationship.
The United States and its allies should continue to make clear to the Russian people that they believe Russia has its rightful place in a united Europe, whole, free, and at peace, provided that Russia is willing to respect the sovereignty and free will of its neighbors, demonstrate a commitment to democracy and human rights, and respect the rules of the road in the international system.
After the Russian general knocked on the door of our embassy to notify us that we had an hour notice that Russian airstrikes would begin in Syria, the President said he wasn’t going to engage in a proxy war.
And, in response — and, of course, deconfliction is our hot — top priority.
And now we’re — the United States is rerouting its flights to avoid Russian warplanes, not the opposite.
Mr Chairman, the introduction of the cruise missiles is a — is testimony to the loss of precision-guided munitions and missile technology advantage that we’ve had for 25 years.
For some time now, the Chinese missile development strategy, the Iranian missile development strategy, and what Russia is doing also with missiles and precision-guided munitions, have literally caught up to the technolo^cal advantage that we’ve had.
We are the country that used cruise missiles on our adversaries, and certainly Russians have had this capability, and they’re obviously using it.
So, we have to understand that, that that technological advantage that we’ve had is gone.
And it’s in countries that we’re in competition with; that is, Iran, China, and Russia.
I’m absolutely convinced that Russia — you know, the psychological bully that they are with a national chip on their shoulder since the collapse of the Soviet Union in ’91, I believe they are absolutely convinced they can have their way with us.
And this campaign that they’re doing in Syria was certainly calculated with that thought in mind.
When you think about it, this is — as I said in my opening line, it’s unprecedented for them to move this distance, establish an airbase in another country that, for their purposes, is isolated and vulnerable, from a military perspective.
But, they established this base with confidence that they will be able to control the airspace that they want to use, that the United States will not impede any of their air operations and their support for ground operations.
Not only have they done that, but much as we’re doing in China, who is building airbases in archipelagos in the South China Sea, as opposed to flying over those bases and — because they’re international waters, we’re avoiding them.
We have an enemy, called the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria , but we’re now — that enemy, called ISIS in Syria, because of Russian control of the airspace and desire to fly wherever they want, when they want, we’re avoiding that.
And what’s your General Keane. — “is avoid that, or else face confrontation,” and put our foot down.
But, I think there are prudent actions that you can take to discourage an ally.
If we — the other calculation that Russia has made, and it’s heen manifested as a result of the red line in Syria, the annexation of Crimea, the movement into Ukraine, and a sort of deniability that he gives his adversaries by the kinds of deceptive ways he uses military force — I mean, I believe his calculation — and it’s a correct one — is that we get paralyzed by the fear of escalation and by the fear of confrontation.
And I’m absolutely convinced — I disagree with the Ambassador — I don’t believe the Syria operation in any way, shape, or form will hold him back for exerting his national interests in the Baltics and eastern Europe and breaking down the strategic buffer that he clearly wants to have.
And he will use this — I’m convinced of it — as a platform and foundation for more aggression against that buffer in eastern Europe.
General Keane. — will do it because he knows he can and because he knows he will get away with it.
I think President Putin has now clearly said that there will be no international regime change, based on his understanding of the Libya operation in 2011, where the United Nations Security Council basically, in his view, gave a green light to changing regime.
He is a status quo power, and the power he is the most concerned about, as Ambassador Sestanovich said, is his own power and maintaining his own power.
He is also sending a clear message to President Obama that he is not a regional power, he is a global power, and he has extensive reach.
We’re also seeing where Russia’s military modernization and its significant increases in its defense spending has paid off.
It can move quickly, and it does have sophisticated weaponry that it can use.
And for countries that are quite interested in purchasing Russian equipment, this is also a benefit of seeing the level of sophistication that it has and will be willing to sell.
And our Syrian policy has b^een a demonstration of lack of resolve and weakness, of which he has been able to exploit.
Now, there — in 39 some ways, in talking to some of my Polish and central European colleagues, you know, they’re advocating, “Please, send two Russian divisions to Syria.
But, this — he can move very quickly, and he can turn the temperature up when he needs, and temperature down.
And I think we have to return to our rules, which were established at the end of the second World War, international legal norms.
You know, I think General Keane is right about something very important, and that is, this is a kind of situation that we didn’t face in the Cold War.
Because, in the Cold War, there was a kind of constraint on Russian — Soviet activity, because they — as you say.
Since the Cold War, American use of military power has actually been almost entirely free of a fear of Russian interference.
I don’t think the difference is so much a technological one as a political one.
Obviously, our preference would be for him to think he had to deconflict with us.
That’s — that is not only something we haven’t experienced since the end of the Cold War, it really is a change, even from the Cold War itself.
But, I think we should not forget what some of our advantages are here.
I think our discussion has been very bilateral, as though it’s us against the Russians, forgetting Senator McCain.
We have, in Europe and in the Middle East, an array of states that want to work with us, and who, working with us, can actually check the Russians and limit this kind of independent action.
One of the big things about our passive Syria policy over the past several years is that we’ve not done anything in the way of coalition management to create a block of states that would keep the Russians out.
I think we’ve heen off balance in Syria since Assad violated the red lines and used chemical and biological weapons on his own people.
Many people advocated — I was one of them — that a no-fly zone and a safety zone for refugees be created in Syria.
I think we should consider really elevating NATO in this, an emergency meeting of the North Atlantic Council, to shore up and demonstrate the alliance’s resolve, not only for eastern Europe, but also in the current Middle Eastern problem.
General Jones, in your testimony, you touched very, I think, insightfully on the whole issue of energy policy.
We have a very contentious and confrontational Russia right now at $50 a barrel in oil.
So, that raises a huge issue, which I don’t think that we’re going to settle here at this panel, but we should be thinking strategically, in terms of.
Because that’s what, basically, will take away a lot of his ability to be confrontational.
Senator Reed, I really believe in this and the fact that the United States still does not have a strategic energy policy, I — there isn’t one that I can find anywhere that’s written, either classified or unclassified.
This is a — an asset in our quiver that is incredible, in terms of future potential.
And the sooner, I think, that we understand that energy security is a vital part of our toolkit, in terms of deciding what we’re going to do and not going to do in the rest of the world, I don’t think we fully grasp how the energy situation has changed the power balance in the world.
I think there are ways in which, with United States leadership, particularly with Europe, that we can continue to help our friends and allies wean themselves off of their dependence on Russian energy, which is — will continue to create his economic isolation.
Many of the proposals, in terms of countering the Assad regime, would require overt attacks against Assad’s forces.
Most of what we’ve done, legally, has been under the AUME, which has been in effect for more than a decade.
But, those — but, that’s — that doesn’t mean we shouldn’t confront them and resolve them.
I think that, in many cases, the debates — assumes that these are policy issues alone, that they can be done by decision — General Jones.
Senator Reed. — immediately, where, in fact, there are — I think we have to be very careful.
I know Senator McCain has been extraordinarily eloquent about the issues involving legal authorities and they can use — when we can use them, how do they constrain us, how do they enable us.
I’ll — finally, and I will ask for a quick response, and I’ll ask the Ambassador and then I’ll — anyone else wants to chime in.
The decisive ability to change the facts on the ground in Syria is somehow ground forces, in my view.
I don’t think airpower alone, by any side, is going to decisively sort of settle the issue.
Senator, to work through those in exactly the order you suggest, hoping not to get to number three, but for Russian officials already to be mentioning volunteers suggests to me we should worry that that’s already entrain, and that their analysis is, they can’t succeed without it.
If that’s what it takes to succeed, I think there could be some deployments, and maybe not too far down the road.
They know that the IRGC is leading, in some cases, the local militia, but, in all cases, advising them.
And they also know that there’s about 7,000 Hezbollah and about 3,000 Iraqi Shi’a militia that are being returned from Iraq.
Russian doesn’t — Russia doesn’t have a clue whether this ground force is going to be effective or not.
And I think they’re going to wait to see if they have to inject something.
So, I think they will be guarded about their introduction of significant combat forces.
I’d — first of all, I really appreciate the very blunt answers we’re getting here.
We had — not just General Dunford, but others — Clapper — coming in and making statements that I think are really pretty courageous and talking about the seriousness that we’re facing right now.
When the Ambassador mentioned — and I was prepared to ask this question before, because I’m reading from the Council of Foreign Relations now that you had disagreed with General Dunford in this respect.
I’d like to have each one respond as to whether or not you agree with the statement of General Dunford, in terms of the existential seriousness of this.
General Dunford’s statement was that Russia is the only power that can wipe the United States off the planet with its nuclear arsenal.
And I think, based on their ability and as well as the focus that we have seen over the last several years on strengthening and modernizing their nuclear strategic deterrent and their nuclear submarine forces.
And I think, also, because we have seen, over the last several years, beginning in 2008 with the Russian invasion of Georgia, that the Kremlin is fully able and willing to use military means to accomplish its political objectives.
So, I think that is why the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is very concerned about Russian activities and aggression and their willingness to use their Senator Inhofe.
And I think yesterday’s display of the cruise missiles reinforces exactly what General Dunford was saying.
It was talking about — Captain Jeff Davis told reporters the United States has a good awareness about the skies over — has begun routing — rerouting its airstrikes so they’ll pass clear of the Russians.
He said that we have taken some actions to ensure the safe separation of aircraft.
I look at that, that they are dictating what we’re doing with our aircraft in making those determinations while we’re sitting back and doing what is the most effective way to respond to them.
And, listen, we have full visibility of the airspace and also these airfields that are in Syria.
And we can actually track an airplane taking off from any airfield in Syria, and follow that airplane.
So, the idea that, to avoid some kind of air conflict, that we would stop or curtail our operations against ISIS, which we’ve said we were going to defeat, makes no sense to me.
And the reason I’m asking that — I was over there when they had their parliamentary elections, and they — for the first time in 96 years, there’s not one Communist in their Parliament.
And I think that’s very significant, and I would look for him to stop the lull and get back in.
No, I’m talking about what’s happening right now with the aggressive nature of Putin in the Ukraine.
You know, politically, I believe he achieved what he wanted, and that is this government that was anti-Russian, to a sense, has turned its head away from the thought that it would be economically integrated into Europe or militarily integrated.
Conley, that — and, as you know, we — as all of you know, we just passed our defense authorization bill.
And, just to your previous question, I think Mr Putin is dialing it down in Ukraine because he would like the European Union to lift sanctions, and they have to make that decision in the next couple of months.
On the NDAA, specifically, there is an amendment that speaks about looking at the Arctic and seeing the strategic picture of the Arctic, assessing and making those assessments of what the capability gaps are.
I think it is time — we have studied this issue, and there are pile and piles of studies, but we now have to look at this region more strategically.
And within the NDAA, there is a specific discussion about how to look at the Arctic.
I think it’s also — in the NDAA, there’s also discussion about Poland and east — and looking at increasing our force posture.
These are exactly the strong signals that we need to send, and I thank the committee for their thoughtfulness on trying to get at this problem.
I do — I share your concerns about the Arctic and what’s going on there strategically.
I’m going to defer to my colleague from Alaska, who I — will — am quite confident will discuss that issue in some detail.
It seems to me, if you boil it down to its most essential element, Putin wants Assad in more than we want him out.
He’s willing to make a commitment that we haven’t been willing to make over the past 2 or 3 years.
Our policy has been a — benign neglect is too strong a term, but it’s been a kind of — go slow, hope that momentum would eventually push him out.
And apparently there was some progress being made this summer, and Putin decided he was going to reverse that.
I have this historical dilemma of whether this is the Sudetenland of 1938 or Sarajevo in 1914.
The Archduke is long forgotten, and, at some point, Assad will be, as well.
Perhaps that’s an opportunity for us to make common cause with them, just as we did on the chemical weapons issue.
And this is a place where we do have a coincidence of interest, and perhaps that’s an area that we can focus upon, separate from the issue of Assad.
The — I think, deep in the — as I mentioned in my remarks, deep in Mr Putin’s thought process is, he wants to correct what he sees as a — an injustice with regard to the — how the Cold War ended.
But, I think that it does mean that he will push his borders away from Russia.
And he’s consumed — I honestly believe he’s consumed by this idea that we are his natural enemies.
I mean, he — he is the type — he — I define his leadership as a negative type of leadership, in the sense that people like him need an enemy to make themselves look good.
So — but, he’s been successful, because we — he’s moving faster than we can act, than we’ve acted.
NATO, General Breedlove, has done some very innovative things, within certain constraints that he faces, in terms of the organization and how NATO makes decisions.
Now, what form that’s going to take, we’re going to have to wait and see.
But, he’s — I — he’s going to continue to do this — to exhibit this kind of behavior until he’s confronted with a Senator King.
I’ve always thought of Russian foreign policy as like a thief in a hotel that tries every door until he finds one that’s open.
And, as long as their doors are closed, as long as NATO exists and is vigorous and represents a line, that’s the policy that I think you’re recommending.
But, he has not seen that yet, so until we demonstrate that — and American leadership is absolutely es46 sential in creating the conditions that will show that all doors are securely locked and that he can’t Senator King.
But, I think it’s awfully important, as you pointed out, the first — it was interesting, your first point was economic.
That was what ultimately brought about the decline of the Soviet Union, and that also is what can undermine this new expansion.
Senator King, I think every great power must have a sphere of influence, and Mr Putin is doing it by force.
Regarding NATO, he would seek to undermine — if he can put a — you know, just a — run a train through NATO credibility, that’s the best thing he could do.
How do you get to a new bargain is if — you know, the Warsaw Pact disintegrated, NATO survived.
The only way you get to a new European security architecture, and the only way you get this grand bargain, where, “This is yours and I’ll let you keep that,” is, you have to undermine the credibility of the NATO alliance.
So, if he can divide the alliance, if he can put — if he can provoke a government for taking actions that other NATO allies won’t support because — sort of the Georgia scenario — you provoke until there’s an action, and then you blame the victim for doing that.
He believes that there’s a civilizational challenge here, that the great Russian civilization has to fight against the decadence of the West.
And so, there is a slight ideological component to this, so it’s not about invading Poland.
It’s so eroding America and NATO’s credibility that it just sort of dissolves on its own.
And therefore, Russia can exert its own influence and its own power, and it’s demonstrating that it, in itself, is a superior model of development.
I think they’re going to probe to see how they can best do that, politically and militarily.
They already know that Portugal, Spain, and Canadians are doubtful participants.
I think they’re going to — they will use the Baltics, likely as the best vehicle because of the Russian minority population there.
And just the fact that that question is there gives them some leverage.
How could we cooperate with Russia? — I thought we had a lost opportunity, post-9/11, because of Russia’s experience with radical Islam.
Putin was the first guy that called the President of the United States, you know, based on what happened here.
We actually were involved in it years before that, but we never responded.
So, this is an area where I believe we need a global alliance to deal with it, and I think this is an area where the United States and Russia could exercise some leadership together to put together that alliance.
Let me just add one thing to this picture of Putin’s view of Europe, because I do think he imagines that he can, with a combination of assets, be the dominant power in Europe, because, above all, Europe is divided, unable to act in a way that just — he has expressed his contempt for.
But, I don’t think we should underestimate the lessons that he’s learned over the past couple of years.
He has been surprised by the way in which the United States and Europe have responded to the Ukraine crisis.
Well, I don’t know, myself, what we do know and what the President has been told.
Just seeing the reaction, certainly, of the National Command Authority, it appears, by every indication, that, you know, we didn’t have much forewarning of this, you know, other than when he started to deceptively bring his airplanes in.
You know, he flew his fighters in underneath his large cargo aircraft so they wouldn’t be picked up on radar, and then he was — it was obvious that he was constructing something at the base.
I think the first signs that I believe we knew something were physical signs that something was changing at the airbase.
I don’t know that for a fact, because I’m not privileged to have those classified briefings anymore.
Let me say that, as outrageous as Mr Putin’s actions have been in Syria, there’s one thing you can say for him.
I think this is one of Putin’s major points that he’s making strategically, is that he’s — he will stand by his friends and his allies, and he’s willing to put muscle to that to accomplish that.
And I think — I suspect Putin 48 was somewhat in disbelief to watch America abandon Mubarak in Egypt, to watch America abandon Iraq, to watch America retreat from Yemen, and to watch America retreat from Libya.
That will be read by Putin as another sign of America arbitrarily making decisions about the conditions of a war zone and, because we no longer want to be in it, moving away from it despite those conditions.
Certainly, our allies have all seen this track record of retreat and withdrawal, and obviously it has to give them concerns.
You know as well as I do that anybody that talks to people in the Middle East region — there is not a country in the Middle East who we have a relationship with who has — who doesn’t have doubts about America, in terms of its reliability and its trustworthiness to back them up in times of peril.
I haven’t talked to a Baltic leader, but I’m certain they have some issues with it.
I also know, though, that they truly appreciate the forward positioning of troops and airpower in their country, because that is a positive sign.
I don’t think there’s any doubt that, in the areas that we deal with, particularly in the Middle East, that our reliability factor has suffered a serious blow over the last few years.
I — you know, I thought that the announcement of a pivot towards Asia was a mistake to announce it that way, because when you pivot toward something, you’re pivoting away from something, and the Arabs took it quite differently than what, perhaps, we intended.
You know, I don’t remember being a part of that decision as a Member of Congress for the last 21 years.
It seems to me, as an advocate — as a strong advocate of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, that the Russians have been eating our lunch lately when it comes to the information war.
Unfortunately, the tools that were successful during the Cold War — Radio Free Europe, Voice of America — are no longer the tools that are going to be able to penetrate an incredibly and sophisticated strategic communications campaign.
I was in Bulgaria, 3 weeks ago, where Russian oligarchs and firms have basically purchased every media outlet in Bulgaria.
When you go into eastern Estonia, to Narva, they are only listening to Russian media, and they’re given a completely different universe that they’re living in.
We have seen the efficiency of Russian trolls and tweeting incorrect information that’s happening in the United States that can, you know, cause concern.
We are not able, at this moment, to counter this campaign, but we need to employ a much more effective strategy.
But, we must work much harder at focusing on European public opinion, which is quite negative, as well as in Russia.
But, this is the great challenge of our time, and we really don’t have an effective answer.
The Pentagon confirmed, yesterday, that American pilots are now being told to alter their routes to get out of the way of Russian aircraft.
In your long career, you said you can’t recall a time in which that’s happened.
There probably is something along those lines, but I don’t — in modern warfare, since the United States has had global responsibility, I don’t have a reference for it.
I certainly haven’t served as long as you two have, but I can’t recall receiving or giving such an order, either.
He recalls the experience of Afghanistan when they lost thousands of lives and it made the Soviet leadership very unpopular with the Russian people.
The key part of — one key part of Afghanistan was United States active intervention in providing billions of dollars worth of weapons and support to various Afghan fighting forces.
The — clearly, what we have done in Syria, one, on the side to support the opposition forces, in my judgment, from the beginning, has been totally and completely inadequate.
And we have had very competent people on President Obama’s national security team that were advocating a much more robust strategy, as far back as 2012.
What they did move is covertly dealing with the Central Intelligence Agency -trained force to provide them with some weapons capability.
Despite our faulty programs, the opposition forces, to include the al-Qaeda, have been able to put this regime still in jeopardy for the second time.
And, unfortunately, what’s going to take place now, I think, is, Putin is going to be successful in supporting the Syrian — to push back on many of these gains.
And I don’t think we’re going to do anything more than what we are doing to help the opposition forces.
I don’t believe the President’s going to take any action, you know, to protect them, which he could, by establishing free zones for them, and certainly some other actions that he could take to protect them, as I mentioned in my statement.
And, as it pertains to the rest of Syria, we don’t have a strategy to defeat ISIS in Syria.
Ambassador Sestanovich, in your statement, point five, you say that, “We should all worry about where Russia’s reckless behavior will lead next.
So, I would have a question for the panel about the future, given what General Keane just said.
It’s amusing when a 5-month-old is repeatedly surprised by the same action over and over again in close succession.
I think we may discover, as some of the other panelists have said, that there’s another round of Russian policy in Ukraine.
I think right now they’re unsure of how to handle this crisis, but they have not written off their investment there.
If you ask about crises in the Middle East emanating from Syria, you know.
I’d look to the spillover to other countries that have been very worried about what is going to happen and have not gotten a lot of help from us.
The fact that Turkish airspace was violated over the weekend is a warning by the Russians, but it’s not the only way in which this could spill over.
Syria, unfortunately, has got a lot of neighbors in the Middle East, and Russian policy is going to prolong this civil war.
I’d just put one little extra piece on the board for you to look at if you have General Keane’s maps in front of you.
Azerbaijan is the country off whose coast the Russians fired those cruise missiles.
It’s been able to sustain its independence over a long period of time, but it’s in play.
But, the Russians move on a lot of different fronts, and their aim is, as many of the panelists have said, to restore influence over other countries of the former Soviet Union.
General Keane, you said that aggression unanswered, you fear, leads to more aggression.
If you look at what we — what has happened without us, I guess, doing anything to incite Russia, it’s been pretty astounding.
I think it’s possibly the beginning of the end of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
In 2004 or 2005, we started withdrawing a lot of our forces from Europe.
Some of us had some serious discussions with the thenSecretary of Defense about the tradeoff of doing that.
Our belief, when I was in Europe, was that, yes, you could reduce some of the infrastructure and some of the forces, but it should be balanced by rotational forces elsewhere in eastern Europe, particularly in Bulgaria and Romania, where we — where those countries helped build bases that would accommodate rotational forces, and then, because of the demands on our troop strengths in Iraq and Afghanistan, they were never really used.
And I would strongly suggest that — you know, the old adage “a virtual presence is actual absence” is absolutely correct.
And we need to bolster our presence, and NATO needs to show itself as an alliance of 28 countries that really adheres to what it says and what it’s for.
And it should become more proactive as a way of dissuading other engagements.
Clearly, the United States has been the dominant country in the Middle East that’s outside the region — our own self-interests, obviously — economic, stability and security of the region.
And we’ve been willing to take action to ensure that stability and security.
Russia, with this alliance with Iran, cannot be understated, in terms of its strategic significance.
Every country in the region will be impacted by it and will be making adjustments to the new geopolitical landscape that Iran and Russia are creating for us.
And, as a result of that, they have to leverage their relationship with Russia.
So, our influence — listen, we’re still a major player in the Middle East.
And with this alliance, this will be an accelerant to actually reduce our influence more considerably.
Well, obviously Russia supported the deal as much as the United States did.
Certainly, Iran’s behavior for the last 35 years should have been on the table as a condition for the deal, but it was removed.
The other thing — I totally agree with General Jones — I think, strategically, it — the objective in Europe is the NATO alliance.
Much less collectively come to the aid of another country that is burdened by Russian aggression.
The — strategically, he will break that alliance, and he’s not going to have to take much military action to do it, in my judgment.
And I think Jim laid out some careful points that we could exercise strategically, but we have to lead, and we have to have the resolve to do that.
I just want to emphasize the fact that, although we’re talking about NATO as a military alliance, there is a military component to what we can do to restore NATO, but the economic strategy is also very important, and the political strategy.
So, I think it’s three things that have to come together to have a — an effective strategy to deal with the — Mr Putin’s Russia as it is today.
It — when you focus on that, in terms of “What is his escalation response?” — is the thing that paralyzed us from taking action.
I mean, I think — I do believe there’s prudent things, you know, that can be done.
Do those seem — they seem like prudent — ^you know, we’ve been talking about a no-fiy zone for a while here, ending the barrel bombs, which the Chairman has talked about repeatedly.
Obviously, with Putin’s airpower there, and enforcing a no-fiy/no-bomb zone is more challenging now.
In the south, it — and to enforce a no-fiy zone, you actually have to have someone on the ground to also protect that zone from infiltration from the regime or, actually, Jabhat alNusra.
So, in the south, we can put together a — I prefer to call it a free zone, where the moderates would be protected there, and we would be able to bring refugees in as a sanctuary.
And the reason for that is, we have an effective ground force there in the Free Syrian Army.
In the north, where we truly want to do it, and where the Turks have interest in it as well, it’s much more challenging.
We don’t have the density of moderate forces there that we have in the south.
Well, maybe a better term on my part would have been a safe zone, where they don’t get barrel-bombed from the sky, where things like that General Keane.
In the north, it’s challenging, and I’m not confident that we would have the same results.
I’ll give you a — I’ll give you a firmer answer, actually, than General Keane.
I think if you get — if you have — if you convey that the United States and its allies in the region are going to take serious military action, you will get a serious Russian diplomatic response.
That is, for the first time, Putin will start saying, “You know, we need to talk about the future of the Syrian regime” in a way that has not been true until now.
I think the Russians have not felt that they have to take seriously what we say about the future of Syria, because we’re not playing.
If you want to play in this game, you have to be prepared to put some assets on the table.
And I don’t think we can expect to affect the political equation until the Russians think that there’s a — that the military risks to them are greater than they calculate.
If the economy stays the way it is, certainly that’s going to have some — ^you know, some impact on him.
But, I still believe that Putin’s view is much larger than just a couple of years, in terms of what he portends, strategically, for himself.
If we establish free zones, you know, for moderate opposition forces, but also sanctuaries for refugees, that gets world-opinion support rather dramatically.
If Putin is going to attack that, then world opinion is definitely against him.
You take this issue right off the table, in terms of why he’s in Syria.
And if you’re doing that, and contributing to the migration that’s taken place by your aggressive military actions, then world opinion will have some rather, I think, significant impact on him.
If I could, it’s — we have a model in 1991 in Iraq, where we not only partitioned the north and the south, but we cratered the runways, we were able to get Saddam’s air force completely grounded.
But, what we also did was, by creating those zones, particularly in the north, we avoided a significant refugee problem.
And I think that a mistake was made, back on the redline days, when we didn’t do that as a response to his using chemical weapons.
I believe that Europe would not have been suffering the refugee problem that they have now, and I think — I completely agree with General Keane that, if you tie it to the safety of — and security of innocent civilians, and you take — make it a big enough chunk in the country — I think that that is a powerful argument to do that.
And I agree that it’s harder in the north and that that’s something we should look at in the south.
And I think you’d see some impact in Putin’s behavior sooner than 2 years from now.
Putin doesn’t fold his tent lightly, and he’s not going to admit quickly that this entire operation has been a fiasco for him.
But, if there’s pushback, he will not necessarily just continue plunging forward.
Well, in many ways, though, a lot of this adventurism is because the domestic situation is continuing to deteriorate.
He’s having to tell the 55 oligarchs that they can’t quite get as much funding.
But, remember, he’s created the national narrative that he’s — Russia is encircled by enemies.
And he controls the media space, and he’s created a warlike environment.
So, I think there’s probably a little more longevity here, even if the economic situation continues to fundamentally deteriorate.
So, if you do make the military cost higher, that he can’t cover up — and they’ve done a masterful job of suppressing — even the mothers of Russian soldiers are now foreign agents because they were talking about the disappearance of their sons in Ukraine.
But, his control over his media space is — so, this can go on for a long time.
And I think, if he does run into strength, he responds to that strength and adjusts.
This was during the Russia-Georgian conflict when we had to fly back — Georgian soldiers back to Georgia.
Conley and gentlemen, for being here today, and your service to our country.
For General Jones and General Keane, last week I had voiced my concerns regarding the new intelligence-sharing agreement between Iraq, Russia, Iran, and Assad’s Syria.
And, like all events in Iraq, it seems, according to Deputy Secretary of Defense Robert Work, this agreement caught the administration by surprise.
So, considering the efforts of all of our men and women in uniform and the billions of American taxpayer dollars that have been put into Iraq, supporting the Iraqi people and the Iraqi government, I am troubled that the Iraqi government has entered into this information-sharing agreement.
So, I do think this puts our intelligence professionals at risk, and our country at a greater risk.
And so, if you could maybe talk a little bit about what those risks might be to the American public and why we should or should not have — or why they should or should have not entered into this information-sharing agreement.
Senator, thank you, and thank you for your military service Senator Ernst.
And it has cost Maliki’s ineptness and — the nefarious character that he is, that excluded the Sunnis politically from participation.
You know, one of the things we — one of the things we’ve been advocating is, we need a three-star military headquarters there, with the Ambassador, that interacts routinely with Prime Minister Abadi for political reasons, as well as military reasons, similar to way Ryan Crocker and General Dave Petraeus did with Maliki before.
And it’s not something to be taken lightly, because it is the political decision to include the Sunnis that becomes the lynchpin for success of the indigenous force.
You’re never going to be able to succeed until their participation is there.
Let’s assume we clear Ramadi next week with predominant Shi’a militia forces and some degree of Iraqi army.
What is going to keep ISIS out of Ramadi is Sunnis, Sunnis who are armed and trained and have the resolve to stay there, just as it will be in Mosul.
That participation is totally dependent on a political inclusion of the Sunnis.
So, the fact that Abadi is making this deal — and I think it portends a statement he’s not making publicly, that the United States is not supporting him in a way that he needs, and the Iranians are, the Russians will be, and I think he’s making a shift, right before our eyes, without making any public pronouncements about his loss of confidence in the United States.
Prime Minister Abadi came to this country for his first visit with the President of the United States, and he left, essentially, with nothing more than what he already had.
Four weeks later, he’s in Moscow, and he’s cutting an arms deal with Russia.
Now, he doesn’t want to buy Russian stuff, he wants American equipment.
He can’t even get the American equipment on time in the numbers he wants for the deals he already has with the United States.
That’s how frustrated they are with just supporting him on the decisions we’ve already made, much less additional support.
So, if you’re facing an enemy that’s breathing down on your country and occupies one-third of your country, and you’re challenged to retake that territory and evict them, and you’re comforted by the fact that the United States is coming to your aid, but that aid is so shallow — ^you can understand what he’s doing.
And if he — if Iran’s going to be 57 the helper or if Russian’s going to be the helper, he’s probably going to take it.
We’ve got great witnesses, and have shared with us information about a very grave foreign policy time in our country.
It’s unbelievable that we’re drifting without a kind of a strategy to seriously deal with Russia or the whole Middle East.
I have the greatest respect for George Kennan, but, actually, at the time, he was trying to develop a strategy that would be good even for a couple of years.
And if we had a strategy that was good for a couple of years, we’d be way ahead of where we are now.
Let’s try to think about how to get our act together in a way that does us some good in the Senator Sessions.
I — but, if I could answer your Senator Sessions. — agreement to agree on Ambassador Sestanovich.
Look, the main thing that the Russians have always thought about us in relation to them is that we have allies and that they didn’t, and that they are all by themselves.
This, of course, feeds a lot of insecurity on their part, but it is a genuine advantage for us.
And so, I would suggest that the place to start in thinking about a strategy that will be effective over the next couple of years or the next couple of decades is how to leverage this advantage that we have built up over half a century.
And it’s not — for reasons that the generals have mentioned, not easy to do at this point, because there are a lot of doubts about our strategic good sense and our staying power.
But, these are still assets that are latent and can be recovered if we are at all serious about it.
And, of course, they were sincerely saying they were going to get to 2 percent.
But, their lack of will is so palpable, it seems to me that, if we don’t lead and don’t step up, they’re not going — they’ll just try to negotiate their way and not take any real serious action.
At the NATO summit in 2002, the 19 countries that made up NATO at that time agreed unanimously that 2 percent of their gross domestic product would be provided for national defense.
Ongoing in NATO right now is a reaffirmation of the fact that we need that — everybody needs to chip in that 2 percent.
Conley’s admonition that the next Warsaw summit, next year, is critical, in many respects, not only in what NATO stands for, what it does, how it does it, but how it’s funded, and the commitments that NATO members make now, with 28, should be universally agreed to and should absolutely be supported.
But, I do believe that our engagement in this 21st century is — got to be different than the 20th century engagement.
If you don’t tie in economic development, governance, and rule of law in a more comprehensive, whole-of — ^you know, whole-of-nations involvement, and you don’t show people that there’s a better future for them at the end of whatever conflict they’re going through, you’re going to lose them, and you’re going to create refugees all over the world.
And if you like what’s happening in the Middle East right now, we’re going to love what’s going to happen in Africa in another 10 years, when Nigeria collapses or another big country goes under.
So, this is a very difficult, dangerous time, where weakness is not something that we should show, because people draw — people like Mr Putin will draw the long — wrong conclusions.
And I want to thank the panel, this really incredible experience here, but also great insights.
Conley, I want to thank you, particular, not only for your testimony, your outstanding work on the Arctic.
In terms of the — you mentioned the NDAA, and I appreciate you mentioning that, because, you know, what we are really reacting to, as a Congress, to get serious — that’s a requirement for no plan, actually, for the Arctic — was our current Arctic strategy, which you may have seen.
So, what we’re trying to do is get serious and have the Department of Defense get serious on that.
Also, in your testimony, you know, I think it’s — appreciate all the — you talked about the massive Russian military buildup, which also includes — you didn’t mention it in your testimony — four new brigade combat teams , and, as you mentioned, a new brigade headquarters for the military — Russia — ^Arctic military — 40 icebreakers, and more to come; some of those are nuclear powered.
So But, in terms of the three military exercises you mentioned, they didn’t get a lot of press in the United States.
Do you view those as provocative, in terms of what the Russians were doing, Ms.
I view the last one, the March 2015, because it was a snap exercise at full combat readiness.
We need to get the Russians back to the rules that the OSCE — of transparency, 45-day notification over a certain level — ^because this is where misunderstandings and accidents happen.
So, that, to me, was provocative and unprovoked, although Senator Sullivan.
If you look in the right-hand corner, though, of that map, there’s two blue dots.
They’re the only Arctic-trained American warriors that we have in the Active Duty forces.
We’re not even — you know, there are some people saying, “Hey, we’ve got to stand 60 up.
Senator, that they view them very similar to, as General Jones said, that they viewed our reductions in Europe.
We do not have much of a United States security architecture in the Arctic, other than our missile defense at Fort Greely Senator Sullivan.
Well, I mean, we have told the Russians that they are our partners in the Arctic, and that would be true in the case of the Arctic Council.
But, on the military component, we have not fully addressed and understood the dramatic shifts over the last 12 to 24 months that have occurred Senator Sullivan.
But, you think there’s a — we need to relook at that, given what’s happening.
And I said — it’s not just for the Arctic’s sake, although important changes are happening.
So, what happens in the Baltic Sea, the North Sea, the Barents Sea, and the Arctic — it’s a continuation of operations.
So, we have to look at it holistically, not only the land component, as you rightly note, but also I’m particularly concerned, and what our allies — our Norwegian and British allies are very concerned — is the maritime component.
Senator King was — the North Atlantic is becoming a much more active Senator Sullivan.
I’ve had the opportunity to train a lot in cold weather at Bridgeport and up in Alaska.
Since 1945, the United States has recognized that if you’re not present where you need to be present, and you’re absent, you create a vacuum.
And vacuums are usually filled by people that don’t have the — don’t share your same interests.
And, you know, I used the term “virtual presence is actual absence,” but actual absence means you’re creating vacuums.
And the 61 United States, if it desires to be a globally significant power by the year 2050, needs to think about strategically what we’re going to do to avoid increasing the number of vacuums that we’re creating around the world.
Yes, I mean, it — the acclimatization, the special equipment, everything that you need to operate in minus-30, minus-40-degree temperatures routinely, the toughness of the soldiers themselves to operate in an environment like that, that’s why we have forces there, for that very reason.
Because you can seize an airfield with them very quickly and then bring in a lot of other things to help them out.
But, what this — what is happening here — and I hope the other Senators understand — is, the budget control authority and sequestration is driving the force structure of the Army down to World War II — pre-World War II numbers.
I was with the Chief of Staff and his four-stars just the other day, dealing with this very subject.
And he has no choice but to take brigades out of his force structure because of what the budget control authority is doing to him.
This was done in conjunction with the Pacific theater commander and where he also wanted his forces, not just the Army.
But, let me just say that we have a Democratic President and a Republican House of Representatives and a Republican Senate.
And both of these entities are underwriting sequestration and the decapping of military capabilities and putting this country at a greater security risk than it needs to.
I mean, we’ve got to stop this, and stop this freefall of military capability.
I think we have to retain the current assets that we have in theater and look at how we can best augment to be able to rapidly respond and deploy, if necessary.
General Keane, thank you for once again pointing out the importance of taking responsible action to eliminate sequester on both the defense and nondefense side.
This committee, of all committees, I think, fully understands the negative impact of sequestration on our military.
General Keane, you had mentioned, in response to Senator Reed’s question about whether or not — some of the suggested actions that you put into your testimony raises the issue of whether or not we ought to be having a debate on a new Authorized Use of Military Force.
And I think you acknowledged that some of the suggestions probably would warrant that.
And that may be one of the reasons that we are having such a difficult time, in terms of our strategy in Syria.
Brzezinski stated that it is time for — and I’m quoting him — “strategic boldness,” end quote, calling on the United States to persuade — to persuade — so far, persuasion hasn’t worked very well — persuade Moscow to act with us in stabilizing Syria and encouraging engagement by China.
What are your thoughts on a cooperative role between the United States and Russia, realizing that Russia — Putin is no fool, as one of you said, that, I think, he is as concerned — he must have some concerns about potential for mission creep for them in Syria, and them getting bogged down.
I did not know what Zbig Brzezinski meant in that piece about bringing in China, so you’ll have to ask him.
But, I think the answer to your question, more broadly, is an easy one.
The United States is not going to be able to have any meaningful cooperative — or discussion with Russia about cooperation unless it has its own thought-out strategy and is willing to bring some assets to the discussion, and act on its own if it can’t cooperate.
The administration has been very interested in cooperating, but it has pursued this discussion as though you could get 63 the Russians to cooperate with you as a substitute for American action.
The only way to really get a serious discussion with the Russians is to begin by thinking through what matters to us and what we are prepared to do, and then telling them.
But, to just think of cooperation as a substitute for any independent action is a loser.
I would just say, I think that moment of trying to think cooperatively expired a long time ago.
And, to agree with Ambassador Sestanovich, at this point, it’s — we have no strategy at what we’re clear about and willing to enforce.
So, the strategic cooperation is whether we go along with Mr Putin or whether we don’t.
I would agree that you have to — you — we have to take some action that clearly shows that — that establishes a motivation for President Putin to want to sit down and talk about it.
But, I think that — I think there’s been too much talk and not enough action on our side.
You know, Mr Brzezinski, in that article, also talked about retaliation against the regime, as you recall in the article, as a result of their attacking, you know, our surrogate forces.
I do know that contributing — that Putin understanding our resolve and our commitment, judged by our actions and not by our rhetoric, will make a difference, in terms of pushing him to more thoughtful diplomatic action.
But, if that is the only lever that we’re concerned about, is military escalation, it leaves us with this — the emptiness of the status quo.
Well, I think we should approach him with everything that we have, in terms of putting pressure on him, but I do think we’re out of time, given the military aggression that he is using, and he’s been using for a number of years now, that we have to push back on that.
I would just add one — to the question about whether it’s only military action we’re talking about.
I think an effective strategy is going to have to be one that brings together other countries in the region.
Those other countries are going to want to know what we are prepared to do.
But, to begin with, to — the first kind of cooperation that has to be established for us to have any credibility in conversation with the Russians is with our own friends.
Ambassador Sestanovich, I had a discussion with a diplomat earlier this week who seemed to share the view that the Russian in64 cursion is doomed to fail.
They try to use, as a rationale behind that, as to some $200 billion in reserves that they have to spend.
What they’re doing right now, relatively speaking, seems to be low cost.
We don’t seem to be discussing other partners that are already active in Syria and in the way of Iran and an Iranian nuclear deal that promises to free up assets and to allow that economy to create currency that could become, in my opinion — I want to validate this — a very material part of what Russia ultimately does in Syria.
Well, I wouldn’t say the main cost that President Putin faces is an economic one or — and when people say that he is about — doomed to fail, I assume what they really mean is that the civil war will actually become more intense and that the Assad regime will be short of the kind of intervention that Putin is surely hoping he doesn’t have to launch — would be further weakened.
Yeah, I think that it’s possible that they will have some near-term advantages — I mean, successes.
I — it’s a little hard to predict, but I think, in the short term, you’re going to see some tactical successes, but there’ll be adjustments on the battlefield.
I’m unconvinced that the victory through airpower alone is going to achieve success in either Syria or Iraq.
The other dimension here is, you cannot underestimate the resolve of the Syrian people, in terms of what has happened to them these last 4 years, and their determination.
When you think about it, they went up against a military machine that has all modern weapons, and they stood up against it with very little weaponry themselves.
I mean, what has kept this in their fight is their absolute determination and will to change their country so that their families and communities can have a better life.
And, to both General Keane and General Jones, I had another discussion with a diplomat who said that the White House’s passive posture was not really what they wanted, that they’re acting on the recommendations of the folks in the Pentagon.
Well, first of all — Jim and I are very familiar with this — the Pentagon does not make policy.
What happened here is — I think is very different than the process that we’re — that many of us are used to experience when a President has made a decision that it’s in his national interest to use military force to accomplish political objectives.
He sort of — that is sort of stated to the Department of Defense, in terms of what his goals are, and then they would put together a campaign that would have various options and risk associated with it.
What happened on dealing with this issue, the — not only was the goal stated in terms of “defeat ISIS,” but then the Pentagon was told many things in terms of what the parameters for that operation would be.
But, the rules of engagement are so restrictive that we cannot conduct effective air operations to the degree that we know we can and keep people safe.
So, those kind of restrictions are something I think most of us have not seen in our past, and how you make a policy and then provide the military instrument with a campaign plan and options associated with it.
And, you know, I think it’s startling to hear someone who was formerly in command of NATO to say that it’s at risk of dismantling.
I think that that’s a message that should be loud — heard loud and clear.
Senator, I do not believe that the United States has a strategic energy policy that anyone could read.
And it’s a lit66 tie bit because of the way the Department of Energy was formed.
Years and years ago, the Department of Energy was really the Department of Nuclear Energy.
I’m of the opinion that we have a great Secretary of Energy and a great Deputy.
You know, the Middle East believes that energy is — energy for a security deal over the last 40 years is no longer viable, because we have our own energy.
And, in fact, when you hear people talking about energy independence, I wince at that, because it does say, “We’ve got ours.
But, our energy good fortune can be used, and should be used, in the global playing field for developing countries and also as a response to what Mr Putin is doing, and particularly in central and Eastern Europe.
And this plan that we’re going to enter into the record today is a plan that will wean 14 nations off of Russian — from dependence on Russian energy.
That’s a staggering — if this works, this is a staggering response, an elegant response also, and an economic response, to Mr Putin’s actions.
In behalf of Chairman McCain, let me thank you all for extraordinary insightful testimony and for your commitment and dedication to the country over so many years.
