The first 'Putin war', of 2014, was accompanied by denials of Russian military involvement although there were 15,000 deaths.
As Ukraine reels from Putin’s War 2.0, it is worth remembering that, in November 2013, tens of thousands of protesters took to the streets in Kyiv, Ukraine’s thousand-year old capital city, to protest at the then President Viktor Yanukovych’s sudden decision to abandon plans to sign a free trade agreement with the European Union, blaming Russian pressure.
By Dr Vlad Mykhnenko, Associate Professor of Sustainable Urban Development & Research Fellow, St.
By mid-March 2014, Moscow forced through a de facto annexation of Ukraine’s southernmost region.
Within three weeks, Russian armed groups had seized parts of the Donbas – Ukraine’s easternmost provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk on the Russian border.
The ensuing armed conflict led to at least 15,000 people being killed, 30,000 wounded, with well over 6. million people being permanently scarred by the brutality of the war.The claim that the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine in 2014 was triggered by domestic and economically-determined factors did not hold water then, any more than the current Russian claims are legitimate nowSince the early occupation of the Crimea, the Kremlin has been protesting its innocence.
A sarcastic social media meme was generated, usually tagged to gruesome footage of blown-up Russian tanks and servicemen killed in action in Ukraine.
President Putin, meanwhile, maintained the actual Ukrainian army were fighting a civil war against 'former coal-miners and tractorists' from the Donbas.
But the claim that the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine in 2014 was triggered by domestic and economically-determined factors did not hold water then, any more than the current Russian claims are legitimate now.My research, published in 2020, reveals that economic and material circumstances in the region did not generate the necessary or sufficient conditions for a locally rooted, internally-driven armed conflict.
The role of the Kremlin’s military intervention was paramount for the commencement of hostilities.
Since the early occupation of the Crimea, the Kremlin has been protesting its innocence.
Back in 2014, President Putin went on television to deny Moscow’s military involvement in the war, claiming 'Ikh tam nyet 'The Ukrainian Donbas is a typical shrinking old industrial region, suffering in the post-Soviet period from rapid deindustrialisation and persistent population loss.
The Russo–Ukrainian war caused tremendous damage to the region in the period 2014–2018, with the total amount of permanent asset loss amounting to over US$84. billion in 2013 prices.
Before the current war, the human cost of 15,000 lives lost and many millions permanently scarred by the earlier hostilities has been significant.
The economic standing of Donbas as a whole, within the Ukrainian spatial economy, has more than halved, even considering the remaining economic activity in non-government-controlled territories.During the first four years of conflict, the officially recorded aggregate regional GDP plunged by 61.1% in constant local prices and by US$20. billion, or 73.1%, in foreign exchange terms.
In terms of industrial output, the weight of the occupied territories of Donetsk province shrank to just 20.5% of the aggregate provincial production in 2017.
The economic standing of Donbas as a whole, within the Ukrainian spatial economy, has more than halved, even considering the remaining economic activity in non-government-controlled territoriesIn Luhansk province, ORDLO militants control 29.8% of aggregate provincial production.
As the economic situation in ORDLO continues to deteriorate, the population outflow from the region has inevitably increased.The evidence shows clearly that ORDLO as a whole, let alone its two separate Donetsk and Luhansk sections, has an insufficient economic and demographic basis for anything resembling a financially and materially sustainable future as an independent statelet.
The occupied Donbas is heavily dependent on Russia and formally governed by Moscow’s Inter-Ministerial Commission for the Affected Districts, which acts as a shadow civilian government.The annual cost to Russia of sustaining ORDLO and maintaining and resupplying the armed formations operating there is in the region of US$5 billion.
Nevertheless, Moscow’s prolonged involvement in other frozen conflicts across the post-Soviet space, including its extraordinarily deep patronage of Transnistria, Abkhazia and South Ossetia, does not bode well for a peaceful settlement in the Ukrainian Donbas.
Even before Putin’s War on Ukraine 2.0, the evidence presented here points to the paramount role of exogenous political agency and of endogenous military geography in explaining the outbreak of the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine in April 2014.
He has written numerous articles on post-Soviet transformations and regional and urban economic development, currently serving on the editorial board of Eurasian Geography an Economics.
We must break free of fossil fuel Stockholm Syndrome 20 Jun 2022 20 minutes of daily exercise can keep teens' doctors away 20 Jun 2022 Prestigious Tang prize for Oxford China expert Prof.
