INTRODUCTION TO THE FORUM The events of the past year in Ukraine have been unprecedented, and therefore not easily comprehensible as a single yet complex phenomenon.
Naturally, both participants and outside observers are trying to identify these events with some familiar scenarios, “recognizing” the traits of yet another “color revolution” against a post-Soviet autocracy, or a national liberation movement, or a bourgeois revolution.
We simply lack a ready analytical language and explanatory models to describe the birth of the new Ukraine as a unique and – yes – unprecedented phenomenon.
As a way of expanding the repertoire of available explanatory paradigms, I suggest a serious consideration of the concept of postcolonial revolution.
This notion can be seen as too pretentious and vague,1 but it might be the only way to account for the main characteristics 1 “Postcolonial revolution” is used quite indiscriminatingly in literary studies and the social science literature as a synonym for the anticolonial revolutions of the second part of the twentieth century, or the rise to prominence of postcolonial studies as a methodological trend.
Apollo Obonyo 22 Ab Imperio, 3/2014 of the “Ukrainian events” themselves and the ways that participants in the forum reflect on them: the astonishingly persistent manifestation of one’s own subjectivity in pursuit of forging or upgrading Ukrainian collective subjectivity.
The Ukrainian revolution is a postcolonial revolution because it is all about the people acquiring their own voice, and in the process of this self-assertive act they forge a new Ukrainian nation as a community of negotiated solidary action by self-conscious individuals.
We will see then that not every type of revolution can equally meaningfully describe the realities of Ukraine and the ways they are perceived by participants and analysts.
First, it should be explained why “revolution” – and not, say, civil war.
People are free to use words indiscriminately, but to better grasp the meaning of the phenomenon (rather than just expressing one’s attitude toward it), this word choice must be a conscious one.
Doubtless, over the past year Ukraine has seen an escalation of intercommunal violence, with citizens of the same country killing each other, often on political grounds.
A typical civil war, twentieth-century style, implies the principled clash of opposing collective subjectivities, “two truths” that cannot find a compromise and are determined to seize supreme authority in the nation.
The “Maidanites” are all about distinctive subjectivity, political ideals, and social program.
There is no such a program and no interest in Ukraine, as the leaders of Donetsk and Luhansk “republics” explicitly announced their ultimate goal to secede and join the Russian Federation.
To this, one can respond with an example of the archetypal civil war of the nineteenth century – the United States Civil War that was Amoko.
The appeal of the classical formula is understandable, but in the modern world, “bourgeois-democratic revolution” can be used only as a metaphor rather than an analytical category.
Maidan took place in a society with a capitalist market economy and an institutionalized political democracy.
It overthrew no monarch but a legitimately elected president, and expressed distrust of the parliament (or at least the majority of its members), but it did not question the very values and principles of capitalist economy and parliamentarism.
Perhaps, the only thing that Maidan shared with historical “bourgeois” revolutions was a common reliance on the European tradition of political liberalism that acknowledged the right of popular rebellion against tyranny.
In fact, in his Two Treatises of Government , John Locke claimed that a revolution was an obligation and a civic duty if a government abused the rights and interests of citizens.
Maidan as a declaration of civic subjectivity toward and disobedience of a government that disregarded people’s rights and interests was very Lockean in spirit, but hardly “bourgeois” in practical terms.
Already in April 2014 social scientists from several Ukrainian cities met in Kharkiv to discuss the new post-Maidan social realities, and only few of them (employed by the state police academy) resorted to the language of colonial dependence – and only to explain the motivation of separatists, not revolutionaries.
The main goal of the meeting was to elaborate an active research and civic solidary position of social scientists – the theme of expressing one’s personal subjectivity and enhancing the active public role of the profession was central to most speakers.
The very refusal to play the subaltern card as an ultimate justification for the Ukrainian revolution can be explained by their fundamental incompatibility.
Anticolonial revolution is a powerful act of transcending one’s subalternity, but not one’s embedded dependence on the former colonial master.
In the soft version of anticolonial resistance, former subalterns manage to coordinate collective action, but only in the name of their traditional moral economy and framed 5 Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak.
Scattered Speculations on the Subaltern and the Popular // Postcolonial Studies.05.
Thus, in neither case is there room to express one’s own distinctive subjectivity as the main driving force of the uprising.
The anticolonial paradigm just does not fit the imagined community of Ukrainians and the vision of Ukraine “from the Syan to the Don” that integrates the many regional a local knowledge in Ukraine.
The model of national revolution or national liberation movement seems to better fit the realities of Maidan and the public discourses making sense of it.
The abundance of interpretations of the phenomenon of “nation” provide ample opportunities to cast Maidan in national terms.
This seems all the more appropriate given the high visibility of Ukrainian nationalists on Maidan and on the front of the RussoUkrainian war that followed, as well as the centrality of the discourse of nation-building in post-Maidan Ukraine.
Whatever one’s understanding of nation , “national revolution” implies the rise of some preexisting nation to complete sovereignty.
This (essentially Hegelian) historical scenario can be recognized in the story of the downfall of the Soviet system in 1989−1991, quite typical for the twentieth century.
The Moral Economy of the Peasant: Rebellion and Subsistence in Southeast Asia.
Decoding Subaltern Politics: Ideology, Disguise, and Resistance in Agrarian Politics.
As can be seen in the materials of the forum, this rhetoric was employed by a rather marginal group of Maidan activists , and does not correspond to the general social and political dynamics of the movement, from November 2013 through January, to postrevolutionary developments.
In this broader perspective we see that the main pre-Maidan political force representing organicist nationalism (“integral nationalism” in the Ukrainian political tradition) – the all-Ukrainian movement “Freedom” – has dramatically lost its popularity amid the unprecedented national mobilization.
There was no real preexistent historical Ukrainian state to be restored within its original borders, and no homogeneous nation in agreement about its composition.
Individual people with active civic positions stepped forward to protest the abuse of their rights by the tyrannical regime, and in the course of their collective action a new type of solidarity emerged, and a new Ukrainian nation came into being.
The Ukrainian nation became the product of the revolution, not its perpetrator.
The last and probably the least intellectually productive of the familiar revolutionary scenarios is the concept of color revolution.
This is an insightful and thought-provoking approach, but it is more a metaphor than a self-sustainable explanatory model, as it first requires an explanation of how we understand the persistence of “Sovietness” almost a quarter century after the collapse of the Soviet regime and socioeconomic order.
Within a more analytical and academic context, it is recognized that color revolutions were just a milestone somewhere in the middle of the long transition process from communism, and not “true” revolutions.
The First Postcolonial Revolution or not, the names of color revolutions are really meaningless – but we cannot say this about the Ukrainian revolution of 2014 that immediately proclaimed itself the Revolution of Dignity.
The study of languages of self-description by historical actors is central to the research paradigm developed by Ab Imperio, and from this vantage point the name of the Ukrainian revolution alone presents a decisive argument against comparing it to color revolutions.
The Revolution of Dignity could have been produced only by self-conscious moral and political subjects, having it in mind not just to topple the irritating government but to impose their subjectivity as a new system of coordinates for the revolutionary society.
Communicating this content requires a lot of words and practical actions, it cannot be signified by any single color or plant.
Neither were, for that matter, questions of language or historical memory.
This distinction drawn by Hrytsak is a key to grasping the unprecedented uniqueness of what is happening in Ukraine.
A very general framework for binding common values structured an open field for negotiating a common subjectivity and acting in accordance with it.
The image became viral in the Ukrainian section of the Internet in early September, 2014.
We know that this is a new phenomenon because it largely ignores or creatively recodes the readily available historical precedents and symbols.
The readily available political symbolism and historical mythology of the Ukrainian Insurgent Army and other forms of Ukrainian nationalist mobilization of the 1940s play a surprisingly marginal role in the country at war.
Arguably, this role was much more marginal (on the scale of the whole country) than the role of the 20th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS in the Estonian public sphere, in a country that actually had enjoyed sovereign statehood during the interwar period and that became emancipated from foreign rule long ago.
Ukrainian Jews immediately produced the mem “Yid-Banderite” and actually developed it into a social identity that many proudly accepted.
Klezmer Band, in his usual Yidby yet another insanity broadcasted Banderite t-shirt.
Francis Mazuet. by Russian state TV insinuating that Ukrainian volunteers were promised a plot of land and two slaves for fighting in Donbas,10 followed by the whirlwind of hilarious “creative interpretations” of this news in the Ukrainian section of the Internet.
It is important to stress that this reaction to Russia’s attempts to seize the initiative may be spontaneous, but not unconscious.
New Ukrainians can call themselves Yid-Banderites, Dills, or Khokhly, because they do not follow some preset fixed identities 10 70 let nazad Sovetskie voiska osvobodili Ukrainu ot fashistov // 2014.
This is why they cannot be effectively “trolled” by identity-centered Russian propaganda, and this is what sets them apart not only from subalterns but also from most uncompromised anticolonial rebels.
They are creatively minding their business, inventing a new country for themselves, and when they have to respond to outside pressure, they frame the response in their own terms.
Nothing demonstrates the material power of subjectivity better than the scale and diversity of activities of the volunteer movement in Ukraine.
Arguably, the very process of state building after February 2014 has been stimulated, guided, and even staffed by grassroots citizens’ initiative.
Today, former volunteers are serving as advisers to the president and defense minister, as staff for newly created departments in ministries, and they are elected to the parliament.
There are numerous opportunities to help – the key question is whether people are willing to step forward and help – and, more important, to define the venues and terms of help.
Three percent of the respondents were “professional volunteers” – coordinators, who collected donations and personally delivered them to the war zone.
This is just an example of how the hypothesis of the mass-scale expression of an individual civic position regarding a personally identified cause of communal importance can be verified, quantitatively assessed, and specified in aggregated social profiles.
Several contributors to the forum mention the significance of hybridity as a new phenomenon in Ukraine, or rather as a familiar phenomenon that has changed its modality – from a sign of marginality and parochialism to a trendy and mainstream personal quality.
The project “Information Resistance” 11 See World Giving Index full table // Charities Aid Foundation.
This group reveals a distinctive social composition and a characteristic spectrum of political opinions.
See V Maidane prinimal uchastie kazhdyi piatyi ukrainets – opros // Zerkalo Nedeli.14.
As a speaker for the gradually increasing group of associates, Tymchuk introduced his own format of news aggregation and presentation and soon became a key newsmaker – not just a commentator.
Bilinguals in more than one sense, they are so confident in this intermediary position that they do not feel pressured prove their Ukrainness by switching to the Ukrainian language in public.
The First Postcolonial Revolution In this perspective, the unexpected transformation of Dnipropetrovsk – arguably a no less “Russian” or even “Soviet” city than Donetsk – into a champion of new Ukrainian patriotism and a major factor of public war mobilization efforts appears in a new light.
The decisive role in this transformation of the governor (oligarch and leader of the Dnipropetrovsk Jewish community, Igor Kolomoisky) and his deputies (Gennadii Korban and Boris Filatov) has been broadly acknowledged.
Their motivations are usually explained by their personal convictions and values, particular business interests, and political rivalry with Donetsk elites.
After all, the social group that can be tentatively defined as “Soviet Jews” was the most consistent representative of hybridity in the twentieth century.
In the nationalist social imagination obsessed with defining fixed identities, they were perceived as marginal and parochial – precisely because every hybridity was equated with backwardness.
The closer a group approached some uncompromised “ideal type” the higher its social status was.
Yet, their Jewishness was maintained not only because of outside stigmatization (a formal “nationality” registered in passports), but also because people voluntarily and creatively chose this loosely and very selectively defined self-identification.
In revolutionary Ukraine, the marginal type of Soviet Jews has become surprisingly relevant as an archetype of the new, “post-identity” form of solidarity.
It is important to stress that the project of hybrid Ukrainness does not necessarily threaten but may even greatly enhance the cultural component of it.
A national canon, twentieth-century style, is always an arbitrary nomination of certain local characteristics to the role of the compulsory national standard.
A regional dialect becomes the linguistic norm of “high” language marginalizing other dialects; one type of local dress, repertoire of songs, or cuisine would rise to the status of national importance, making all the rest objects of ethnographic research, at best.
Even “ethnic Ukrainians” themselves are so diverse that a single mandatory national canon has to be discriminatory toward some.
At the moment, a model of culture in a hybrid nation remains nonexistent because Ukraine is still elaborating this project in real time, while leading world theorists are lagging far behind the revolutionary sociocultural transformations there.
Despite its obsession with an extensive methodological exploration of every nuanced social status and interaction, postcolonial theory is astonishingly underdeveloped when it comes to hybrid identities.
There is a widespread misperception that the authoritative contribution by Homi Bhabha provides an exhaustive reflection on historical hybridity,16 but even this tradition (essentially denying hybridity the right to subjectivity of its own) has not been effectively engaged in empirical studies.
The quite substantial body of research on hybrid imperial social personae and “imperial biographies” that is produced within new imperial history not only “normalizes” hybridity but demonstrates its mainstream role in prenational and anational societies.
The unfolding story of the Ukrainian postcolonial revolution – arguably, the first of this kind ever – provides a unique opportunity for postcolonial scholars to upgrade their theoretical models.
Dynamic hybridity not only offers a practical political solution for a heterogeneous and multifaceted society such 16 Homi K Bhabha.
A Critical Reflection on Homi K Bhabha’s Post-Historical Thoughts // Ab Imperio.13.
The First Postcolonial Revolution as Ukraine , but also opens new horizons for European and North American societies, where the original promise of multiculturalism and affirmative action did not live up to the original high expectations.
Multiculturalism is framed by the essentialist, nation-centered twentieth-century discourse of fixed identities.
The hybridity espoused by new Ukrainians demonstrates a truly postcolonial emancipation of one’s subjectivity unconstrained by alien hegemonic will as well as by the golden chains of communal traditions with their cult of “authenticity” and rigid scenarios of identity politics.
Like a “bourgeois revolution” or “national liberation movement,” it is not a “thing” – just our more or less accurate description of it, and only from one angle.
Euromaidan appears to be “bourgeois democratic” because, historically, self-conscious civic subjects belonged to the upper classes.
Euromaidan is anti-Soviet (it toppled Lenin statues throughout the country) because it is post-Soviet and refuses to borrow ideas and symbols from the past in order to outline the future – but not in any Cold War-period sense.
But to scholars themselves – and all other bystanders commenting on Ukraine – this is truly the last judgment.
If the model of “postcolonial revolution” is correct, this means that Ukraine has opened up new historical horizons and is already living in the future.
Everybody has the right to disapprove of the Ukrainian revolution and wish bad for the country – one should just realize that by doing this in the name of reviving and freezing some mostly imagined past, s/he is getting locked in a different temporality with no future.
It is just that some rise up to the role of self-conscious subjects of common history, and others voluntarily surrender their own subjectivity to become the slaves of predetermined identities and scenarios.
Fedor Berezin, currently the deputy war minister of the “Donetsk Republic,” is the author of two dozen novels in the genre of Russian nationalist military sci-fi.
Bykov mentions a few other Ukrainian and Russian writers of conservative sci-fi and fantasy that wholeheartedly sided with counterrevolution, for some reason omitting the dean of Russian fantasts, Sergei Lukianenko, prominent for his vicious anti-Ukrainism.
Bykov attempts to place Arsen Avakov, the interior minister in Ukrainian revolutionary government, in the same context of fantasts attempting to rewrite the future – because Avakov used to be the main sponsor and organizer of the leading festival of sci-fi writers in Russian language, the Star Bridge, that took place every year in Kharkiv, Ukraine, from 1999 to 2012.
Avakov organized the event in reality, while conservative fantasts dreamed about the idealized past in the future.
When Avakov joined the government to build a new Ukraine, former festival participants rose up against this unknown future – in the name of the rigidly predetermined historical scenario that was devoid of any spontaneous subjectivity.
One year after the outbreak of Euromaidan, we see that the Ukrainian revolution has put to the test not just the political order in Europe, but − to a much greater degree − the reputation of intellectuals who are professionally involved in analyzing Ukraine or revolutionary politics.
It seems that the main reason for this frustration results not from political disagreements per se or conflicting scholarly interpretations, but from encountering an explicit refusal of very intelligent people to put their minds to work rigorously.
What really hurts is not an opposing opinion, but barely masked superficial indifference.
This probably explains the otherwise inexplicable solidarity of West European and Russian left-wing activists not with the Ukrainian antikleptocratic popular uprising with a strong anticolonial component, but with explicitly imperialist and chauvinist Russian aggression.
Otherwise, they would have to reconsider their ideas 20 Vladimir Sorokin.
The 2011 English edition translates the answer as “It’ll be all right,” which is misleading.
They forget that operating with conventional categories and models is only part of the institutionalized scholarly process.
The position of Russian scholars on Ukraine is the least interesting to analyze, as they do not try to preserve even the status quo in the face of rapidly changing reality , but wholeheartedly succumb to excessive archaism and intellectual scarcity.
With rare exceptions, the level of expertise on Ukraine has deteriorated in Russia to a state beyond any intellectual relevance.
Ideological censorship and political pressure encourage people in humanities and social studies to profess performativity and “ornamentalism,” reproducing formal academic procedures without engaging in truly critical thinking.
The dominant discourse explains everything – from the Ukrainian crisis to Russian domestic problems – through the trope of “foreign agency,” whether the United States, cunning Kremlin manipulators, or aliens from outer space.
Within this discourse it seems plausible that protesters spent weeks in the bitter cold on the Kyiv Maidan because they were paid for it, that volunteers took up arms to defend their country in exchange for “a plot of land and two slaves” – any external stimuli are perceived as more credible by default than an explanation through subjective motivation.
People just do not believe in someone’s else personal agency, sincerity, and determination – because being unaware of their own subjectivity, they do not recognize the subjectivity of others.
Parochial cynicism is employed to cover the profound frustration caused by the events people do not want to control – and therefore cannot control.
Even the most self-conscious liberal segment of the demoralized Russian educated society is hopelessly stuck in the discourse of identities.
A society that is not a common sphere of contesting and negotiating individual subjectivities is nonexistent in “objective reality,” and no legally impeccable “cadasters” of fixed social identities and references to past common fates can compensate for this emptiness.
The postcolonial revolution of subjectivity in Ukraine threatens Russian society by the sheer contrast it unwillingly produced – between vibrant life and the soulless (but not yet decomposed) social body.
The tragedy is that they are doing this for no personal reason, just because these people have no subjectivity as members of society, beyond immediate personal interests.
It is just that the twentieth century accustomed us to fake referendums arranged around phony agendas imposed by politicians.
In revolutionary Ukraine, people define the political agenda for themselves as a true referendum.
The case of Navalny proves that Russian society is not alien to processes unfolding in Ukraine, which, however, have very bleak prospects of success.
In Ukraine, it took at least a decade (since the Orange Revolution of 2004) of intensive public debates to collectively produce that new feeling of the solidarity of individual subjectivities.
The discussion gradually expanded from academic and semi-academic periodicals to the general media, then to the Internet, from blogs to Facebook posts, and finally to brief Twitter messages understood by everyone without the need to properly contextualize the ideas expressed.
It should not come as a surprise then when a Russian-language Facebook post by the commander of the volunteer Donbas battalion, Semen Semenchenko, almost verbatim quotes from the Ukrainian-language column by historian Yaroslav Hrytsak published four months earlier.
Despite their social and cultural (and political) differences, both of them belong to the common sphere of hybrid yet solidary subjectivity structured by common ideals and values.
If offered a post in Cabinet of Ministers, I would have opted for Minister of Transport.
And first thing, I would have lowered for certain categories of population the cost of train tickets west to east, and east to west.
The First Postcolonial Revolution Therefore, it is necessary to “sew Ukraine together” by trains and cheap airlines.
Lviv and Donetsk with Luhansk should give a hand to each other and sew the country together.
When we are tricked into confronting each other, told stories about Banderites and bandits from Donbas – the whole Ukraine suffers.
At least ten years of debating values and goals cannot be “telescoped” to a few months of propaganda even by the most talented and progressive political leaders such as Navalny.
To make such a dialogue possible in Russia ten years from now, the public discussion should have been initiated yesterday.
We should become an alternative to what Moscow was in the former Soviet Union.
It is to Kyiv, not Moscow, that Russian-speaking citizens of these countries should look.
Drawing on the materials of the forum, he then suggests that the concept of “postcolonial revolution” is better suited to integrate all the key features of the phenomenon in question within one 24 Yaroslav Hrytsak.
Most important, the revolution is characterized by the astonishingly persistent manifestation of people’s subjectivity.
The Ukrainian revolution is a postcolonial revolution because it is all about the people acquiring their own voice, and in the process of this self-assertive act forging a new Ukrainian nation as a community of negotiated solidary action by self-conscious individuals.
Gerasimov concludes with surveying the influence of the Ukrainian revolution on the international field of Russian Studies, and how it put to the test the convictions of those who preach a leftist and even revolutionary political agenda.
Surprisingly many leftists in Europe and the United States have sided with the cleptocratic and imperialist Russian regime against the revolutionary new Ukrainian nation.
A critical deconstruction of familiar clichés implies that one has to enter uncharted waters and embrace a new, unfamiliar reality of post-postmodern society and postcolonial revolution.
