It remained neutral throughout World War Two even as neighbouring Nordic countries were invaded, and during the Cold War.
A poll by Demoskop and commissioned by Aftonbladet newspaper showed 51% of Swedes are now in favour of NATO, up from 42% in January.
However, Sweden's Defence Minister Peter Hultqvist said joining NATO was not an easy decision, nor one that could be rushed based on recent events alone.
Moscow says it is conducting a ""special operation” to disarm its neighbour and capture leaders it calls neoNazis.
Sweden and Finland already have very close cooperation with NATO and have been invited to recent summits.
NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said in January the two countries could join the alliance ""very quickly"" if they decided to apply for membership.
Sweden took the decision this month to send weapons to Ukraine, the first time since 1939 Sweden sent weapons to a country at war.
Nonfarm payrolls for the month grew by 678,000 and the unemployment rate was 3.8%, the Labor Department’s Bureau of Labor Statistics reported Friday.
That compared to estimates of 440,000 for payrolls and 3.9% for the jobless rate.
In a sign that inflation could be cooling, wages barely rose for the month, up just 1 cent an hour or 0.03%, compared to estimates for a 0.5% gain.
The year-over-year increase was 5.13%, well below the 5.8% Dow Jones estimate.
For the labor market broadly, the report brought the level of employed Americans closer to pre-pandemic levels, though still short by 1.14 million.
Labor shortages remain a major obstacle to fill the 10. million jobs that were open at the end of 2021, a historically high gap that had left about 1. vacancies per available workers.
As has been the case for much of the pandemic era, leisure and hospitality led job gains, adding 179,000 for the month.
The job gap for that sector, which was hit most by government-imposed restrictions, is 1. million from pre-Covid levels.
The unemployment rate for the industry tumbled to 6.6%, a slide of 1. percentage points from January and closer to the 5.7% of February 2020.
December moved up to 588,000, an increase of 78,000 from the previous estimate, while January’s rose to 481,000.
Together, the revisions added 92,000 more than previously recorded and brought the three-month average to 582,000.
The labor force participation rate, a closely watched metric indicating worker engagement, moved higher to 62.3%, still 1. percentage points from the February 2020 pre-pandemic level.
The trend for jobs is clearly upward after a wintertime surge of omicron cases, while exacting a large human toll, left little imprint on employment.
The economy also has been wrestling with pernicious inflation pressures running at their highest levels since the early 1980s stagflation days.
The Labor Department’s main inflation gauge showed consumer prices rising at a 7.5% clip in January, a number that is expected to climb to close to 8% when February’s report is released next week.
Amid it all, companies continue to hire, filling broad gaps still left in the leisure and hospitality sector as well as multiple other pandemic-struck industries.
Monetary policymakers widely view the economy as near full employment, adding pressure to prices that have soared amid supply shortages and demand surges related to the pandemic.
Inflation has come as Congress has pumped more than $5 trillion in stimulus into the economy while the Fed has kept benchmark borrowing rates anchored near zero and injected nearly $5 trillion into the economy through asset purchases.
Now, Fed officials expect this month to start raising interest rates, with market expectations that those hikes likely will continue through the year.
While overall traffic crashes and people injured were down in 2020, fatal crashes and fatalities increased.
In January, the United States DOT released the federal government’s comprehensive National Roadway Safety Strategy, a roadmap to address the national crisis in traffic fatalities and serious injuries.
The strategy adopts the safe system approach and builds multiple layers of protection with safer roads, safer people, safer vehicles, safer speeds, and better post-crash care.
It is complemented by unprecedented safety funding included in President Biden’s Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
The United States Department of Transportation and its Federal Aviation Administration is blocking Russian aircraft and airlines from entering and using all domestic United States airspace.
The Notice to Air Missions and regulatory orders suspends the operations of all aircraft owned, certified, operated, registered, chartered, leased, or controlled by, for, or for the benefit of, a person who is a citizen of Russia.
This includes passenger and cargo flights, and scheduled as well as charter flights, effectively closing United States air space to all Russian commercial air carriers and other Russian civil aircraft.
Russian aircraft were already effectively barred from most United States destinations due to bans already imposed by Canada and Europe.
Many airlines, including Delta, American, United and United Parcel Service have also suspended flying over Russian airspace.
International supply chains are taking a hit, with some airlines re-routing flights but many others canceling services that fly over Russian airspace.
The greatest disruption is likely to be seen in the Asia-Europe corridor.
The country closed its skies to civilian aircraft on February 24, according to flight tracker Flightradar 24, averting potential tragedy for airline passengers and crew.
The International Civil Aviation Organization Council has met to discuss the worsening situation.
The Council underscored the paramount importance of preserving the safety and security of international civil aviation and the related obligations of Member States, and in this context, urged the Russian Federation to cease its unlawful activities to ensure the safety and security of civil aviation in all affected areas, and to respect its obligations under the Chicago Convention as well as other relevant international air law treaties.
It called upon all concerned parties to seek to resolve the crisis through peaceful dialogue and diplomatic channels.
The Council also recalled with deep sorrow the human suffering that was caused as a result of the downing of flight MH17 in the east of Ukraine on 17 July 2014, and underlined that such a tragedy should never happen again.
In the same context the Council reconfirmed its support to the Safer Skies initiative led by Canada relating to improving international efforts to safeguard civilian flight operations over or in the vicinity of conflict zones.
That said, SPD continues to grapple with being short-staffed, and it appears as though that situation likely won’t be resolved any time soon.
In early February, Mayor Bruce Harrell announced a so-called “hotspot” patrol initiative, designed to target specific areas of the city experiencing disproportionate crime rates with an influx of police officers.
That began with emphasis patrols around 12th Avenue and South Jackson Street, with SPD’s focus now turning to Third Avenue and Pine Street.
Amid concerns voiced by business owners over an uptick in crimes, Diaz hopes to establish “a more visible presence” throughout the downtown corridor, in hopes of stabilizing the situation.
To account for that in the near term, the department is pulling officers from each of its precincts and having them walk downtown beats, while exhausting any and all avenues to fill other gaps.
News of damage to a major Ukrainian nuclear-power plant rattled already fragile sentiment.
Market participants are trying to assess how much the conflict, and tough Western sanctions on Russia, will damage global economic growth and further stoke inflation by disrupting commodity supplies.
Russia’s central bank will keep the Moscow stock market largely closed for a fifth straight day, shielding local shares from a potential selloff.
The selloff in the Russian ruble stabilized, with the currency down 0.1% against the greenback, according to FactSet, trading at 110.14 per United States dollar.
Ukrainian officials said Russian shelling caused a fire at a nuclear power plant, intensifying fears about Moscow’s tactics and concerns about a nuclear disaster.
However, officials said the fire didn’t affect essential equipment, lessening worries about reactor damage.
As of early Friday, the management building at the plant was under the control of Russian forces.
Front-month futures prices for Brent crude oil, the global benchmark, rose 0.1% to $110.61 a barrel.
The United States equivalent, West Texas Intermediate crude, added 1.3% to $109.05 a barrel.
In the previous session, WTI briefly topped $116 for the first time since 2008.
In bond markets, the yield on the benchmark 10-year United States Treasury note declined to 1.778%, down from 1.843% Thursday.
All three major United States indexes are up 2% or more since Russia invaded Ukraine last week.
Investors were cheered this week when Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell said he would propose a quarter-percentage point interest-rate increase at the central bank’s coming meeting, alleviating concerns about a steeper hike.
However, Mr Powell also warned Thursday that the conflict in Ukraine would likely push up inflation.
The worsening situation in Ukraine is driving investors to trim risk exposure ahead of the weekend, said Kenny Wen, wealth management strategist at Everbright Securities International in Hong Kong.
Asian stocks dropped, in part reflecting Thursday’s action on Wall Street, where technology stocks sold off more than the broader market and U.S.-listed Chinese companies stumbled.
Hong Kong’s benchmark Hang Seng Index fell 2.5%, registering its lowest close since March 2020.
FB -and Amazon.com Inc. campuses on the West Coast began emptying out as the coronavirus started spreading across the U.S., a move that was quickly mirrored by the vast majority of offices nationwide.
Today, many skilled knowledge workers have no interest in going back to the way things used to be.
In their constant quest for new talent, tech firms—and old-guard companies that need to find more techsavvy talent—will do what it takes to hire and retain people who feel empowered to demand the schedule and location of their choice.
Even when the pandemic is over, many tech leaders believe work flexibility will be a staple, hiring will be more geographically dispersed and people will spend their time differently than they did before, with designated hours they’re available to collaborate with colleagues and other periods where individual work is the priority.
She predicts that bosses who force staffers back to offices in rigid ways will lose credibility with their workforces.
Employees will be returning to the office a few days a week starting in early April.
Twitter Inc., which was among the first to announce it would allow its employees to work from anywhere permanently, announced Thursday that it plans to start reopening its offices March 15.
But in making the announcement, CEO Parag Agrawal, stressed that the company’s ultimate return-to-work philosophy is employee choice.
Perhaps one of the most lasting ways Covid has altered the workscape is hiring, as evidenced by a recent Twitter thread where several high-profile executives chimed in.
It feels like now the place to be is the internet,” tweeted Brian Chesky, chief executive of Airbnb Inc.
The head of Coinbase Global Inc., Brian Armstrong, said Silicon Valley had already relocated from California to the cloud.
Eighty-nine percent of new hires at the cryptocurrency exchange were somewhere other than the West Coast in the most recent quarter, he tweeted, up from 30% before the pandemic.
Alyssa Henry, the head of the Square business within the newly renamed Block Inc., tweeted that 40% of managers on her team don’t have any direct reports living in the same location.
The tech industry isn’t the only one undertaking far-flung recruiting efforts these days.
General Motors Co. said this year it plans to hire 8,000 high-tech employees, many of them based far from its Detroit headquarters—some in offices in places like Austin, Texas, and some working from home.
He took the job at the auto maker last year helping to oversee hiring, in part, because it allowed him to continue living in Massachusetts.
Once teams scattered in the Covid era and started performing their roles from all over the country, tech companies explored ways for them to balance collaboration time with colleagues with focused time for individual work.
Enter “asynchronous” work, where employees get to set their hours in part by what schedule best suits their lives.
Slack Technologies Inc. has “core hours” where team members are supposed to be available to jump on a call or huddle with their teams.
Slack parent Salesforce Inc. encourages employees to set their Slack status to “focus time” when they’re handling individual work or “connecting,” to signal their availability to collaborate.
Salesforce recently tried its first “Asyne Week,” where 20,000 of its nearly 70,000 employees canceled routine meetings to make more time for solo work, said Carolyn Guss, a spokeswoman.
Of those who participated in the experiment, 72% said it made them more productive and 70% reported it made them less stressed.
Twitter is adopting a similar approach where teams come up with common hours that work for them to collaborate.
It also recently experimented with a companywide “focus” week where the majority of meetings were canceled and people could catch up on things like backlogged assignments.
Now Twitter encourages workers to think about “meeting hygiene,” which could involve setting a tight agenda for efficiency, recording the meeting so people who can’t join can still listen at a later time, and considering whether the meeting really needs to happen at all, Ms.
There’s still a lot for companies to iron out to make asynchronous models run smoothly, Ms.
Workers can’t string together enough hours in a row to focus, so they sometimes work well beyond the traditional 9-to-5 schedule, with pings and dings signaling requests coming to them from all over the internet.
Dean predicts savvy employers will help people shrink their online time.
Instead, teams will do more front-end planning for projects and then send team members off with tasks and deadlines.
For some, hybrid models can work where people come in on set days of the week, while other teams might need to work from an office for five days, two weeks in a row, to pound out a plan for a project; then they could work from home for several weeks as they deliver that project, with online checkins in the meantime.
New Ways to Gather Tech companies spent years selling their lavish office campuses full of perks like on-site massages, free food and exercise classes as prime reasons to come work for them.
Even though most workers will only go back part time, these spaces will still serve an important purpose, several companies say.
Meta Platforms Inc., the parent company of Facebook, last year signed a lease on Austin’s Sixth Street, adding another 589,000 feet of square footage to its existing office space in the city.
Instead, it calls them “studios”; there are fewer desks and more meeting rooms and lounges for less formal team gatherings.
The company said it plans to see how those experiments go before scaling them.
More companies are holding off-site meetings at hotels, coffee shops or executives’ backyards the new way to gather groups instead of pulling them into traditional offices.
Salesforce has said its existing offices will be used for more collaboration and less individual work, but it’s going a step further with an off-site project that combines work and wellness.
Salesforce is bringing 10,000 employees to an employee retreat outside of Santa Cruz, Calif., this year, where workers will meet for training and bonding with their colleagues, in addition to hiking, yoga and cooking classes.
The pandemic has ripped down the boundaries between employees’ personal and professional lives, and many executives say workers’ mental health and wellness concerns will continue to bleed into their workdays.
Conversations that may have once taken place with friends outside of the office now feel natural among colleagues, who have grown accustomed to supporting their peers during the pandemic, said Francine Katsoudas, chief people, policy and purpose officer at networking giant Cisco Systems Inc.
She says it will continue to be more acceptable for employees to talk about their mental health and the state of their personal lives at work—and to expect support from their bosses when they do.
After weeks of intense negotiations in Vienna involving the United States and Iran, and Britain, France, Germany, Russia and China, senior diplomats said they were now within reach of an agreement that would restore the 2015 deal.
That pact lifted most international sanctions on Tehran in exchange for strict but temporary restrictions on Iran’s nuclear work.
Iran has been pushing for more sanctions relief if the nuclear deal is restored.
In particular, it wants the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps to be taken off Washington’s most significant terror sanctions list, the Foreign Terrorist Organization.
The United States has long pushed back against the demand given the Revolutionary Guard’s role across the Middle East backing designated terrorist groups such as Lebanon’s Hezbollah.
A final decision would almost certainly need to be cleared at the highest levels in the Biden administration.
However, it is almost certain under any restored nuclear deal that the Biden administration will lift sanctions on dozens of terrorist-listed people and entities, a move that is already sparking criticism in Washington.
Iranian officials also cautioned that talks hadn’t crossed the finish line.
The United States left the nuclear deal in 2018, with former President Donald Trump saying it did too little to stop Iran’s pathway to a nuclear weapons.
On Thursday, the U.N.’s International Atomic Energy Agency said Iran had doubled its stockpile of highly enriched uranium, leaving the country close to amassing enough weapons-grade nuclear fuel for a bomb.
The Vienna talks have focused on agreeing on the steps Tehran and Washington would need to take to restore the pact.
European and United States diplomats have said a deal needs to be wrapped up in the next few days or they will exit the negotiations.
Time is running short, they say, because Iran’s nuclear advances mean it could soon be impossible to recapture the main benefit of the deal for the West, Russia and China—keeping Iran far enough away from having enough nuclear material for the bomb.
Under a restored deal, Iran’s “breakout time”—the duration needed to amass enough nuclear fuel or a bomb—could be as little as six months, United States officials say, compared with around 12 months when the original deal came into force in January 2016.
A first sign that negotiations were advancing came Thursday morning when the IAEA said its Director General Rafael Grossi would travel to Tehran for talks to resolve one of the final issues standing in the way of a deal.
Mr Grossi is seeking an agreement with Iranian senior officials about how to handle a probe into undeclared nuclear material found in Iran.
Iranian officials say they want to eliminate that investigation as part of a deal to revive the nuclear pact, something that Mr Grossi and Western officials have said is unacceptable.
The IAEA is considering some kind of road map, Western diplomats said, which could offer Iran reassurance the investigation won’t be open-ended if Iran steps up its cooperation in answering the agency’s questions about its nuclear work.
Iran wants the probe closed, Iranian and Western officials say, because the IAEA could censure Tehran if it doesn’t cooperate and that could open the way for the issue to be sent up to the United Nations Security Council, where international sanctions could be imposed.
Ahead of Mr Grossi’s trip to Iran, Israeli Prime Minister Naftali Bennett called him to press his government’s concerns about the nuclear deal and its position that the nuclear probe be continued.
They agreed to speak again after the Tehran trip and Mr Grossi will be visiting Israel in the near future, a senior Israeli official said.
By Thursday evening, European negotiators were posting on social media pictures of their teams at Vienna’s plush Palais Coburg hotel where the talks take place, with messages of thanks for the hard work.
Early this week, talks grew tense after Iran’s top negotiator returned from his capital and put back on the table demands that Tehran had previously made.
They included demands for guarantees that if the United States quits the deal again, Iran’s contracts with Western firms won’t be ripped up.
The United States and Europeans have said repeatedly that they can’t offer guarantees about what a future United States administration would do.
By Wednesday evening, Western diplomats said Iran seemed no longer to be pressing the issue so strongly.
Failure to reach a deal could lead Iran to move closer to nuclear weapons capabilities although Tehran has always said its nuclear program is for purely peaceful purposes.
Western officials don’t believe Iran has fully mastered building a nuclear warhead or fixing it to a missile.
However on Thursday in a confidential report circulated to members, the IAEA reported that as of Feb., Iran has 33. kilograms of 60% enriched material, up from 17. kilograms in early November when the agency last reported.
Iran would need around 40 kilograms of 60% enriched uranium to produce enough weapons-grade nuclear fuel for a weapon.
The 90-minute call failed to deliver a diplomatic breakthrough, and a senior French official said it left Macron convinced that “the worst is yet to come” and that Putin aims to take control of all of Ukraine.
The conversation, which the French presidency said was initiated by Putin, came as Ukrainian officials were set to hold talks with a Russian delegation, according to Russian and Ukrainian officials.
But based on the two leaders’ exchange, there was no indication Thursday that a diplomatic solution could be in sight.
Responding directly to those comments Thursday, the Kremlin news service said Putin disagreed “with many points” raised in Macron’s address, and he denied that Russia was behind the shelling of major Ukrainian cities — despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary.
Macron is the only Western leader who has been in consistent public contact with Putin since the invasion of Ukraine, in an effort the French presidency has described as an attempt to keep the doors to meaningful negotiations open.
Before the invasion, Macron had led Western efforts to prevent an escalation of the crisis through diplomatic channels, traveling to Moscow last month to keep Putin engaged.
Since mid-December, the two leaders have spoken over a dozen times, according to the French presidency.
Macron has also been in frequent contact with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky — the most recent time on Thursday, following his call with Putin.
Return to Top 03/03 ‘Freedom convoy’ spinoff heads to DC os:/www.washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/2022/03/03/dcGIST The United States protesters inspired by the self-styled “Freedom Convoy” that occupied downtown Ottawa for weeks headed out from Southern California last week for a cross-country trip to the D.C. region.
Washington County Public Schools in Hagerstown announced that students would be dismissed 2’ hours early on Friday because of expected traffic congestion caused by the convoy.
Those estimates are consistent with what Ohio State Highway Patrol authorities are seeing as the convoy heads to Lore City, Ohio, said Sgt.
Supporters have been joining and leaving throughout the trip, making it difficult for officials to predict the size of the group before it reaches a given region.
Christopher Watson, a spokesman for the Illinois State Police, said of the convoy that traveled through his state earlier this week.
The convoy is on Day 9 of its 11-day journey, traveling from Monrovia, Ind., to Lore City, Ohio.
Supporters from other states, including in the Northeast region, have posted their own routes on social media in hopes of meeting up with the group when it arrives in the Washington area.
Social media posts showed people waving American flags on the side of a highway for a Northeast contingent of People’s Convoy drivers coming through Pennsylvania.
But Pennsylvania Department of Transportation officials monitoring traffic did not notice anything unusual throughout the day, said Fritzi Schreffler, an agency spokeswoman.
There was about a mile of vehicles driving south on Interstate 81, approaching Franklin County, Pa., on Thursday night, which Schreffler estimated may be the convoy.
Organizers have emphasized that they have no plans to go into D.C., but they have not publicized what they will do when they arrive or how long they will stay.
Throughout the cross-country trip, People’s Convoy organizers have rallied people by calling pandemic restrictions and mandates an infringement on their freedoms, even as many of those measures at the federal and local levels have been blocked or rescinded.
Brian Brase, a convoy organizer, said the group wants an end to the national emergency declaration in response to the coronavirus — first issued by President Donald Trump in March 2020 and later extended by President Biden — and for Congress to hold hearings investigating the government’s response to the pandemic.
Organizers disagree with that characterization and have tried to frame the convoy as bipartisan.
But speeches, rallies and flags are full of pro-Trump and anti-Biden rhetoric.
The possibility of a caravan of trucks and cars has heightened security, drawing in police agencies from Maryland and Virginia to monitor the Beltway.
D.C. police spokesman Dustin Sternbeck said the department’s posture has not changed since additional security was ramped up in the days ahead of Tuesday’s State of the Union address, and the Civil Disturbance Unit remains activated as a precautionary measure.
Sternbeck said D.C. officers remain stationed along highway entrances to the District and some exit ramps, along with trucks from the Department of Public Works, in case roadways need to be blocked or traffic diverted.
Police declined to say specifically what they might do should the convoy try to enter the District.
Authorities note that large trucks are barred from many D.C. streets, with regulations restricting where they can park and how long they can idle.
As they prepare for this weekend, the agency said in a statement that people can expect to see a larger presence of Virginia troopers and other safety teams.
Maryland State Police also said the agency is working with regional authorities to monitor the situation.
Although the forecast into early next week is mostly springlike, consecutive cold fronts are set to surge across the Lower 48 in the next one to two weeks.
The first, gentle front will dive into the Central States this weekend before pushing off the East Coast by Wednesday.
The cold will come as somewhat of a shock as record warmth is predicted to precede the onset of the chillier weather pattern in a number of areas this weekend into early next week.
On Saturday, abnormally warm temperatures will span the Central States with highs from 65 to 70 degrees stretching from Des Moines to Pittsburgh.
By Sunday, the warmth will edge eastward, with high near 70 as far north as Columbus and Philadelphia and record-challenging highs at or above 80 in many parts of the Southeast.
On Monday, highs near 80 could creep as far north as Richmond and even Washington.
After the first of the two cold fronts pushes through the eastern United States Tuesday, temperatures will return closer to seasonal norms by Wednesday as the more significant blast of cold, sourced from the Arctic, drops into Montana.
By late on March 10, or in about one week, frigid air is projected to have penetrated through the Rockies and as far south as the Texas Panhandle.
The cold will then probably sweep through the Midwest and western Great Lakes by March 11 with temperatures 30 degrees below normal in some areas.
This could mean highs only in the teens and single digits with subzero lows.
Places that had highs in the 70s and 80s this weekend may only be in the 30s and 40s that weekend, with freezing overnight lows.
As the cold air arrives late next week, it could be accompanied by snow, particularly in parts of the Upper Midwest, Great Lakes and interior Northeast.
Exactly how cold it gets at particular locations, the timing of its arrival and associated snow amounts still need to come into focus; sometimes models overpredict the intensity of cold snaps at long time ranges.
However, there is a strong model agreement that an Arctic front will enter the eastern two-thirds of the Lower 48 late next week and bring widespread below normal temperatures.
The National Weather Service Climate Prediction Center’s 8to 14-day temperature outlook shows a high likelihood of below normal temperatures between March 11 and 17 over the Upper Midwest and Great Lakes.
We would expect the zone of below normal temperatures to shift east when the outlook is updated to cover the period of March 12 to 18.
In the wake of the blast of cold — ending around March 15 — longer range models do indicate temperatures should moderate back to near normal levels later that week.
Through the end of the month, models advertise a bumpy pattern with frequent swings in temperatures although probably not of the magnitude that we’ll see over the next 10 days.
But as military tensions rose a year ago along Ukraine’s eastern border, the 29-year-old Ukrainian woman returned to her country of birth to become a soldier.
She was fully aware of the danger she was getting herself into—since 2014, Ukraine has been the target of Russian-backed aggression in its eastern region of Donbas.
We are not afraid of death; we are afraid to be slaves,” Kristina, who withheld her last name and location due to safety concerns, told VICE World News.
The decisions of Ukrainian women like Kristina to pick up arms to defend the country from Russian threats helped give rise to a military that has a higher share of women than most other armed forces in the world.
At the beginning of 2021, there were around 57,000 women in Ukraine’s armed forces, comprising 22. percent of the total, according to the ministry of defence.
Only a handful of countries that conscript men and women on equal conditions, such as Norway and Sweden, have a comparable or higher level of female representation in their military.
As Russia continues its attacks on Ukraine, the responsibility of defending the country has fallen in part to the growing ranks of formal—and informal—female fighters.
Among them have been a 79-year-old woman who recently learned how to fire a gun, former beauty queen Anastasiia Lenna, who represented Ukraine at the 2015 Miss Grand International pageant—and Kristina, the former wedding singer.
Since President Vladimir Putin invaded his neighbor on Feb., women have been prominent among Ukrainian civilians fighting Russian forces, from making Molotov cocktails to dismantling road signs.
Their role in Ukraine’s resistance can be traced to the Maidan protests in 2013, where a wave of mass demonstrations resulted in the ousting of Ukraine’s Russia-aligned president Viktor Yanukovych.
During the protests, which were vehemently opposed by the Russian government, women helped out in makeshift hospitals and joined self-defense units.
That year, the military began to see a major uptick in the number of women joining—a figure that more than doubled in the six years to 2020. “ reveal that Ukrainian society will do everything to protect its freedom and sovereignty,” said Olesya Khromeychuk, the director of Ukrainian Institute London, a charity organization and center for educational activities related to Ukraine.
When Moscow annexed Crimea and backed separatists in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region in 2014, many women simply replicated the roles they were engaged in during the protests—but this time in the armed forces, Khromeychuk said.
Initially, women were not allowed to take up combat positions, though some still found a way around legal restrictions.
Over the years, reports have emerged of gender-based discrimination, as well as allegations of sexual harassment in the army.
But in 2018, the passage of a military gender equality law granted women equal rights as men in the army, giving rise to a profound societal shift, Khromeychuk noted.
As of last December, an update to Ministry of Defence regulations required women between 18 and 60 deemed fit for military service to register with the armed forces so that they could be mobilized during war.
In February, Ukrainian authorities announced that they were looking to recruit over 1. million civilians into the Territorial Defense Force, a military reserve branch comprising civilian reservists.
Last year, Yevheniia Chekh decided it was her national duty to join such a unit.
A year ago, she was a beautician living in the Poltava region in central Ukraine.
Volunteers like Chekh are known as “weekend warriors,” people who hold civilian jobs but take part in military drills and who can be called upon to support the armed forces in resisting invaders.
Prior to the invasion, Chekh had been spending her Saturdays at military exercises, and with no prior sporting history, her experience has been an arduous one.
But the 46-year-old told VICE World News that she had “no fears and hesitations” about going into combat.
But the fact remains that recruits like Chekh, those with no previous military experience, are an imperfect solution to the current crisis.
In a video that went viral over the weekend, former Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko speaks in a live television interview while behind him, a soldier accidentally drops his rifle magazine.
The soldier’s awkward mistake became an instant meme, sparking laughter and then sympathy.
While it’s unclear if the man was a professional soldier or new recruit, commenters took him to represent the many Ukrainian civilians, including women, who have assumed military duties amid a chaotic Russian invasion.
Toroshenko grew up in Montreal, thousands of kilometres away from the country her father had left to flee famine and conflict.
But, she like many other Ukrainian Canadians, has maintained strong connections to the country — and watched horrified as family and friends are trapped in war.
Canada is home to 1. million people of Ukrainian descent — the world’s second largest Ukrainian diaspora after Russia.
The spires of their churches still dot rural landscapes and large cities.
Prominent community leaders and politicians are of Ukrainian ancestry, including Canada’s deputy prime minister, Chrystia Freeland.
Those cultural and political ties are particularly prominent in the Canadian Prairies, where generations Ukrainians have braided their culture and history into the vast landscape.
In the provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta, hundreds of one room schoolhouses were once named after Ukrainian figures and communities.
Nearly 30 towns and a handful of parks are named after places and people from Ukraine.
Vegreville, Alberta, where Toroshenko now lives, boasts one of the world’s largest pysankas — an intricately painted Ukrainian Easter egg weighing more than 5,500 pounds and drawing thousands of curious tourists each year.
Regular people, as young as 18, defending their country,” Toroshenko said.
As Ukrainian-Canadians pore over news accounts and social media the Russian invasion has also unearthed painful memories of their own family histories — many of which are marked by conflict, dispossession and exile.
That history inspired Toroshenko to return the favor to her family’s homeland, traveling ten times to Ukraine as an elections observer.
But as the war continues, she fears the democratic structures she and thousands of others helped establish over the years are under threat of collapse — as is the dream of what Ukraine could become.
Canada’s deputy prime minister Chrystia Freeland, who grew up in a tight-knit rural Ukrainian community in the Prairies, spoke last week to the country’s diaspora, offering words of hope.
Others have tried to shake off the sense of powerlessness, drawing instead on the tightness of the community.
But to be able to see ourselves in the Ukrainians who came before us was an inspiration.
It showed us there was a place for us here — and a path for us to follow,” said Zoya Kostetsky, a Winnipeg-based artisan who moved from to Canada from the Ukrainian city of Lviv in 2005.
As she stood with her family at a recent rally against the war, she was struck by how the grief she felt was shared across the crowd.
Return to Top Desperate to help in some way, she organized a raffle with prizes from local businesses, and raised more than C$20,000 to aid in relief efforts.
But the knowledge that if her family hadn’t left, they too would be facing the prospect of fighting in the war has left a heavy mark on her.
The funds she has raised have gone to help both citizens fighting and those fleeing to neighboring countries, and Kostetsky said the gratitude from aid groups in Ukraine — and the overwhelming support of the broader community around her, have kept her motivated.
HEADLINE | 03/03 Russians flee; escape war consequences GIST ps://www.thequardian.com/world/2022/mar/03/people-leaving-russia-ukraine-war Alexei Trubetskoy knew he had to get out the moment he woke up and looked at his phone on the morning of Russia’s invasion into Ukraine.
Trubetskoy, who runs an English language school in Moscow, bought a ticket to Sri Lanka on the same day.
A growing number of Russians have decided to leave their country following Vladimir Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine, fearing the economic and political consequences the move will have.
My future is taken away from me, the country won’t be the same,” Trubetskoy said.
Russia has already seen a major crackdown on those opposing the invasion.
More than 7,500 people have so far been detained at anti-war protests across the country, according to the independent monitoring site OVD-Info.
A number of the country’s independent news outlets have also been forced to shut down.
Andrei Kolesnikov, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment, said it was expected that the country would see an exodus of its “quality working force” who will sense there is “no future” for them in Russia.
Without them, Russia can’t develop itself,’ Kolesnikov said The exodus has been fuelled by rumours that authorities could declare martial law as soon as Friday, when the federation council, Russia’s upper house of parliament, is due to hold an unscheduled meeting.
Such a move would be unprecedented in modern Russian history and could involve mass mobilization of the male population as well as the closure of borders, according to an official document describing the law.
We booked the first plane available on Tuesday and flew to a random country I have never been before,” said Anton, a senior manager at a major Russian oil and gas firm.
The last time the federation council called an unscheduled meeting was February 22, when the body approved Vladimir Putin’s request to use military force outside the country, two days before the invasion of Ukraine.
The federation council said it will officially meet to discuss a package of anticrisis measures in response to western sanctions.
In a briefing with reporters on Thursday, the Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, dismissed speculation about the introduction of martial law.
A senior source working at one of the three major airports in Moscow also said he believed it was “unlikely” that the borders would close.
But as speculation mounted, a feverish mood was felt in Moscow on Thursday.
Those seeking to leave faced a severe lack of available flights after western countries closed their airspace to Russian airlines.
Flights to Yerevan, Istanbul and Belgrade were completely sold out for the coming days while a oneway ticket to Dubai was priced at over £3,000 — compared with £250 in ordinary times — according to the flight aggregator Skyscanner.
Train tickets from St Petersburg to Helsinki were also sold out on Thursday and Friday.
Some men who left earlier this week said they were extensively questioned at the Russian border.
Andrei, a Moscow-based cinema director, said he was held at Moscow’s Sheremetyevo airport before boarding a flight to Baku.
His luggage was searched, and an official went through his private chats on different messaging apps.
He asked me why I wanted to ‘flee’ and why I was reading independent outlets like Meduza.
Amid growing uncertainty, the head of the central bank, Elvira Nabiullina, urged her fellow Russians to stay calm.
Friends, let’s remember, a lot is dependent on us, we need to leave behind any disputes and just help our colleagues,” Nabiullina said in a rare public statement aired on Russian state television.
Russia earlier this week also introduced new laws to stimulate the country’s IT sector.
Many Russians working in tech will likely be eyeing to leave the country given that their skills will be valued abroad.
But despite efforts by officials to convey a sense of stability, some at the very top of the Russian government have themselves evacuated their loved ones.
We were advised to leave as soon as possible,” said the daughter of a top Russian official who has met Putin on multiple occasions.
The Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, built between 1984 and 1995, is the largest nuclear power plant in Europe and the ninth largest in the world.
It has six reactors, each generating 9SOMW, and a total output of 5,700MW, enough energy for roughly 4m homes.
In normal times it produces one-fifth of Ukraine’s electricity and almost half the energy generated by the country’s nuclear power facilities.
The plant is located in south-east Ukraine in Enerhodar on the banks of the Kakhovka reservoir on the Dnieper river.
It is about 200km from the contested Donbas region and 550km south-east of Kyiv.
A fire broke out in a training building outside the plant in the early hours of Friday, after being shelled by Russian forces, Ukrainian authorities said.
Ukraine’s foreign minister confirmed the reports at 2.30am, tweeting that the Russian army was “firing from all sides upon Zaporizhzhia NPP, the largest nuclear power plant in Europe.
He called for an immediate ceasefire to allow firefighters to control the blaze.
They later reported that the third power unit at the plant was disconnected at 2.26am, leaving just one of the plant’s six units, unit four, still operating.
Early reports of the incident at the power plant sent financial markets in Asia spiralling, with stocks tumbling and oil prices surging further.
The United States also said their latest information showed no indication of elevated radiation levels at the plant.
Russia has already captured the defunct Chernoby1 plant, 100km north of Kyiv.
Some analysts noted the Zaporizhzhia plant is of a different and safer type to Chernobyl, which was the site of the world’s worst nuclear disaster in 1986.
Irwin, who operated nuclear power plants in the UK for three decades, is a former manager of the openpool Australian lightwater reactor, Australia’s only nuclear reactor.
He said the PWR reactors are “a lot safer” than the reactors at Chernobyl, and did not appear to be damaged yet.
HEADLINE | 03/03 Gas prices continue climb amid uncertainty ton-gas-prices-continue-to-climb-march-2022/ GIST A surge in crude oil prices brought on partly by Russia’s ongoing invasion of Ukraine has sent gas prices skyrocketing across the country, and Washington has not been spared from that trend.
Currently, the state is averaging $4.10 a gallon at the pump, trailing only California, Oregon, and Nevada, with even higher rates in large cities like Seattle.
As of early February, gas in the Seattle metropolitan area averaged $4.12 a gallon, before rising to $4.28 in March.
Comparatively, San Francisco is now averaging $5 a gallon, breaking the city’s previous all-time high of $4.73 set in October of 2021.
In Portland, residents are even reporting a handful of gas stations charging upwards of $6 a gallon.
Nationally, gas prices have been rising for the better of the last two-plus months, with the beginning of Russia’s incursion into Ukraine sparking even more dramatic increases.
The impasse shows how hard it is for Beijing and Moscow to circumvent the dollar-centric international financial system—despite the duo’s shared interest, and even though China has some experience in helping other nations evade sanctions.
Western countries have imposed an array of penalties on Russia in the past week, from freezing much of its central bank’s foreign-currency reserves to booting some Russian banks off Swift, the payment network widely used in international banking transactions.
China has long been concerned about what it calls “dollar hegemony,” especially as the trade war with the United States worsened, and has found an ally in the Kremlin, which was previously sanctioned after its 2014 annexation of Crimea.
The two countries increasingly trade with each other without using dollars, giving Russia an important outlet for selling oil, gas and other products without touching the United States financial system.
Just over a third of Russia’s exports to China were settled in dollars as of last September, the most recent data available shows, down from 96% in 2013.
A little more than half of China’s exports the other way were settled in dollars, down from 90% in 2013.
But this trade pales against the other markets now largely shut off to Russia, and while Beijing has also been vocal in its recent opposition to sanctions, big Chinese banks aren’t likely to ride to Russia’s rescue.
The first problem is that Chinese financial institutions have been less keen on the idea of banking Russian clients than their political leaders are.
Eight years since the Crimea annexation, “the level of warmth has gone up,” said Prof.
Another major headache is a 2017 law that allows the United States to penalize foreign entities that trade with sanctioned companies, countries and individuals.
For any bank that wants to be able to transact in dollars, the consequences could be drastic.
Due to the broad Western actions, “there’s now less room for Chinese companies and financial institutions to be doing business with Russian counterparts,” he said.
After the United States sanctioned Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam in 2020, she said she lost access to banking services and had to collect her salary in cash.
China’s Cross-Border Interbank Payment System, or CIPS, has been touted as a potential workaround as Russian banks get ejected from Swift.
But analysts and lawyers say it isn’t fit for this purpose, at least yet.
Launched in 2015, CIPS was developed by China’s central bank to promote the international use of the yuan, and largely handles yuan-denominated trades between China and abroad.
But as of the third quarter of last year it handled an average of just 13,000 transactions a day, raising questions about how quickly it could scale up.
Although the comparison isn’t exact, Swift processed more than 40 million messages a day over the same period.
The two networks are also complementary as much as they are competing, since Swift is primarily a messaging system.
More than 80% of CIPS transactions rely on Swift telegram, according to estimates by ANZ economist Raymond Yeung and his colleagues.
Swift messaging underpins transactions between the Moscow branch of Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Ltd., the only yuan-clearing bank in Russia, and ICBC’s Beijing headquarters, according to research by Prof.
One longer-term option, if Western sanctions stay in place and cause long-term damage to the Russian economy and China’s strategic interests, would be for Beijing to tap smaller lenders to deal with Russia.
Some small Chinese banks have previously facilitated trade with sanctioned countries such as North Korea and Iran.
In 2009 the oil major China National Petroleum Corp. bought a Xinjiang-based commercial bank, which was later renamed Bank of Kunlun.
After that, the bank relied on deposits and other businesses from the CNPC family of companies, according to its annual reports.
In 2012, the Treasury Department sanctioned Bank of Kunlun, together with an Iraqi bank, for helping Iranian banks move millions of dollars, and barred it from accessing the United States financial system.
Bank of Kunlun has in recent years wound down its activities in Iran, as China diversifies its energy sources.
You have no business in any of the developed countries to begin with,” said Prof.
Chen, who was an independent director of PetroChina, the listed arm of CNPC, between 2011 and 2017.
The crack Ukrainian unit was trying to thwart Vladimir Putin’s plan for a rapid takeover of Kyiv some 20 miles away.
Elite Russian airborne troops had landed in helicopters hours earlier on the first day of Russia’s war against Ukraine.
If they could hold the airfield, Russia would be able to fly in hundreds of soldiers and move rapidly to seize the Ukrainian capital, part of Mr Putin’s plan to force a quick capitulation.
The Russians, protected by a concrete barrier topped with barbed wire, were directing withering fire at Lt.
Russia’s bid to seize the airport embodied its military planners’ ambitious assumptions that Ukrainian defense would collapse under overwhelming firepower.
Russian officials and propagandists have for years boasted that Moscow’s forces could overrun its smaller neighbor in days.
Kharchenko, backed by volunteer fighters, has slowed the Russian advance, halting it entirely in the area around Hostomel Airport after a day of back-and-forth fighting.
The airport standoff has emerged as the key to Ukrainian resistance and one big reason Russian forces have become bogged down so far.
On Thursday, the Russian military made gains in the south, penetrating the city of Kherson and pushing toward Zaporizhya.
This account of scenes in one of the most significant battles during the week-old conflict is based on firsthand reports of two soldiers involved in the chaotic fighting, official Ukrainian military reports and videos and images of events at the airfield.
The first sign of war in Hostomel came at 7m. on Feb., hours after Mr Putin announced the invasion, when a cruise missile slammed into the ground meters from an apartment block, blasting a crater and blowing out the building’s windows.
The airport has a long runway used to test aircraft and for cargo, making it a juicy target for airborne forces to seek control of.
The Ukrainian National Guard unit defending the airport was below full strength.
Most of its heavy equipment and personnel were hundreds of miles to the east, on the front lines of a war that Russia had fomented eight years earlier.
Still, this was the elite Rapid Reaction Brigade, based at the airport precisely because of its fighting skills and ability to deploy quickly.
Formed in 2015, it had spent years fighting Russian proxies in eastern Ukraine.
Andriy Kulish, a 36-year-old who left his job in communications to join the army in 2014, had just made tea for two comrades a few hours after the missile hit when he heard the chopping of helicopter blades.
They unleashed a barrage of rockets and machine-gun fire on the airport and adjoining military base, sending the Ukrainian soldiers diving for cover.
Coming under aerial bombardment was a new experience for the unit, because the Russian-led militants in the east have no air force.
But the defenders, including officers, contract soldiers and conscripts, soon got their bearings.
They spread out throughout the base and the airport and fired back “passionately and fiercely” with everything they had, said Lt.
Ukrainian officials and soldiers defending the airport described some 30 or more helicopters.
The aircraft flew in twos and threes, circling for strike runs on the airport and the base.
The initial Russian barrage badly damaged the Antonov airplane Mriya, Ukrainian for Dream, the largest transport aircraft in the world.
Kulish said he saw a plume of smoke rising from the hangar where it was undergoing repairs.
Kulish said the sheer number of bullets they pumped into two others forced them down despite their armor.
After nearly three hours of fighting, the Russian helicopters began to land and disgorge airborne troops, who fanned out and began firing.
The Ukrainian defenders had run out of antiaircraft missiles and were running low on other ammunition.
Now facing an enemy on the ground as well as in the air, the brigade commander ordered a withdrawal, stuffing the unit’s flag down his jacket before they left.
Kharchenko’s unit of 48 paratroopers jumped into three helicopters and sped toward Hostomel.
Reaching a field west of the airport, the paratroopers spilled from their helicopters.
Kharchenko led the way quickly but silently across a road flanked by houses, a field and a ditch filled with trees and branches.
The paratroopers rushed forward, but then hit a 7-foot concrete wall topped with barbed wire.
Kharchenko cut a hole in the wire and started helping his comrades over the wall.
Kharchenko radioed for help from another unit of Ukrainian paratroopers in armored vehicles, who were supposed to be assaulting the airport from the north.
Kharchenko tried to calm the soldiers on the other side of the wall, worried that their screaming would direct the Russians to pick them off.
The paratroopers pulled out small shovels and hurriedly dug a tunnel under the wall, managing to drag one of their comrades out.
Kharchenko called in coordinates for Ukrainian artillery to hit the enemy from the south.
And another Ukrainian unit was rushing in from the southeast in civilian vehicles.
The paratroopers set up a firing point for antiaircraft missiles in the field outside the wall.
The Ukrainian commander told them over the radio that the latest intelligence indicated the Il-76s had aborted their mission.
Kharchenko decided he would have to leave the men behind who were trapped on the other side of the fence.
The paratroopers withdrew to the south, moving slowly because several were wounded, including Lt.
It took them 40 minutes to cross a field that they had sped across in 10 minutes in the other direction.
Suddenly, they heard the roar of Russian armored vehicles heading their way.
They quickly set up an ambush, taking out the tank at the front of the column and firing rocket-propelled grenades at the other vehicles.
Then he saw a Ukrainian flag in the passenger window and collapsed inside with relief.
The paratroopers hadn’t retaken the airport, but they had foiled the Russian airborne operation.
Ukraine quickly brought up reinforcements that have halted Russian forces on a front line around Hostomel and in neighboring towns that have seen heavy fighting in recent days.
He was smoking outside the day after the raid when a soldier he didn’t recognize approached him.
It was the first paratrooper who had jumped over the fence at the airport.
He had crawled out despite severe back wounds from a grenade and been taken to a hospital by locals.
Russia’s subsequent invasion of its neighbor is forcing Beijing into adjusting its foreign policy in a way that risks damaging relations with the U.S.-led West and undoing years of efforts to paint itself as a responsible world leader.
In Beijing, the ripple effects of a move that may cost China dearly are now sinking in, say the officials and advisers.
Some officials say they are fearful of the consequences of getting so close to Russia at the expense of other relationships—especially when Russian aggression against Ukraine is isolating Moscow in much of the world.
Already, many politicians from Washington to Brussels have grouped Beijing together with Moscow as a new “axis”—a term giving Western alliances more reason to disengage from China and form closer ties among themselves.
Just a year ago, Mr Xi was making remarks such as “The East is rising, and the West is in decline,” as China’s economy roared back while much of the world was mired in Covid-19 lockdowns.
Beijing was trying to shape and inhabit a role for itself as a leader on combating climate change and a benevolent sponsor of developing nations, even as it was ramping up nationalistic rhetoric, including around its claims to Taiwan.
This year, during which Mr Xi is expected to break with precedent and seek a third term in power, he is facing an economic downturn at home that is largely a result of his own policies—and a geopolitical shift in which China has placed itself on one side of a gulf that has almost all of the rest of the world on the other side.
What Beijing will do next depends on how hard the United States will push sanctions on Russia, say the foreignpolicy advisers.
Mr Xi also likely will continue to maintain his partnership with Mr Putin, as Beijing sees little chance of improvement in its United States ties and needs to keep Russia around as its most important strategic collaborator even if it isn’t an outright ally.
But that will require China to continue to straddle an increasingly difficult diplomatic position.
Xi-Putin summit in late November, as soon as Mr Putin accepted the invitation to attend the opening of the Beijing Winter Olympics.
At the time, Western nations including the U.S., the U.K. and Canada were laying the groundwork for a diplomatic boycott of the Games over China’s human-rights record.
The Biden administration was about to kick off a Summit for Democracy in early December that sought to establish a clear alternative to Beijing’s autocratic rule.
Those moves infuriated Beijing and drove its decision-making, say the officials and advisers, who are familiar with the process leading to the Feb. declaration.
One of Mr Xi’s objectives was to lay out an ideological foundation for the partnership between China and Russia, those people said.
To that end, the Chinese ambassador to Washington teamed up with his Russian counterpart in publishing an unusual joint opinion piece in late November in the magazine of the Center for the National Interest, a Washington-based conservative think tank established by former President Richard Nixon.
The two argued that democracy “can be realized in multiple ways” and isn’t the prerogative of any one country or group of countries.
The Feb. joint statement said both countries “have profound democratic traditions rooted in a thousand years of development,” a phrase reflecting Mr Xi’s ideological views.
A thousand years ago, China was in the emperor-ruled and feudal Song Dynasty, known for a highly developed bureaucracy.
It was Beijing that suggested including that the two countries’ friendship has “no limits”—wording read with apprehension in the West—according to the officials and advisers.
The intention was less a declaration China would stand by Russia in case of war than a strong message to the United States about the resolve the two have in confronting what they see as increased American threats, the people said.
What didn’t factor into Beijing’s planning was Moscow’s increasingly heated rhetoric on Ukraine, those people said.
Even as the Russian troop buildup along the border of the Eastern European country intensified and Chinese officials were presented with American intelligence on a likely Russian invasion, Beijing still dismissed that scenario as unlikely.
And, these people said, China saw Mr Putin’s brinkmanship as already getting him desired results, including a divided North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Nonetheless, Mr Xi’s endorsement of Mr Putin’s opposition to NATO expansion in the statement focused the attention of many in the West on China’s role in the developing Ukraine crisis.
The price As soon as Mr Putin left Beijing after the Feb. declaration, China’s top leadership disappeared from public view, huddling to form a response to the developing Ukraine crisis.
More than a week later, they emerged to embark on a series of statements that showed a desire to dial back or clarify Beijing’s embrace of the Kremlin.
Since the Russian troops marched into Ukraine on Feb., China has been walking what many foreignpolicy experts call a diplomatic tightrope.
It is locked into having to help Russia and has little interest in seeing Moscow collapse economically, while it is trying to stick to its foreign-policy principles around sovereignty and attempting to prevent its relations with the United States and Europe from completely collapsing.
Beijing has refrained from coming to Moscow’s aid in a significant way.
But it is complying with the more damaging financial sanctions the United States has imposed on Russia, for fear of losing access to the dollar-dominated global trading system, say some Chinese bankers.
They say their default position is to comply with the sanctions unless higher-ups tell them otherwise.
China’s ambiguous stance on the Russia-Ukraine war will likely speed up moves by countries from the U.K. and Australia to Japan to guard against Beijing, foreign-policy analysts say.
They were already firming up economic and military ties with the United States and each other in the face of Beijing’s coercive behavior toward some of its trading partners and increased military activities near the Taiwan Strait.
The Biden administration is preparing to further harden its economic policy toward China.
Beijing is finding greater resistance to its effort to deepen its relations with Central and Eastern Europe.
Prospects are dimming for the European Parliament to unfreeze the legislative process for ratifying the European Union’s investment pact with China that could bolster economic ties between the bloc and Beijing, say European business executives.
And a planned summit between China and the EU for April, if it isn’t canceled, is now likely to be dominated by discussions of China’s position on Ukraine.
A phone call between Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi and his Ukrainian counterpart Tuesday illustrates Beijing’s conundrum in trying to adhere to its foreign-policy stance while not outright condemning Russia’s invasion, and nodding to Russian rhetoric that NATO expansion threatens its security.
China has built its foreign policy around the principle that a country’s territory is inviolable and its internal affairs should be free from interference by others.
That notion forms the foundation of China’s argument that the rest of the world should stay out of its claims on Taiwan, since it regards the self-ruled island as a part of China.
China’s commitment to that principle seemingly would force it to condemn Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, something it has refrained from doing.
Its policy statements have called for dialogue to resolve the crisis, avoiding the word invasion.
Meanwhile, Western officials worry that Russia’s actions based on the argument that Ukraine is historically a part of Russia could embolden China to step up its own long-stated goal to bring Taiwan into its fold.
Personal ties Since rising to power in late 2012, Mr Xi has made himself the dominant force in China’s foreign policy and put emphasis on what he calls “big-power diplomacy”—a marked change from the relatively unassuming foreign-policy agendas of previous Chinese leaders that featured compromise and focused on building up ties with the United States The more centralized and aggressive foreign-affairs approach, the foreign-policy advisers say, means that views that differ from the top leader’s agenda aren’t filtering up to Mr Xi.
Today, despite Chinese state media’s pro-Russia rhetoric, some advisers privately question whether the partnership could cut China off from Western technologies and other resources and hurt its development, according to the foreign-policy advisers.
After all, they have noted in private discussions, it is China’s opening to the United States and its allies that has propelled enormous Chinese growth in the past four decades.
China and Russia’s shared interest in confronting the United States has helped drive their relationship to its closest point since early in the Cold War.
Xi and Putin, authoritarians who have visions of restoring their countries to past glory, even if in China’s case that past was centuries ago.
Mr Putin has shown Mr Xi the kind of respect he has sometimes withheld from other world leaders.
Sergey Radchenko, an international-relations professor at Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, pointed to instances where Mr Putin would be deliberately late for meetings with foreign dignitaries.
On one occasion, he brought out his dog to a meeting with then-German Chancellor Angela Merkel who, Mr Putin knew, was terrified of dogs.
HEADLINE | 03/03 Ukraine’s leader meets the media ps://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/03/world/europe/zelensky-ukraine-russia-invasion.html GIST KYIV, Ukraine — Unshaven and wearing a military T-shirt, a haggard President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine on Thursday hosted his first news conference since the war began, inviting journalists into his office building, now fortified with sandbags.
In an animated briefing, Mr Zelensky, whose defiance has made him a symbol of Ukrainian resistance to the Russian invasion, laid out the state of negotiations with Russia, voiced pride in his people, pleaded for a no-fly zone and spoke frankly about fear of dying.
Beyond the answers Mr Zelensky provided to questions, pulling a chair close to attending journalists, the news conference seemed intended to signal that his battered government is at least still functioning a week into the war, despite increasingly dire conditions in Kyiv.
Mr Zelensky said he was particularly proud of ordinary Ukrainians’ resistance to the Russian attack, a seething, angry uprising by much of society even as Russian tanks bore down on major cities and the capital.
He said that no senior officials had fled the country, and several top aides turned up at the news conference.
Mr Zelensky said he had appealed to Western leaders for additional military support, including asking President Emmanuel Macron of France and Chancellor Olaf Scholz of Germany to impose a no-fly zone over Ukraine, an unlikely proposition, while also pursuing negotiations with the Russian leadership.
The second of two rounds of talks with Russia in recent days took place on Thursday.
Mr Zelensky’s negotiator at the talks, Mykhailo Podolyak, said later Thursday negotiations wrapped up with an agreement on cease-fire corridors for civilians to escape heavy combat, but no progress on a settlement.
He said he was ready to compromise on some points, but he did not specify which, and said he would not bend on conditions threatening Ukrainian sovereignty.
Reporters arrived at the presidential office in minivans that wove through concrete barriers and steel Ibeams welded into crosses and placed on the streets to slow tanks.
In the government district of Kyiv, usually a quiet, leafy neighborhood of offices and elegant, 19th century apartment blocks, armored cars blocked crossroads.
The vans sped through a warren of courtyards and into a back entrance to the presidential office building.
Inside the building, security officials escorted journalists by flashlight through darkened corridors filled with soldiers.
At doorways, firing positions were in place to shoot from inside Mr Zelensky’s office compound onto the street outside, suggesting a readiness to hold out even if street fighting reaches the site.
He was, though, animated and gestured energetically to drive home points.
Though the briefing was held in a conference room to suggest some modicum of normality, soldiers with assault rifles stood in the room and the windows were blocked by piles of white sandbags.
He reiterated his request for direct talks with President Vladimir V Putin, something the Russian leader has rebuffed both before and after the start of hostilities.
Of the conflict and what he described as reports the Russian army did not intend to repatriate its war dead to avoid stirring antiwar sentiment at home, he said, “this is a nightmare.
Many of the Russian soldiers were 18and 19-year-olds, said Mr Zelensky, who is 45.
Mr Zelensky said he had asked Mr Scholz and Mr Macron to impose a no-fly zone over Ukraine.
The idea has been largely rebuffed by Western governments as all but impossible, for risking direct conflict between NATO and Russian forces.
But he said that Russian aggression would only spread if not stopped in Ukraine.
He criticized German officials for working at cross-purposes with Western efforts to pressure Russia into a settlement in the long-simmering eastern Ukraine war by building a new natural gas pipeline, Nord Stream 2, to Russia.
The pipeline was intended to provide cheap energy for Germany’s economy, though the project is now suspended.
Mr Zelensky, a former comedian who has always had a keen sense of image and storytelling in politics, said he was aware that his repeated televised appeals for resistance, and continued presence in the beleaguered capital, had turned him into a symbol in many countries of bravery and defense of democracy.
Mr Zelensky did have caustic words for Prime Minister Naftali Bennett of Israel, who has balanced support for Ukraine with an effort to maintain ties with Russia and had blocked some transfers of weapons to Ukraine that include Israeli-manufactured parts.
Mr Zelensky, who is Jewish, noted that a Russian missile this week killed five civilians on the territory of a Holocaust memorial site in Kyiv, Babyn Yar.
Mr Zelensky said he was inspired to see images of people praying at the Western Wall in Jerusalem wrapped in blue and yellow Ukrainian flags.
He suggested it was time for the Israeli government to take a moral stand.
Asked if he was afraid of dying in the war, he said everybody has such fears.
He added, though, that as president, “I simply do not have the right” to be afraid.
If he were not president, he said, he probably would have joined the volunteers who accepted rifles when the military started handing them out last week, and so would be facing risks in any case.
He said he might also have chosen to help by handing out food to soldiers instead.
Defiant Ukrainians, bolstered by a huge influx of weapons from NATO countries, have put up surprisingly effective resistance, while Moscow’s forces have run into a host of logistical problems, according to Western military and intelligence assessments.
Russian forces surging out of Crimea cut off Mariupol, a port city to the east, while to the west, where they seized the city of Kherson on Wednesday, they advanced on the port of Mykolaiv, leaving them just 60 miles from Odessa, a vital shipping center and the largest city in the south.
In a second round of talks held in Belarus, Russia and Ukraine agreed to establish “humanitarian corridors,” with possible cease-fires in them, for civilians to evacuate the most dangerous areas, and to allow food and medicine to reach those places.
A fire broke out early Friday morning at a complex in southern Ukraine that is home to Europe’s largest nuclear power plant, after Russian troops fired on the area, Ukraine’s foreign minister said.
Security camera footage filmed early on Friday and verified by The Times showed a building ablaze inside the power complex near a line of military vehicles.
The videos appeared to show people in the vehicles firing at buildings in the power plant, but it was unclear if the vehicles were Russian or Ukrainian.
President Biden spoke with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine about the fire on Thursday night, and urged Russia to “cease its military activities in the area and allow firefighters and emergency responders to access the site,” according to a White House description of the call.
For eight years, President Vladimir V Putin of Russia has been building what amounts to a massive military staging area in Crimea, the Black Sea peninsula he invaded and annexed from Ukraine in 2014, and forces stationed there appeared well equipped to charge out of their bases and seize swaths of southern Ukrainian territory the moment the order came.
Russia’s near-monopoly on naval power in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov should have provided additional firepower to assist ground troops.
Instead, their advance has been sluggish, hampered by operational breakdowns and a seeming inability of commanders to coordinate disparate military forces, which if combined effectively should have easily overwhelmed Ukraine’s defenses.
In the north, an enormous Russian military convoy has stalled for three days near the capital, Kyiv — for reasons not entirely clear — and while Russian forces have extensively shelled large cities like Kharkiv, Chernihiv and Kyiv, causing civilian casualties, none have fallen to Moscow’s control.
Russians have seized a coastal corridor along the Sea of Azov, linking their forces in Crimea to those in southeastern Ukraine.
In that stretch, only Mariupol held out on Thursday, despite a massive Russian bombardment that had cut power, water and heat to the city.
The mayor, Vadym Boichenko, painted a grim picture of the siege of a city blockaded by land and sea.
Mr Putin, acknowledging Russia’s war casualties for the first time, said Thursday that he would pay the equivalent of almost $50,000 to the family of each Russian soldier killed.
Such figures could not be verified, but even by the Russian count, it is already the bloodiest conflict for Russia’s military since the 1999-2000 Chechen war.
Unshaven and haggard, Mr Zelensky, who has emerged as an anti-Kremlin hero in the West for defying Mr Putin and remaining in Kyiv, held his first news conference since the invasion, in a room lined with sandbags in case of shelling.
He expressed willingness to compromise but did not specify on what issues, and held out little hope of reaching an agreement anytime soon.
In a further sign that the conflict could worsen, President Emmanuel Macron of France emerged pessimistic from a long phone conversation with Mr Putin, according to an aide to Mr Macron, who said the Russian leader seemed determined to control all of Ukraine.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Filippo Grandi, said that one million people had fled Ukraine for neighbors to the West, primarily Poland — an increase of more than 300,000 from the day before.
Hundreds of thousands of others have been displaced from their homes but remain within Ukraine, or fled or were evacuated eastward, into Russia.
Ukraine’s railroad agency said westbound trains were only for evacuation.
Before the invasion, many military analysts believed that Russia would make short work of the Ukrainian forces.
Even Ukraine’s own generals predicted that a full-scale Russian assault with shock troops and air power could overwhelm their military in days, if not hours.
Ukrainian troops, armed with anti-tank and antiaircraft missiles, have proved resourceful, legions of civilians have enlisted in the Territorial Defense Forces, an auxiliary to the military, and the Ukrainian government says that 50,000 Ukrainians have returned from abroad to fight Russia.
Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s secretary general, after meeting in Brussels with Gen.
In the south, Russian forces that captured their first major Ukrainian city, Kherson, a shipbuilding center ordinarily home to 300,000 people, were on the move toward Mykolaiv, with a peacetime population of almost 500,000 and one of Ukraine’s three largest ports.
As of Thursday morning, there had been no shelling inside the city, he said, but Ukrainian forces on the perimeter were targeted with rocket fire, forcing them to change positions constantly.
Charging further into Ukraine could put Russian forces in danger of stretching themselves too thinly, said Michael Kofman, the director of Russia studies at CNA, a research institute based in Arlington, Va.
Already the forces in Ukraine’s south and elsewhere appear in some instances to have outpaced logistical units, forcing them to await fuel and other supplies.
Even so, preparations continued on Thursday to shore up defenses in Odessa, a city of one million and Ukraine’s largest port.
The mayor, Gennady Trukhanov, visited an industrial area on the outskirts where teams of men were filling sandbags from a mountain of yellow dirt for barricades.
In the morning came word that several Russian naval ships had left Crimea, headed toward Odessa.
Ukrainian officials said the ships could have been deployed to assist an attack by Russian land forces, though by evening there was no clear sense of the vessels’ whereabouts.
Mr Kofman said it was unlikely the Russian Navy would mount an amphibious assault on the city until its forces were also ready to attack by land.
Mr Zelensky, like some Western officials, said many Russian soldiers, including some taken prisoner, had no idea they would be sent into Ukraine and were aghast to learn it, not understanding why they would be conducting such a war.
As word filters back of death, injury and capture, Russians are awakening to the reality of a war many had not expected and did not want.
Ukrainian officials and ordinary citizens are posting to social media photos and videos of Russians killed or captured, and burned-out or abandoned Russian military vehicles.
Rumors swirled through Russia of impending martial law, conscription and closed borders.
In just a week, sanctions and boycotts have deeply wounded the Russian economy, and more punitive measures are expected.
Volkswagen, Mercedes-Benz, Toyota, Ford, General Motors, Apple, Spotify, Accenture and Ikea are among the many companies suspending operations in Russia.
Major oil companies have called off joint ventures with Russian counterparts.
While some prominent Russians have denounced the war, the government is cracking down on the last vestiges of independent media, limiting access to information about the conflict.
Lawmakers proposed prison sentences of up to 15 years for media that publish “fakes” — widely taken to mean anything that contradicts the Kremlin line.
The television channels Dozhd and TV Rain suspended operations indefinitely.
Dmitri Muratov, the journalist who shared the Nobel Peace Prize last year, said that his newspaper, Novaya Gazeta, could be close to having to shut down.
Dozens of the top Russian chess players made statements opposing the war and appealing to Mr Putin to stop it, including Ian Nepomniachtchi, the top-ranked Russian and recently a finalist for the world championship; Alexandra Kosteniuk, a former women’s world champion; and Alexander Grischuk, several times a candidate for the world championship.
Mr Putin has insisted that Ukraine is rightfully a part of Russia, not a real country, and he is bent on reestablishing Moscow’s hold over much of Eastern Europe.
He has called NATO’s eastward expansion a threat, particularly the prospect that Ukraine might join someday.
But the war has hardened anti-Kremlin attitudes in Ukraine, a former Soviet republic, and far beyond.
NATO has ramped up forces on its eastern flank, and an array of countries are sending advanced weaponry to Ukraine.
Even Germany, a NATO member that had not sent arms into a conflict zone, has begun helping to arm Kyiv’s forces, as have Sweden and Finland, nonmembers that had tried to remain neutral in East-West clashes.
After Russia invaded, Ukraine applied for membership in the European Union, a step that would greatly deepen its ties to the West, and E.U. officials say that two other former Soviet republics, Georgia and Moldova, may do the same.
The official, Marvin G Richardson, the acting director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, told a gathering of weapons manufacturers that the rule banning online sales of untraceable components for homemade weapons — expected to have already been in place — would not be completed until June.
This jarring split screen — a president demanding action on gun violence and an industry-friendly subordinate pumping the brakes — infuriated some Biden allies.
Mr Richardson’s leadership of A.T.F., they believe, reflected the White House’s waning focus on gun control after the defeat last year of Mr Biden’s pick to run the bureau, David Chipman, who had vowed to overhaul an agency that has been without a permanent leader since 2015.
But Senate Republicans are blocking him, forcing the White House to pursue limited executive actions through an underfunded agency systematically weakened by congressional Republicans and the gun lobby.
And increasingly, progressives see Mr Richardson’s low-key leadership of A.T.F.’s policymaking functions as part of the problem.
Administration officials say Mr Richardson is making the best of a thankless job and has spent much of his time focused on deploying agents to deal with gun violence.
His leadership “has been critical” to combating the recent national rise in shootings, said a spokeswoman for the Justice Department, Dena Iverson.
In recent weeks, anti-gun groups have stepped up pressure on the White House and Attorney General Merrick B Garland as the administration continues a protracted search for a new nominee to lead the bureau.
In addition to pushing for faster enforcement of the ghost gun rule, they have urged Mr Biden to create a special gun violence office in the West Wing comparable to the one he has established for climate policy.
But that proposal has been rejected by Susan Rice, the president’s domestic policy adviser.
She has told gun control activists, including Fred Guttenberg, whose daughter was killed in the school shooting in Parkland, Fla., in 2018, that there is no need to hang another “shingle” in the West Wing to deal with the problem.
Last week, a coalition of 43 groups sent a list of action items to Mr Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris, urging them to move faster on an A.T.F. pick, create the new office and “use the authority” of the White House to inject a new sense of urgency into the issue.
That letter was prompted in part by Mr Richardson’s appearance at the convention alongside Lawrence G Keane, the general counsel for the National Shooting Sports Foundation, which hosted the event and is the gun industry’s main trade group.
Mr Keane has teamed with A.T.F. on several campaigns to limit illegal firearms purchases, and he has known Mr Richardson for years.
But he also helped lead the campaign that sank Mr Chipman’s nomination, waging a scorched-earth effort to block a man he viewed as an existential threat to his booming industry.
At times, Mr Keane has publicly questioned Mr Biden’s age and mental capacity, and Mr Chipman has accused him of endangering his family by reposting a photograph purporting to show Mr Chipman, a former A.T.F. agent, standing in the ashes of Waco — even though he arrived after the bloody 1993 siege in Texas.
But Mr Richardson, who has been at the A.T.F. for more than 30 years and is expected to retire in the next year, was not the only bureau official to attend the convention, known as the Shooting, Hunting, Outdoor Trade Show, or SHOT Show.
The event typically attracts 55,000 attendees and raises $35 million for the National Shooting Sports Foundation by renting space to hundreds of vendors, including a handful of companies selling ghost gun components.
A total of 65 A.T.F. employees went this year, and eight of them were assigned to the security details of top bureau officials.
On average, about 55 staff members have attended the three-day event each year since 2015, according to an agency tally of attendees provided by an administration official.
A.T-F. officials say it is necessary to deploy such a large contingent in the presence of those they regulate to answer technical questions about compliance with federal law and regulations.
But critics of the bureau say the presence of so many A.T.F. employees is emblematic of the agency’s too-cozy relationship with the industry.
In an interview, Mr Keane said he did not view Mr Richardson’s attendance as an endorsement of his views.
Instead, he said he saw it as a good-faith effort to coordinate enactment of the ghost gun regulation, a rule banning the use of high-capacity “bump stocks” later in the year and a new electronic bookkeeping system.
He defended his previous comments about Mr Biden, saying they were a reaction to the president’s threat, so far unfulfilled, to pass a law removing the gun industry’s immunity from civil lawsuits.
Mr Richardson dedicated 30 A.T.F. staff members to process what was the largest-ever response to a firearms proposal, Ms.
But two White House officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to publicly discuss the matter, said Mr Richardson had misspoken and that the rule would, in fact, be finished by early April.
They said that another claim by Mr Richardson, that enforcement of the regulation would begin 90 days after the rule was completed, was also off base, and that the gap would be closer to 60 days.
But anti-violence groups and local officials in California, where ghost guns now account for 25 to 50 percent of weapons recovered at crime scenes, say that a delay of even a few weeks will allow manufacturers extra time to pump out untraceable components that can be used in crimes.
White House officials say that the president is doing all that he can to address the crisis, given the refusal of Senate Republicans to consider restrictions on some semiautomatic weapons, red flag laws to keep mentally ill people from carrying guns and enhancing background checks.
But bureau officials said Mr Richardson had tried his best to balance the bureau’s concurrent roles as a law enforcement agency that partners with local departments on gun cases and a regulatory body that licenses firearms dealers and regulates industry practices.
Even the agency’s harshest critics concede that its employees work under intolerable conditions and praise A.T.F.’s deployment of its investigative resources.
To ensure closer cooperation, he took the highly unusual step of ordering his agents to work in the same Lower Manhattan office with the Police Department’s intelligence division.
Canada announced similar relief on Thursday, as did the European Union, which said it would offer three years of protection for Ukrainian refugees.The United Nations predicted that 10 million Ukrainians, about a quarter of the country’s population, could be displaced by the Russian invasion.
Lawmakers and advocacy groups have been calling for the relief, known as temporary protected status.
Some have estimated that 28,000 to 30,000 Ukrainians could be eligible for it; the designation gives them permission to stay and work in the United States for 18 months.
In this case, it will not apply to any Ukrainians who entered the country after March 1.
The Biden administration moved quickly on the designation, even as advocates have been pleading with the government for months to offer similar relief to people from Cameroon, who have faced violence and persecution when they were not granted asylum in the United States and deported.
Daniel Tse, the founder of the Cameroon Advocacy Network, said he saw a racial component to the decisions.
The Department of Homeland Security, which decides when to grant temporary protected status in close coordination with the White House, did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Previously, Mr Mayorkas has said that the immigration system treats all migrants equally.
Both Republican and Democratic lawmakers have called for the administration to offer the benefit to Ukrainians.
Senator Bob Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey and the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, praised the administration for giving this relief to Ukrainians.
But he also urged the White House to designate citizens of Cameroon, Ethiopia and Afghanistan as eligible for the same benefit.
The administration also paused deportations on commercial flights to the region, according to an official who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly.
On March 1, three Ukrainians were scheduled for deportation to Kyiv on a commercial flight, the official said.
More than 1,000 Ukrainians were caught crossing the southwest border of the United States from October to January, a significant increase compared with previous years, according to government data.
There are currently more than 400,000 people living in the United States under temporary protected status, including immigrants from Burma, El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, Nepal, Nicaragua, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, Syria, Venezuela and Yemen.
Advocates for limiting immigration have been critical of the program, which they say ultimately lets people who receive the designation stay in the United States permanently.
The federal agency that handles applications for the temporary benefit reports about a six-month wait period.
Ukrainian immigrants who qualify for the program can also apply for authorization to work in the United States.
On Thursday afternoon, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada announced a new program for fleeing Ukrainians to be granted quick, temporary immigration status in the country, which has a large Ukrainian population.
His government also announced a special program, through which Ukrainian-Canadians can sponsor family members fleeing Ukraine to settle permanently in Canada.
The world spent months wondering whether Russian President Vladimir Putin would invade Ukraine.
Trying to define Mr Putin’s ultimate endgame in attacking Ukraine — and how this military campaign will alter the landscape for Europe, the U.S., NATO and the broader international order — have become consuming questions as the war plays out in Kyiv, Kharkiv and other cities across Ukraine.
It has become clear that the Kremlin’s immediate goal is to drive Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy from power and install in his place a friendly regime that toes the line on Mr Putin’s security demands and stays firmly in Russia’s orbit.
Such a government would immediately sever Kyiv’s growing ties with the West, end its quest to join NATO, and provide a major shot in the arm for Mr Putin’s larger ambition to rebuild Russian influence across Eastern Europe and create a buffer against the West.
Russia may be able to topple the Zelenskyy regime, but maintaining full control over Europe’s largest country and its population of 44 million would require a massive, long-term military presence and Soviet-style repression.
Mr Putin already is facing growing protests at home, and the West’s unprecedented economic pressure on Moscow would make the prospects of a drawn-out guerrilla war in Ukraine a tough sell to a Russian population that has shown minimal enthusiasm for the war.
Although it can’t defeat Russia in a head-on conflict, the Ukrainian military and its cache of Western weapons are more than capable of wreaking havoc on Moscow in the form of a highly motivated insurgency, inflicting a heavy toll on Mr Putin’s forces and chipping away at troops’ appetite to fight.
The lack of clarity about Mr Putin’s endgame has fueled talk that he may not have one.
Indeed, any Russian attempt to take over all of Ukraine and govern it as a satellite state harks back to the failed invasion of Afghanistan in the 1980s.
That campaign exposed the limits of a military as mighty as that of the Soviet Union.
More recently, the disastrous end of the United States military’s 20-year effort to stop another insurgency in Afghanistan offers the Kremlin a second cautionary tale.
With a full Ukrainian surrender seemingly off the table, the two nations are back at the negotiating table.
Mr Zelenskyy on Thursday expressed openness to talking directly with Mr Putin, raising the possibility of some sort of negotiated settlement.
We don’t threaten anyone, we are not terrorists,” Mr Zelenskyy told reporters Thursday.
Mr Zelenskyy said it’s not so much that he wants to talk with Mr Putin but he probably has to.
A peace deal, in theory, could include assurances from Ukraine that United States and NATO troops won’t operate on its soil, or guarantees that Ukraine will never host any long-range missiles or other weapons that could be used to target Russia.
In addition to a slow-burning insurgent war against Russian troops, possibilities include a Ukraine that is cut into two.
Some analysts have dubbed that scenario the “Cyprus model,” in reference to a split of the country after a Turkish invasion in 1974 to support the Turkish Cypriot population.
In Ukraine, that might mean a Russian-dominated eastern half of Ukraine, representing rump independent states recognized by few countries around the world.
An independent Ukrainian government would continue to hold sway in the west.
Mr Putin, in a string of speeches, essays and even his declaration of war last week, has laid out a set of grievances dating to the fall of the Soviet Union.
It includes NATO’s expansion across Eastern Europe and the Balkans, the fate of ethnic Russian populations “trapped” in other countries with the Soviet Union’s fall, and the “color revolutions” in Ukraine and other countries that he said are trying to topple Kremlinfriendly regimes.
Having rebuilt Russia’s military forces after the declines of the 1990s, some analysts say, Mr Putin feels strong enough to rebuild the great power status of the Soviet Union and force the West to adjust.
Few nations outside of close Russian allies such as Belarus and Syria would recognize any Kremlin claim over Ukrainian territory or a Russian puppet state claiming control over a chunk of Ukrainian soil.
The world has largely rejected Mr Putin’s claim to the Crimean Peninsula after Russia’s 2014 invasion, and the international community would certainly follow suit if Russia tries to split Ukraine, claim half of it or embark on any other path that ends the democratically elected Zelenskyy presidency.
If Russia is defeated or bogged down by a bloody insurgency, Mr Putin could lash out with something more drastic.
The erratic Russian leader this week put his nuclear forces on high alert, stoking fear that he may dramatically escalate the situation if his forces can’t secure a quick victory.
As recently as Thursday, Mr Putin laid out that vision in a 90-minute phone call with French President Emmanuel Macron.
According to aides, Mr Macron ended the phone call convinced that Mr Putin was determined to take control of all of Ukraine, whatever the hurdles or consequences.
Should Russian forces take Kyiv and depose Mr Zelenskyy, the United States and NATO almost certainly would reject any Moscow-backed government.
Under such a scenario, the West could recognize Mr Zelenskyy or another leader who takes his place as the head of a Ukrainian government in exile with headquarters elsewhere in Europe.
The prospect of Ukrainian resistance forces based in neighboring NATO countries carrying out a guerrilla war against the Russian puppet government is just one more nightmare scenario for Western planners.
The Biden administration, which has staunchly rejected the idea of United States forces fighting in Ukraine, hasn’t entertained questions about a Russian military victory.
Foreign policy specialists say such an outcome would be chilling and would raise the danger of conflict between Russia and the West.
The United States and its allies also would have to decide whether to continue their massive economic sanctions campaign on Russia or relax measures over time if the fighting stops.
These two responsibilities — robustly defending European peace and prudently avoiding military escalation with Russia — will not necessarily be compatible,” they wrote.
Return to Top 03/03 Russia advances in Ukraine south ps://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2022/mar/3/russia-advances-ukraines-south-us-widens-sanctions/ GIST Russian and Ukrainian officials tentatively agreed to create “humanitarian corridors” to evacuate citizens from combat zones, but they failed to reach any major cease-fire Thursday as Russia’s military pushed deeper into Ukraine, battling to control a key electricity-producing hub in the south and gaining ground toward severing the country’s access to the Black Sea.
President Biden announced that the United States was widening the number of Russian oligarchs to target for economic sanctions springing from the Kremlin’s decision to invade.
He said he was working with European and other allies around the world to freeze the assets of a growing circle of wealthy Russian elites with ties to Russian President Vladimir Putin.
He said in a short speech to the nation that the week-old invasion was proceeding “according to schedule,” despite signs that Moscow’s ground advance on Ukraine’s capital in the north has apparently stalled.
A huge armored column was at a standstill outside Kyiv, and Ukrainian forces were putting up an unexpectedly tough fight against a larger and better-armed Russian army.
The Russians, however, have brought their superior firepower to bear in recent days and launched hundreds of missiles and artillery attacks on cities across Ukraine.
Kyiv confirmed that the southern city of Kherson had fallen, making the Black Sea port of 280,000 people the first major city fully seized by Russian forces.
Russian troops also made significant ground gains along Ukraine’s southern coastline toward a goal of cutting Kyiv’s access to the Black and Azov seas.
Such a development would deal a major blow to Ukraine’s economy and allow Russia to build a land corridor to the Crimean Peninsula, which Moscow seized in 2014.
A senior United States defense official said on the condition of anonymity that the Crimea annexation gave Russia a logistical advantage with shorter supply lines that smoothed the Russian military’s offensive in that part of Ukraine.
Heavy fighting also continued on the outskirts of another strategic port, Mariupol, on the Azov Sea, plunging it into darkness, knocking out most phone service and raising the prospect of food and water shortages.
Ukrainian officials said their missile defense systems have parried numerous attacks, and Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko said explosions overnight in the capital were Russian missiles being shot down.
Kyiv has stared down the Russian aggression by calling on Ukrainians to rise up and wage a guerrilla war against the invaders.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said his countrymen are not afraid of anything and will continue to resist the Russian invaders.
Small-scale protests simmered in Russian cities, and high-profile artists, scholars, athletes and chess players publicly condemned the war.
Still, Mr Putin insisted the week-old invasion was unfolding according to plan.
At the start of the invasion, he falsely claimed that one goal was the “de-nazification” of Ukraine’s leadership under Mr Zelenskyy.
Western analysts have criticized Mr Putin for promoting deliberate disinformation about Mr Zelenskyy, who is Jewish.
Mr Putin separately praised Russian forces and announced that the Kremlin would pay compensation to families of Russian soldiers killed in Ukraine.
Although the actual number is not clear, Ukrainian officials reported it as far higher.
United Nations officials said Thursday that the number of Ukrainians who had fled to Poland, Moldova and other neighboring countries topped | million, with more possibly on the way.
Afterward, a Macron aide told the Agence France-Presse news agency that the French president heard “nothing that could reassure us” from Mr Putin and that “the worst is still to come” in Ukraine.
Ukrainian and Russian delegations met for a tense second round of talks in neighboring Belarus.
Both delegations emerged saying they had agreed to establish tentative cease-fires in areas designated as “humanitarian corridors” inside Ukraine to evacuate civilians from combat zones.
The apparent goal is to establish pathways for civilians to escape and facilitate the delivery of food and medicine to areas hit by the heaviest fighting.
In Kyiv, snow gave way to a cold, gray drizzle as long lines formed outside the few pharmacies and bakeries that remained open.
Russian forces battled for control of the southern city of Enerhodar, a crucial energy-producing hub on the Dnieper River that accounts for about one-quarter of Ukraine’s power generation.
The mayor of Enerhodar, the site of the biggest nuclear plant in Europe, said Ukrainian forces were battling Russian troops on the city’s outskirts.
Video showed flames and clouds of black smoke rising above the city of more than 50,000.
People streamed away from the inferno past wrecked cars as sirens wailed.
The United States and its allies have avoided a direct military confrontation with Russia.
Instead, it has responded to the invasion by channeling more weaponry to Ukrainian forces while implementing a massive economic sanctions campaign against the Russian state and political elites who back the autocratic Putin government.
Targeting oligarchs Mr Biden announced that the United States had leveled a fresh slate of sanctions directly targeting Russian oligarchs with ties to Mr Putin.
Notable targets of the sanctions included Alisher Burhanovich Usmanov, a wealthy Russian whose yacht was just seized by German authorities, and Dmitry Peskov, Mr Putin’s high-profile spokesman at the Kremlin.
Administration officials said 19 Russian oligarchs and 47 of their family members will face visa restrictions from the State Department.
Others sit atop Russia’s largest companies and are responsible for providing the resources necessary to support Putin’s invasion of Ukraine,” the fact sheet said.
I don’t believe this is going to be the last set of oligarchs” to be sanctioned.
The United States and allies also issued sanctions on 26 Russia and Ukraine-based people who play central roles in spreading disinformation about the invasion.
Some Russian oligarchs have come out in opposition to the war, including billionaire tycoon Oleg Deripaska, who had been sanctioned by Western nations.
He warned that potential damage to Ukraine’s nuclear power facilities as a result of the combat could endanger lives not only in Ukraine but also Europe as a whole.
Mr Deripaska is the latest in a number of Russian oligarchs, now targets of sanctions from the West, who are calling for an end to the invasion of Ukraine.
Others on the list include billionaires Mikhail Fridman, Pyotr Aven, Oleg Tinkov and Aleksei Mordashov, the outlet reported.
Mr Zelenskyy appealed in a press conference for face-to-face talks with Mr Putin.
He joked that they should not be separated by a 30-foot table as other Western leaders have been on recent Kremlin visits.
He excoriated NATO nations for refusing to impose a no-fly zone over Ukraine to challenge Russian air superiority.
He accused foreign mercenaries of attacking the Russian military and supply convoys taking part in President Vladimir Putin’s week-old invasion of neighboring Ukraine.
Mr Konashenkov said such “acts of sabotage” are being carried out with weapons supplied by the West.
As to why there isn’t a rash of videos of the foreign volunteers on social media sites, he said the mercenaries prefer not to get in front of the cameras.
Ukrainian officials have lodged their own charges that Russian mercenaries are assisting in the invasion.
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy earlier this week said the Russian private security firm The Wagner Group had hired mercenaries to try to assassinate him and other top figures in the Ukrainian government.
Baumiote | 03/03 Demand falls, states hold vaccine stockpile ps://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2022/mar/3/as-vaccine-demand-falls-states-are-left-with-huge-/ GIST As demand for COVID-19 vaccines collapses in many areas of the U.S., states are scrambling to use stockpiles of doses before they expire and have to be added to the millions that have already gone to waste.
From some of the least vaccinated states, like Indiana and North Dakota, to some of the most vaccinated states, like New Jersey and Vermont, public health departments are shuffling doses around in the hopes of finding providers that can use them.
State health departments told The Associated Press they have tracked millions of doses that went to waste, including ones that expired, were in a multi-dose vial that couldn’t be used completely or had to be tossed for some other reason like temperature issues or broken vials.
Nearly 1. million doses in Michigan, 1.45 million in North Carolina, 1 million in Hlinois and almost 725,000 doses in Washington couldn’t be used.
The percentage of wasted doses in California is only about 1.8%, but in a state that has received 84 million doses and administered more than 71 million of them, that equates to roughly 1. million doses.
Providers there are asked to keep doses until they expire, then properly dispose of them, the California Department of Public Health said.
The problem is not unique to the United States More than a million doses of the Russian Sputnik vaccine expired this week inn Guatemala, because nobody wanted to take the shot.
Vaccination program managers say that tossing out doses is inevitable in any inoculation campaign because of the difficulty in aligning supply and demand for a product with a limited shelf life.
But the coronavirus pandemic has killed nearly 6 million people and shattered economies across the globe, and every dose that goes to waste feels like a missed opportunity considering how successful the vaccines are in preventing death and serious disease.
It also comes only about a year after people desperate to get the vaccine attempted to jump in line to get ahead of those deemed higher priority.
Hospital board members, their trustees and donors around the United States got early access or offers for vaccinations, raising complaints about favoritism and inequity at a time when the developing world had virtually no doses.
And many poorer nations still have low vaccine rates, including 13 countries in Africa with less than 5% of their population fully vaccinated.
T hey are plagued by unpredictable deliveries, weak health care systems, vaccine hesitancy and some supply issues, although health officials say inventory is markedly stronger than earlier in the pandemic.
In fact, supplies are so strong that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention now advises doctors that it’s OK to discard doses if it means opening up the standard multi-dose vials to vaccinate a single person and the rest has to be tossed.
Joseph Bresee, who directs the COVID-19 Vaccine Implementation Program at the Task Force for Global Health in Decatur, Georgia.
The Department of Health and Human Services also said that redistributing states’ excess doses to other nations is not feasible because of the difficulty in transporting the shots, which must remain cold, in addition to not being cost effective because of the relatively small number concentrated at sites.
The vaccines authorized in the U.S., made by Pfizer, Moderna and Johnson & Johnson, can last for up to about six months from the time of manufacture.
A senior HHS official familiar with vaccine distribution plans would not say how many doses nationwide have already been marked as wastage, stating that there were too many variables to effectively calculate a nationwide rate and that states would have the most accurate figures.
The official took issue with the word “wastage,” saying it implies mismanagement when states are effectively overseeing their inventories.
The average number of Americans getting their first shot is down to about 70,000 a day, the lowest point since the United States vaccination campaign began in December 2020.
About 76% of the United States population has received at least one shot and roughly 65% of all Americans are fully vaccinated.
With demand so low, states will undoubtedly be confronted with more waste in the months ahead, although they will benefit from any booster expansions.
Idaho, for example, has 230,000 doses on hand but is only averaging fewer than 2,000 doses administered a week.
Oregon’s vaccination rate is slightly higher than the national average, but the health authority there said last week that they have “significant excess vaccine on hand” because of the recent drop in demand.
The state is trying to use up as many of the 716,000 doses in its inventory as possible.
Rhode Island has the highest percentage of residents who are fully vaccinated in the nation, at slightly more than 80%, but the health department reported having 137,000 doses on hand last week.
Health officials say they need them for a big push to increase the vaccination rate for booster doses.
Health officials in some states have developed “matchmaker” programs to connect vaccine providers with excess doses with providers seeking doses.
Many said they’re attempting to redistribute doses with expiration dates that are quickly approaching.
New Jersey has a task force that has transferred more than 600,000 doses around the state since June.
West Virginia has offered to transfer Pfizer adult doses to nearby states.
Immunization managers have been asking for single-dose vials, especially for pediatricians, but it may not work for manufacturers to package it that way yet, said Claire Hannan, executive director at the Association of Immunization Managers.
HHS said states are ordering prudently, paralleling the drop in demand.
The minimum order for Pfizer used to be nearly 1,200 doses but now it’s 100, and Moderna reduced the number of doses per vial, the agency said.
And yet there are numerous similar interviews with Russian captives which have been circulating on Ukrainian social media channels, expressing similar sentiments.
Eight days after Vladimir Putin’s invasion it is clear that a significant number of his servicemen are demoralised and reluctant to fight.
Others have abandoned their vehicles and have set off back towards the Russian border on foot, lugging their weapons and kitbags, videos suggest.
These episodes do not mean that the Kremlin will fail in its attempts to conquer Ukraine, as its tactics shift to brutal shelling of civilians.
But low morale among invading troops might be one reason why Russia’s blitzkrieg plan to overwhelm Ukraine appears not to have progressed at the speed Putin would have wanted.
The assumption in Moscow was that the operation would be swift and successful.
Soldiers were given food and fuel supplies for only two or three days, the videos suggest.
The Kremlin also appears to have had a totally fantastical idea of the reception they would get.
Several prisoners of war said they had been assured Ukrainians would welcome them as liberators.
Russian forces were expecting flowers and cheers, not bullets and bombs, they said.
They didn’t anticipate resistance,” Artem Mazhulin, a 31-year-old English teacher from Kharkiv said.
Mazhulin said his uncle and aunt, Viktor and Valentina, had talked with Russian soldiers when they rolled past their house in Kupiansk, in north-east Ukraine, close to the border.
The soldiers explained they were looking for Banderivtsi, or followers of the second world war Ukrainian nationalist leader Stepan Bandera.
Kovzhun said the Russian general staff had thought the invasion would be “easy peasy”, and a repeat of the operations to seize Crimea in 2014, or their recent deployment to Kazakhstan, which were largely unopposed.
Instead, Ukrainian civilians had stood in front of enemy tanks, blocked armoured columns with their bare hands and had sung the national anthem in front of twitchy Russian guards.
Nick Reynolds, a research analyst for land warfare at the defence and security think tank the Royal United Services Institute , said the Ukrainian figure for killed enemy soldiers was likely to be a more reliable than the Russian estimate, adding that the footage of engagements involving Russian forces available online suggested the toll the Kremlin was willing to admit to had already been exceeded.
Nevertheless, he added, there is little to show how the Ukrainian authorities have arrived at their own total.
The several thousand dead tally could itself be a slight exaggeration, he said.
There is no doubt Ukraine is utilising the discomfort of captured soldiers for propaganda purposes.
Several videos show young men calling their mothers back in Russia, who have no idea their sons are fighting in Ukraine.
The Ukrainian authorities have opened a hotline for worried Russian relatives, in another PR scoop.
Nonetheless, there is an authentic sense that many Russian servicemen regret ever having come to Ukraine, a journey that has ended for some in death or disillusionment.
No changes in radiation had been recorded but any loss of ability to cool nuclear fuel would lead to “significant radioactive emissions” that could “outgrow all previous nuclear power plant accidents”, they said.
The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Mariano Grossi, offered to travel to Ukraine to facilitate talks with Russia aimed at guaranteeing the safety of nuclear plants during the conflict.
The situation “continues to be extremely tense and challenging,” he said. e The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, appealed directly to Russians to stage protests over the seizure of nuclear power infrastructure by Russian troops.
The blaze has sparked deep concern over the fate of Ukraine’s nuclear plants amid the worsening fighting. e United States president Joe Biden and Canada’s prime minister Justin Trudeau also condemned Russia for shelling the plant and starting the blaze, which took hold in a training building on the site’s perimeter. e Russia’s defence ministry blamed the attack on the nuclear plant on Ukrainian saboteurs, calling it a “monstrous provocation”. e The death toll from Russian airstrikes in a residential district of the city of Chernihiv rose to 47, regional authorities said.
A third round of talks is set to take place next week. e Russian forces were in control of local and regional government buildings in the strategically important Black Sea port of Kherson, local authorities said.
Russian forces appeared to be moving to cut Ukraine off from the sea via its key southern ports, claiming the capture of Kherson and tightening the siege of Mariupol. e Concern is mounting over the movements of a huge column of Russian military vehicles outside Kyiv.
That such a “deconfliction” line has been established was not yet officially announced, but multiple news organisations confirmed the news.
Players Association agreed to suspend all Covid-19 protocols, effective immediately, returning teams and players to pre-pandemic operations for the first time since March 2020.
The N.F.L., which is not in season, is the first of the United States’ major professional sports leagues to halt its coronavirus-related policies.
Players and team staff members will no longer be required to wear masks inside facilities, adhere to social distancing measures or restrict access within team buildings based on vaccination or job function, according to a memo sent to all 32 teams on Thursday, though each team will have to comply with local ordinances governing mask mandates.
Teams are expected to provide an area where P.C.R. tests can be run on-site for anyone who self-reports coronavirus symptoms, but there will be no mandatory testing cadence.
Those who test positive will be required to isolate for five days, as per current recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
New case numbers and hospitalizations have fallen sharply from the nationwide peak in January.
The N.F.L. said in the memo that it would work with the players’ union and medical experts to monitor whether protocols needed to be reimposed in full or in part.
A PGA Tour spokesperson said the circuit would return next week to pre-pandemic access to facilities including the locker room, dining room and fitness area.
The tour discontinued testing last summer for players and caddies unless they were symptomatic, but still had limited other staff and visitors’ access to the mainly indoor facilities used by players.
The N.B.A. and the N.H.L. are among the leagues that relaxed, but did not eliminate, their protocols in January.
But the league did not report any positive tests between the divisional round playoff games and the Super Bowl.
In the final weeks of the 2021 season, the league dropped testing of asymptomatic players, regardless of vaccination status.
The league mandated in December that all team staff members who were in close contact with players receive a booster shot.
Last month, the league said only about 10 percent of players had been boosted, but that number may have gone up since the end of the season.
That figure is up from 70 percent last week, when the C.D.C. announced its new strategy of assessing coronavirus community levels to help return the country to some version of normal life.
But even before the C.D.C. shared updated guidance, cities and states were quickly shedding mask mandates as cases of the Omicron variant declined and calls for relaxed measures grew louder.
The recommendations no longer rely only on the number of cases in a community to determine the need for restrictions such as mask wearing.
Based on these three factors, counties can calculate whether the risk to their residents is low, medium or high, according to the agency, and only areas of high risk should require everyone to wear a mask.
But unvaccinated people should wear masks even in low-risk areas, the agency said.
While much of the country is now categorized in low or medium risk, much of West Virginia and large swaths of Kentucky, Virginia, Nebraska and Montana remain at a high risk according to the C.D.C. data.
Among the communities considered high risk in the state is Kanawha County, which includes Charleston, the capital.
The gap has become especially pronounced among children who are eligible for vaccines, with vaccination rates for 5to 11-year-olds twice as high in urban areas as in rural ones.
Vaccination rates tend to be markedly lower in counties where a majority of residents voted to re-elect former President Donald J Trump in 2020.
As a result, Covid has taken a devastating toll on the most Republican parts of the country since the Delta variant began circulating, killing people there at far higher rates than in places where Mr Trump was unpopular.
The number of Americans dying each day from Covid has fallen in recent weeks as Omicron cases have plummeted.
But the daily death toll remains nearly as high as it was during the worst days of the Delta surge, with more than 1,800 people now dying on average per day.
The C.D.C. study examined how many people in almost all United States counties had received at least a first dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna vaccines or a single dose of the Johnson & Johnson vaccine by the end of January 2022.
In rural areas, vaccination coverage among people at least five years old was 59 percent, compared with 75 percent in urban counties.
That gap was more than twice as high as it was among American adults in April 2021, before eligibility was widened to include all adults, the C.D.C. said.
In addition to problems overcoming partisan resistance to vaccines, C.D.C. scientists said that many rural areas suffered from inadequate access to health care.
Nearly 40 percent of rural parents have reported that their child’s doctor did not recommend a Covid vaccine, compared with 8 percent of parents in urban areas, the C.D.C. said.
But coverage of booster doses is lagging in urban and rural areas alike, the C.D.C. reported.
Roughly 50 percent of those eligible for a booster shot or additional dose had received one in both urban and rural counties.
Starting on Friday, masks will no longer be mandatory in public settings like grocery stores, restaurants and bars.
And proof of vaccination or negative test results will no longer be necessary to enter indoor bars, wineries or most other businesses.
California state rules still require proof of vaccination or negative test results to enter large indoor events, as well as masks on transit and in other high-risk settings, including hospitals.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s updated measures, she said, Los Angeles County is in the low-risk category.
Ferrer said that masks were strongly recommended, and individual businesses could opt to keep in place requirements.
Although the city of Los Angeles will, for the time being, still require bars, restaurants and many other indoor businesses to check vaccine status, the moment marks a major symbolic milestone for Angelenos who have weathered some of the nation’s deadliest surges and have lived under some of the nation’s most enduring restrictions.
Ferrer has been a particular voice of caution, even as her department has faced frustration from residents who believed stringent rules were unnecessary.
Ferrer, along with other public health officials across the country, has shifted her focus toward measures to prevent surges, hospitalizations and deaths.
She said the county would continue to help residents get vaccinated, and that her department would continue to track case data closely to intervene before outbreaks at schools or businesses spiral out of control.
Ferrer emphasized that the county would work to ensure that all communities have equitable access to therapeutics for people who get sick with Covid-19.
On Monday, the governors of California, Oregon and Washington jointly announced that on March 12, they would lift statewide mask requirements in schools, which were some of the last remaining statewide restrictions.
And California officials lifted a mask mandate for unvaccinated people in indoor public spaces on Tuesday.
In March 2020, for the first time in the United States agency’s nearly 60-year history, the Peace Corps temporarily suspended its operations and evacuated more than 7,000 volunteers from posts in more than 60 countries.
But later this month, the organization will send initial cohorts composed of new volunteers and volunteers who were evacuated in 2020 to Zambia and the Dominican Republic.
The Peace Corps first sent a small group of 21 volunteers to the Dominican Republic nearly 60 years ago in the summer of 1962.
The organization is an independent agency of the United States government that was created by President John F Kennedy in 1961.
The Peace Corps sends volunteers abroad to help with social and economic development projects — meaning the volunteers dig wells, teach in schools and train people in everything from sewing to breastfeeding.
The volunteers deployed in Zambia will engage with communities to provide education about the coronavirus and promote access to vaccines.
Those in the Dominican Republic will support communities to overcome challenges that were exacerbated by the pandemic, like helping to recover literacy skills, addressing increased school dropout rates, and preparing young adults for the work force.
About 50 volunteers in total make up the two initial cohorts, and though it is a far cry from the typical 3,500 people deployed globally during prepandemic years, Peace Corps officials have ambitions to send increasingly more eager volunteers internationally.
The organization has targeted communities in Africa and Latin America for the initial returning deployments because of the regions’ reliable medical evacuation points.
One third of Hong Kong’s ambulance workers have tested positive for the coronavirus or are isolating because they are close contacts of positive cases.
That’s nearly 1,000 employees, said Saphine Yip at the Fire Services Department.
The longest wait time for an ambulance was a day and 15 hours, she said.
Officials are battling the city’s worst coronavirus outbreak, with 56,827 cases reported on Thursday.
The city has recorded 1,153 deaths since the Omicron variant began to spread in January, and the majority of deaths have been among the older people who are not vaccinated.
For much of the pandemic, Hong Kong avoided massive outbreaks by employing tough border controls and social distancing rules.
For the better part of the last two years, officials recorded singleor doubledigit daily cases, and most of those were considered imported cases from travelers who had recently arrived in Hong Kong and were still in quarantine.
Once a model for how to control a pandemic, Hong Kong is becoming a cautionary tale, with scenes that recall the earliest — and most fearful — days of the pandemic.
Hospitals have run out of beds in isolation wards and are operating at near full occupancy rate and dead bodies have piled up in hospital hallways because of limited manpower to move the dead to public morgues.
Healthcare workers and emergency responders have been faced with soaring demand for their services from the public and officials have appealed to those with mild symptoms to stay home instead of using up precious government resources.
New cases fell by 16 percent last week, according to new data from the World Health Organization released on Tuesday.
Deaths dropped by 10 percent, in a continuation of the downward trends reported by the agency the previous week.
The W.H.O.’s Western Pacific region reported a 32 percent increase in new weekly cases.
Despite high vaccination rates in China and Vietnam, new cases have multiplied rapidly over the past two weeks.
Vaccine supply and delivery constraints have improved, W.H.O. officials said at a Wednesday news conference, adding that 56 percent of the global population is now fully vaccinated.
More than 10 billion doses of the vaccine have been administered, according to Our World in Data.
Leaders of countries and municipalities have interpreted the decline in cases and deaths as a signal that life could return to normal in the near future.
In recent weeks, pandemic restrictions such as mask mandates governing public spaces and schools have fallen away in many communities.
But the toll on mental health has been steep and gaps in care persist, the W.H.O. said in a report on Wednesday.
The agency found that in the pandemic’s first year, depression and anxiety had increased by 25 percent.
The report named a long list of stressors aggravating mental health issues, including social isolation, loneliness, fear of infection, financial duress, the suffering and death of loved ones and grief after bereavement.
While people with pre-existing mental health disorders were not predisposed to contracting the virus, they were more likely to be hospitalized, become severely ill and die if infected, the data suggested.
The pandemic has also disproportionately affected the mental health of young people and women, the report said.
And pregnant women have been particularly vulnerable, according to W.H.O. officials.
New Zealand is being walloped by a major outbreak of the Omicron variant, with the virus spreading at what may be the fastest rate in the world.
On Thursday, the country reported 23,194 new cases, a once unthinkable number in a small island nation of about five million people where the record daily case count before the current wave was in the low hundreds.
The explosion in cases has come as the government, under political pressure, loosened its strict regulations meant to prevent the spread of the virus, and as the highly transmissible Omicron reduced the effectiveness of the controls that remained.
That has filled many New Zealanders with anxiety as they learn to live with the pandemic-related risk that the rest of the world has grappled with since early 2020.
Also on Thursday, Roscosmos announced it would stop selling rocket engines to American companies.
The moves, both fallout from Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine, stand to further isolate the Russian space agency from its Western space partners, and limit Russia’s private space activities dramatically.
OneWeb was rescued from bankruptcy in 2020 by the British government and other investors.
It was scheduled to launch 36 satellites aboard a Russian Soyuz rocket from Kazakhstan on Friday.
Mr Rogozin also posted a video on Twitter showing Roscosmos personnel on a platform next to the rocket covering up British, American and Japanese flags emblazoned on the rocket’s exterior.
The space agency’s ultimatum, which came just three days before the previously planned launch, spurred emergency discussions among British officials and OneWeb shareholders, who decided Wednesday night to cease all future launches from Baikonur, the spaceport in Kazakhstan where Russia conducts most of its launches.
Mr Rogozin suggested on Twitter that OneWeb’s decision would plunge the company into another bankruptcy proceeding.
Chris McLaughlin, OneWeb’s chief of government affairs, dismissed the warning.
Britain does not possess its own ability to launch large payloads to orbit.
Mr McLaughlin said OneWeb would look to alternative launch providers in Japan, India and the United States.
The company was rescued from bankruptcy in 2020 by India’s Bharti Enterprises, OneWeb’s largest shareholder, and Britain, whose $500 million public investment in the satellite operator aimed to boost Britain’s space economy.
Without rockets to launch on, OneWeb’s aim to complete its mega-constellation faces serious disruption.
It is competing with SpaceX’s Starlink constellation to beam broadband internet to remote regions around the world.
OneWeb had already faced pressure from British politicians to follow energy companies in severing Russian business ties.
The company had paid for its Russian launches in bulk through Arianespace, the French rocket company, and had six more missions remaining under the contract — a launch lineup likely worth hundreds of millions of dollars.
In the coming days, OneWeb is set to enter negotiations with Arianespace to determine how, if possible, to retrieve the money for the suspended Soyuz missions, according to a OneWeb official who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss sensitive business deliberations he was not authorized to disclose.
The official added it was unclear to OneWeb executives when or how the 36 satellites currently in Russia for Friday’s now-canceled mission would come off the rocket, or where those satellites will be stored while OneWeb searches for a different launch provider.
Mr Henry added that launch contracts of this size are typically signed two years in advance.
Russia’s move to hobble the business of one of its space agency’s biggest commercial clients was perhaps the strongest example so far of how the war in Ukraine was spilling over into space, an area where the country has for decades found cooperation with countries that were once its Cold War adversaries.
Last week, Roscosmos withdrew more than 80 Russian personnel from French Guiana where the European Space Agency has its only launch site and flies commercial Soyuz missions.
Then ESA said a joint robotic mission to Mars by the agency and Russia, expected to launch later this year, is now “very unlikely” to proceed on time.
And on Thursday, Roscosmos said it would stop cooperating with Germany on joint space station research projects.
With the barrage of Western sanctions over the invasion, Roscosmos’s isolation from its Western partners seemed inevitable, said Victoria Samson, a space policy analyst at the Secure World Foundation.
NASA, which jointly manages the International Space Station with Roscosmos, has said it intends to continue cooperating with its Russian counterparts.
The two partners had been negotiating an agreement to launch Russian astronauts on Crew Dragon, a SpaceX vehicle that carries NASA astronauts.
Beyond cooperation with NASA, Russia said on Thursday it would halt the sale of rocket engines to American companies.
SpaceX also provides this service to the space station, as do spacecraft launched by Japan and Russia.
In a more symbolic move, Mr Rogozin said Russia would no longer provide assistance in the use of a different Russian engine already purchased and in use by United Launch Alliance for Atlas 5, one of the most frequently used American rockets.
U.L.A.’s chief executive, Tory Bruno, played down the effect of the loss of technical aid from Russia, saying, “We can do without if necessary.” ami HEADLINE | 03/03 Seattle cleared homeless camp relocates SOURCE ps://komonews.com/news/local/mercer-street-camp-cleared-but-some-of-its-tents-moved-a-block-awa GIST SEATTLE — Less than 24 hours after a notorious Seattle homeless encampment was cleared, new tents were setup Thursday a block away.
City crews removed the infamous encampment from a field near Mercer and Highway 99 on Wednesday but tents have now appeared across the street.
That has led to frustration for some business owners, who said the city is just moving the problem around instead of solving it.
When the crime and safety problems were across the street from Copiers Northwest, employees there said it was bad enough.
The firm's workers now fear things will get worse with campers moving to their doorstep.
While at the site, KOMO News saw some of the relocated campers openly doing drugs.
The encampment on Mercer Street had a history of violent crimes caught on camera, including a machete attack, a deadly hit-and-run, tent fires and robberies.
While the city’s Hope Team said 33 people accepted offers for shelter after the camp was clear, another 17 turned down the help.
An outreach worker told KOMO News some of the campers have even barricaded themselves in a nearby vacant building.
As more tents takeover the sidewalk, they’re demanding to know what the end game is.
The videos appeared to show people in the vehicles firing at buildings in the power plant.
Ukraine’s state emergency service later said the blaze went out after 6m.
The fire did not affect essential equipment at the plant, the International Atomic Energy Agency said on Twitter, citing its communication with the Ukrainian government.
About an hour after dawn, Ukraine’s nuclear regulatory inspectorate said in a statement that Russian military forces were now occupying the complex.
It said that all of the site’s power units remained intact and that no changes in radiation levels had been observed.
The fire broke out after a Russian attack on a training building outside the perimeter of the plant, according to a statement by Ukraine’s state emergency service.
A spokesman for the nuclear plant, Andriy Tuz, was quoted by The Associated Press as telling Ukrainian television that shells had set fire to one of the plant’s six reactors that was under renovation and not operating.
Ukraine’s nuclear inspectorate later said in its statement that one unit of the six units was operating, another was in “outage,” two were being cooled down, and two others had been disconnected from the grid.
President Biden spoke with Mr Zelensky about the fire and joined him in urging Russia to “cease its military activities in the area and allow firefighters and emergency responders to access the site,” the White House said.
Mr Biden’s energy secretary, Jennifer M Granholm, said on Twitter that the United States had not detected elevated radiation readings in the area, echoing an earlier assessment by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain said he would seek an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council about the blaze at the complex, according to his office.
Before the fire was reported by Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, the director general for the International Atomic Energy Agency said in a statement that ‘“‘a large number of Russian tanks and infantry” had entered Enerhodar, a town next to the plant.
The director general, Rafael Mariano Grossi, said that troops were “moving directly” toward the reactor site.
The Zaporizhzhia nuclear complex, on the Dnieper River roughly a hundred miles north of Crimea, is the largest in Europe.
According to the International Atomic Energy Agency, its six reactors produce a total of 6,000 megawatts of electric power.
In comparison, the Chernobyl plant in northern Ukraine produced 3,800 megawatts — about a third less.
The four reactors of the Chernobyl complex were shut down after one suffered a catastrophic fire and meltdown in 1986.
But an additional danger at the Zaporizhzhia site is the many acres of open pools of water behind the complex where spent fuel rods have been cooled for years.
Experts fear that errant shells or missiles that hit such sites could set off radiological disasters.
For days, social media reports have detailed how the residents of Enerhodar set up a giant barrier of tires, vehicles and metal barricades to try to block a Russian advance into the city and the reactor site.
GIST As President Vladimir V Putin wages war against Ukraine, he is fighting a parallel battle on the home front, dismantling the last vestiges of a Russian free press.
On Thursday, the pillars of Russia’s independent broadcast media collapsed under pressure from the state.
Echo of Moscow, the freewheeling radio station founded by Soviet dissidents in 1990 and that symbolized Russia’s new freedoms, was “liquidated” by its board.
TV Rain, the youthful independent television station that calls itself “the optimistic channel” said it would suspend operations indefinitely.
And Dmitri A Muratov, the journalist who shared the Nobel Peace Prize last year, said that his newspaper Novaya Gazeta, which survived the murders of six of its journalists, could be on the verge of shutting down as well.
Precipitating the outlets’ demise were plans by the Russian Parliament to take up legislation on Friday that would make news considered “fakes” about Russia’s war in Ukraine punishable by yearslong prison terms.
The Russian authorities have already made it clear that the very act of calling it a “war” — the Kremlin prefers the term “special military operation” — is considered disinformation.
The crackdown on independent journalists — many of whom fled the country this week, fearing that even worse repressions were to come — added to the sense of crisis in Russia.
The economy continued to reel from Western sanctions as airlines canceled more international flights and more companies suspended operations — including Ikea, the Swedish furniture retailer, a totem for Russia’s middle class and the employer of some 15,000 Russians.
He told President Emmanuel Macron of France in a phone call that his aim of securing “the demilitarization and neutral status of Ukraine” would be “achieved no matter what,” according to the Kremlin.
A second round of peace talks in Belarus yielded no breakthrough, though Ukraine said Russia had agreed to “humanitarian corridors” to allow civilians to leave areas of intense fighting.
Thursday evening, in nationally televised remarks, Mr Putin for the first time personally acknowledged Russian casualties in the fighting and praised Russian troops as heroes who were fighting “fascists” akin to Hitler’s invading army.
Ukrainian resistance, Mr Putin said, was only evidence of the population being brainwashed by Western propaganda and by neo-Nazis.
And up to now, Russian independent media led by Echo of Moscow, TV Rain and Novaya Gazeta had given those Russians a voice.
As a result, Mr Venediktov argues, the Kremlin is intent on controlling the narrative of its “special military operation” in Ukraine even more intensely than it otherwise controls the news media.
Echo of Moscow is owned by Gazprom, the state energy giant, but has often broadcast sharp critiques of the Kremlin.
Analysts believed the station survived thanks to Mr Venediktov’s personal connections to the ruling elite and Mr Putin’s desire to maintain a veneer of pluralism amid his creeping authoritarianism.
For instance, it gave voice to supporters of the imprisoned opposition leader Aleksei A Navalny and covered the wave of protests he inspired across Russia early last year.
During the war in Ukraine, Echo of Moscow has featured interviews with Ukrainian journalists who described the horrors of Russia’s invasion, a decision that appeared to cross a line.
On Tuesday, the authorities took Echo of Moscow off the air for the first time since the Soviet coup attempt in 1991 and on Thursday, its board of directors decided to shut the station entirely.
TV Rain was founded in 2010 by a media entrepreneur, Natalia Sindeyeva, and a TV director, Vera Krichevskaya.
It became a symbol of free-minded journalism, and a place where young journalists could launch their careers.
Though the Kremlin created challenges for the channel, it always found a way to persevere.
In 2014, cable networks removed TV Rain from their bundles, costing the channel about 80 percent of its audience.
On Thursday, TV Rain broadcast a full news report on YouTube, after which Ms.
Sindeyeva announced that the outlet was shutting down, at least for the time being.
Roskomnadzor, the Russian telecommunications regulator, blocked the outlet on Tuesday, accusing it of inciting extremism, abusing Russian citizens, causing mass disruption of public calm and safety, and encouraging protests.
After TV Rain’s final broadcast, various employees — some of them having just fled the country — appeared on a livestream on the company’s YouTube channel.
In speeches that turned emotional and tearful, they talked about their work, the state of the Russian news media and the channel’s accomplishments, and offered words of fortification for everyone watching.
Tikhon Dzyadko, the editor in chief of TV Rain, confirmed on Wednesday that he had left Russia out of concerns for his safety.
At the end of the livestream, those who Zoomed in left, and everyone else walked out of the studio.
During the 1991 attempt to overthrow the Soviet Premier Mikhail S Gorbachev, Soviet state television played “Swan Lake” on a loop.
It did the same as the country waited for the party leadership to select successors to Soviet premiers Leonid Brezhnev, Konstantin Chernenko and Yuri Andropov.
Like his colleagues, Mr Muratov has felt the pressure of the government closing in.
In the last several days, he said the newspaper he runs, Novaya Gazeta, had received fines totaling 1,300,000 rubles, or about $12,000.
At Echo of Moscow’s offices on Thursday, Mr Venediktov said that in a “regular country,” Echo of Moscow would be considered banal.
But Echo of Moscow refused to stick to official themes of triumph and progress, instead digging into the problems and the culprits.
He drew the example of Mr Navalny, an opposition figure in Russia whom Mr Putin does not refer to by name.
Its pilots and air defenses have prevented Russian fighter jets from conquering the skies.
And a band of savvy Ukrainian cyberwarriors are so far beating Moscow in an information war, inspiring support at home and abroad.
To the surprise of many military analysts, Ukrainian troops are mounting a stiffer-than-expected resistance to Russian forces up and down battle lines across a country the size of Texas, fighting with a resourcefulness and creativity that United States analysts said could trip up Russian troops for weeks or months to come.
The Ukrainians are also exploiting a bungled beginning to Russia’s all-out assault.
Armed with shoulderfired anti-tank weapons, they have attacked a mileslong Russian armored convoy bearing down on Kyiv, the capital, helping stall an advance plagued by fuel and food shortages, and stretching a march that was expected to take a handful of days into possibly weeks.
The strategic southern city of Kherson fell on Wednesday; the Kremlin’s army has intensified its bombardment of Kyiv and other cities; and, despite a flow of fresh arms pouring in from the West, Ukrainian leaders say they desperately need more weapons to destroy Russian tanks and down Russian warplanes.
And while the Ukrainian government has publicized its victories and Russian attacks that killed civilians, it has said far less about battlefield losses of its mechanized units.
For their part, Russian officials are keen not to present the operation as a war, and so they have not put out information about the engagements their forces have won.
The result, in these early days of the invasion, is that the Ukrainians are turning the tables on the Russians in the information campaign.
On the battlefield, the Ukrainian military is conducting a hugely effective and mobile defense, using their knowledge of their home turf to stymie Russian forces on multiple fronts, Gen.
Mark A Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said on Thursday.
General Milley said some of the tactics employed by Ukrainian troops included using mobile weapons systems to bedevil the Russians wherever they could.
United States officials have been impressed with the fighting prowess of the Ukrainians, but their assessment that Russia has the superior military has not changed.
Ukraine has succeeded in slowing the Russian advance, but has not been able to stop it, nor is the resistance strong enough to shift Russian President Vladimir V Putin’s war aims.
Over the long term, United States officials said, it will be difficult for Ukraine to continue to frustrate the Russian advance.
Hodges, the former top United States Army commander in Europe who is now with the Center for European Policy Analysis.
Ukraine has one of Europe’s largest militaries, with 170,000 active-duty troops, 100,000 reservists and territorial defense forces that include at least 100,000 veterans.
The Ukrainian army has been training for further Russian encroachment ever since Russia seized Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula in 2014 and began supporting separatists in the Donbas region, in eastern Ukraine.
Many of Ukraine’s veterans fought in those battles, so there is a subset of the population that is trained and knows how to fight Russians.
United States Special Operations Forces have also trained Ukrainian military forces.
Leaders in Kyiv then assigned those soldiers to conventional units, allowing them in turn to train a larger portion of the army.
American analysts say that training has made a difference on the battlefield.
The United States has provided more than $3 billion in weapons, equipment and other supplies to Ukraine’s armed forces since 2014.
In those eight years, United States military advisers, including Army Green Berets and National Guard troops, have trained more than 27,000 Ukrainian soldiers at the Yavoriv Combat Training Center near Lviv in western Ukraine.
Indeed, Michael R Carpenter, the United States representative to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, hailed a Ukrainian marine, Vitaliy Skakun, in remarks in Vienna on Thursday.
The marine had blown himself up on a bridge in the southern Kherson region to prevent a line of Russian tanks from crossing, the Ukrainian military said.
From the invasion’s opening hours, Ukraine’s underdog military has sought to flip the script on the more than 150,000 Russian forces massed on its borders.
For instance, Ukrainian troops repelled an attack by Russian airborne and special forces on a key airfield north of Kyiv last Thursday in the initial hours of the war, thwarting a Russian attempt to open a major air bridge on the outskirts of the capital.
As Russians approached Kyiv and Kharkiv, the Ukrainians were able to shift their forces to critical locations faster than the invading forces.
Not only have the Ukrainians moved more nimbly, they also made good choices about where to concentrate firepower.
Thomas Bullock, an open-source analyst from Janes, the defense intelligence firm, said Russian forces have made tactical errors that the Ukrainians have been able to capitalize on.
The Russians “have stuck to main roads so that they can move quickly and not risk getting bogged down in mud.
But they are advancing on winding roads and their flanks and supply routes are overly exposed to Ukrainian attacks.
In Kyiv, the Ukrainian counterattack has pushed the Russian troops west and forced them to call in reinforcements as they try to encircle the city, said Mr Kagan, an expert on the Russian military who leads the Critical Threats Project at the American Enterprise Institute.
While it is often easier to defend than attack, especially in a complex multifront invasion, the Ukrainians have taken advantage of the Russian decision to use too small a force, sometimes only two battalions at a time, to take key points.
The Ukrainians have been far more successful in the north, defending Kyiv and Kharkiv, the country’s second-largest city, than they have been in the south, where better trained Russian forces in Crimea have had more success.
United States government officials believe that Mr Putin is likely to redouble his assault.
But some analysts say that growing Russian casualties, increasing economic disruptions in Russia resulting from sanctions, and the likelihood of an enduring Ukrainian insurgency could upend that strategy.
In Situation Room meetings in recent days, the issue has come up repeatedly, according to three officials.
Mr Putin’s tendency, American intelligence officials have told the White House and Congress, is to double down when he feels trapped by his own overreach.
So they have described a series of possible reactions, ranging from indiscriminate shelling of Ukrainian cities to compensate for the early mistakes made by his invading force, to cyberattacks directed at the American financial system, to more nuclear threats and perhaps moves to take the war beyond Ukraine’s borders.
The debate over Mr Putin’s next moves is linked to an urgent re-examination by intelligence agencies of the Russian leader’s mental state, and whether his ambitions and appetite for risk have been altered by two years of Covid isolation.
It was a sign of the depth of American concern that Defense Secretary Lloyd J Austin II announced Wednesday that he was canceling a previously scheduled Minuteman nuclear missile test, to avoid escalating direct challenges to Moscow or giving Mr Putin an excuse to once again invoke the power of the country’s nuclear arsenal.
But beyond canceling the missile test, there is no evidence that the United States is considering steps to reduce tensions, and a senior official said there was no interest in backing off sanctions.
In fact, President Biden announced expanded sanctions on Thursday, aimed at Russia’s oligarch class.
Many of those named — including Dmitri S Peskov, Mr Putin’s spokesman and one of his close advisers — rank among his most influential defenders and the beneficiaries of the system he has created.
A few hours after he spoke, S&P dropped Russia’s credit rating to CCC-, the credit-rating agency said ina statement.
That is far below the junk bond levels Russia was ranked at a few days after the invasion, and just two notches above a warning that the country was going into default.
It suggested that Mr Putin’s effort to “sanctions-proof” his economy had largely failed.
And at least for now, there is no discernible off-ramp for the Russian leader short of declaring a cease-fire or pulling back his forces — steps he has so far shown no interest in taking.
At a news briefing at the White House on Thursday afternoon, Jen Psaki, the press secretary, said that she knew of no efforts to show Mr Putin a way out.
Yet a senior State Department official, asked about the debates inside the administration on the risks ahead, said there were nuances in the administration’s approach that point to possible outs for the Russian leader.
Mr Biden’s policy, the official said, was not one of seeking regime change in Russia.
The idea, he said, was to influence Mr Putin’s actions, not his grip on power.
And the sanctions, the official noted, were designed not as a punishment, but as leverage to end the war.
But the administration would calibrate its sanctions, and perhaps reduce them, if Mr Putin begins to de-escalate.
And the official said that because Mr Putin has now exerted such control over Russian media, closing down the last vestiges of independent news organizations, he could spin some kind of de-escalation into a victory.
Yet that hope collides with the assessments of Mr Putin’s instincts, many of which are based on open, unclassified observations.
William J Burns, the C.I.A. director, was an early advocate of the view that the Russian leader planned to invade, and was not massing troops around Ukraine simply to gain leverage in some kind of bargaining game.
He seems unlikely to accept any result that does not achieve his goal of bringing Ukraine closer to the Russian fold.
And, especially after the Russian military’s poor performance in the first week of the war, he may be concerned that any whiff of failure could weaken his hold on power.
His strategy in coming weeks, some other American officials have warned in closed meetings since the crisis accelerated, could be to redirect the conflict toward Washington, hoping to distract from the Russian forces’ attacks on civilians in Ukraine and rouse a nationalistic response to the actions of a longtime adversary.
Tatyana Bolton, the policy director for cybersecurity and emerging threats at the R Street Institute, expressed confidence on Thursday that the financial industry was ready.
Morgans of the world spend more on cybersecurity than many government agencies,’’ said Ms.
Bolton, a former senior official in the Department of Homeland Security whose family immigrated from Russia.
Members of Congress have also raised concerns that Mr Putin could unleash Moscow’s network of criminal hackers, who have conducted ransomware attacks that have shut down hospitals, meat processing plants and the Colonial Pipeline network that carried nearly half of the gasoline, diesel and jet fuel on the East Coast.
Another possibility is that Mr Putin will threaten to push further into Moldova or Georgia, which, like Ukraine, are not members of NATO — and thus territory that the American and NATO forces would not enter.
Secretary of State Antony J Blinken is making Moldova one of his stops on a reassurance tour that began on Thursday.
Last Sunday, as the fighting accelerated, Belarus passed a referendum that amended its constitution to allow for nuclear weapons to be based, once again, on its territory.
American officials are expecting that President Aleksandr G Lukashenko may well ask Mr Putin to place tactical weapons in his country, where they would be closer to European capitals.
And Mr Putin has shown, twice this week, that he is ready to remind the world of the powers of his arsenal.
But the next move for Mr Putin is likely to further intensify his operations in Ukraine, which would almost certainly result in more civilian casualties and destruction.
HEADLINE | 03/03 Lukoil, Russia oil firm, calls for end to war ps://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/03/business/energy-environment/lukoil-russia-oil-ukraine.html GIST Lukoil, Russia’s second-largest oil company, appeared to distance itself from President Vladimir V Putin on Thursday by calling for a “fast resolution” to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
Lukoil is one of the most recognizable Russian brands in the United States.
Many lawmakers in Washington are pressing the Biden administration to ban the purchase of Russian oil by United States companies and to impose sanctions on Russian energy companies.
Shares of Lukoil on the London Stock Exchange have fallen more than 40 percent since mid-February.
Lukoil has long projected a more independent image than Rosneft, the state-controlled company that dominates the Russian oil industry.
Lukoil was founded in 1991 as a state-owned enterprise as the Soviet Union was falling apart.
The company went private in 1993, and seven years later it acquired Getty Oil, an American company, which gave Lukoil a network of United States filling stations.
It was not clear whether the move was a sign that executives of Russia’s largest private enterprise were breaking with Mr Putin, or mainly an effort to persuade Western leaders, business partners and customers to keep doing business with the company.
While petroleum products are the biggest Russian import in the United States and Europe, Russian products and sports teams have become pariahs.
Several states have banned the sale of Russian vodka, and restaurants, stores and bars across the United States have taken Russian spirits off their shelves.
The Newark City Council voted on Wednesday to suspend the business licenses of local Lukoil gas stations.
Lukoil stations in the United States sell fuel produced in many countries, including the United States.
They are operated as independent franchises, and make up a small fraction of Lukoil’s operations.
The company has subsidiaries in roughly 30 countries, including those involved in exploring and producing oil and gas in Azerbaijan, Egypt, Colombia and Iraq.
The company’s biggest reserves are in Russia, particularly western Siberia.
Now South Africans are defending their loyalty to another autocrat — Vladimir V Putin — and sitting out the global outcry over his invasion of Ukraine.
The striking tally reflected the ambiguous attitude across much of the continent where, with a handful of exceptions, the Ukraine war has been greeted with conspicuous silence — a sharp contrast with Western countries that are expanding sanctions, seizing oligarchs’ yachts, pressing for war crimes investigations, and even openly threatening to collapse the Russian economy.
And in recent years a growing number of countries have contracted with Russian mercenaries and bought ever-greater quantities of Russian weapons.
A few African countries have condemned Russian aggression as an attack on the international order, notably Kenya and Ghana.
Some 25 African nations voted for the United Nations resolution that denounced Mr Putin’s actions on Wednesday.
But deep divisions in the continent’s response were apparent from the start.
The deputy leader of Sudan flew into Moscow on the first day of the conflict, exchanging warm handshakes with Russia’s foreign minister as warplanes bombed Ukrainian cities.
Morocco, a longtime American ally, offered a watery statement, annoying American officials who nonetheless kept quiet.
In Ethiopia, Russian flags flew at a ceremony on Wednesday to commemorate a famous 19th century battle against Italian invaders, recalling the involvement of Russian volunteers who sided with Ethiopian fighters.
African sympathies for Ukraine were also diluted by reports of Ukrainian border guards forcing African students to the back of lines as they attempted to leave the country, raising a furor over racism and discrimination.
President Muhammadu Buhari of Nigeria, which has 4,000 students in Ukraine, decried the reports.
Mr Putin has partly sidestepped opprobrium in Africa by calling in chits that date back to the Cold War, when Moscow backed African liberation movements and presented itself as a bulwark against Western neocolonialism.
On Sunday, Russia’s foreign ministry paused its focus on Ukraine to remind South Africa, in a Tweet, of its support for the fight against apartheid.
But Mr Putin has also divided African opinion thanks to his own efforts to expand Russian influence across the continent through an unusual combination of diplomacy, guns and mercenaries.
In an effort to regain some of the influence that Moscow lost in 1991 with the collapse of the Soviet Union, Mr Putin hosted a glitzy summit in the southern Russian city of Sochi in 2019 that was attended by 43 African heads of state.
But as Russia’s economy strained under Western sanctions imposed following the annexation of the Crimea in 2014, it could not afford the expensive enticements offered by other powers in Africa, like China’s cheap loans or Western development aid.
In recent years, Wagner mercenaries have fought in civil wars in Libya and Mozambique, and are currently guarding the president of the Central African Republic, where they helped repel a rebel assault on the capital last year.
In January, Wagner fighters appeared in Mali, as part of a deal to combat Islamist insurgents that infuriated France, the former colonial power, which last month declared it was pulling its own soldiers out of Mali.
The military junta ruling Mali denies inviting Wagner into the country, but United States military officials say as many as 1,000 Russian mercenaries are already operating there.
Russia accounts for nearly half of all arms imports into Africa, according to Russia’s arms export agency and organizations that monitor weapons transfers.
One of Mr Putin’s staunchest defenders in the past week was a powerful figure in Uganda, a major customer for Russian weapons.
He added, “When the USSR parked nuclear armed missiles in Cuba in 1962, the West was ready to blow up the world over it.
Now, Russia is engaged in a fresh bid for influence in Africa, but driven by right-wing nationalism.
A similar divide has emerged in Asia, where nations with authoritarian leaders or weak ties to the West have embraced Mr Putin’s war or avoided criticism of Russian military aggression.
Last week the Automobile Association of South Africa predicted that rising fuel prices would reach a record high in the coming weeks.
Food is getting more expensive too — Russia and Ukraine are major sources of wheat and fertilizer in Africa — at a time when many African countries are still reeling from the pandemic.
But the war could also have an economic upside for Africa, albeit one that could take years to be felt.
As Europe pivots away from Russian gas imports, it could turn to African countries looking to exploit recently-discovered energy reserves.
President Samia Suluhu Hassan of Tanzania, which is seeking a $30 billion investment to tap a huge gas discovery in the Indian Ocean, said the invasion of Ukraine could provide an opportunity.
Elsewhere, though, Mr Putin is still benefiting from his image as a thorn in the West’s side.
Many South Africans remember that the United States supported the apartheid regime until the 1980s.
However, aside from the historical ties with Russia, South Africa is motivated to call for diplomacy rather than fighting because that approach aligns with the country’s stance on international conflicts for the past 30 years, she said.
The BBC said this week that it would use radio frequencies that can travel for long distances and be accessible on portable radios to broadcast its World Service news in English for four hours a day in Kyiv, the Ukrainian capital, and in parts of Russia.
On Tuesday, Russian projectiles struck the main radio and television tower in Kyiv.
Shortwave radio has been a go-to vehicle to reach listeners in conflict zones for decades, used to deliver crackling dispatches to soldiers in the Persian Gulf war, send codes to spies in North Korea and pontificate through the Iron Curtain during the Cold War.
But more modern forms of radio along with the internet eventually pushed shortwave out of favor; the BBC retired its shortwave transmissions in Europe 14 years ago.
Over the last week of February, viewership of BBC’s Ukrainian language site more than doubled from a year earlier to 3. million visitors, the broadcaster said on Wednesday.
Millions of Russians are also turning to the BBC, the broadcaster said.
Other Western news outlets have also experienced a surge in viewership.
The BBC “plays a determined role in undermining the Russian stability and security,” Ms.
Early Friday, BBC’s Russian service reported problems accessing its site in Russia.
However, some local spots say they still plan to require proof for now.
Gislason said they want everyone to come and feel comfortable, but their priority is health, safety and the comfort level of their staff.
She and her colleagues are hopeful someday soon COVID and vaccinations won't be a factor.
They're just one of a number of Seattle restaurants that posted on social media that they plan to continue checking for proof of vaccination.
Gislason said they aren't trying to make anyone feel uncomfortable and they hope customers will be amenable and understanding.
Gislason said The Octopus Bar had to close for two weeks in December as cases skyrocketed after she got sick and the rest of the staff followed.
They do expect to let the mask mandate go away, considering people tend to have their masks off once they're eating or drinking anyway, and they hope to end the vaccination requirement when everyone is comfortable.
But for now, they hope people will bear with them and respect their staff.
On Thursday, Seattle Councilmember Sara Nelson echoed the assessment, who along with her council colleague Andrew Lewis agreed to an interview with KINGS on the corner of Third and Pine, where there has been rampant open-air drug dealing, retail theft, and assaults.
Third Avenue has been a criminal hotspot for years, but this week flared up again, with a series of shootings and stabbings.
Business owners have threatened to close, or have done so already, because of the unchecked activity in the heart of downtown.
On Thursday, the Seattle Police Department parked a mobile precinct in the middle of the street, across from Century Square, and the visible criminal activity seemed to dissipate.
However, it comes at a time when the police department is understaffed, by Interim Seattle Police Chief Adrian Diaz and Mayor Harrell's accounts.
Lewis takes exception when asked about the fact that he was on the council that voted to cut SPD jobs and reallocate resources in 2020.
The council members also said they're ready to dust off a dormant plan to rebuild and remodel Third Avenue.
The 'Vision' first pitched by the Downtown Seattle Association in 2019, sought to revitalize and brighten the transit corridor with trees and improved pedestrian thoroughfares.
Both Nelson, who is a city-wide representative, and Lewis, who represents Downtown, said those kinds of big changes, which would revitalize the corridor filled with boarded-up buildings, won't happen overnight, but immediate changes should also be expected.
It will be the 10th property purchased for the program, which aims to rapidly develop permanent supportive housing for homeless residents by buying apartment buildings and hotels.
In early February, Kirkland City Manager Kirk Triplett posted to the city’s Facebook page to voice support for opening the hotel to the homeless after residents began asking questions about the project.
Kirkland Mayor Penny Sweet said in a statement Thursday, “The conversion of this hotel into permanent supportive housing continues Kirkland’s commitment to being a safe, inclusive and welcoming community where everyone belongs and will save lives.
The county and city will partner to schedule public meetings this spring to give community members a chance to give input.
One concern from residents in the past was that the property, located at 10530 Northup Way, is adjacent to Eastside Preparatory School.
Others said they believed the project would lead to more police activity.
As for its future residents, the hotel will offer 24/7 onsite staffing that will provide them with case management as well as services for both behavioral and physical health.
Comments made at a city council meeting have sparked debate over whether the city should be considering one.
Brier, a city of just 7,000 people, has been struggling to fill its six-person police force.
Almquist is looking to fill three positions, which is half the department.
Mayor Dale Kaemingk said residents are adamant the city have its own force.
Right now it's relying on the Snohomish County Sheriff's Office for assistance.
I felt that was a really great thing for him to work on and he has brought some really strong candidates.
At least three of the candidates Almquist mentioned during the February 22 council were fired from their previous jobs because of the vaccine mandate.
During the meeting councilmember, Martin Krienke voiced his concerns about hiring unvaccinated officers.
Councilmember Valerie Roman said it could become a problem if there's an outbreak within the department.
Councilmembers also discussed whether there would be an issue with public perception.
The comments and discussion led to debates on community pages from residents about whether the county should issue a mandate.
Kaemingk said he isn't aware of any future action to formally consider a COVID19 vaccine mandate.
He argues he's not aware of any law enforcement department in Snohomish County requiring the vaccine.
In a letter to the city, the mayor said he's received the vaccine and encourages others to get vaccinated.
He added the COVID-19 cases in Snohomish County are declining and that the CDC has relaxed its indoor masking recommendation.
He taught me by example to first be a good listener and work hard at understanding the position of those I disagree with.
Much of the strike involves a company named CalPortland, which is owned by a Japanese company, Taiheiyo Cement.
Teamsters gathered at the Japanese consulate on Thursday to up the pressure against them.
The strike has been getting international attention, especially as the striking teamsters turn their focus to the Japanese business.
Strikers said the strike is much more than a story about business, but it’s affecting their livelihoods.
Four other concrete companies that have been impacted by the strike issued a response, saying workers were offered an 18% increase in wages over a three-year period, and it was rejected by the union.
The pass will cost $1,699, with a $100 discount for those renewing from this season, a steep increase from the current season in which full-price season passes cost $999, The Seattle Times reported.
The news coincided with the announcement of a major capital investment in the busy ski area near Mount Rainier National Park by owner Alterra Mountain Company.
Notably, the new Crystal Legend Pass will not be a member of the Ikon family, which provides access to some 45 ski destinations worldwide.
It will cost an additional $300 to add an Ikon Pass onto the new allaccess Crystal pass.
The infrastructure investment will begin in April, when the resort intends to break ground on a $25 million, 25,114-square-foot lodge with new dining, retail and ticket-sales facilities.
The United States Justice Department has created a task force to go after the assets of Russian oligarchs, with the Biden administration vowing to seize their yachts, luxury apartments and private jets.
Oligarchs — or extremely wealthy business leaders who are politically connected — became more prominent in Russia in the 1990s, but they are not unique to Russia.
Many Russian oligarchs are heavily involved in and benefit from Russian President Vladimir Putin's regime, with some serving in political positions.
For example, when Putin opened a new bridge to Crimea in 2018 — a region Russia had annexed from Ukraine in 2014 — the bridge was built by his friend Arkady Rotenberg's company and the truck he drove across it was made by Sergei Chemezov's state corporation Rostec, according to The Carnegie Moscow Center, a think-tank that focuses on domestic and foreign policy.
For example, Dmitry Patrushev, the son of Russian Security Council Secretary Nikolai Patrushev, was appointed as Russia's minister of agriculture, according to The Carnegie Moscow Center.
Numerous Russian oligarchs and government officials were sanctioned by the United States in 2018, in part for the regime's occupation of Crimea and for continuing to instigate violence in Ukraine, according to the United States Treasury Department, which announced the sanctions.
Rotengberg's son and Patruskev were included in that round of sanctions for their involvement with the regime.
The Justice Department says the new multi-agency initiative known as Task Force KleptoCapture aims to enforce the sweeping sanctions, export restrictions and economic countermeasures that the United States and its allies and partners have imposed on Russia following its unprovoked invasion of Ukraine.
While the task force aims to hold the sanctioned Russian elite accountable following the country's invasion of Ukraine, tracking down and seizing their assets will not be easy.
These extraordinarily wealthy and powerful individuals — including Vladimir Putin himself — have taken elaborate steps to protect their wealth around the globe.
Some oligarchs are trying to dodge penalties by moving assets — like their mega-yachts — into territories where sanctions don't apply and where their property cannot be seized or their assets frozen.
Financier and anti-corruption advocate Bill Browder told CBS News senior investigative correspondent Catherine Herridge that the goal is to get oligarchs to pressure Putin to stop the war.
Some wealthy Russians have spoken out against Putin's attack on Ukraine.
Mikhail Fridman, who founded one of Russia'a largest largest private banks, said he does not believe war should be a solution.
As a British citizen I ask you to save Europe from war,"" wrote Lebedev, whose father, Alexander Lebedev, is a former KGB agent turned bank owner.
He is considered an ally of Putin, but wrote that ""peace is very important"" and talks to end the war should begin ""as soon as possible,"" according to The Associated Press.
And young people are back at schools and universities — many of them for the first time in years.
It isn’t quite how things were before the COVID-19 pandemic — mask mandates still exist in some places — but with infections steadily declining, life in South Asia is returning to a sense of normalcy.
The mental scars from last year's delta-driven surge persist — especially in India, where health systems collapsed and millions likely died — but across the region high vaccination rates and hope that the highly contagious omicron variant has helped bolster immunity are giving people reasons to be optimistic.
While experts agree that opening up was the right move amid falling case numbers, they caution that optimism should be tempered with lessons from the past two years.
She said that new variants remain a concern, especially if the virus mutates into a more lethal version while retaining its infectiousness.
Those concerns were put aside in Nepal this week, as hundreds of thousands of people gathered at the Pashupatinath Temple in Kathmandu for a festival of the Hindu god Shiva.
Some restrictions remain on the island — masks are mandatory in public places — but the government hopes that foreign tourists will return soon, helping bolster its faltering economy.
The island nation was so short of hard currency during the pandemic that authorities had restricted imports of cars and fertilizer.
Now it’s using its dwindling reserves to pay for ever more costly oil needed to keep the economy running.
Apart from the loss of human life, the pandemic also made millions poorer, including many who were among the most vulnerable.
The stringent lockdown, announced with a few hours’ notice in 2020, forced thousands of people to walk home to their villages from the cities where they worked.
Those workers have now begun returning to cities, as activity picks up at factories and construction sites.
If we don't eat, we die,” said Devendra Kumar, a young laborer working at a construction site in New Delhi.
Kuldeep Singh Tomar, 38, who owns a shoe shop in New Delhi, said that sales have increased from around $400 daily in January to twice that in February.
In Bangladesh too, people are cautiously taking off their masks while dealing with the fallout of the pandemic.
Return to Top 03/03 EU clears Moderna for children 6-11yrs old ps://abcnews.go.com/Health/wireStory/eu-clears-moderna-shot-young-kids-pfizer-boosters-83226044 GIST AMSTERDAM -The European Medicines Agency said it has authorized Moderna's coronavirus vaccine for children aged six to 11, in addition to recommending booster shots of Pfizer's vaccine for those aged 12 and over, in decisions aimed at providing further protection against COVID-19 for children across Europe.
Marco Cavaleri said the Moderna vaccine for younger children will be a half-dose of what is given to older teens and adults.
He said research showed young children had an immune response comparable to that seen in older populations “as measured by the level of neutralizing antibodies” against the COVID-19 virus.
Cavaleri said the Moderna shot was also being recommended for use as a booster dose in people who had received other vaccines.
The Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine was previously granted a green light for use in children aged five and over last November.
Cavaleri said data from countries including Israel and the United States in more than 400,000 children showed that a third dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine in children 12 was safe and effective.
Children are typically at much lower risk of severe coronavirus disease but are still vulnerable amid high levels of transmission.
Cavaleri also said while some European countries have started offering their older populations a second booster dose based on concerns their immunity may fade quicker, the EMA has made no such recommendation.
In recent weeks, COVID-19 cases and deaths across much of Europe have dropped significantly after peaking in late January.
But numbers are still rising in some places with lower vaccination rates elsewhere, including Russia and Turkey.
In the spring of 2021, after every adult became eligible for the vaccine, over 2 million people a day were getting their first dose.
However, in recent months, with most of those willing to get their shots now inoculated, vaccination rates have plummeted.
The number of Americans who are receiving their first COVID-19 vaccine now stands at a pandemic low, with fewer than 80,000 Americans initiating vaccination each day.
Further, since December, the rate of people getting boosted has also fallen significantly, dropping from 1 million booster shots administered a day to less than 140,000.
Although there are certainly fewer unvaccinated than vaccinated people in the U.S., tens of millions of Americans remain unvaccinated and unboosted.
Across the country, more than 58 million eligible Americans remain unvaccinated, while 87. million Americans -about half of those currently eligible to be boosted -have yet to receive their supplemental dose.
Amid the declining interest, some scientists and health officials say it is possible Americans could need an additional booster this fall, or seasonal boosters in the future, to address waning vaccine immunity or new coronavirus variants.
The experts interviewed by ABC News are concerned about how to convey that message while maintaining trust as well as how additional doses might further exacerbate inequities in access and care around the country.
Since the fall, immunocompromised Americans have already had the option to receive a fourth mRNA dose.
However, for the general public, the benefit of additional doses still is not clear.
In an interview with Bloomberg TV last week, Fauci said that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is studying data on a ""month-by-month basis,"" and should durability rates continue to fall, officials will have to decide whether to begin offering a fourth dose, particularly to those at higher risk, such as the elderly.
However, even if data emerges indicating the need for a fourth dose, convincing Americans to get another shot may present a new set of challenges.
Shira Doron, an infectious disease physician and hospital epidemiologist at Tufts Medical Center, told ABC News.
Some people point erroneously to the increase in breakthrough infections as a reason to not get vaccinated, she said.
Thus, experts say, it is important for public health experts to emphasize the benefit of vaccination, and how dramatically reducing the risk of developing severe illness or dying if infected.
In December, a period of omicron dominance, unvaccinated people were 14 times more likely to die of COVID-19 compared to people who received the one-shot Johnson & Johnson shot or two shots of Pfizer and Moderna vaccines.
Health experts also caution that if a fourth dose is eventually needed, it will be important for health officials to outline what the purpose of an additional dose would be.
Evidence exhibiting protection against severe illness and death, will ultimately be paramount, Brownstein added.
Experts are particularly concerned about the continued growing racial disparity in the current booster drive, and the impact such gaps in uptake could have on populations that are already at increased risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes.
Black and brown Americans are currently lagging in the booster effort, with only 39.5% of eligible Hispanic/Latino Americans boosted, and 43.8% of eligible Black Americans boosted.
Asian Americans lead every race/ethnicity group, with 58.9% of the eligible population boosted.
If additional shots are needed in the future, experts worry about deepening inequities.
As health officials plan for the months and years ahead, Doron suggested there are several potential ways to proceed, including switching to an annual vaccination should a seasonal pattern with COVID-19 emerge or waiting for continued signs of waning effectiveness and recommending a fourth dose then, particularly to those at high risk.
Regardless of how officials decide to move forward, experts say it will be essential to convince Americans of the importance and benefits of vaccines, and thus, that low COVID-19 vaccination rates could not only undermine recovery prospects, but potentially also lead to another surge of infections in the advent of a new variant.
Firefighters responded to the Friendly Garden Apartments in Silver Spring, just outside Washington, D.C., about 10:30m.
Video footage from a nearby resident’s outdoor security camera shows an explosion obliterating an end unit of one building.
Steven Inman was cooking in a nearby apartment when he heard the blast.
My father yells out to me and I was already running over here,” he said.
Inman said he helped a woman and her small child get out of the building and found another woman with third-degree burns over much of her body.
Montgomery County Fire and Rescue Service Chief Scott Goldstein said 10 people were taken to the hospital, three with serious injuries.
I do not have a number to provide you at this point,” Goldstein said at an afternoon news conference.
The building that exploded, as well as those immediately adjacent to and across from it, have been declared unsafe to reoccupy.
Goldstein said there were “possible indications of alerts” by search dogs, which could indicate bodies or survivors could be in the rubble of the exploded building.
Crews will need to bring in heavy machinery to remove an unstable freestanding wall in order to facilitate the search, he said.
Video from the scene showed flames shooting from the roof of a building and debris scattered on the ground.
Goldstein indicated that most of the flames had been extinguished by Thursday afternoon.
Authorities were hoping to escort residents back into the buildings that have been declared unsafe later Thursday so that they could retrieve belongings before being taken to shelter or hotels, and to allow residents to reoccupy three other buildings.
Larry Hogan tweeted that his team has been in contact with county officials about the explosion, and that the state fire marshal, state police and state emergency management officials were offering their support.
Washington Gas, a utility that serves the area, said it was aware of the incident and that its personnel were assisting the fire department.
In 2016, two children and five adults were killed, and 68 people sent to the hospital, after an explosion and fire at the Flower Branch apartments a few miles away.
After a three-year investigation, National Transportation Safety Board officials said Washington Gas’ faulty equipment was the most likely cause of the explosion.
The board also found multiple communication gaps and missed opportunities to correct the leak that might have prevented the 2016 explosion.
People around the complex smelled natural gas six times in the weeks and months before the explosion, but nobody ever called the gas company to report a possible leak, investigators said.
Leading nuclear authorities were concerned — but not panicked — about the damage to the power station.
The assault triggered phone calls between Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and United States President Joe Biden and other world leaders.
The United States Department of Energy activated its nuclear incident response team as a precaution.
The attack on the eastern city of Enerhodar and its Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant unfolded as the invasion entered its second week and another round of talks between the two sides yielded a tentative agreement to set up safe corridors to evacuate citizens and deliver humanitarian aid.
Nuclear plant spokesman Andriy Tuz told Ukrainian television that shells were falling directly on the facility and had set fire to one of its six reactors.
That reactor is under renovation and not operating, but there is nuclear fuel inside, he said.
Firefighters cannot get near the flames because they are being shot at, he said, and Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba tweeted a plea to the Russians to stop the assault and allow fire teams inside.
United States Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm tweeted that the Zaporizhzhia plant’s reactors were protected by robust containment structures and were being safely shut down.
In an emotional speech in the middle of the night, Zelenskyy said he feared an explosion that would be ""the end for everyone.
The International Atomic Energy Agency said the fire had not affected essential equipment and that Ukraine’s nuclear regulator reported no change in radiation levels.
The American Nuclear Society concurred, saying that the latest radiation levels remained within natural background levels.
Jon Wolfsthal, who served during the Obama administration as the senior director for arms control and nonproliferation at the National Security Council, said the plant's reactors have thick concrete containment domes that should protect them from tank and artillery fire.
But he too was concerned about a potential loss of power at the plant, which could imperil its ability to keep the nuclear fuel cool.
The mayor of Enerhodar said earlier that Ukrainian forces were battling Russian troops on the city’s outskirts.
Video showed flames and black smoke rising above the city of more than 50,000, with people streaming past wrecked cars.
Prior to the shelling, the Ukrainian state atomic energy company reported that a Russian military column was heading toward the nuclear plant.
They are breaking down doors and trying to get into the apartments of local residents,” the statement from Energoatom said.
Later, a livestreamed security camera linked from the homepage of the Zaporizhzhia plant showed what appeared to be armored vehicles rolling into the facility’s parking lot and shining spotlights on the building where the camera was mounted.
Then there were what appeared to be muzzle flashes from vehicles, followed by nearly simultaneous explosions in surrounding buildings.
Ukrainian Prime Minister Denys Shmyhal called on the West to close the skies over the country's nuclear plants.
The United States and NATO allies have ruled out creating a no-fly zone since the move would pit Russian and Western military forces against each other.
Vladimir Putin’s forces have brought their superior firepower to bear over the past few days, launching hundreds of missiles and artillery attacks on cities and other sites around the country and making significant gains in the south.
The Russians announced the capture of the southern city of Kherson, a vital Black Sea port of 280,000, and local Ukrainian officials confirmed the takeover of the government headquarters there, making it the first major city to fall since the invasion began a week ago.
Heavy fighting continued on the outskirts of another strategic port, Mariupol, on the Azov Sea.
The battles have knocked out the city's electricity, heat and water systems, as well as most phone service, officials said.
Associated Press video from the port city showed the assault lighting up the darkening sky above deserted streets and medical teams treating civilians, including a 16-year-old boy inside a clinic who could not be saved.
The child was playing soccer when he was wounded in the shelling, according to his father, who cradled the boy’s head on the gurney and cried.
Severing Ukraine's access to the Black and Azov seas would deal a crippling blow to its economy and allow Russia to build a land corridor to Crimea, seized by Moscow in 2014.
Overall, the outnumbered, outgunned Ukrainians have put up stiff resistance, staving off the swift victory that Russia appeared to have expected.
But a senior United States defense official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Russia’s seizure of Crimea gave it a logistical advantage in that part of the country, with shorter supply lines that smoothed the offensive there.
Ukrainian leaders called on the people to defend their homeland by cutting down trees, erecting barricades in the cities and attacking enemy columns from the rear.
In recent days, authorities have issued weapons to civilians and taught them how to make Molotov cocktails.
The second round of talks between Ukrainian and Russian delegations was held in neighboring Belarus.
Putin told French President Emmanuel Macron he was determined to press on with his attack ""until the end,” according to Macron's office.
The two sides said that they tentatively agreed to allow cease-fires in areas designated safe corridors, and that they would seek to work out the necessary details quickly.
A Zelenskyy adviser also said a third round of talks will be held early next week.
Putin claimed that the Russian military had already offered safe corridors for civilians to flee, but he asserted without evidence that Ukrainian “neo-Nazis"" were preventing people from leaving and were using them as human shields.
He also hailed Russian soldiers as heroes in a video call with members of Russia's Security Council, and ordered additional payments to families of men killed or wounded.
The Pentagon set up a direct communication link to Russia's Ministry of Defense earlier this week to avoid the possibility of a miscalculation sparking conflict between Moscow and Washington, according to a United States defense official who spoke on condition of anonymity because the link had not been announced.
The Russian and Ukrainian delegations gathered in the Brest region of Belarus for the second round of talks in four days.
Unfortunately, the results Ukraine needs are not yet achieved,"" Ukraine's presidential adviser, Mykhailo Podolyak, tweeted following the meeting.
Ukrainian officials have previously said they want Russia to withdraw all troops from Ukraine.
During a televised briefing on Thursday with foreign journalists, including ABC News, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said Russia is ready to negotiate.
Lavrov said Russia would continue its military operation while the talks were ongoing, saying it cannot allow ""military infrastructure"" to remain in Ukraine as a threat to Russia.
Zelenskyy on Thursday expressed no interest in demilitarizing and issued a warning to Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Zelenskyy said he is ready to meet and talk directly with Putin and repeated his calls for a ""no-fly"" zone over Ukraine immediately, saying it would act as a deterrent.
In an earlier statement posted on Facebook, Zelenskyy said, ""We are a nation that broke the enemy's plans in a week"" and praised his military forces and Ukrainian civilians who have taken up arms to defend the country.
As he has done previously, Putin called Ukrainians and Russians ""one people"" and that his troops are fighting against ""neo-Nazis,"" a claim that has been debunked by the United States and its Western allies.
Nearly 1,100 manatees died in 2021, which is roughly 20% of the east coast population of manatees, according to a lawsuit filed by Save the Manatee Club, the Center for Biological Diversity and Defenders of Wildlife.
Rose is the executive director of Save the Manatee Club, the non-profit organization started by singer Jimmy Buffet in 1981 that is dedicated to protecting manatees and preserving their natural habitat.
The group tells ABC News that popular waterways for manatees, like the Indian River Lagoon on Florida’s east coast, have suffered years of pollution from sources like failed septic tanks, improperly treated sewage and fertilizer that deposits nutrients into the water.
According to the lawsuit, the Florida manatee was first listed as an endangered species in 1967, but to help protect the animals even further, USFWS designated areas where manatees are found as a “critical habitat” in 1976.
Critical habitats are specific areas that have biological and physical features that are important for the survival of a species.
When the critical habitat was first established, important components of the habitat, such as the seagrass, were not taken into consideration, Rose said.
But by 2008, updated Congressional and USFWS definitions of a critical habit and new scientific information required that the manatee's critical habitat designation be adjusted, according to the lawsuit.
Environmental groups requested that USFWS update the term in 2008 and the agency agreed, but never followed through, according to the lawsuit.
The United States Fish and Wildlife Service did not respond to an ABC News request for comment on the lawsuit.
Save the Manatee Club hopes the USFWS ""will work with us now to ensure that seagrasses and warm water habitat are better protected to prevent a continuation of the devastating losses of so many manatees due the continuing loss of seagrasses, which are literally “critically important” to the future survival of manatees,” Rose said.
Save the Manatee is also appealing to the United States Environmental Protection Agency in hopes to upgrade water quality standards so that seagrass will not continue to die from pollution.
If the court rules in favor of the environmental groups, it will result in higher standards and stiffer penalties for those who pollute waters which kill seagrass.
According to Rose, until the standards are raised, the manatees and their ecosystems will continue to be under threat.
The sanction targets include Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov, as well as one of Russia's richest men, Alisher Usmanoy, according to the White House.
Germany had already seized Usmanov's superyacht, and the White House said both the boat and Usmanov's private jet -which it said was one of the largest privately-owned aircraft in Russia -would be blocked for use in the United States or by Americans.
It said the elites sanctioned provided direct and indirect support to the Russian government through their business empires, wealth, and other resources.
It described Usmanov as one of Russia’s wealthiest billionaires with vast holdings across multiple sectors of the Russian Federation economy as well as internationally.
This superyacht’s estimated worth is believed to be between $600 and $735 million.
Dilbar has two helipads and one of the world’s largest indoor pools ever installed on a yacht.
The estimated cost to run Dilbar is $60 million per year,"" Treasury said.
Usmanov’s aircraft, an Airbus A340-300, the release said, is believed to have cost between $350 and $500 million.
Shortly after he arrived in Brussels for a full day of meetings Thursday with NATO, the G-7, and European Union counterparts, among other allies, Secretary of State Antony Blinken weighed in on the new sanctions.
The statement also said the Department of State is imposing substantial costs on Russia’s defense enterprises by sanctioning 22 defense-related firms.
Russia’s war will worsen inflation GIST ps://abcnews.go.com/Business/wireStory/feds-powell-russias-war-ukraine-worsen-inflation-83230954 WASHINGTON -Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell warned Thursday that Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which has already driven up oil prices, will likely further magnify the high inflation that has engulfed the United States economy.
At the same time, Powell said he is committed to doing whatever it will take to slow inflation, underscoring the Fed's high-risk challenge in raising interest rates enough to stem price increases without tipping the economy into another recession.
The Fed chair, addressing the Senate Banking Committee on his second day of semiannual testimony to Congress on interest rate policies, stressed his belief that the economy is strong enough to withstand higher borrowing costs.
His expression of confidence echoed his testimony Wednesday that the Fed can engineer a “soft landing"" in which the economy would slow enough to ease inflation even while hiring and growth remain healthy.
Consumer prices are already rising at their fastest pace in four decades, having jumped 7.5% in January compared with 12 months earlier.
Gas prices, a key driver of that increase, have soared 40% over the past year.
In the view of most economists, the surge in inflation is largely a consequence of a shortage of labor and components resulting from bottlenecked supply chains, much of it resulting from the global economy’s swift rebound from the pandemic recession.
Steve Daines, a Montana Republican, Powell noted that inflation is generally thought to rise about 0. percentage point for each $10 increase in the price of a barrel of oil.
Richard Shelby, an Alabama Republican, urged Powell to do “what it takes” to control inflation.
He praised Paul Volcker, who led the Fed in the early 1980s and who sharply increased the Fed’s benchmark short-term rate to choke off the double-digit inflation of the 1970s.
But Powell stressed his belief that the Fed can bring down inflation without triggering a recession.
The economy grew last year at the fastest pace since the 1980s, the Fed chair noted, the unemployment rate is at a low 4% and hourly pay is rising steadily, before adjusting for inflation.
Job openings are near a record high, Powell added, and Americans are quitting their jobs at a record pace, usually for better, higher-paying positions.
For these workers, pay gains over the past two years have slightly exceeded price increases.
On Wednesday, Powell had said that he would propose a quarter-point rate hike at the Fed's next meeting in two weeks, which would be the first rate increase since 2018.
The Fed chair repeated Thursday that if inflation didn't decline this year as he expects, he is open to bigger hikes at some later central bank meeting this year.
But opaque communication from the United States Food and Drug Administration and drugmakers, on top of whiplash over the shifting timeline and unexpected delays, has led to confusion and angst.
Some parents are obsessively tracking every press release, investor report and social media announcement to glean information, and a few have even lied about their kids’ ages to get their children vaccinated.
Parents have been told that vaccines for little ones are coming “soon” over and over.
In September, Pfizer’s CEO Albert Bourla said that two-shot data for 2to 4-year-olds would be available “before the end of the year,” with submission to the FDA soon after.
That data turned out to contain mixed news, and timelines got pushed out as Pfizer added a third shot.
Anthony Fauci suggested authorization could happen sometime in February, and momentum seemed to be gathering as the FDA scheduled a meeting of outside experts to review Pfizer’s data on Feb. to consider authorizing two doses first while waiting for data on the third.
In the latest twist, however, the FDA then delayed that meeting, saying that new information had led it to decide it was better to wait for more data.
All of this happened as first the delta variant, then omicron, sent an increasing number of children to the hospital, filling up pediatric wards.
Some parents, hearing experts urge the public to get vaccinated as soon as possible to prevent catching the highly infectious variant, were frustrated not to have that option for their children.
I laid them on their back when they were babies so they wouldn’t suffocate,” said Dr.
Knowing that vaccines are preventing deaths in kids over 5, it pains her that one isn’t available yet for her 3-year-old.
To bring some clarity to the conversation, I dug into FDA policy and asked officials at the agency, Moderna and Pfizer as well as pediatric vaccine experts the questions parents most want answered.
What I learned dispels a widespread myth, adds context to the factors officials are deliberating and provides an update on timing.
While children under 5 are much less vulnerable to the coronavirus than adults, they are not invulnerable to serious consequences.
They’ve been hospitalized and have died at a higher rate than kids ages 5 to 11, according to the agency.
Scott Krugman, vice chair of pediatrics at the Herman & Walter Samuelson Children's Hospital at Sinai.
A source of anxiety for many parents is that it’s hard to predict which kids may have bad outcomes.
The condition, in which many different organs including the heart, lungs, kidneys and brains become inflamed, can be serious and even deadly.
Experts have been telling parents that they can keep their little ones safe by surrounding them with people who are vaccinated, boosted and masked.
But many parents point out that restrictions are easing and people are becoming more active, so the risk is actually increasing for their children.
As schools drop mask mandates as well, some parents are also worried that their vaccinated older kids could bring the virus home to their unvaccinated younger siblings.
Her 4-year-old son, Jeremy, was born with a rare gene mutation that causes brain malformations and is particularly at risk of experiencing a seizure if he gets sick.
Whittington lives in rural West Virginia and said that the low vaccination rate in her area has made her have to keep Jeremy out of pre-K to avoid exposure.
But the agency isn’t considering Whittington’s situation in isolation; it has a far more complicated calculus to make.
I really want to know that, if the FDA tells me I’m going to have to give this to my kid or I should give this to my kid, I want to know that it really works,” an FDA official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, told me.
Only 1 in 4 children ages 5 tol1 was fully vaccinated as of March 1, and polling has shown that about a third of parents want to “wait and see,” while another third do not plan to get their child the shot.
When cases of omicron were surging and more and more kids were being hospitalized, the agency made an unprecedented move by saying it would consider authorizing two shots of the Pfizer vaccine for kids under 5 while waiting for the rest of the efficacy data on a third shot.
The thinking was that those kids could get a head start on the vaccine series before the third shot was authorized.
But the plan also hung on the presumption that the third dose would do the trick.
Peter Hotez, a pediatrician and dean for the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine.
C Buddy Creech, professor of pediatrics and director of the Vanderbilt Vaccine Research Program.
Pfizer, which was gathering data in real time, reportedly found that its shots were less effective against the omicron variant.
With this new information in hand, the FDA decided to delay and wait for data from all three shots to come in before considering authorization.
One factor in the decision was that risk for children overall has dropped as omicron cases have fallen.
The agency has a challenging job of balancing the need for thoroughness with speed, said Dr.
Paul Spearman, director of the division of infectious diseases at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.
It’s not unusual for children’s vaccine trials to take longer than adults’ because of additional steps needed to find the correct dosage for different age groups, Spearman said.
Ian Stone, parent of a 4-year-old in San Diego, said he’s willing to wait for a vaccine.
I don’t want it to be pushed forward because we have to have something,” he said.
But Stone, who works in public relations, said he thinks the unexpected delay “may cause more harm than good.
Misinformation has further confused parents, causing unnecessary concern that vaccines will be further delayed.
In December, Pfizer said that two shots were found to be safe for all kids under 5, but while children under 2 generated antibody levels similar to what has been seen in 16to 25-year-olds, the 2to 4-year-olds did not hit the same bar for effectiveness.
In response to the results, the drugmaker said it would start testing a three-shot regimen to see if that could increase the level of protection.
A myth sprung up and circulated around the internet, printed in traditional media and repeated by doctors, that the FDA had a policy that prohibited it from authorizing vaccines for age groups out of order.
Age de-escalation describes how some clinical trials are run, including the COVID-19 vaccine trials.
Adults are enrolled first, and once the vaccines are proven safe and effective, then the trial extends to younger and younger age groups.
I also asked Pfizer why, then, it hadn’t sought authorization for kids under 2 first.
The FDA is tightly limited by regulation and cannot publicly discuss trial data before approval outside of specific circumstances, such as an advisory committee.
Perhaps something in Pfizer’s data in infants made the drugmaker or FDA determine it wasn’t sufficient for authorization, but until data becomes public, it is impossible to know.
As for Moderna, authorization of its vaccine for 12to 17-year-olds has been held up in the United States because of concerns that it could cause myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle.
Moderna is now testing a smaller dose for adolescents and 6to 11-year-olds, but in the meantime, the company has said that it expects data from its trial of kids under 5 in March.
Parents, again confused by the supposed age de-escalation policy, have speculated that Moderna could not ask the FDA for authorization for the youngest kids before the teens had access to the vaccine.
Two companies could have data on vaccines in kids under 5 in a matter of weeks.
Pfizer has said it’ll have data on three doses “in spring” and Moderna has said it’II have data by the end of March.
If the data looks good, there’s nothing to stop the FDA from authorizing a vaccine for kids of a certain age group, even if an older cohort misses the mark or hasn’t yet gotten the green light.
Creech, who is also a principal investigator for Moderna’s pediatric vaccine trials, and Spearman both told me they expect authorization by April or, in a worst-case scenario, May.
The bad news is that this far into the pandemic, communication is still floundering in the face of a public that is increasingly distrustful of scientists and federal health agencies.
It’s true that the FDA is legally limited in discussing data particulars and manufacturers are traditionally secretive about ongoing trials.
What is apparent is that while many parents would like to see more data, what they want even more is to be reassured that their kids’ health is a priority.
It grieves us too that it’s been so complicated,’” said Jennifer Martin, a parent of three in Seattle.
I wish it could have come earlier, more often and been on the record, but I hope it provides some parents a bit of reassurance that they’ve been heard.
The antiwar hackers have also gone after pro-Russian hackers, swiping and leaking thousands of internal chats from the Conti ransomware group, as well as military communications and more.
And Anonymous accounts reported that they’re now battling Russian disinformation and trolls.
Anons also said pro-Russian elements were circulating a hit list to report their social media accounts en masse, trying to get #OpRussia hackers deplatformed.
Ukraine supporters without hacking skills were urged to hijack hashtags that were trending on Twitter earlier today in support of Russia and President Vladimir Putin, and use them to distribute content showing the truth about Russia’s attack on Ukraine.
Hackers were using #OpRussia, #OpKremlin, and similar hashtags to announce actions against Russian sites, similar to the #OpISIS campaign that targets the terror group’s deluge of online propaganda and the #OpKKK campaign that targets white supremacists.
Latest cyber ops claimed by hackers include breaching and leaking files from the Rosatom State Atomic Energy Corporation, taking down the official portal of the pro-Putin government in Crimea, and broadcasting Ukraine’s national anthem on Gazprom Media Radio.
Hacker vOg3lSec posted files that they said came from a private service hosted by Russian State Space Corporation “Roscosmos” and contained space agency data on the Luna-Glob moon exploration program.
NB65, a hacking group affiliated with Anonymous, claimed earlier that it breached the control center of Roscosmos and cut off the agency’s control over its spy satellites as part of the ongoing cyber-offensive.
An Anonymous video posted Feb. threatened to “take hostage” industrial control systems if the crisis escalated, and since #OpRussia began hackers have claimed breaching a Russian Linux terminal and gas control system in Nogir, North Ossetia.
One Anonymous account posted a long list that they said was IP addresses and ports for industrial control systems in Russia.
New networking equipment that were brought to replace old ones got infected.
DHS’ Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency and the FBI issued a joint Cybersecurity Advisory Saturday providing an overview of destructive malware that has been used to target organizations in Ukraine as well as guidance on how organizations can detect and protect their networks.
An intelligence brief from the Department of Homeland Security in January warned stakeholders that Russia “would consider” launching a cyber attack against the United States if the United States or NATO respond to Russia’s potential invasion of Ukraine in a way that the Kremlin perceived as threatening to Russian security.
There’s a flood of intel on Russian military, nukes and crooks, says dark-web intel expert Vinny Troia, even with the Conti ransomware gang shuttering its leaking Jabber chat server.
Conti ransomware gang crooks conjecturing that the National Security Agency was maybe behind the mysterious, months-long TrickBot lull.
Those are just some of the sensitive, valuable data that’s being hacked out of Russia in the cyber war zone — a war that erupted even before the country invaded Ukraine.
And dumping a lot of critical data on military, nuclear plants, etc.,” said Vinny Troia, cybersecurity Ph.D. and founder of ShadowByte, a dark web threat intelligence and cyber fraud investigations firm.
That ongoing dump, which has included source code for Conti and TrickBot, a decryptor (that doesn’t help recent victims whose files have been encrypted by the Conti gang, unfortunately), and much more, stopped yesterday when the Conti gang shut down its Jabber servers, Troia told Threatpost on Wednesday.
He visited the Threatpost podcast to update us on the mountain of data about Russia that intelligence experts are now slogging through.
My guest today is Vinny Troia, cybersecurity PhD and founder of ShadowByte, a dark web threat intelligence and cyber fraud investigations firm.
Today, we’re going to focus on all of the data that’s being leaked on Russia as a result of its invasion of Ukraine.
So my background I come from a DOD background did a lot of work for surface deployment command.
And yeah, I was there for about, I think six or seven years before moving over to private sector.
And while I was there, I did a lot of work in compliance and random security hacking projects, a lot of red teaming, pen testing.
Fast forward to today, our focus now is primarily dealing with a lot of ransomware cases, incident response, and we do a lot of ransom negotiations as well.
We’re constantly focused on dark web threat actors and any of the players, really.
And well this past week must be just a flurry with the dark web activity around Ukraine and Russia.
So in an email, you were talking about how everyone is so focused on Russia hacking the world, but the world has been also hacking Russia and dumping a lot of critical data on military nuclear plants, etc.
I’d say last month, there was a lot of data coming out about Ukrainian citizens.
So that was kind of interesting, almost like a precursor to what was happening.
And now it’s almost like, the rest of the world that’s really pissed and started hacking back and you’re seeing so much data coming out.
I’m actually looking for sorry, as we speak, I’m going through some of this data.
I mean, there’s stuff on a nuclear plants, some of their air force capabilities.
There’s another database that I just recently came across that is about a hundred thousand of their military members with photos, passport numbers, things like that.
I mean, I know that anonymous of course has jumped in to, to, to wage war on behalf of Ukraine, cyber war on behalf of Ukraine.
And I know that you can put out a call for help from cyber experts on this too.
And it’s really funny that Joe Biden didn’t mention security once in the state of the union last night, being that it was such a big deal and everybody’s been talking about it.
The news has been all about cyberattacks and Russia’s capabilities and it’s such a priority, but it just wasn’t even mentioned once.
I just, I find that really strange, but regardless, it’s nice that the world kind of banded together to really come after Russia.
One of the most, honestly, just incredibly fascinating things is all these leaks that have been occurring regarding the Conti ransomware.
And they’re arguably the largest or at least one of the top few largest ransomware groups in the world.
I mean, as early, as recently as today with the most recent chat logs that came out, so somebody still has access to their servers and I haven’t even had a chance to read the ones from today.
That’s not even going to be usable to anybody because it was for an older version.
Another one of my sources was telling me that just one of the gang’s groups got hit by this and everybody else is pretty much doing fine.
So Conti uses, or used, this one piece of software called TrickBot in order to disseminate and ... one of the or groupings of the chat log showed that the NSA came after TrickBot specifically.
Everybody knew that TrickBot pretty much shut down for a few months, but I didn’t know that about the NSA piece.
It’s presumed to be the NSA, given the level of skill that was involved, we’ll call it finesse.
Yeah, it’s basically a handful of officials talking about it and how they were shut down and how they basically had to rebuild their infrastructure.
They were down for a little bit and eventually they came back, but it just shows that they were being targeted by nation states.
So I think the majority of Russia’s economy is coming from some sort of crime.
The underground members say “protect the motherland, the motherland protects you.
I think I saw some keys floating around as well, but new code is written on top of old code and it’s not like it was replaced completely.
So I would imagine that there will be some fallout from that code base.
I can’t speak to what can be done with all of it, honestly, but the point is it’s there and, in the right hands, I’m sure it could be pretty useful.
No, and like I said, a couple of hours ago we had more leaks from their Jabber server.
So I would imagine whoever has access has been able to pull off a lot, and I think actually just shut it down finally.
But the point is they figured out that somebody did have access to their Jabber logs.
I would say that, just because Conti’s out doesn’t mean that the problem is going away anytime soon.
So be diligent and keep up with your passwords and make sure that you actually have fresh passwords, because looking at these logs and how they’re getting into a lot of these systems, it’s just using other people’s recycled passwords.
And I mean, even now the majority of hacks are still caused by reused passwords.
We can get some intelligence out of the exploits that they’re targeting.
I think I saw Zerologin was mentioned as one, and of course we know a lot about their tooling right now.
I know that we’ve got email addresses of some of the members of the gang.
You can use that to look for other accounts and potentially start to reverse back to maybe who they are.
So the takeaways for listeners are that these leaks haven’t stopped, and we don’t even know how many that is promising.
I don’t know what else is going to be released in terms of tools, but I’d say all of this has probably put a dent in everything they’re doing for a little bit.
I was going to say, giving credit to Krebs on this one, one of the things he reported on was that there was a conversation, and I haven’t even made it to the set about how the ransomware groups were being investigated.
And someone high up in the group basically told them they didn’t have anything to worry about.
I think REvil. that takedown, was the one I was thinking about when I alluded to this kind of token law enforcement action on Russia’s part to maybe make the United States shut up.
OK, well, Vinnie, unless you’ ve got anything else to add, I’m going to let you go.
ContiLeaks, the source of the Conti leaks, is not believed to be the same entity as vx_underground, which has disseminated the leaked files.
The first is a severe flaw found in versions 2. and later of the BD Viper LT system, an automated specimen processing and integrated molecular testing tool.
The device uses hard-coded credentials, which could allow an attacker to access, modify or delete device data, including protected health information and personally identifiable information.
CVE-2022-22765 is ranked 8. in severity and has a low attack complexity.
The flaw is not exploitable remotely and there are currently no known public exploits specifically targeting it.
BD simultaneously issued an alert for another hard-coded vulnerability found in a long list of its Pyxis automated medication dispensing systems.
A successful exploit could allow a threat actor to gain access to protected health information or other sensitive data.
The alert also notes that BD manages the credentials, which aren’t visible or used by customers to access the impacted devices.
BD's recommendations for voluntarily reported flaws BD voluntarily reported these flaws to CISA and is currently working on remediating the hard-coded issues.
The vendor intends the alert to raise awareness of the flaw and its recommended compensating controls for systems using hard-coded credentials.
Entities should make sure to implement physical access controls for the impacted Viper LT devices, while ensuring only authorized end-users can access the impacted systems.
Where applicable, the system should be disconnected from network access.
If access is necessary, entities should use standard network security policies and procedures.
BD recommends entities secure the impacted BD Pyxis products by using compensating user controls, including limiting physical access to authorized personnel, tightly controlling the management of system credentials, isolating the impacted devices, and monitoring traffic.
Entities are encouraged to work with the vendor or recommended remediation steps and to ensure all patching and virus definitions are up to date.
Disclosures are critical to the healthcare sector’s ability to maintain the security of highly complex medical device security infrastructures.
While challenging, working with the vendor directly on best practices can expedite the process.
On the vertical sector front, financial services was the most impersonated industry of 2021, with six brands in the Top 20 that represented 35% of all phishing pages.
Chase, PayPal, and Wells Fargo were the most impersonated financial services brands.
Organizations and employees are bombarded with phishing emails, some which clearly evade email security, explained Saryu Nayyar, founder and CEO of Gurucul.
Nayyar said with the sophistication and deceptions used by threat actors, invariably someone will click on one of these emails, compromising an organization.
George McGregor, vice president at Approov, pointed out that all of these brands are also heavily dependent on mobile apps.
McGregor said cloned and modified apps are increasingly being used as an attack vector with fake or modified apps used to steal consumer data and divert transactions.
Patrick Harr, CEO of SlashNext, said Vade’s data runs in line with what his team has been seeing.
However, Harr said SlashNext’s threat lab has seen more targets to Microsoft products vs.
Facebook, having seen a 57% increase from Q4 2021 to the first months of 2022.
Our threat labs see phishing start to ramp up on Sundays in the United States because this is Monday morning in other parts of the world where much of the cyberattacks originate.
Hank Schless, senior manager, security solutions at Lookout, added that social engineering remains one of the biggest headaches that IT and security teams have to deal with.
Schless said organizations need to implement a security strategy that protects users, devices, and data from the individual endpoint up to the cloud.
These assets included databases, remote access sites, and cloud services.
Reposify’s analysis showed that 86% of these companies have at least one exposed remote access service, 80% expose network assets, and 63% expose back office internal networks.
Just over half of the cybersecurity firms have at least one exposed database.
The study showed that more than two-thirds of companies exposed PostgreSQL databases, and half exposed Oracledb databases.
One concerning finding is that — except for storage and web assets — a majority of exposed services are in the organization’s “unofficial perimeter,” which means they are less likely to be monitored.
More than 40% of the vulnerabilities affecting exposed services have a “high” or “critical” severity rating.
IT Army of Ukraine was formed by cyber-specialists in the country, and the results of its operation became evident quickly.
Apart from launching DDoS attacks targeting key Russian sites, the group also exposes the personal details of opinion-makers in Russia and other people who play a significant role in the conflict.
Check Point reports that the phenomenon is growing as more fraudsters jump in trying to seize the opportunity to scam well-intended individuals.
Unverified news The third category that’s booming is news feeds that bypass mainstream outlets and post unedited, uncensored feeds from the war zone, 24/7.
Aside from the fact that publishing unedited war scenes breaches journalistic deontology, many of the news posted on these groups are not checked or verified and could very well be fabricated.
This is even a problem for vetted social media platforms as geopolitical analyst Michael Horowitz admitted when posting footage of a realistic-looking, computer-generated air dogfight created on a video game engine.
Check Point reports that these channels still amass a large number of users.
For example, the ‘Ukraine War report’ has 20,000 members, while ‘Russia vs.
Another news channel aimed at exposing Russian war crimes, ‘Ukrainian Witness’ (CBugetesb Yxpanust), has reached 100,000 members.
Some of these channels may post accurate information, but it’s nearly impossible for users to distinguish between real and fabricated reports.
This is why the platform is considered a haven for cyber-criminals who have been selling illegal material and even services to other pseudonymous users for years now.
Additionally, you should treat all new requests with suspicion and avoid sending money to anyone no matter the claims and presented assurances.
In its ""2022 Cyber Threat Landscape Report"" published this week, Deep Instinct said that its data shows that execution, persistence, and privilege escalation were the top three attacker actions, as defined by the MITRE ATT&CK framework, suggesting that adversaries had focused on initial infiltration and payload execution as opposed to extensive lateral movement.
In addition, the increased adoption of ransomwareas-a-service , which is easily accessible on the Dark Web, has resulted in a 15% increase in detected ransomware threats, according to the report.
The threat landscape is going to be extremely treacherous in coming months, especially as cyber operations escalate because of Russia's war on Ukraine, making defensive agility very important, says Shimon Oren, vice president of threat research and AI intelligence for Deep Instinct.
Ransomware Rules Cyberattacks and incidents are now the top concern for businesses in 2022, and ransomware is the top threat, with 57% of business professionals rating the surge in ransomware as their top concern, according to the recently released Allianz Risk Barometer 2022.
Seven out of 10 financial firms had suffered a ransomware attack, with the average ransom topping $91,000, although 70% of firms would or have refused to pay the ransom, according to Egress, a cybersecurity firm focused on insider threats.
To mitigate the risk, companies need to harden their network, processes, and people, says Tony Pepper, the firm's CEO and co-founder.
Most companies, however, are focused on mitigating the overall business risk, rather than the specific cybersecurity dangers.
While 83% of companies are spending on anti-phishing, 72% maintained a cyberinsurance policy, 64% retained outside legal counsel, and 55% invested in a forensic investigation, according to a report on executives' views on phishing published by Egress.
Return on Investment For attackers, it's all about return on investment, hitting organizations that can afford to pay with multiple attacks.
Currently, triple extortion — consisting of encrypting data, stealing data, and using a denial-ofservice attack — is the favored method to pressure companies into paying.
As long as the returns exceed the costs, ransomware will continue, says Rotem Salinas, senior malware researcher at CyberArk.
Attackers are definitely becoming increasingly sophisticated in ways of obfuscating their malware, making it harder to detect.
Yet whether the attacker goes for a quick, impactful attack or a slower, stealthier spread depends on the attacker's motivations and goals.
In either case, the defensive focus should be on hardening the information-technology environment, preventing the attack, and automating the initial response, because otherwise the attacker will either quickly infect other systems or execute the payload, says Deep Instinct's Oren.
In addition, with more expertise focused on providing ransomware-as-a-service, and a variety of leaked codebases allowing malware developers to build on one another, ransomware will continue to become more sophisticated and evolve quickly, CyberArk's Salinas says.
The STOP and REvil malware families accounted for the vast majority of ransomware detected by the firm.
Officials from California, Florida and several other states issued similar warnings.
The T-Mobile breach involved the data of tens of millions of current, former or prospective customers of the wireless company.
The stolen data is attractive for identity theft and other financial crimes.
Law enforcement agencies from multiple states are investigating the breach.
In some cases, the hacker accessed people’s names, dates of birth, Social Security numbers and driver’s license or ID numbers.
The company also said technical data — including international mobile equipment identities and international mobile subscriber identities — were also compromised.
IMEIs, which are often used for advertising purposes, are a unique fingerprint for a device that cannot be reset.
The state attorneys general noted that identity protection services already have alerted many of the affected consumers about the dark web activity.
Cybercrime forums have been under increased pressure by state, federal and international law enforcement agencies, but the buying and selling of people’s personal data is still an active criminal industry.
Millions of Americans fall victim to identity theft and fraud each year, resulting in billions of dollars in losses.
Yet, few resources exist to help Americans, experts and the news media understand digital fraud and the latest attacks,” says Emily Snell, President of Allstate Identity Protection.
To help solve for this, Allstate Identity Protection is launching a report designed to shine a light on the latest lines of attack being utilized by identity fraudsters.
Many falling victim to identity theft and fraud Between October and December 2021, total identity theft and fraud cases increased by 11%, led by rapid spikes in instances of fraudulent credit and/or loan account creation, inquiries, and applications.
Fraudulent creation of new credit and loan accounts grew by 61% from 2020 to 2021.
By December 2021, this type of fraud accounted for over half of our total identity theft cases.
Another 42% of cases from October to December 2021 were instances of credit and loan applications.
Be on the lookout for disability fraud After defrauding the government agencies that handle unemployment fraud, scammers may be turning to the state-level agencies that oversee disability benefits.
Between November and December 2021, there were open cases involving false disability insurance claims in California double compared to previous months.
As this year’s tax season gets underway, Americans should watch out for signs of disability fraud.
Victims may receive a letter related to disability benefits for which they did not apply, or an employer may notify the victim that someone has filed for disability in their name.
Unemployment fraud on the decline Reports of unemployment and tax fraud continue to decline, with both constituting just 1% and 0.6%, respectively, of total remediation efforts between October 1, 2021 and December 31, 2021.
Fueled by the pandemic, unemployment fraud at one point accounted for nearly three-quarters of all remediation cases.
SSU revealed this in a tweet further distributed by Ukraine's State Service for Special Communication and Information Protection to Ukrainian Twitter users.
The enemy has broken into some sites of regional authorities and local governments and spreads through them lies about the alleged 'capitulation and signing of a peace treaty with Russia',"" the SSU said, as Reuters first reported.
Ukraine also targeted by phishing, malware attacks Since Russia's invasion, Ukrainian networks and organizations have been under a constant barrage of cyberattacks.
The Computer Emergency Response Team of Ukraine and Facebook warned of phishing campaigns against Ukrainian officials and military personnel.
On Wednesday, cybersecurity firm Proofpoint said it spotted spear-phishing attacks targeting European government personnel aiding Ukrainian refugees.
This campaign aligns and is likely related to July 2021 phishing attacks also to the Ghostwriter hacking group.
Ukrainian officials are not the only ones targeted in such attacks, as SSSCIP revealed one day after the start of the war, saying that a separate series of phishing attacks also began targeting Ukrainians with malicious documents.
These warnings come on the heels of malware attacks using ransomware decoys and destructive HermeticWiper and WhisperGate wiper malware aiming to destroy data on targets’ devices and render them unbootable.
SOURCE GIST The ethics watchdog, which regulates lobbying at the State Capitol, said on Friday that an investigation had been launched to determine the scope of the attack and who was behind it.
The Commission shut down systems, including its lobbying application and financial disclosure statement online filing system as a precaution.
The Commission said that it is in the process of notifying the regulated lobbying community and financial disclosure statement filers of the security incident and its impact.
Extensions will be automatically granted for any filings due at the time of the attack and could not be submitted because of the outage.
JCOPE said the period of those extensions would be determined once the systems have been brought back online.
Seattle-based Expeditors expects the fallout from the attack will have a “material adverse impact” on its finances as it continues to repair information systems and restore services to freight customers, the company said in a separate filing Wednesday to the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The company, the world’s sixth-largest freight forwarder by revenue, according to research group Armstrong & Associates Inc., told customers on Feb. that it had been hit by a targeted cyberattack and said that it had shut down most of its operating systems.
Additionally, Expeditors asked federal maritime regulators to exempt it from requirements to publish ocean freight rates for 90 days to “allow time for it to cope with the consequences” of the attack, which barred it from accessing and updating the rates, according to a March 2 notice.
Numerous cyberattacks have roiled the operations of the logistics industry in recent years.
The fallout from logistics company hacks includes the challenge of tracking down cargo that’s traveled while systems have been down, said Jake Williams, a senior instructor at Bethesda, Md.-based cybersecurity training company SANS Institute who has worked with logistics companies.
Financial services firm Cowen Inc. on Thursday cut its 2022 earnings estimate for Expeditors to $7.25 from $7.55 a share, citing the cyberattack’s shortand long-term costs.
Fisman, an epidemiologist and physician, has been outspoken about Covid and public health.
Even when he tweets something innocuous — once, to test his theory, he wrote the banal statement “kids are remarkable” — he still receives a flood of angry pushback.
He posted about topics like requiring vaccination and improving ventilation to prevent the spread of Covid — and the nasty responses never came.
No support for the trucker convoy, no calls to try the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, for treason.
Others have observed the same phenomenon; those who frequently encounter bots or angry responses are now seeing a significant drop-off.
Covid misinformation, which has often trended on social media over the past two years, seems to be taking a nosedive.
The reasons for this “bot holiday’’, as Fisman calls it, are probably varied — but many of them point to the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Russia’s information war with western nations seems to be pivoting to new fronts, from vaccines to geopolitics.
And while social media has proven a powerful tool for Ukraine — with images of Zelenskiy striding through the streets of Kyiv and tractors pulling abandoned Russian tanks — growing campaigns of misinformation around the world could change the conflict’s narrative, and the ways the world reacts.
Russia began limiting access to Twitter on Saturday, sanctions have been levied against those who could be financing disinformation sites and bot farms, and social media companies are more attuned to banning bots and accounts spreading misinformation during the conflict.
Conspiracy theories around the so-called “New World Order” — loosely defined conspiracies about shadowy global elites that run the world — have converged narrowly on Ukraine, according to emerging research.
At the same time, “whereas before the topics were very diverse — it was Ukraine and Canada and the virus and the global economy — now the entire conversation is about Ukraine,” he said.
Online activity has surged overall by 20% since the invasion, and new hashtags have cropped up around Ukraine that seem to be coordinated with bot-like activity, Finkelstein said.
Users pushing new campaigns frequently tweet hundreds of times a day and can catch the eye of prominent authentic accounts.
But it’s pretty difficult to believe that it’s not involved,” Finkelstein said, with topics strikingly similar to Russian talking points about the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, being controlled by the west and the need to dissolve Nato.
And influencers who previously demonstrated against vaccines are now turning their support to Russia.
Social media users may see a topic trending and not realize its connection to conspiracy theories or disinformation campaigns, said Esther Chan, Australia bureau editor for First Draft, an organization that researches misinformation.
In this case, it seems “their orders got changed because priorities shifted”, he said.
Russia has coordinated significant misinformation campaigns to destabilize western countries, including topics like the 2016 election and the pandemic, according to several reports.
Inauthentic accounts are not fully responsible for real hesitations and beliefs.
But they amplify harmful messages and make pushback seem more widespread than it is.
These sites frequently sow division on controversial issues, research finds, and they make it more difficult to spot disinformation online.
The escalation of narratives like these could have wide-ranging consequences for policy.
It’s clear that what Russia’s doing is against the moral order of the modern world.
But as the war becomes prolonged, and people become exhausted, that may change,” Finkelstein said.
The research around these changing campaigns is limited, looking at thousands of tweets in the early days of an invasion, Carley cautioned.
It’s very early to understand what direction the misinformation is going and who is behind it — and conspiracies tend to follow current events even when there aren’t coordinated campaigns.
And “that does not mean that all the disinformation, all the conspiracy theories about Covid are not still there,” she said.
Misinformation campaigns around the New World Order can quickly morph depending on the target, giving them more longevity than some other conspiracy theories.
It may be too soon to say what’s emerging during the invasion of Ukraine, but leaders should understand what terms are emerging in conspiracy theories and disinformation campaigns so they don’t inadvertently signal support for the theories in their public statements, she said.
A global agreement on how to address misinformation or disinformation would be key, Carley said.
And the thing is, because we’re all connected very tightly throughout the world in social media, it doesn’t matter that one country has some strong reactions because it’ll still go from another country’s machines on to your machines,” she said.
Such rules would also need to have teeth to prevent further campaigns, she said.
And educating the public about how to parse misinformation and disinformation is also important.
A request for information from the surgeon general’s office demanded that tech platforms send data and analysis on the prevalence of Covid-19 misinformation on their sites, starting with common examples of vaccine misinformation documented by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The notice asks the companies to submit “exactly how many users saw or may have been exposed to instances of Covid-19 misinformation,” as well as aggregate data on demographics that may have been disproportionately exposed to or affected by the misinformation.
Vivek Murthy, also demanded information from the platforms about the major sources of Covid-19 misinformation, including those that engaged in the sale of unproven Covid-19 products, services and treatments.
Denying requests for information does not carry a penalty, but the notice is the first formal request from the Biden administration of the tech companies to submit Covid-19 misinformation data, according to the surgeon general’s office.
Murthy used his first formal advisory to the United States to deliver a broadside against tech and social media companies, which he accused of not doing enough to stop the spread of dangerous health misinformation — especially about Covid-19.
The request for information is part of President Biden’s Covid National Preparedness Plan, which the White House detailed on Wednesday and which is a road map for a new stage of the pandemic where Covid-19 causes “minimal disruption,” according to the White House.
Mr Biden first revealed details of the plan during his State of the Union address Tuesday night.
In addition to demanding misinformation data from the tech platforms, the surgeon general called on health care providers and the public to submit information about how Covid-19 misinformation has negatively influenced patients and communities.
Andy Biggs, R-Ariz., ranking member of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism and Homeland Security, penned the request to subcommittee Chair Sheila Jackson Lee, D-Texas, in part on grounds that “There is no known case in which a foreign national who pinged on a terror watch list was simply released on his own recognizance.
The silent treatment should come as no surprise in this era of sharp partisanship.
The GOP co-signatories probably understood this when they sent the letter.
But they had to send it anyway because the case at the root of this partisan kerfuffle is too serious for stupid swordsmanship.
This one deserves a real hearing, perhaps an inspector general investigation, and media inquiry as the objectively non-partisan homeland security matter this is.
The case of Lebanon-born Venezuelan Issam Bazzi’s release into the American interior is just the latest such incident that raises serious questions.
Chief among them is whether the historic mass-migration crisis at the United States southern border has seriously degraded national security.
How This Terrorist Suspect Was Set Free Bazzi was among a swell of Venezuelans who began crossing the Rio Grande in escalating numbers last November on word that the United States was handing out free passes into the interior.
Some 25,000 turned themselves in at the border in December and another 22,000 did in January.
According to leaked Department of Homeland Security documents in my possession, Bazzi flew with his wife and daughter to Monterrey, Mexico, in early November, then swam the river into Brownsville, Texas.
His name and fingerprints flagged him as on the FBI’s terrorism watch list, so a mistaken identity is unlikely.
In the lexicon of United States Customs and Border Protection, Bazzi is described in the documents as a “Category 5 group member,” which can mean not considered armed and dangerous.
As | explain in my book, “America’s Covert Border War,” danger level is irrelevant for what is supposed to happen with any border-crossing terrorist group member on the FBI’s watch list.
FBI agents operating in line with established post-9/11 protocols interrogate watch-listed migrants and others from countries of national security interest who cross the southern border and end up in Immigration and Customs Enforcement detention centers.
That happened when Bazzi was flagged as a suspected terrorist in Brownsville, Texas, after his crossing.
Typically, migrants suspected of terrorism are deported to their home countries, even if they have no “highly derogatory” intelligence information on their records and don’t pose a flight risk, as the FBI said of Bazzi.
Granted, the United States could not have deported Bazzi to Venezuela because of American diplomatic estrangement with the Nicolas Madura regime.
But DHS would have known that the Biden administration was working on an agreement with Colombia to air-deport Venezuelan border-jumpers there.
Starting January 31, the United States began deporting Venezuelans to Colombia under that agreement.
ICE headquarters in Washington D.C. ordered Bazzi released into the United States on his own recognizance to pursue an asylum claim in Michigan, where he had family, according to the DHS documents.
Bazzi was claimed to be at heightened risk from Covid-19 in the detention center due to a “Chronic Care Condition — Overweight,” the leaked DHS documents said.
LeDuff told me he made contact with Bazzi and relatives who, in brief telephone communications, denied he was a terrorist and said they had no idea why he was on a terrorism watch list.
Even Deeper Causes for Concern According to the documents, United States authorities had denied Bazzi a tourist visa in 2019 to visit relatives in the Detroit area.
All thinking Americans on either side of the political aisle should find unity in asking why Bazzi’s illegal crossing of the southern border and merely asking for asylum got him inside the country.
The obvious initial indicator, short of more answers, is that a border defense failed in an important national security function, most probably because a mass migration crisis of historic proportions.
An overloading 2 million apprehensions during 2021, the most since the nation began counting in 1960, has broken management systems down there.
Instead of the outcome for Bazzi’s tourist visa application, Bazzi’s illegal border crossing has him living free on his own recognizance pending the outcome of an asylum case that, also because of the border, will allow him total freedom for years because of a vastly expanded immigration court backlog.
Mexico Also Released a Yemeni Terror Suspect One reason to suspect the mass migration crisis has heightened a once fairly managed national security threat is that the Bazzi case is now the second one I have found where border counterterrorism protocols apparently broke under the weight.
According to other government documents leaked to me, Mexican immigration in April 2021 caught a Yemeni just as he was about to cross into Del Rio, Texas.
At that early stage of the mass migration crisis, collaborative protocols with the Americans, as I also report in “America’s Covert Border War,” seemed to be working.
Notified, the Americans would have run the name and fingerprints through databases and gotten the FBI watch list hit; Yemeni national Ahmed Mohammed Ahmed was a “Category 5” member of a terrorist organization.
An American law enforcement intelligence source told me the Mexican intelligence officers prematurely left him at a European transit airport and returned to Mexico.
The Mexicans caught him again in July 2021, preparing to cross into Del Rio.
But instead of deporting him this time, Mexico let Ahmed go free, an act the Americans would never have previously agreed to.
Ahmed was supposed to check in weekly with immigration once a week but, of course, disappeared.
The release so alarmed the Americans that they sent out a “Be On The Lookout” bulletin to law enforcement on the Texas side to capture him.
Return to Top 03/04 Australia lists Hamas as a terrorist group ; .jpost.com/international/islamic-terrorism/article-699332 GIST Australia on Friday listed the entire Palestinian Islamist group Hamas as a terrorist organization, calling the move a deterrent to political and religious violence and bringing Australia in line with the United States, the European Union and Britain.
Australia had for two decades proscribed Hamas's paramilitary wing, the Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades, as a terrorist organization but flagged last month that it wanted to upgrade the listing to the whole organization, a process that involved consulting Australia's state and territory leaders.
The change puts Australia into lockstep with its allies, which have also been moving to tighten their opposition to the Gaza ruling body, citing its access to sophisticated weaponry and terrorist training facilities.
Fleeing Russia's invasion, Ukraine's Jewish refugees look to the future ""The hateful ideologies of terrorist groups and those who support them have no place in Australia,"" Home Affairs Minister Karen Andrews said in a statement.
Listing organizations was a deterrent to violent extremism and sent a message that Australia condemned the use of violence to achieve political, religious or ideological aims, she added.
Proscribing an organization in Australia makes it illegal to give it funds, support or services.
It has ruled the Gaza Strip since a civil war in 2007 when it expelled forces loyal to Western-backed Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas.
Abbas remains dominant in Palestinian self-ruled areas of the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
Australia has been building its list of designated terrorist groups, which now number 28.
Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham and Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham, which are based in Syria, and the Nationalist Socialist Order, a group based in the United States.
Return to Top 03/03 Covid impact extremists groups use of IEDs ps://reliefweb.int/report/world/covid-19-and-its-impact-extremistps-use-ieds GIST The global Covid-19 pandemic, now entering its third year, has wreaked havoc on the safety, health and well-being of societies and communities worldwide.
As of 1 March, 2022, there have been 435,626,514 confirmed cases and 5,952,215 deaths|1] as reported by the World Health Organization.
Beyond the daily lives of many being altered due to this crisis, global socio-economic, geopolitical, and conflict landscapes have been impacted.
Resources and political attention have been refocused on public health, distracting from counterterrorism efforts allowing terrorist groups in many countries to carry on as normal.
The pandemic has allowed terrorist recruiters and extremists to exploit financial, health and personal concerns opportunistically to advance their own movement and ideology all while using propaganda to reinforce power and influence, and fuel division to further a loss of trust in governance and state authority.
Violent extremists have continued to utilize low-tech, low-cost tactics such as improvised explosive devices , shooting attacks and vehicle ramming that often defy detection and disruption.
By analysing discourse from these groups during the pandemic, as well as the AOAV's own database on global IED attacks, we sought to discover if dialogue and strategy impacted tactics, specifically IED usage, and capability during the Covid-19 pandemic.
AOAV's data is gleaned from English language media reports and does not profess to capture ever single incident.
Especially in an age of pandemic, reporting of explosive violence may well have been under-powered and neglected.
The Islamic State Covid-19 introduced yet another threat to the already battered and fragile political orders in Iraq and Syria, putting further strain on the failing health care systems there.
Subsequent statements from their al Naba newsletter called the disease a ""painful torment"" for all ""Crusader nations"" in the West.
While followers were warned not to travel to Europe, they were urged to protect themselves through physical precautions and prayer and to capitalize on the paralysis of Western governments and their militaries.
The group also stated that followers should free ISIS prisoners being held in camps in Iraq and Syria.
Present proxy militias, civil unrest due to high unemployment, ethno-religious grievances, a lack of government trust and vulnerable borders in Iraq and a civil war in Syria, that is about to enter its eleventh year, has aided this re-establishment.
ISIS claimed responsibility for 28 of the 2020 IED attacks, the PKK 2 and the remaining attacks had unknown perpetrators.
Interestingly, 2020 had the lowest number of IED attacks for the three year period, mainly attributed to a decline in attacks during the first half of 2020, when the Covid pandemic began.
ISIS also claimed responsibility for the highest number of attacks during 2019 with a total of 62.
The IED attacks over the three year period focused mainly on soft targetsroads, urban residences, villages, agricultural land, places of worship or markets.
This was mainly attributed to a marked decline in IED attacks in Syria for the second half of 2021.
Landmines accounted for almost 10% of the attacks in 2019 and 2020 and 15% of the attacks in 2021. 18 of the attacks for the three year period were suicide attacks. of the attacks were victim-activated, this accounted for 20% of all IED attacks for the three year period.
Soft targets were again with roads, markets, villages and urban residences accounting for a large number of the attacks. of the IED attacks were car bombs, 60 were road side IED's, 2 were multi-explosive IED's and the remaining attacks were nonspecific.
Al Qaeda and Affiliates In recent years, officials have characterized the Al Qaeda threat as stemming mainly from its affiliates.
In March 2020, an AQ affiliate group issued a declaration on the Media Network Al-Thurur, rejecting a cease fire and instead calling for an intensified battle against a crippled West.
Hayat Tahrir al Sham in Syria instructed its followers not to let the virus distract them from their fight against Shiites and other non-believers.
In its Iba' newsletter they stated that the virus had been sent by God to kill disbelievers.
Markets, public spaces, schools and mosques were closed down and HTS instructed people to keep their distance from others.
Further to this, AQ, HTS and A-Shabaab ""have used official propaganda channels to emphasize their governance and state-building credentials, and to present the effectiveness of their respective ‘Ministries of Health’ within their pseudo-states.
IED Attacks in Somalia Al-Shabaab is the largest, wealthiest, and most violent AQ associated group in the world, according to the US Department of Defence.
For the past three years, Al Shabaab has been responsible for half of all IED attacks in Somalia.
Soft targets accounted for 90% of all IED attacks.% of the IED's were used in roadside attacks, 23% were used as car bombs and the remaining were non-specific IED attacks.
IED attacks over the three year period were by remote detonation, 54 were suicide attacks, 24 were vicitim activated, and the remaining had an unclear activation method.
The Taliban The Taliban's response to Covid-19 has been in stark contrast to other extremist groups.
They have been eager to profess their readiness and aptitude for handling the crisis, hoping to reinforce their political legitimacy and social status.
While efforts and co-operation with the Afghan government have varied district to district and are often described as propaganda, their public health awareness campaign during the Covid pandemic has been welcomed.
Social media pages connected with the group have shown Taliban members in white gowns and gloves distributing soap and educating on proper hand hygiene.
Remarkably, they began to cooperate with the World Health Organisation and the Red Cross.
This unexpected response may have resulted from many top members of the Taliban contracting the virus, leaving leadership roles vacant affecting security and financial operations.
The US withdrawal from Afghanistan has renewed concerns that it will become a safe haven for a plethora of terrorist and extremist groups and many of these efforts aided by government and NGO health workers will be discontinued.
While the United Nations reported the plummeting of covid testing and vaccinations in the weeks after the Taliban seized power,|13] a recent January 2022 video of the Taliban's acting Minister of Public Health, Qalandar Ebad urging the people in Afghanistan to get vaccinated, gives hope.
IED Attacks in Afghanistan There were a total of 1,072 recorded IED attacks in Afghanistan during the period of 2019-2021.
As the lowest number of attacks have occurred most recently , it is likely correlated to the Taliban takeover.
Soft targetsroads, urban residents, villages, and markets were the most common targets.
Only 8% of all attacks were on hard targets.% of all attacks used road side bombs, 12% used car bombs, 0.1% were multi-explosive IED's and the remaining 34% were non-specific IED's.
Conclusion Extremist groups have used the instability that the Covid pandemic has presented to their distinct advantage.
Dialogue has reinforced ideological beliefs and has been used as a tool to further strengthen strategy and to gain legitimacy.
IED attacks and tactics used over this period have remained fairly consistent over the past three years, exhibiting extremist organisations’ ability to maintain their operational capacity.
The last six months of 2021 have provided the lowest IED attack totals during the three year period for Syria, Afghanistan and Somalia.
Only in Iraq has the most recent six month total for IED attacks been at its highest level for the three year period.
Looking ahead, similar trends have already been seen from the AOAV database from January 2022 with IED attacks levels, tactics and targets in all four countries remaining consistent with end of year 2021 levels.
As 2022 progresses, extremist groups look likely to continue to embrace unpredictable, smallerscale IED attacks, while continuing to expand their growth and increase their operational capabilities.
A blast struck the mosque during Friday prayers, and gunmen pushed inside, opening fire on worshipers packed into the main hall.
Pakistani police tweeted that at least two assailants carried out the attack, first firing on police officers guarding the mosque in central Peshawar.
The tweet said one officer was killed and a second was critically wounded.
Video released by police showed victims being loaded into ambulances as additional security forces arrived at the scene.
Militant attacks have increased in Pakistan along border regions with Afghanistan since the Taliban takeover of Kabul last year.
Some leaders of extremist groups long active in Pakistan have said the Taliban’s rise next door has emboldened their forces.
In a 6-3 ruling on Thursday, the court allowed the United States government to block the psychologists from giving evidence in a case brought by Abu Zubaydah, a Guantanamo prisoner who was arrested in 2002 and has been held without charge ever since.
The majority of the justices granted the government the privilege of “state secrets” — a power that prevents the public disclosure of information deemed harmful to national security.
Zubaydah had wanted to call the psychologists, James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen, to confirm that he had been unlawfully detained and tortured in a so-called CIA “black site” in Stare Kiejkuty, Poland.
It is public knowledge that the prisoner was tortured in a number of black sites in several countries between 2002 and his transfer to Guantanamo four years later.
Among the many harrowing torture techniques that were applied against him, he was waterboarded — a form of controlled drowning — 83 times.
In Thursday’s ruling, the nine justices of the supreme court divided along unusual lines that crossed the traditional conservative-liberal divide.
The majority opinion was written by Stephen Breyer, the court’s senior liberal justice who is retiring at the end of this term.
In his opinion, Breyer argued that the government was entitled to assert the “state secrets” privilege even though the critical information in question — in this case the location of a CIA black site in Poland — was already publicly known.
Breyer agreed with the CIA that “clandestine” relations between the United States and foreign intelligence services were based on trust and had to be protected in the interests of national security.
Two justices dissented from the opinion — the liberal justice Sonia Sotomayor and conservative Neil Gorsuch.
In a lengthy rebuttal, Gorsuch pointed out that the torture to which Zubaydah was subjected had been extensively chronicled in official reports, books and movies.
But respectfully, we should not pretend it will safeguard any secret,” he wrote.
Elena Kagan, the court’s third liberal justice, stood apart from the majority opinion, arguing that the case should have been allowed to proceed in a lower court.
Mark Denbeaux, a lead lawyer for Zubaydah, said that the court’s ruling would have a detrimental impact on public accountability.
Denbeaux added that the evocation of the state secrets privilege was entirely in line with the past 20 years in which the CIA had relentlessly labored to keep the details of the torture program from being revealed.
Though the Zubaydah case ultimately failed to dent the wall of secrecy that has been erected around the CIA’s torture program, it was remarkable in one other regard.
When the supreme court heard arguments in the case in October, several of the justices openly referred to the prisoner’s interrogation as a form of torture.
It was the first time that the nation’s highest court had used the “torture” word with regard to Guantanamo detainees and their treatment in the wake of the terrorist attacks on 9/11.
Suspicious, Unusual Top of page 03/04 Flight diverted; 3 unruly passengers GIST ight-diverted-unruly-passengers/index.html — An AeroMéxico flight from Toronto to Mexico City was diverted to Houston early Thursday morning to remove three passengers who appeared to be intoxicated.
The passengers, two men and a woman, were told they weren't allowed to consume alcohol by a flight attendant, according to an account of the incident from the Houston Police Department, and were advised to finish their beverages.
The flight attendant alerted the captain, who diverted the plane to Houston.
Two passengers were transported to Houston's Sobering Center, a facility where people can be transported without being arrested to avoid a criminal record for public intoxication.
Augusto Bernal, a spokesperson for Houston Airport System, confirmed that ""Houston Police and CBP met the flight and removed the passengers from the aircraft.
The flight departed shortly after to Mexico City,"" Bernal said via email.
A big problem in the United States Unruly passenger behavior reached record highs in the United States last year, with nearly 6,000 reports of unruly behavior logged by the Federal Aviation Administration.
The agency said in mid-February that 80 of the disruptive incidents on aircraft since the start of last year have been referred to the Justice Department to consider criminal prosecution.
In February, an American Airlines flight attendant hit an unruly passenger in the head with a coffee pot as he tried to open the plane's exit door and the flight was diverted.
The FBI was involved in that case and the passenger was charged with one count of assaulting and intimidating a flight attendant.
The FAA does not have authority to prosecute criminal cases, but it can propose fines of up to $37,000 per violation for unruly behavior.
In November, the FAA proposed $161,823 in civil penalties against eight passengers for for alleged incidents of unruly behavior involving alcohol.
Boch's Bentley was one of 1,500 rare cars on board the Felicity Ace when it sank Tuesday.
It's not exactly clear how many cars were on the ship when it went down, but vessels the size of Felicity Ace can carry at least 4,000 vehicles.
The ship was on its way to Rhode Island from Germany when a fire broke out 13 days prior to its fiery demise.
Beyond the Bentley were 12-cylinder Lamborghinis — a rare, exotic car Boch said might never see the road again.
The ship's sinking comes as the auto industry deals with supply chain issues that have made it hard for many Americans to find vehicles.
Boch, who owns multiple car dealerships in Massachusetts, expressed his concerns for a potential ""ship shortage,"" and thinks that could create more issues for car owners in the United States.
Boch told WJAR his Bentley has been re-ordered and car manufacturers are working with other affected customers.
Then in 2020, ferocious winds from Hurricane Laura destroyed homes across coastal Louisiana.
Hurricane Ida hit in 2021, leaving the entire city of New Orleans without power for days.
Such extreme weather is becoming more common, and that’s just one of the warnings for the Gulf of Mexico region in a United Nations report released this week.
The devastating effects of climate change in the region also include rising seas, collapsing fisheries and toxic tides, even if humanity somehow manages to limit global warming to 1. degrees Celsius above the pre-industrial era.
The report, an “atlas of human suffering,” details numerous ways in which climate change will affect the gulf.
From Texas to Florida, which has the longest coastline of any state, the entire United States Gulf coast is under serious threat from rising seas as the planet's polar ice caps melt, the United Nations report says.
The region, home to major oil and gas production in Texas and Louisiana and tourist destinations in Mississippi, Alabama and Florida, tends to be conservative politically, and its mostly Republican leaders have stressed adaption to climate change — higher roads, sea walls, preventing saltwater intrusion — more than broad efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions or promote cleaner energy.
For example, the Republican-led Florida House of Representatives refused on Tuesday to add cleanenergy measures to a plan to bolster the state against sea level rise and flooding.
Petersburg-area congressional seat, was disappointed lawmakers didn't do more.
People considering 30-year mortgages are already looking for homes and commercial buildings that pose lower flood risks.
In Miami Beach, streets already flood on sunny days, especially during the so-called King Tides, and the report says the Tampa Bay area, surrounded by shallow seas, and is considered one of the most vulnerable places in the nation for storm surges.
Sea level rise poses an existential threat to much of Louisiana, because so much of the Mississippi River delta has been sinking due to human interventions.
The loss of sediment from leveeing the river and saltwater intrusion caused by coastal oil and gas development are two big culprits, Keim noted.
In Florida alone, the decline of the reefs could translate into $24 billion to $55 billion in economic losses by 2100, the report said.
Miami-Dade released a strategic sea level rise response plan in 2021 that calls for adapting infrastructure, elevating roads, building on higher ground and expanding waterfront parks and canals.
The city of Miami Beach has already spent more than $500 million installing pumps to flush water off the island, with no guarantees that this will keep the tourists’ feet dry.
The city of Miami is spending potentially billions of dollars to keep the ocean at bay and limit saltwater intrusion into freshwater supplies.
In Louisiana, the state’s Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority has a plan with “very specific projects,” the United Nations report said, such as dredging to replenish wetlands and rebuilding barrier islands damaged by storms.
Alex Kolker, an associate professor of coastal geology at the Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium in Cocodrie, noted that on Feb., Louisiana also announced a plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050.
Outbreaks of red tide, which are natural toxic organisms originally noticed by the Spanish explorers, have become more frequent and more deadly because of warmer air and water, experts say.
The increasing outbreaks kill more fish and sea life and harm the tourist industry with smelly fish-strewn beaches, poor fishing and the possibility of harms to human health, especially among people with asthma or other lung conditions.
The warmer water also fosters algae blooms, caused by pollution from agricultural, urban and other sources, that are getting worse along Florida's coasts, contributing to the lack of seagrass that has led to a record die-off of manatees in the past year.
The state resorted to feeding one group of starving manatees romaine lettuce instead.
The jet's resting place in international waters had fueled speculation that China might want to attempt its own salvage operations of the world's most advanced stealth fighter jet.
On Jan. while conducting regular flight operations in the South China Sea the jet crashed on the carrier's deck while attempting a landing.
It ultimately slid off of the deck into the ocean waters and seven sailors, including the pilot, were injured in the crash.
The Navy said shortly after the incident that it would attempt to recover the jet that ultimately was located at a depth of more than two miles.
The plane was recovered using a remotely operated vehicle, known as the CURV-21, that attached specialized rigging and lift lines to the aircraft so it could be raised by the crane aboard the Picasso.
Soon after the crash, a video that showed the aircraft on approach and photos that showed the aircraft floating in the water were posted on social media and confirmed by the Navy as having been taken aboard the aircraft carrier.
Five sailors, including a junior officer, were later charged with leaking a second video that showed the actual crash that had been recorded by one of the ship's surveillance cameras.
Tattoos that bedeck his entire body express his fealty forever to one of the largest gangs in the United States Now 36, the longtime Latin King enforcer is trying to leave anyway.
He is seeking to scrub his past by erasing his gang tattoos through a new gang-cessation and jobs program he and 11 other inmates signed up for at a Chicago-area jail.
The Associated Press got exclusive access over two days to the first 12 inmates enrolled in the largely privately funded program at the DuPage County Jail and to their cellblock.
Eck, jailed on burglary charges, earned the nickname “Hollywood” on the street for his swagger.
But nightmares jarred him awake for days before he recently walked into the jail’s new tattoo-removal wing.
One goal is to land the inmates jobs in horticulture, welding and other fields they’re learning, said the program’s civilian director and chief architect, Michael Beary.
He said there’s booming interest among businesses scrambling to address COVID-19-driven labor shortages.
Jobs training was available previously, but the gang and tattoo emphasis was added this year.
Now they say, ‘As long as they show up for work, we don’t care what they did,’” said Beary, a longtime business owner and executive director of the nonprofit JUST of DuPage, founded by a Roman Catholic nun to develop reentry programs for inmates.
But if they graduate, they do get help searching for work and relocating away from their gangs.
To graduate, participants must have their gang tattoos removed or covered with other tats.
It’s proof, said DuPage County Sheriff James Mendrick, they’re serious about forsaking their old lives.
The first tattoo Eck had covered was one on his arm of the Latin Kings’ initials.
Jail-sanctioned tattooist Tom Begley inked the image of a deer over it in a four-hour session in February.
A roaring lion — a favorite Latin Kings symbol — was recently converted to a roaring bear.
Eck has to be careful to pick animals that aren’t other gangs’ symbols.
Begley and his wife, Meagan Begley, of the suburban Electric Tattoo Parlor, jumped at the chance to lend their skills.
Inmates painted a mural on a wall in the jail’s three-chaired tattoo studio.
On a previous day, Tom Begley transformed a Satan Disciples tattoo on Jaime Marinez’s forearm from a Christian cross fashioned from rifles into the image of a vulture.
Nearby, Meagen Begley removed hand tattoos of 27-year-old Latin Count leader Gilberto Rios, wielding a pen-like tool to scrape off outer skin, then injecting a saline solution.
One she removed from Rios’ hand was a backward “D,” a symbol of disdain for Marinez’s gang.
Mendrick, elected sheriff as a Republican, contends violent crime in his county is often committed by gangs from Chicago, in neighboring Cook County.
Mendrick is convinced the program, funded partly by church donations, will help reduce crime.
The program also offers classes on the Bible, anger management and decision-making.
The killing of his best friend two months before Eck was jailed a year ago began changing his perspective.
It was an internal hit by a Latin King who coveted his friend’s higher perch in the gang hierarchy, Eck said.
It was like, enough is enough,” said Eck, adding that guilt at having hurt others also began weighing on him.
In another tattoo session, Tom Begley traced a new image over a scar on Marinez’s chest from when he was shot last year at a stoplight.
The tattoo is of a clock set to 6:20, memorializing the date his father died of a heroin overdose on June 20, 2016.
The 21-year-old knows he’s putting himself in peril by spurning his gang.
Eck credits Beary, whom he describes as a father figure, for persuading him to join the program.
One more criminal conviction, he said, could send him to prison for life.
Speaking on a recent afternoon, he appeared startled when he realized what pronoun he was using to talk about the Latin Kings.
As he struggles to reinvent himself, he says he wants nothing to do with his gang persona.
Vice. i pkvq/chained-woman-human-trafficking-china GIST When shocking videos emerged in China of a mother of eight chained by her neck to the wall of a shack, later suspected to be a victim of human trafficking, 56-year-old Zhang Xiuhong felt torn between two possibilities.
Zhang, whose teenage daughter went missing after leaving home for school 14 years ago, hoped for a moment that the woman in the videos was her long lost girl, Yao Li.
Zhang studied the face of the woman in the videos closely—she had the same square-shaped face as Yao, her only child.
Like many parents with missing teenage daughters, Zhang suspects Yao had been abducted and sold either as a sex worker or a wife to a rural man away from home.
A traditional preference for sons has led to sexselective abortions and a heavily skewed sex ratio in China.
In some rural places, the demand for brides has fueled trafficking businesses, as criminal gangs take women, often from even less developed areas, and sell them to bachelors unable to find local matches.
In late January, one victim became the face of such exploitation that spurred a national outcry.
In TikTokstyle videos filmed from a village in the eastern province of Jiangsu, the woman was seen shivering in a doorless shed, standing with a chain around her neck and a lock hanging below her chin.
The videos also revealed that the woman had given birth to seven sons and one daughter.
In one clip, Dong Zhimin, the father of the children, casually said he had many children to earn respect from fellow villagers.
The abuse of the woman incensed millions across a country that has for the most part emerged from poverty and moved on from dated practices such as forced marriages.
And it broke Zhang’s heart to think that her daughter could have met the same fate 14 years after she left home for school with a ponytail and never returned.
One afternoon in April 2008, several months before China hosted its first-ever Olympic Games in Beijing, Zhang received an unexpected phone call from her daughter’s school.
Zhang worked at a family-run restaurant near her home in suburban Beijing.
She had said goodbye just an hour ago to her daughter, Yao, who headed out on a bicycle to go to school.
It was Saturday, but like many students in China, Yao attended a weekend tutoring session at her junior high school to prepare for demanding exams.
But the teacher called and asked why her 14-year-old daughter was absent.
Anxious that Yao had gotten into an accident, Zhang and her husband searched every spot on the teenager’s way to school and asked every person who might have seen her.
In the late afternoon, Zhang spotted Yao’s white sneaker—by the cornfield, next to a pile of trash and weeds.
Some 14 years later, Zhang has held on to the shoe as the last sign of her daughter’s existence, and she holds out hope of seeing her again one day, like some have in tearful reunions frequently celebrated on Chinese television and even turned into hit movies.
But those reunions are also a reminder of a history of human trafficking once prevalent in large swathes of the country, a phenomenon sociologists say is not unique to China and which they attribute to a mix of economic and social factors.
Globally, more than half of human trafficking victims were trafficked for sexual exploitation, according to a 2020 United Nations report.
Of every 10 victims detected worldwide, five are adult women and two are girls.
And as China held its second Olympic Games earlier this year and projected itself as a prosperous and confident country, the videos of the chained woman shattered any notion that human trafficking was a thing of the past in the rising power.
While the authorities were mindful of managing its global image as the spotlight fell on sporting spectacles in the Chinese capital, citizens openly questioned just how many trafficked Chinese women are subjected to inhumane abuse today and whether the authorities are doing enough, if anything, to address their plight.
They have battled with internet censors to vent their anger and petition for change.
Police in China record a few thousand trafficking cases involving women and children every year.
Chinese court records and anthropological studies showed female victims of human trafficking were typically brought from Vietnam, Myanmar, North Korea and China’s southwestern border to bachelors in the populous inland provinces, where the male-to-female ratios are highly disparate and economic development stagnated.
In exchange, the women’s parents receive cash payments and the often-false promise that their daughters would live a comfortable life with their future husbands.
Many other victims were deceived with promises of job opportunities away from home.
But the official data likely only account for a small fraction of the trafficking, forced marriage, and sexual assault committed against women, as many who are living with violence, stigma, and poverty are unable to pursue a criminal investigation.
The chained woman in Feng county, Xuzhou city, Jiangsu province could be one of the numerous women who have been suffering in silence.
What is fueling the outcry is not only the inhumane treatment of the chained woman, but also the authorities’ years of negligence of the cruelty committed to her, and their perceived attempts to cover up the crime.
In an official statement issued on Jan., days after the videos went viral, Feng county said Dong’s father found the woman when she was begging on the streets in 1998.
Dong started putting chains on her because she, supposedly afflicted with mental disorders, was smashing objects and beating up family members, government investigators said.
In a third statement on Feb., officials said the woman was someone nicknamed Xiaohuamei, or Little Flower Plum, from a remote village on the Chinese-Myanmar border populated by ethnic minorities.
She allegedly got lost when a fellow villager took her to eastern China to get medical treatment.
These inconsistent explanations, coupled with internet censorship, did not ease public anger, as people continued pushing for an investigation into nationwide trafficking networks and a chance for the woman to speak for herself.
With most state-controlled media outlets silent on the controversy, former investigative journalists went to the woman’s hometown to look for her relatives.
People who sympathized with the woman handed out flyers on the streets of Shanghai to advocate for her.
Two young women embarked on a journey to visit her in hospital, a mission cheered on by tens of thousands of internet users, although police soon detained them and accused them of “picking quarrels and provoking trouble,” one of them wrote on the microblogging site Weibo after she was released.
Meanwhile, more evidence of the prevalent bride trade surfaced and began to garner public attention.
The court of Feng county was found to have rejected at least two women’s requests to end their forced marriage and ordered them to treasure their families.
A photo album documenting the lives of mentally ill women sold into sex slavery went viral.
People are again sharing the 2007 drama film Blind Mountain, which depicts the kidnapping and trafficking of a female university student.
Its director, Li Yang, said people could share his film to support the campaign against trafficking and he wouldn’t pursue copyright charges.
A 32-year-old woman surnamed Ke told VICE World News that videos of the chained woman prompted her to pursue an investigation into the trafficking of her own mother, a school teacher who was also sold to Feng county in the ‘80s from the northwestern province of Shaanxi, after an agent told her family she would find a better job in a bigger city.
Ke said her mother was locked up by another household and gave birth to a daughter.
In 2008, Ke’s mother made a report to police, but it was dismissed due to a lack of evidence.
In its most recent report, released in late February, the government said DNA tests confirmed the chained woman is Little Flower Plum from Fugong county, Yunnan province.
After one failed marriage, the woman, born in 1977, was lured to Jiangsu province in 1998 and sold three times to different men, before ending up in the shed.
Three people, including the father of her eight children, have been arrested for trafficking, while 17 local officials were given penalties.
State media also released a video showing the woman receiving schizophrenia treatment in hospital.
She lost her teeth due to severe gum infections, the hospital said, but internet users doubt this.
This week, the Chinese Ministry of Public Security said it would conduct a campaign against the trafficking of women and children and pay special attention to those with mental or physical disabilities.
For some villagers in the more developed eastern China, it is cheaper to buy a bride from remote mountains or neighboring countries than to pay dowry gifts to a local woman, and local cadres sometimes turn a blind eye.
China’s skewed sex ratio at birth, itself a result of selective abortion of female fetuses, is often blamed for the bride trade.
But activists say the root cause is the view that women are properties of their fathers, brothers, and husbands without their own free will.
While trying to preserve stable families and boost birth rates, authorities are failing to protect women from trafficking, sexual violence, and other domestic abuse, the activists argue.
Zhou Xiaoxuan, a leading figure of China’s #MeToo movement, said while the chained woman’s mental illness, poverty and ethnic minority background had contributed to her extremely cruel exploitation, her fate—forced to produce offspring but stripped of freedom—teflects a struggle shared by the broader female population.
Among child victims of trafficking, girls are much more likely than boys to be sold as spouses or sex workers after they were abducted or deceived with fraudulent job offers.
The idea that missing girls would one day be found in a forced marriage like the chained woman has been a tormenting hope for their parents.
Zhang, the mother of the missing teenager Yao Li, moved to Beijing from the northeastern province of Heilongjiang, after she lost her job at a steel company amid massive layoffs at state factories in the ‘90s.
She washed dishes and chopped ingredients at a restaurant run by her sister, while her husband took up gigs as a cleaner and security guard near the Beijing railway station.
She used to listen to songs by Taiwanese girl group S.H.E. on an MP3 player gifted by a relative.
She loved roller skating but the family could not spare the money to get her a pair of skates—a decision Zhang now regrets.
Yao dreamed of becoming a flight attendant, but she had never boarded a plane.
After he punched her in the face and wielded a meat cleaver at her about a year ago, Zhang moved out.
Now she takes care of her own parents, while doing livestreams on social media to spread the word about Yao—the cheapest way to gather help.
Like other parents in search of their children online, Zhang repeats the same story over and over again during her daily livestream.
ADL’s research found that although 2021 data indicated a 5% drop in incidents of distributing white supremacist propaganda from 2020 — with 4,851 cases reported, compared with 5,125 the year before — the numbers remain at worryingly serious levels.
Throughout 2021, white supremacist propaganda was reported in all states except Hawaii.
The ADL found that in 2021, at least 38 white supremacist groups distributed propaganda, including pieces that presented Ashli Babbitt, a January 6 rioter, as a martyr for their cause.
Among the 38 white supremacist groups tracked by the ADL, three groups — Patriot Front, New Jersey European Heritage Association and Folkish Resistance Movement — were found to be responsible for 91% of all propaganda activity.
Patriot Front, a Texas-based alt-right group, was responsible for 3,992 of all the propaganda incidents in 2021, constituting more than 82% of nationwide incidents.
According to ADL, the group distributed propaganda in every state except Hawaii and Alaska.
The group’s activities were largely concentrated in Pennsylvania, Virginia, Massachusetts, Texas and Maryland and its members were responsible for 82% of propaganda distribution across college campuses and 94% of white supremacist stenciled graffiti.
NJEHA’s propaganda campaigns were found to have targeted various groups including Jewish people, Black people, immigrants or the LGBTQ+ community.
FRM, a hate group created with the intent to spread national socialism, was responsible for the third highest number of propaganda incidents in 2021.
Additionally, the group was responsible for 50% of antisemitic propaganda incidents last year.
Its activities were recorded in 19 states but were mostly found in Minnesota, Mississippi, Arizona, Colorado and Texas.
In addition to tracking white supremacist propaganda, the ADL also found that antisemitic propaganda distribution has skyrocketed compared to the previous year.
But on Wednesday, a judge in Snohomish County Superior Court ordered a mistrial in the case, The Daily Herald reported.
Judge Richard Okrent agreed with Meza’s defense attorney that an accumulation of ""errors"" at trial by the deputy prosecutor in the case may have prejudiced the jury when it convicted the defendant.
Snohomish County Prosecutor Adam Cornell said his leadership team would review court documents to decide what to do next, which could include appealing the decision.
Meza was charged with second-degree murder for Peterson’s death on a Community Transit bus.
According to Meza’s trial testimony, Meza had confronted Peterson about smoking drugs on the bus.
A Lake Stevens man who claimed self-defense when he shot and killed a passenger on a Community Transit bus last month has been charged in Snohomish County Superior Court with second-degree murder.
Security footage showed it was the hand of Peterson’s friend reaching in.
He then shot Peterson again, intentionally, police said Meza told them.
After a weeklong trial, a jury convicted Meza of a lesser charge of first-degree manslaughter.
Firefighters at the scene determined the fire to be arson after finding a possible pipe bomb near the car.
The police department’s bomb unit was called to the scene and concluded the improvised explosive was no longer a threat.
The police department is boosting its presence in the troubled neighborhood near Third Avenue and Pine Street.
That’s where a 15-year-old boy was murdered Wednesday night around 7:30m.
Residents in the neighborhood woke up to a mobile police precinct and strong police presence of officers on bike patrols on Thursday.
The block of Third Avenue between Pike and Pine streets was also clear from the usual mass of people there.
But many say it shouldn’t have taken the murder of a teen for the block to be cleared.
The latest deadly shooting comes after another man was murdered here Sunday, and yet another man was shot in the face last Monday.
To have a 15-year-old shot here at 7:15 at night is just absolutely devastating and unacceptable,” said Detective Valerie Carson with the Seattle Police Department on Wednesday night.
Business owner Brandon Davis runs Profit 3D, a 3D printing company near Third and Pike.
The police presence currently at Third and Pine is similar to the response Seattle police launched nearly two weeks ago at 12th and Jackson in Little Saigon, another trouble hot spot.
Oh, let’s go down towards that way,” said Carlos Manuel, who was working in Little Saigon on Thursday.
In the past two weeks since 12th and Jackson was cleared, violence near 3rd and Pine has escalated with three shootings in 10 days, including deadly incidents on Sunday and Thursday nights.
Diaz said patrol officers at 12th and Jackson would be replaced with non-patrol personnel to staff the mobile precinct there, in order to free up officers downtown.
My heart is filled with sorrow for the victims — for the individuals and families traumatized; for the downtown residents, workers and businesses with no choice but to live and work alongside recurring crime and gun violence; and for people across Seattle who should see downtown as a thriving beacon for our city and region but instead continue to see a corridor defined by chaos, dysfunction, and tragedy.
Working with Chief Diaz, law enforcement partners and community advocates, we are launching a comprehensive and collaborative approach to address this crisis.
To those who share my belief that Seattle must be safe for everyone, I encourage you to be part of the solution and consider applying to join our police service today.
Late Thursday afternoon and two Seattle Police officers were working the block near 12th Avenue and Jackson Street, making it clear things are changing.
What was once described as an open-air drug market is now an empty sidewalk -and that’s a big deal.
Woo is part of the CID Community Watch, a group of volunteers that during the start of the pandemic started walking the streets as an extra set of eyes and ears.
Last month the Seattle Police Department parked a mobile precinct in the area, cleared out the sidewalks and have maintained a visible police presence.
We’re not entirely sure if this is going to be a short-term fix, quick fix.
We’re hoping to work with the city on long-term sustainable solutions,” Woo said.
Wednesday Seattle police warned of a man who pushed a woman down a flight of stairs at a light rail station and is believed to have stabbed a second person.
Seattle Mayor Bruce Harrell is expected to address the crime on 12th Avenue and Jackson Street and will likely touch on what’s happened on 3rd and Pine during a press conference Friday morning.
Video of the incident shows Ellis being repeatedly punched and choked, and officers using a Taser and kneeling on him.
His death was later ruled a homicide by the Pierce County Medical Examiner’s office.
He’s buried, but there’s no honor,” said Pastor Gregory Christopher, President of the Tacoma Ministerial Alliance.
Since Ellis’ murder, Tacoma has seen changes to its city council and police department, including a new chief.
But what hasn’t changed is the employment status of the three officers who were charged for Ellis’s death.
Timothy Rankine, Christopher Burbank, and Matthew Collins all remain fully employed by the Tacoma Police Department, something LegallyBlack founder Tisha Marie said only pours salt in a deep wound.
But James Bible, the attorney for the Ellis family, said they have no intention of stopping until justice is served because the consequences go much further.
KING 5 reached out to the Tacoma Police Department, but they said they cannot comment on an open investigation.
The trial date for the three officers charged in Ellis's murder is scheduled for October 3, 2022.
The businessman they knew as administrator of that chat and as someone who organized philanthropic efforts such as a Christmas toy drive for needy children and renovations for an elementary school had just been arrested.
Conor Vincent D’Monte, known as Johnny Williams in Puerto Rico, was allegedly a leader of a violent gang sought by Canadian authorities on charges including first-degree murder.
Authorities don’t know exactly when D’ Monte, 44, arrived in Puerto Rico, but they believe he had been using the alias “Johnny Williams” in the island for at least several months.
The six-foot-one-inch fugitive settled into a rural, eastern mountain community near El Yunque rainforest, living in a house in front of a street with no name in a working-class neighborhood, Torres said.
Every month, D’Monte would accompany employees of a nonprofit organization known as Karma Honey Project and attend a farmer’s market in the nearby city of Carolina, said a woman who lived in the same community as him and sold goods next to his stall.
D'Monte remains in federal prison in Puerto Rico as he awaits an extradition process.
His public defense attorney declined comment, but she noted in a court hearing on Thursday that D'Monte, who has Canadian and Irish citizenship, requested that the consulates of those countries be notified.
He even met with Puerto Rico’s agriculture secretary and a local senator and was invited to the governor’s mansion last month for his role in trying to save honeybees after Hurricane Maria as part of his involvement with the Karma Honey Project, a nonprofit company created in February 2019.
Its president, Candice Galek, is a Miami entrepreneur and former model.
In its 2020 annual report, the most recent one available, the company stated that its volume of business did not exceed $3 million.
Its balance sheet noted that it had no assets or liabilities, according to filings with Puerto Rico’s Registry of Corporations and Entities.
He said he met D’Monte in the early days of the pandemic after being added to his WhatsApp group, and that D’Monte was known as “Johnny Teeth,” because his teeth were so white and straight.
The businessman described D’Monte as a “tremendous sales guy” who was very jovial.
It’s unclear why D’Monte chose Puerto Rico or if he knew anyone in the United States territory.
He is accused in the killing of a rival gang member at a Vancouver strip mall in February 2009, at a time when that part of British Columbia was experiencing one of the worst gang violence outbreaks in its history, according to a police statement.
D’ Monte also is accused of conspiring to murder two alleged rival gang members known as the Bacon Brothers, according to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
McConnell said it’s highly unusual for fugitives to be on the run for as long as D’Monte and to successfully assimilate themselves into a community.
D’ Monte, whom police said has traveled to Spain and Asia and is associated with a drug network in Mexico, was last seen in the Vancouver area in January 2011.
After that, he vanished until he reappeared in Puerto Rico more than a decade later.
Torres, with the United States Marshals Service, said high-profile fugitives often assume the profile of a very wealthy person because they have the means.
Three weeks before federal agents arrested D’Monte, Torres said his agency finally had collected enough information to identify the fugitive, noting they never received any tips.
As D’Monte drove through the popular tourist district of Isla Verde on Feb., the agents closed in.
Return to Top 03/03 Ex-cop Breonna Taylor shooting not guilty ps://abcnews.go.com/US/jury-finds-officer-brett-hankison-quilt GIST A jury in Louisville, Kentucky, has found Brett Hankison, the former police officer charged with recklessly shooting into a neighboring apartment during the course of the raid that ended with the death of Breonna Taylor, not guilty on all three counts of wanton endangerment in the first degree.
Hankison was charged with three counts of wanton endangerment for firing multiple shots into a neighboring apartment that endangered the lives of three people on March 13, 2020.
The jury deliberated for just three hours before returning its verdict.
Hankison fired 10 shots into Taylor's apartment, several of which entered a neighboring apartment where a man, child and pregnant woman were living, according to prosecutors.
Prosecutors said Cody Etherton, Chelsey Napper, and her son, Zayden, were all sleeping at the time of the shooting.
Bullets and casings from Hankison's gun were found at the scene and retrieved from a common wall of Taylor and her neighbors.
In an interview with Louisville Metro Police Department's Public Integrity Unit in the weeks following the shooting, Hankison alleged that he saw muzzle flashes and was ""certain"" at the time he heard an AR-15 rifle firing out of the apartment.
No AR-15 rifle or corresponding bullets or casings were found on the scene.
Hankison, and fellow officers Myles Cosgrove and Mattingly, fired 32 shots into Taylor's apartment while serving a ""no-knock"" warrant.
The plainclothes officers were serving the warrant searching for Taylor's ex-boyfriend, who they allege was dealing drugs.
He was not at the residence, but her current boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, thought someone was breaking into the home and fired one shot from a 9 mm pistol at the officers.
Mattingly was struck in the leg and three officers opened fire, killing the 26-year-old Taylor.
Two bullets that had entered the ceiling were also found in the apartment above Taylor's.
Napper, or her young son,"" Walker's lawyer, Frederick Moore IL, said in a statement following the ruling.
Hankison told the court in his testimony on Wednesday that he was not aware of the layout of the apartment or apartment complex prior to the execution of the warrant.
Taylor's death sparked outrage nationwide and protests calling for the officers to be held accountable for the killing.
We appreciate the hard work of our prosecutors and respect the decision of the jury,"" Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron said in a statement after the verdict was read on Thursday.
