With the 2018 North Atlantic Treaty Organization Summit concluding, the focus of the international media’s attention turns to the Helsinki meeting between American President Donald Trump and his Russian Federation counterpart, Vladimir Putin.
Friction between Washington and several of the European capitals as well as tension between President Trump and his domestic opposition cast a shadow over the summit with these parties expressing concern that the American leader will cave to the demands of the Russian president.
Such concerns stem from charges that President Trump has been comprised by Russian intelligence or is at least sympathetic to Moscow.
Regardless of the validity of such accusations, it is worth inquiring as to what “demands” President Putin will make of his American counterpart.
Michael McFaul, President Barack Obama’s former Ambassador to Russia, argues that President Putin could give President Trump “a history lesson about Ukraine or about Russia’s relations with Syria, and the president somehow says he will reverse his own administration’s policy.
President Putin will behave as he has at past meetings with United States leaders, using the summit as an opportunity to recount American misdeeds.Klimov argues that this is a chance for President Trump to hear the other side of the story.
Russian journalist Leonid Bershidskiy adds that Helsinki will present a chance for President Putin to make himself look like the reasonable leader on the world stage.
With a grand bargain between both powers highly unlikely, it is worth examining some of the individual points of contention in Russo-American relations, what Moscow’s goals are with respect to each of them, and whether the Trump administration is willing or able to concede.
Russia’s annexation of Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula in 2014 and its subsequent sponsorship of an insurrection in the country’s eastern Donbas region proved to be major factors in the deterioration of Russo-American relations.
They are also a major focus for Western media and politicians with regard to the upcoming Trump-Putin summit.
These figures fear that President Trump’s “comprised” state could lead him to “surrender” Ukraine and Crimea to Russia.
Russia strongly desires a United States withdrawal from interference in Ukraine’s affairs.
Per Moscow’s narrative, the Maydan uprising of early 2014 that forced out Ukraine’s Russia-leaning president, Viktor Yanukovych, was an illegitimate, Western-backed coup d’état designed to draw Ukraine away from Russia’s sphere of influence, where the Kremlin argues that it rightfully belongs.
Moscow was also disturbed by the how the revolution brought to power anti-Russian, ultra-nationalist political parties like Praviy Sektor and Svoboda as well as their paramilitary arms, organizations such as the Azov Battalion and C14.
As for President Trump’s views on the conflict, he has previously stated that Crimea is rightfully Russia’s because the population there speaks Russian.
It is unclear whether this remains his official position, with him only saying that “we’re going to have to see,” when directly asked if the United States will recognize the peninsula as part of Russia.
In any event only the United States Congress can grant official American recognition of Crimea as a republic of the Russian Federation.
For his part, National Security Advisor John Bolton insists that Crimea is notpart of Russia and Congress is unlikely to lift sanctions, one of the few points of bipartisan consensus.
American weapons are already in the country and NATO advisors have become a mainstay in Ukraine’s armed forces.
For its part, Russia is unlikely to consider anything with regard to Ukraine until after Ukrainian presidential and parliamentary elections next year.
Yet, some suggest that Putin will reintroduce the idea of stationing peacekeepers in Ukraine.
Europe wants an international force to police Ukraine, forcing Russian mercenaries and special operators out and ensuring the reintegration of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblastiwith the rest of Ukraine.
As such, European leaders most likely will not agree to such a proposal if President Putin reintroduces it, and given the views of President Trump’s cabinet, the American foreign policy bureaucracy, and the United States Congress, a compromise with regard to the Ukrainian conflict favoring Russia – or a compromise of any kind – is unlikely to be reached at the upcoming Helsinki summit.
A further concern among European leaders is the rather hostile rhetoric that President Trump directs toward NATO member states.
He has initiated a trade war with Europe by putting tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from the European Union.
Meanwhile, President Trump as called for the readmittance of Russia into the Group of Eight , from which Russian was expelled in 2014 for its annexation of Crimea.
Such statements leave European leaders concerned that if President Trump is sincere in his statements, he will be open to manipulation by President Putin, considered by many analysts to be plotting to divide the West through subversion and immobilize the Atlantic Alliance.
Indeed, the expansion of NATO is a major point of contention in Russo-American relations.
In Moscow’s view, the encroachment of the West into its traditional sphere of influence left it with no choice but to engage in military actions such as the 2008 intervention in Georgia and the sponsorship of insurrectionists in eastern Ukraine.
However, allegations that President Putin wishes to destroy the Western world order – especially by using President Trump as an asset – stand on flimsy ground.
Firstly, President Trump does not have the authority to readmit Russia into the G8.
The other members are stalwart in their convictions that Russia should not be welcomed back.
Russia is still a member of the G20, which gives President Putin the opportunity to schmooze with such figures as China’s Xi Jinping, India’s Narendra Modi, and Turkey’s Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
Additionally, Russia, as a major aluminum and steel producer, will suffer from President Trump’s trade war with Europe.
Europe is a major customer of Russian-supplied energy, Western corporations have long desired to invest in Russia, and much of the wealth held by Russian oligarchs is kept in banks in the West.
Furthermore, the United States government does not appear to be in line with President Trump’s more drastic proposals, such as a significant United States troop withdrawal from Germany.
BothSecretary of Defense James Mattis and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo have spoken positively of the Alliance, and the Trump administration continues to put pressure on it European allies to maintain sanctions on Russia.
In short, the upcoming Helsinki summit is unlikely to result in any sort of dramatic restructuring of the Atlantic world order in part because of President Trump’s inability to do so and because of Moscow’s desire more so for a return to the pre-Crimea status quo than for the destruction of the liberal-democratic West through right-wing sleeper agents.
Russia and the United States have been at loggerheads over Syria, Russia’s primary client state in the Middle East, since protests against the government of President Bashar al-Asad began in 2012 and morphed into a violent jihadistand Islamist-led insurgency.
The United States took advantage of the situation by providing arms to anti-Asad rebels, some of which ended up in the hands of more hardline Islamic insurrectionists.
At the same time, the United States launched a bombing campaign against the Islamic State jihadist group in eastern Syria, working with Kurdish militias to seize the caliphate’s territory.
The Kremlin has long opposed United States regime change efforts in Middle Eastern states such as Iraq, Libya, and Syria, arguing that they only empower jihadist factions hostile to the rest of the world, especially Russia.
The Russian military intervention in Syria served to prevent Syria from becoming a haven for such elements as Libya has.
Russia further demonstrated its opposition to American regime change ambitions by renewing the leases on the Tartus naval replenishment facility and the Khmeymim air base.
Both facilities will undergo considerable expansion and host weapons platforms such as anti-aircraft batteries and air superiority fighters designed to counter Western military technology.
President Trump, too, has expressed an interest in withdrawing the 2,000 United States troops stationed in Syria.
The Syrian Arab Army would police this zone with Russia’s assurances that Hizbullah and Iran not be allowed to operate there.
The area in question is Syria’s Daraa province, which is under relentless bombardment from Syrian and Russian air forces.
The assault forced over 45,000 refugees to flee the city with Jordan opposed to any of them crossing its borders.
As this region borders Israel, Tel Aviv, like Washington, is also opposed to the presence of Iranian and Hizbullah forces in Daraa.
Interestingly, Russia appears somewhat willing to compromise on this issue, and it may be the most plausible positive breakthrough in Russo-American relations to emerge from the Helsinki conference.
President Putin may try to convince the leaders of these countries that he can provide the guarantees they seek.
Israel, a country with greater ties to Moscow than most would expect, has called for Russia to rein in Iran and Hizbullah in Syria.
However, Russia’s willingness to orchestrate an Iranian/Hizbullah withdrawal from southern Syria is a separate issue from its ability to do so.
Russia’s alliance with Iran and Hizbullah was a temporary one to combat IS and retard the collapse of the Syrian government.
In June of this year, Russia deployed its troops to the Lebanese border without consulting Hizbullah.
In a compromise, SAA personnel took overt he positions occupied by Russian forces.
On 17 May, President Putin said that all foreign forces should withdraw from Syria.
He emphasized that this includes Turkish, Iranian, American, and Hizbullah forces.
Israeli officials concur that only Syrian soldiers should be stationed in southern Syria.
Ultimately, Iran is a longtime partner of the Syrian government as is Russia.
Iranian troops arrived in country at Damascus’s request before Russia began its formal military intervention in Syria.
Moscow is unlikely willing to compromise its relationship with its chief Middle Eastern client state, so despite its desires , it will have to contend with Syria’s decisions with regard to keeping Iranian troops in country.
Though these are the major points of contention between Russia and the United States currently, there are a few others worth mentioning briefly here.
The Helsinki summit is arguably the best forum for U.S.-Russia nuclear arms talks, especially given that the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty expires in 2021.
Nuclear arms have been a major point of contention between the two countries since the U.S.’s withdrawal from the ABM Treaty in 2002.
This event was followed by the stationing of ballistic missile defense installations throughout Europe.
Russia feels that these systems prevent it from achieving strategic parity with the United States and will give America a clear advantage in the event of a nuclear war.
Such insecurities likely prompted Russian violations of the 1987 Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, a point that President Putin may raise at the summit.
Also overshadowing the Helsinki meeting are allegations of Russian meddling in America’s 2016 presidential election and charges that Trump’s campaign “colluded” with the Kremlin to secure his win.
For his part, President Trump has cast doubt on assertions that Russia meddled in the United States 2016 presidential election.
He also denies any collusion between his campaign and figures linked to the Russian government.
Trump administration officials said that the president would discuss election meddling with the Russian leader.
Also, merely days before the summit, special counsel Robert Mueller announced the indictment of 12 Russian officers affiliated with the Main Intelligence Directorate for their role in the hacking of Democratic National Committee e-mails in 2016.
In response to the recent Mueller indictment, President Putin and his entourage will likely continue their usual tactics of deflection.
Ushakov recently issued a statement arguing that those who oppose improving U.S.-Russia relations should not be allowed to speculate on Russian interference in the election and that raising such issues was harmful to any reconciliation between the two countries.
In conclusion, though, it appears that the upcoming Trump-Putin summit will yield any results disproportionately favorable to either state.
Experts at the Washington, D.C.-based Kennan Institute note that a true reconciliation would involve Russia ceasing to challenge the U.S.-led order and the United States to recognize Russia as a partner in the international sphere.
They argue that the Helsinki forum will only moderate the confrontation and is not likely to lead to any fixed outcomes.
Russia recognizes that because so much of the American foreign policy bureaucracy is at odds with President Trump, therefore making it unlikely that Moscow will achieve any of the results it most desires, namely an American retreat from Russia’s near abroad and recognition of Russia as a great power and international partner.
Russia will continue to make such offers to the United States in the coming months, a state of affairs largely similar to the pre-Helsinki status quo.
However, one must not discount the possibility of a further deterioration in Russo-American relations following the summit should Moscow not get what it desires.
Professor Cohen argues that a lack of progress in a Putin-Trump summit could have disastrous consequences in Moscow for American national security.
President Putin could become convinced that negotiating with the West is futile, leading to a more hostile Russian foreign policy and a further deterioration of relations between Washington and Moscow.
New evidence has emerged to buttress previous reporting that in 2016 GRU officers bankrolled a failed but potentially violent coup against Milo Djukanovic, then-prime minister of Montenegro.
At the time, Montenegro was preparing for ascension into NATO, and it became a member state in early 2017.
Such violent subversive activities on Russia’s could become more commonplace if the coming summit convinces President Putin that it is futile to negotiate with the West.
Russia will undertake more drastic steps to curtail Western interference in its sphere of influence.
