Adopting the Social Identity Theory perspective, the contribution analyses the interrelationship between the evolution of the EU’s SP approach towards the eastern neighbours and the development of the EU’s identity.
It demonstrates how the process of categorization relating to the ideational ‘self’, ‘we’ and ‘other’ took place; and how only the EU’s relationship with Russia and not that with Ukraine has accumulated the discursive markers of a strategic partnership.
The contribution, furthermore, analyses the challenges to the EU changing approach stemming from the 2013–2014 Ukraine crisis.
Introduction The present contribution explores the changing relationship between the European Union and the two largest countries in its eastern neighbourhood, namely Ukraine and Russia, between 1991 and 2014.
SIT considers agents to be driven by the inherent desire to maximize their own self-esteem, which is only possible in social relationships/participation in significant groups.
Thus, the contribution’s approach can be summarized as an analysis of the interrelationship between the evolution of the EU’s SP approach towards its eastern neighbours, on the one hand, and the development of (particular dimensions of) the EU’s identity, as a process of refocusing the ‘self’, ‘we’, and ‘other’, on the other hand.
Such a c­ omparative ­approach should also help to illuminate the specific characteristics of each r­ elationship while also pointing out their differences.
The contribution points to the evolution of two increasingly different interaction patterns corresponding to different EU identity categories.
As a result, and in contrast to the EU–Russia relationship, the SP cooperation paradigm has not been in high demand in EU–Ukraine relations.
In addition, the contribution demonstrates how, following the contestation of the autonomy of the EU ‘potential we’ by Russia in the course of the Ukraine crisis, the EU has rethought the SP as a suitable expression of the EU–Russia relationship.
SPs as means and channels of socialization The end of the Cold War created the need for both the European Community /EU and the Newly Independent States to define their international identity.
Soon after the Treaty of Maastricht inaugurated a new stage of European integration, the EU was faced with a number of pressing issues and dilemmas, including how to design its relationship with the states to its east.
Finding answers to these questions would inevitably impact upon the EU’s identity.
From this perspective, the most significant process taking place in the 1990s was EU’s eastern enlargement; the NIS, including Ukraine and Russia, were not an immediate EU priority.
This new facet of being a norm promoter/socializer determined the EU’s initial approach to Russia and Ukraine.
At the same time, the EU aimed at a specific categorization of most of the NIS, setting them apart from the CEES and the Baltics.
Along with the new prospects of cooperation in cultural, educational, scientific and technological fields, the PCA stipulated the creation of a multilevel political dialogue aiming at involve consultations at the highest political level.
The institutional infrastructure of the dialogue consisted of the high-level summits of presidents/ heads of government,1 the Cooperation Council ,2 the Cooperation Committee , the regular meetings of subcommittees, and the Parliamentary Cooperation Committee.
Corresponding to the central role of norm and value promotion and socialization in the EU’s approach, SP recognition disappeared when the socializees failed to move forward according to the expectations of the socializer.
Thus, not only was the EU ‘self’ defined as socializer of the countries to its east, but these countries themselves agreed with this facet of the EU ‘self’ as a central feature of their SPs.
The growing international ambitions of the EU were reinforced by the evolution of the CFSP, the creation of the European Security and Defence Policy and the emergence of the external dimension of the Justice and Home Affairs.
These changes coincided with the entry into force, after a long ratification process, of the PCAs with Russia, in December 1997, and with Ukraine, in July 1998.
Soon after the political dialogue between the parties became operational, the EU adopted two more instruments reaffirming the importance of Russia and Ukraine, namely the CSs.
Thus both Russia and Ukraine were assigned special importance by the EU, this time not only vis-á-vis the NIS states, but also vis-á-vis third countries in general.
At the same time, to judge from EU’s aspirations to develop CSs towards the Mediterranean and the Western Balkans (Spencer 2001, 32), the special interest in Russia and Ukraine was related to their position as direct neighbours of the EU; that is to say, the EU SP approach seemed to be underpinned by a specific geographic rationale, namely a focus on the EU’s periphery.
CSs were expected to operationalize the CFSP, having high expectations attached to them in terms of improving the EU’s foreign policy.
In one important way, however, CSs did represent a potentially important adjustment of the EU SP approach.
The eventual ‘modelling’ of the CSU on the CSR, in structure and sometimes with exactly the same wording, should be understood in these terms.
Nevertheless, the EU’s importance as part of Russia’s ‘generalized we’ was not contested.
While envisaging a stronger dimension of political dialogue and security cooperation,4 the SP maintained an emphasis on the socialization of partners into a ‘generalized we’, by stressing the importance of common values and norm promotion, including support for the democratic transition process, market reforms and the consolidation of the rule of law.
Such a twofold nature of the SP, combining a distinction of both countries by means of a stronger political and security dialogue, with a more comprehensive and less individualized objective of norm promotion, offered Ukraine and Russia room for their own interpretation of the new EU approach.
In Russia, the CSR was interpreted as an indicator of a changing interaction pattern determined by more horizontal elements in contrast to the previously asymmetrical relationship.
An example of the importance of such mutually beneficial cooperation was the launch of the Energy Dialogue at the Paris EU–Russia summit in 2000, aimed at facilitating the trade and investment flows between the EU and Russia in the energy sector.
The document also allowed for the possibility of EU/WEU (Western European Union) operations.
In the absence of the desired candidate status, the explicit recognition of Ukraine on the EU’S SP radar did not impress Kiev.
Ukraine’s subsequent strategy consisted in acting against such possible categorization, by putting forward initiatives of a closer rapprochement, in the spirit of the Strategy on Ukraine’s Integration with the European Union, adopted in 1998, as well as the associated Programme containing a roadmap towards EU membership.
The EU’s adoption of the CSs corresponded to its aspiration to change the interaction pattern with both Russia and Ukraine, by substituting one underpinned by the socialization of partners into the ‘generalized we’ with one based upon more specific identity categories.
The latter was intended to be achieved by means of a positive differentiation between Ukraine and Russia, on the one hand, and other countries, on the other hand.
The emergence of the ENP can be regarded as another instance of the EU defining a new identity dimension as a basis for redefining its interaction with its partners.
Maintaining such positive influence over the countries in its direct proximity was also in line with the EU’s post-enlargement aspirations to affirm itself as a strong international actor capable of constructing a foreign policy beyond a reliance on its members’ individual perspectives.
On the other hand, recognizing its role as its neighbours’ ‘significant we’, the EU aimed to maintain and indeed reinforce the interaction pattern based upon socialization of its partners.
In this spirit, the ENP maintained most of enlargement’s operational instruments and mechanisms, including the centrality of the political conditionality principle underpinning both the EU partners’ approximation to European values and their adoption of the acquis communautaire.
After being initially included in the ENP, Russia withdrew from the initiative in its early stages.
The launch of the Common Spaces worked towards further consolidation of the change in EU–Russia relations, away from the EU as Russia’s ‘generalized we’ and towards ‘self–other’ interaction.
This tendency was reinforced by the terrorist attacks of 9/11 and subsequent rapprochement of Russia with the United States , which allowed Russia’s Chechnya problem to be presented in a new light.
The emergence of the Common Spaces, underpinned by ‘self–other’ interaction, not only defined the EU–Russia SP as a non-ENP relationship, but also led to the categorization of the ENP as ‘something that an SP was not’, corresponding to a marginal interest in this paradigm in Kiev.
This is not to say that the Ukrainian leadership was enthusiastic about the EU ‘potential we’ categorization as an ultimate basis for the relationship.
Indeed, viewed from Kiev, the CS, the ENP and even the AA all shared a compensatory logic and represented temporary solutions.
Rather, Ukrainian leadership accepted the ENP as the best available fit to Ukraine’s ‘prospective we’ aspirations.
This explains Kiev’s embracement of the ENP in spite of the fact that Ukraine could not influence the design or content of the initiative, while the transfer of norms and values was stipulated to occur in an asymmetric and non-negotiable manner.
The EaP and Russia’s emerging challenge to the EU ‘potential we’ In 2009, the ENP was complemented by the EaP, which provided for an explicit eastern dimension of this initiative.
Supported especially by CEES and the Baltics , the EaP was designed for six eastern ENP states, thereby excluding Russia.
Thus, while maintaining the interaction pattern of the ENP, the EaP sought to reinforce the ‘potential we’ as a distinctive EU foreign policy identity category, with AA and DCFTA as its sharper institutional expressions.
To attract new members, Russia employed both sticks, such as threats of sanctions, tariffs and higher gas prices, as well as carrots, such as loans and a natural gas discount offered to Ukraine.
Moscow’s attempts to attract Ukraine to the Eurasian project have not changed Kiev’s ‘prospective we’ aspirations.
In reality, this meant joining a range of EU cooperation arrangements traditionally open to candidate countries (Ferreira-Pereira and Vieira 2014, 152), such as alignment with the EU Common Positions and Declarations, which at some point achieved a rate of 90 per cent .7 Some of these decisions implied tangible losses, including the worsening of relations with countries essential to Ukraine’s aspirations to offset its economic (and energy) dependence on Russia, such as Iran.
Thus, and in spite of all well-documented setbacks in Ukraine’s ‘EU-ization’ , a range of Ukraine’s actions and declarations appeared to uphold the ‘potential we’ interaction pattern, as well as Ukraine’s ‘prospective we’ aspirations.
Such a position determined Moscow’s insistence on a joint consultative body as the basis of its engagement with the ESDP, corresponding to Russia’s ‘real partnership role’ , and also prevented the negotiation of a new agreement to replace the PCA, which expired in December 2007.
Following the rise to power of Viktor Yanukovych in 2010, the EU–Ukraine rapprochement slowed down, the EU expressing concern regarding Ukraine’s 6 Correspondingly, the price of gas would be reduced from over US$400 per 1000 cubic metres to US$268.
Since July 2011, Ukrainian naval forces have been part of the Greek-led EU Balkan Battle Group , making Ukraine one of the first non-EU member states to join an EU battlegroup.
Still, all these setbacks did not result in Ukraine renouncing the ‘potential we’ as a basis for the relationship.
Continuity with the previously established course towards ‘we-doing’ was provided with the July 2010 gas law aiming to create a legal framework for the introduction of a competitive gas market, and the subsequent accession of Ukraine to the European Energy Community, in February 2011.
Here, once again, Ukraine’s interaction with the EU stood in contrast with Russia’s as manifest in the latter’s contestation of the EU’s emerging acquis communautaire and the Third Energy Package .10 Against the background of a never disputed acceptance of the EU ‘potential we’, the U-turn decision of Yanukovich at the 2013 November Vilnius summit, resulting in non-signature of the AA, pointed to a radical redefinition of EU– Ukraine interaction.
Even though Yanukovich attempted to mitigate his position by stating that, despite ‘difficulties’, the country would continue moving towards European integration, and that the AA was not being rejected but rather reconsidered in Ukraine in light of what best served the national interests (BBC Russian 2013), it was obvious that the decision to halt approximation to EU norms would mean a fundamental revision of Ukraine’s ‘self’, ‘other’ and ‘significant we’, in a way that was explicitly proscribed by Moscow, and under direct economic and political pressure.
This is not to say that membership in the EU or in the DCFTA suddenly became uncontested issues in Ukraine , or that the costs of adopting and implementing the acquis communautaire were unconditionally accepted.
Rather, the events in Ukraine were a reaction against the radical reorientation towards the Eurasian Union and the associated benefits to the Yanukovich regime.
This permitted the portrayal of 9 In line with the EU’s stipulating the improvement of the political situation in Ukraine to be a precondition for further rapprochement, in December 2012 the European Council made signature of the AA contingent upon Ukraine complying with international standards of electoral practice, ending selective justice and implementing previously agreed reforms.
The so-called ‘Füle List’ of 19 EU demands was expected to pave the way to the signature of the AA in 2013.
The non-signature of the AA not only made further rapprochement with the EU less probable; it also opened a prospect of Russia consolidating itself as Ukraine’s ‘significant we’, which made the political regime of Viktor Yanukovich suddenly look like a bad imitation of Russia’s semi-authoritarianism.
Most importantly, the use of force against demonstrators between D ­ ecember 2013 and February 2014 resulted in the ultimate loss of the appeal of the Eurasian Union in terms of the positive identity of Ukraine as a potential in-group member—a tendency that would be further reinforced in the course of the Ukraine crisis in 2014.
The EU had to acknowledge the extent of Russia’s influence over the EaP states, which amounted to a ‘counter-conditionality’ of its own, and find responses to the associated Russian measures.
Support for its ‘potential we’ was provided by the EU b ­ acking the Euromaidan demonstrators, by the introduction in February 2014 of sanctions against Yanukovich and some other regime figures and by recognizing the interim government led by Arseniy Yuatsenyuk and Interim President ­Oleksandr Turchinov.
Importantly, the EU also demonstrated flexibility while signing the political part of the AA with the Ukrainian interim government on 21 March 2014, only days after the annexation of Crimea.
As a result, and in spite of the fact that the EU was trying to stabilize a situation that Russia was actually actively determining on the ground, the EU–Russia interaction pattern remained unchanged, while EU’s efforts to sustain its ‘potential we’ were undermined.
This initial approach was characterized by ‘greater unity among the EU’s twenty-eight members’ (Schmidt-Felzmann 2015, 215).13 The extraordinary Council meeting convened on 3 March 2014 led to a number of decisions , including the suspension of EU–Russia political dialogue and the introduction of sanctions against Russia.
The unfolding Ukraine crisis challenged the EU ‘potential we’ on two accounts.
Firstly, the hostilities instigated by Russia aimed to highlight the weakness of the EU as a military actor with a clearly defined strategy to protect its ‘potential we’, whereas Russia’s strategy was both well defined and successfully applied to a number of EaP countries.
The Donbass uprisings broadened after 7 April, to which Turchinov responded with the launch of an antiterrorist operation on 15 April.
This was followed by the Odessa tragedy in the first days of May 2014 and by the declaration of independence of the Luhansk and Donetsk Republics on 11 May.
All these events hinted at the fact that the EU ‘potential we’ could hardly be managed by the instruments available to the EU, such as sanctions against Russia-backed separatists, as well as Russian officials, and economic assistance to Ukraine.
The challenge became only more pronounced with the failure of the Geneva Agreement and the kidnapping of Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe observers in Slavyansk at the end of April 2014.
Viewed from Kiev, the EU was underperforming in sustaining its ‘potential we’ in other ways, as well.
In particular the EU’s modest and reactive response to the ongoing hostilities was met with disappointment.
By then, the situation on the ground was defined by the incident of the downing of a Ukrainian Air Force transport aircraft IL-76, resulting in the death of 49 people, and by the uninterrupted supply of arms from Russia to Ukraine.
In the meantime, the EU was not even prepared to change its position regarding the possibility of Ukraine being considered part of the EU ‘prospective we’, that is, by bringing Ukraine any closer to prospective membership.
The frustration in Kiev also grew as Germany’s growing impetus in the peace talks (for instance during the July Berlin talks that took place following the resumption of the ATO by the Ukrainian leadership, on 30 June) turned out to be aimed as much at avoiding conflict escalation by any means as at engaging ­Russia, while the implications for Ukraine’s territorial integrity were down14 In 2014, the EU promised Ukraine €11 billion over seven years.
The European Commission allocated €11 million of humanitarian assistance as well as €17 million in development aid for preparations for the winter and early recovery and an additional €4. million was provided to meet the recovery and integration needs of internally displaced persons.
Until then, ­Angela Merkel’s insistence on a pro-Russian Ukrainian representative in the Trilateral Contact Group, preference for a ‘political solution’ of the crisis (that is, federalization of Ukraine) and pressing the Ukrainian leadership towards a unilateral ceasefire were seen, in Kiev, as instances of a Russia-first approach that contradicted EU’s moral obligation to sustain its ‘potential we’, ­especially in the face of growing human losses and a deteriorating humanitarian situation.
The adoption of more significant, ‘tier three’ sanctions did not take place until the tragic downing of MH-17 on 17 July 2014, which eventually led to the 31 July restrictions imposed on key sectors of Russia’s economy, including the majority of government-owned banks and the energy and defence industries.
These tier three sanctions banned the import and export of arms as well as the export of dual-use goods .15 In addition, while the EU sanctions (working in tandem with the restrictions imposed by the US) eventually proved to have an impact on the Russian economy and a constraining effect on the Russian leadership, they could not prevent Russia openly supplying weapons and troops, believed to be Russian forces, to Ukraine.
However, the Russian involvement could not be restrained by such symbolic signals, or additional sanctions, including those imposed in November 2014 targeting Russian defence enterprises as well as Rosneft and Transneft.
The issues at hand, however, were not limited to an immediate response to the hostilities, but were, rather, related to the EU’s strategy towards its neighbourhood in general.
The latter was especially reinforced by the option of a provisional application allowing Ukraine to benefit from the agreement prior to its ratification by the European Parliament and ­Verkhovna Rada on 16 September 2014.
As for the EU, it once again needed to find an answer to a new and unexpected challenge.
On the one hand, it was clear that the initial position assumed by the Commission in 2013, indicating ‘that the countries would have to choose’ between a DCFTA and integration into the Eurasian Custom Union—‘one or the other’ —was impossible to maintain.
Responding to the Russian concerns, the EU established trilateral negotiations, the first meeting being held on 11 July 2014.
Taking advantage of the pause in the hostilities marked by the Minsk-I talks in autumn 2014, the EU–Russia–Ukraine negotiations led to a solution announced on 30 October, the parties agreeing to delay the implementation of the DCFTA until the end of 2015, while also prolonging the preferential arrangements for duty-free Ukrainian exports to the EU until 1 January 2016.
Thus, even though a possibility of renegotiation remained open until the beginning of 2016, and in spite of the fact that the negotiations’ results represented a compromise rather than a triumph on the part of the EU/Ukrainian negotiators,16 the EU demonstrated that it was matching its aspirations by defending its ‘potential we’ with action.
Such proposals, which corresponded to the Russian claim that engagement was 16 The postponing of the DCFTA raised concern, in Ukraine and beyond.
In Ukraine, Danylo Lubkivskiy, Ukraine Deputy Foreign Minister, resigned in protest at the delaying of the DCFTA, considered an indication of the EU giving in to Russia’s demands.
The view of the gradual engagement with Russia was associated with the idea of the EU circumventing a fundamental disagreement and attempting to return to business as usual, which could crystallize into a relationship underpinned by Russia’s aspiration to seal a redefined interaction pattern.
The EU, however, was reluctant to subscribe to what was seen as a division into a sphere of interests associated with an acknowledgement of Russia’s ‘great-powerness’, including the right to veto the choices of the EaP states.
Moreover, the balance of the EU–Russian interaction in 2013–2014 left open the question of the definition of their modus vivendi, and the associated challenge of recalibration of their interaction and, along with it, a potential redefinition of the EU’s identity.
The initial interaction based upon the ‘generalized we’, with the emphasis on the socialization of both Ukraine and Russia eventually evolved into two divergent interaction patterns corresponding to different EU identity categories.
As a result, and in contrast to the EU–Russia relationship, where the SP has been a constant reference point, in the EU–Ukraine relationship a SP was not in high demand.
First, the gradual dissipation of EU–Ukraine SP official discourse has not been linked to a diminishing strategic importance of Ukraine to the EU or to a reducing commonality of interests between the parties.
In this sense, the findings of the present contribution emphasize the importance of the ‘demand side’ in the evolution of the EU’s SP policy.
The EU’s strategic partners, in their interaction with the EU, can determine their orientation towards/away from an SP with the EU, eventually changing the institutional pattern of relations.
Thus, rather than being a one-way, unilateral EU exercise undertaken in reaction to structural international changes, EU SP policy is also being actively shaped by the EU’s partners.
The result was the emerging Russian challenge to the autonomy of the EU ‘potential we’, enforced through a variety of ways and means as shown in this contribution.
Third, the article has also shown that while the crisis in Ukraine gave the EU identify the challenge of protecting its ‘potential we’ vis-á-vis Russia, the EU ­record in this regard is mixed.
On the one hand, Russia’s contestation of the EU ‘potential we’ by indirectly instigating a military conflict indicated EU overstretch.
This perception led to Kiev eventually changing its neutral status, thereby paving the way to the prospect of NATO membership.
In this respect, the EU found the necessary means to sustain its ‘potential we’ throughout 2013–2014.
At the same time, the Ukraine crisis made the EU rethink the suitability of an SP as a discursive and institutional expression of the EU–Russia relationship, which was recast in increasingly antagonist terms.
Finally, the contribution has demonstrated that SIT provides a fruitful ground for the analysis of EU foreign policy.
The acknowledgement of such multiple challenges to the EU provides a complementary explanation of why the EU was so profoundly overwhelmed and overstretched by the crisis.
At the same time, the contribution has demonstrated how the two dimensions in EU identity—the ‘self– other’ interaction and the EU ‘prospective we’—have clearly interfered with each other.
The findings of this contribution thus indicate that the EU’s recalibration of its ‘self’, ‘significant/prospective we’ and ‘other’ may result in tensions and regional conflict, thereby paving the way towards a further redefinition of the EU identity.
