A very busy week, not just in the DPRK, but also in Russia and Ukraine.
Steve Bannon, a former senior adviser to United States President Donald Trump, told an audience in Prague that NATO countries in Europe need to start paying more to protect themselves from Russia and stop being a “protectorate” of the United States.
Speaking at a forum sponsored by a Czech defense contractor on May 22, Bannon said that while Russia is a “kleptocracy” being “run by bad guys,” the real geostrategic threat to the world is China.
The North American Aerospace Defense Command, or NORAD, is responsible for detecting incoming threats and protecting the airspace above the United States and Canada.
Britain’s 2015 defence plan fell apart; a new review offers a door to new discussions.
Poland says Russian networks were trying to foment Polish hostility to Ukraine.
The Russian Army, which has long emphasised its artillery arm, is once again upgrading conventional tube artillery and adding new targeting techniques.
Samuel Cranny-Evans, Mark Cazalet, and Christopher F Foss report on the country’s more flexible approach to fire missions Since armed conflict began in Ukraine in 2014, the world has been given insight into Russia’s land warfare playbook.
Much of its current warfighting strategy relates to modernisation efforts that began in 2008, and these have had a profound affect on the strategies and equipment used in artillery formations.
Russian developments have focused on dramatically increasing accuracy and rate of fire, but the country has also decreased the size of artillery formations.
Russia claims that the ground-based missile system is capable of intercepting hypersonic missiles, drones, aircraft as well as stealth warplanes like the F-22 and the F-35.
Russia quietly conducted the world’s longest surface-to-air missile test, according to sources with direct knowledge of United States intelligence about the weapons program.
The Russian Navy says a nuclear-powered submarine has successfully test-fired four intercontinental ballistic missiles on the country’s northwestern coast.
United States Ambassador to Moscow Jon Huntsman says he has experienced “frustration” due to the reluctance of some Russian officials to meet with him because of the state of affairs between the two countries.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has approved a new cabinet, leaving several key officials in place and appointing a son of longtime ally Nikolai Patrushev as agriculture minister.
President Vladimir Putin has nominated former longtime Finance Minister Aleksei Kudrin as the head of Russia’s Audit Chamber, the lower chamber of parliament says.
Paul Goble Staunton, May 23 – Before the 1917 revolution, Nicholas II used Cossack units to attack political opponents and ethnic and religious minorities, driving the two together and making his overthrow all the more likely.
Now, Vladimir Putin appears set to repeat the tsar’s mistake, moving from attacking protesters with his “Cossacks” to undermining non-Russian nations.
Putin’s move in fact may be even more dangerous to his position that Nicholas II’s was to his because unlike the Cossacks of later imperial times who were under effective military control, the neo-Cossack bandits Putin is using are ideologically hostile to dissent and minorities as such.
He points out that there is a Kazan link even to the Moscow events because a company there gave 1. million rubles to the shadowy Central Cossack Host that took part in the March 5 mayhem.
But he provides disturbing information about the appearance and growth of “Cossack” villages and units in the Middle Volga.
The Cossack rebirth at the end of the 1980s involved both real Cossacks and those who wanted to participate in a militarized movement.
The former would like to see their regions returned to them or even to gain independence, things Moscow opposes; but the latter have proved to be extremely useful to the powers that be.
Many of them have been profoundly affected by the propaganda of Orthodox autocracy and conservative values and are thus quite prepared to be foot soldiers in the campaign against modernity, urban values and non-Orthodox peoples and nations, Garifullin continues.
The regime uses them to suggest that “’Orthodox society’” is behind its repressive policies.
That is a part of the history of the Cossacks Putin’s “Cossacks” don’t talk about because it is inconsistent with their “Black Hundreds” views.
Neo-Cossack communities, supported by grants from the Russian Presidential Administration, have appeared in various parts of the Middle Volga, Garifullin says.
Often they are used as supplements to the police; but they are also being used to try to halt the de-Russification of the area as ethnic Russians move out.
The support of the neo-Cossacks for Orthodoxy and imperial traditions is, the analyst says, “an element of cultural policy, a unique ‘soft force’ in this case, judging from everything which serves as an attempt to maintain the status quo” of Russian dominance even as ethnic Russians lose their share of the population.
The introduction of these “Cossacks” in places where Cossacks never existed before thus represents int eh first instance “an ethno-cultural factor” designed to undermine and threaten the non-Russians even as it encourages the ethnic Russians to remain where they are.
But such efforts carry with them real risks, Garifullin says, including violent clashes with the non-Russian nations.
And on the other, he concludes, “the intensification of propaganda of one religious may promote radicalization” not only among members of that religion but in response among those who are of a different faith.
Thus, “’Cossackization’” Putin-style could end by triggering an outburst of Islamist radicalism in the Middle Volga.
Nothing quite like that has ever happened before, Andrei Illarionov says; and its consequences are likely to be both fateful and far reaching.
Of course, the Russian commentator says, nepotism is far from unknown in Russian history.
And there have been cases when the offspring of senior officials have later risen to positions of power on their own without the intervention of their parents.
Such events are often referred to as nepotism, but they really are not, Illarionov says.
He named his son deputy and then first deputy foreign trade minister and his son in law deputy and first deputy interior minister.
But he did not in those cases or others put these children into the top jobs.
It has lasted longer and it has involved his willingness to see the offspring of senior officials become ministers as in the current case of Patrushev’s son becoming minister of agriculture.
Among these are both successful cases – North Korea, Syria, Azerbaijan and Chechnya – unsuccessful ones – Ukraine – and some that are still in the process of preparation – Belarus.
Paul Goble Staunton, May 22 – “Thirty years ago, from May 21 to May 28, 1988, Soviet Sakhalin stood in the squares and called the authorities to account for the impoverished condition of the people,” Regnum’s Olga Demidenko writes.
She picks up on the memoirs of those day that have been assembled by a regional news agency, KrabikMedia and not insignificantly posts her article under the rubric “politics” rather than “history,” an indication of the way the 1988 events echo today.
To be sure, no one died; but only because they could go into the forests or to the rivers and sea and find food for themselves.
People had to stand in long lines, and they were offended by the fact that the communist party elite continued to live well and to do nothing, even as their own lives deteriorated.
Vera Boltunova, described by Demidenko as “a real participant of the Sakhalin Spring of 1988, a member of the CPSU, a happy mother of three children, and an employee of the regional gas and oil prospecting trust, says that everything began when the appeals of Moscow and the actions of local officials diverged.
Moscow was talking all the time about glasnost and perestroika and about the need to select “real leaders, “she says; “but local party bosses demanded that people vote for the only candidate they put forward.
Boltunova says that a party boss would do that was no surprise but that a Soviet journalist would talk about it and suggest that others do as well very much was.
On May 21, small groups of people began to assemble in front of the local theater.
And at the invitation of several people in the crowd, they began to share their grievances which went far beyond the heavy-handedness of the obkom secretary.
There was no extremism in this, and some of the protesters, led by bulldozer operator Sergey Mikhail kept order.
After a few hours, they elected “an initiative group” and it undertook to organize similar groups in workplaces and in neighborhoods.
The idea that the people could take things into their own hands spread like wildfire.
And this tragedy of the people is occurring when the new bosses are living well and amassing enormous wealth that they claim they have “’honestly earned’” but that most believe they have stolen from the people, the Regnum journalist says.
The island’s residents “today just as 30 years ago, are complaining about collapsing housing, about how new construction quickly collapses because it isn’t being built up to standards, about shabby hospitals, the lack of places in schools, and a whole range of other misfortunes.
It is thus an open question, Demidenko implies, if and when they will act as their parents did 30 years ago.
Paul Goble Staunton, May 22 – At a time when it is attempting to Russianize and even Russify non-Russians living within the Russian Federation, Moscow is doing what it can to block the integration of ethnic Russians living in other countries, thereby costing itself influence and leading to more ethnic re-identification among them than anyone expected, Pavel Kazarin says.
And this has been the case, he says, “for one simple reason:” Moscow views them only as irredenta.
For Moscow, the millions of ethnic Russians in the former Soviet republics are to remain as they were so that they can become “a pretext for ‘reunification’ in the framework of a single common state.
Moscow has done what it can to block “the integration of ethnic Russians into the political nations of those countries in which they are fated to live.
The very idea that Russians could live according to interests not of Moscow but of their new capitals is viewed as treason” in the Russian capital.
According to Kazarin, “the Kremlin never needed the adaptation of ethnic Russians.
It opposed the idea of “Russians for Ukraine” insisting that they be Russians for Russia even in Ukraine.
And all of this reflects the fact that Moscow “isn’t interested” in the Russians but only in itself.
In Ukraine’s Donbass, for example, the interests of ethnic Russians are “secondary relative to the interests of the Russian leadership.
But Russians recognize this and that has had consequences Moscow can’t possibly want.
Ethnic Russians began to integrate into Ukraine – as a result of an independent choice which they have made between their own motherland and their new one.
Their new identity is replacing their old one, the commentator says; and in the next census, the number of people identifying as ethnic Russians is likely to decline far more than anyone now expects.
Paul Goble Staunton, May 22 – It is a commonplace that Vladimir Putin is reviving many features of the Soviet and even tsarist past; but it is less widely recognized that many are discussing these new-old things as if they were almost a carbon copy of the originals.
In fact, they are not; and in three key cases, Putin’s innovations are different and much worse.
The first is the promotion of social strata or as they were and are called in Russian sosloviya, groups of people defined not by their relationship to the economy as classes are but by their relationship to the state.
The return of such strata as a defining feature of Putin’s Russia has been highlighted by the increasing amount of nepotism among the Kremlin leader’s cronies.
The parallels with the post-Petrine Russian imperial state are obvious because in that state all subjects were defined by their relationship to the tsar.
There are many elements of that in Putin’s Russia, but there is at least one major difference besides the absence up to now of a formalization of these divisions.
But in Putin’s Russia, the wealthiest are entirely dependent on the state and the state has moved against education and science in ways that limit the emergence of a counter-elite.
Consequently, the Putin arrangements restore the worst features of the pre-1917 arrangements while largely precluding some of the circumstances that reduced these consequences and ultimately led to revolution.
The second case in which Putin’s copy is worse than the original concerns his use of people whom he calls and who call themselves “Cossacks” even though such people are radically different and far more dangerous to Russia than were their namesakes.
One Moscow analyst who has pointed to this difference and its dangers is Aleksey Makarkin of the Center for Political Technologies.
Before 1917, “the Cossacks were in military service and thus subject to military discipline.
Moreover, the Cossacks before 1917 followed orders, good, bad or indifferent, regardless of what their own political views may have been.
But “the Cossacks” of the Putin era are profoundly “ideologized” people who have their own agendas and are quite prepared to exceed their authority in the pursuit of them including the use of force and violence.
Many of the “Cossacks” of today are extremely “archaic” in their views.
They find the present-day city offensive, believe young people are too free and easy, and look to the Sovietpast for their “moral” orientation, either because they had experience with it or their parents or other relatives did.
That is bad enough, but what is worse is that the Russian powers that be have taken them under their wing, used them as adjuncts to the state’s police power, and refused to punish them for their excesses lest these “Cossacks” desert the state at some future hour of its need.
That is not how the tsars acted, but it is how Putin and his regime are, Makarkin says.
Instead, it represents a radical and dangerous redefinition of the basic categories of the Eurasianists.
Paul Goble Staunton, May 21 – Two of the most truly “punished peoples” of Soviet times but ones that are left off many such lists are the ethnic Finns and Ingermanlanders who lived in the northwestern portion of the USSR near Finland.
But if the Finns ultimately had a country to go do, the Ingermanlanders have suffered from the first years of Soviet power up to now.
At the time of the first Soviet census in 1926, approximately 130,000 people declared themselves to be Ingermanlanders, but as a result of repressions in the 1930s and early 1940s, their number fell to less than 30,000 – even before they were deported as a result of the 1947 decree.
At the conclusion of World War II, the Ingermanlanders were briefly allowed to return to their immemorial homes but that didn’t last.
And only the death of Stalin in 1953 did any of them have the chance to return home.
And only on June 29, 1993, did the post-Soviet government lift these restrictions.
At present, there are only a few thousand Ingermanlanders living near St.
They are represented by two groups, Inkerin Liito, the officially recognized one which many feel considers the policies of Stalin by working closely with the special services and the regional governments.
The other is the Free Ingria group whose leaders have been forced into exile but which enjoys significant support among the local Ingermanlanders who show up at its demonstrations, patronize its cafes at which Ingermanland symbols are shown, and who look to Finland and Estonia for support.
Like other more familiar punished peoples from Soviet times, they deserve better treatment from the Russian government and more support from people around the world who care about the rights and freedoms of small ethnic groups that some representatives of larger ones believe they can trample with impunity.
The arrival to urban centers and the countryside of millions of Muslim labor migrants from Central Asia is at the center of what could emerge as Russia’s most radical ethnic makeover in centuries.
Retired FSB General Ivan Mironov, a KGB veteran from the 1970s, commands the pseudo-Cossack unit whose members were filmed beating anti-Putin protesters in Moscow on May 5.
Although Mironov has tried to remake himself as a guardian of Russian Orthodox tradition, he is an old-school product of the Soviet security agencies with a murky history in the emergence of Russia’s post-Soviet kleptocracy.
The host of the YouTube channel of jailed opposition politician and anticorruption campaigner Aleksei Navalny has also been jailed for 30 days following his detention in Moscow.
Activists have announced a global campaign to demand the release of Ukrainian filmmaker Oleh Sentsov, who opposed Moscow’s 2014 annexation of Crimea and is now on hunger strike in a Russian prison.
Hidden deep in the woods of Siberia, a community of top Soviet scientists created an isolated pocket of freedom and openness — until Brezhnev stamped it out.
The Siberian village of Loshchinka is plagued by alcoholism and unemployment, all-too-common symptoms of Russia’s crumbling countryside.
Garbage is piling up on the streets of Nizhneudinsk, in Russia’s Irkutsk region, after the Defense Ministry closed the town’s main dump.
The head of Tatarstan’s symphony orchestra has come under fire for comparing Tatar music to a hodgepodge salad.
Another aide of jailed Russian opposition politician Aleksei Navalny has been jailed over nationwide protests against President Vladimir Putin.
Desperate villagers have painted “SOS” in big letters on their roofs to get help from the authorities in Tatarstan, Russia.
Their houses are crumbling, they have no running water, and the last public buses were in March.
Soccer’s world governing body has declared Russia’s World Cup players free of doping but said it will continue to investigate other soccer players in the country.
Russian President Vladimir Putin and his Bulgarian counterpart have hailed their common cultural ties and vowed to revive economic links between the two Black Sea nations.
The United States on May 22 gave United States customers of Russian van manufacturer GAZ more time to wind down business with the company, in the latest softening of sanctions against GAZ owner Oleg Deripaska.
Voters in Moldova’s main cities of Chisinau and Balti are heading to the polls to elect their mayors for one year.
Ukraine has done everything to cross the Rubicon and return to the EU, Poroshenko said.
Paul Goble Staunton, May 23 – The Russian Federation has shown itself ever more ready to take steps to bottle up Ukrainian shipping in the Sea of Azov by the use of its naval power, a violation of international law that would severely harm Ukraine’s economic and security situation if it goes unchallenged.
Kyiv must “do an analysis and secure ratification by Ukraine” to the full list of international conventions and agreements concerning maritime operations.
These ten measures are likely to inform Kyiv’s policies in the coming days if as expected Russia moves to tighten its control over the Sea of Azov and the Kerch straits.
Expert on security issues, Lieutenant-General Vasyl Bohdan says Russia’s actions in the Sea of Azov, namely military drills within 16 kilometers from Ukraine’s coast and detention of Ukrainian ships, are aimed at providing political and economic pressure on Ukraine.
Russia’s attempts are aimed at diverting public attention and causing serious losses and an escalation of the situation in Ukraine, Bohdan said.
Estonian President Kersti Kaljulaid will be the first leader of a foreign state to visit the Ukrainian-controlled Donbas area, which was liberated by the Ukrainian army from the Russian occupation forces.
The United States State Department has called on Russia to end its aggression in Ukraine due to the increase in violence in the past week.
While Russia perpetuates the violence in eastern Ukraine by pouring money, soldiers, and resources into the region, the Russian economy continues to stagnate, Nauert said.
Russian-backed forces have suffered huge losses in Donbas over the past day.
As of 07:00 on May 23, it was reported four fighters of the Russian-terrorist forces had been killed and four others were wounded.
The Ukrainian Armed Forces have destroyed an enemy position near the village of Troyitske at the Svitlodarska Duha bulge in Donbas, eastern Ukraine.
The purpose of the Ukrainian military attack on Horlivka is to “tighten the noose” around Donetsk, a source in the headquarters of the Joint Forces Operation told Strana.ua news outlet.
Therefore, if the territory around Horlivka is owned , the separatists will surrender Horlivka without a fight.
He stressed that Horlivka is a strategic bridgehead to attack Debaltseve and Yenakiieve.
Moreover, the Armed Forces of Ukraine do not formally violate the Minsk agreements.
Such movement is not considered an offensive,” an officer of Ukraine’s Armed Forces noted.
On May 20, the separatists near Horlivka tried to push the Ukrainian Armed Forces out, but were driven back.
Later, it became known that in the southern outskirts of Pivdenne settlement near Horlivka, two Ukrainian servicemen were killed and four were injured in the firefight with the separatists.
Europe’s forgotten war in the east of Ukraine is far from being a frozen conflict.
The Armed Forces of Ukraine sustain casualties almost every single day.
In summer of 2015, the Russian-hybrid forces attempted to capture Maryinka, a southwestern suburb of Donetsk, but the attacks were repelled.
In winter of 2016 Ukrainian army and volunteer battalions retook a village of Shyrokyne on the coast of Azov Sea after a long period of positional engagements.
There are no significant territorial gains in the Donbas since early 2015 when the second direct invasion of the Russian regular forces led to the occupation of Debaltseve, the main railway hub of the Donbas region, and further loss of Donetsk Airport.
The SBU Security Service of Ukraine keeps on public informing about recording results of Russian war crimes in the territory of Ukraine.
The SBU operatives established that the urgent withdrawal of Dozors was conducted by the PMC Wagner logistics platoon.
The Russian-led forces resorted to Grad multiple rocket launchers and 122mm artillery systems, having increased the number of attacks on Ukrainian troops in Donbas, eastern Ukraine, to 58 incidents in the past day, May 19.
A reconnaissance and subversion group of the 46th separate assault Battalion “Donbas” of the Ukrainian Joint Forces captured three enemy troops during a short battle late in the evening on May 20.
The Joint Forces handed the three captives and their personal firearms over to the SBU Security Service of Ukraine.
Russian-backed forces have blown up a bridge on the Khrustalniy-Luhansk route near the village of Ivanivka.
The building of the Center for Socio-Psychological Rehabilitation has been damaged, where there were 28 children, as a result of shelling by Russian occupation forces in Toretsk on Monday morning.
According to the press service of the National Police in Donetsk region, during the shelling the windows in the center building were damaged, there are no casualties.
The administration of the centre appealed to the police with a request for assistance in the evacuation of 28 children aged 3 to 17 years.
As a result of shelling in the morning of May 21, seven apartment buildings were damaged, the police of Donetsk region in Toretsk reported.
Two children have been taken to intensive care and 34 more are under the supervision of doctors after an unknown substance was sprayed in a Mykolaiv school, Deputy Head of Mykolaiv Regional State Administration Yevhen Shevchenko has written on his Facebook page.
Ukraine and Canada have signed an agreement on military training, the press service of the Ukrainian Interior Ministry has reported on Facebook.
Joint Forces Operations Commander Serhiy Nayev has expressed dismay at the loss of life of civilians on both sides of the demarcation line due to shelling by Russian occupation forces.
Monitoring officials say clashes between Ukrainian forces and separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine have escalated in recent days to some of the fiercest fighting of 2018.
Ukraine’s main security agency has warned of a potential Russian cyberattack ahead of this weekend’s final match of the Champions League soccer tournament.
Federal officials have flatly denied online rumours circulated by Russian social media accounts that three Canadian soldiers working in Ukraine were killed by a landmine.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has signed a law under which Ukraine’s airmobile forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were renamed the Air Assault Forces.
The move is an important phase in the further development of the Ukrainian army.
A new type of troops may appear in the Armed Forces of Ukraine – the military department is considering the possibility of granting the status of a separate type of territorial defense troops that are now part of the Land Forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
Forces of defense, which were formerly created at military commissariats, were transformed into separate battalions and erected in the territorial defense brigade.
The brigade consists of eight battalions of TrO, company of fire support, anti-diversion fight, mortar unit, units of combat and logistics.
They are completed both by military personnel and by reservists, which make up the majority of the units and are called up if necessary.
According to the plan, reservists will be regularly trained at the gathering, the final of which is to hold brigade exercises.
The first, in June this year, will be deployed to full strength and combat coordination at the military training ground, 119th brigade of territorial defense in Chernihiv region.
During the exercises, actions will be taken to cover the state border – one of the five tasks assigned to territorial defense.
Poland, using the experience of Ukraine, began to create its territorial troops in 2015, just as a separate species.
Last year, the Polish Territorial Defense Forces Command officially gained abilities and took over the first brigades.
It will be recalled that in April, the Chief of the Medical Service of the Armed Forces Colonel, medical service Igor Khomenko said at a briefing about plans to create another separate type of troops – medical.
Crimea’s Russian-installed leaders have failed to live up to promises to free up public access to beaches.
Deputy Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People Ilmi Umerov has said the Crimean bridge, which links Russia with the Russian-occupied peninsula, has become “a bridge to nowhere” for the occupiers, and the huge funds spent on its construction will not pay off.
This bridge is unlikely to justify itself from the economic point of view in the near future.
The Head of State noted that the American anti-tank complexes had shown extremely high efficiency.
The absence of the seeker for ATGW makes it impossible to develop missile complexes of the third generation, because the rest of our parts are made serially and used on domestic missile systems of the second generation.
According to the press service of the company, in middle May was conducted a successful final test of the Skif man-portable anti-tank guided missile system developed for a foreign customer.
The design of the advanced AT guided missile system “Skif” has undergone a number of changes in accordance with the requirements of the potential customer.
All modifications aimed at adapting the launcher for use in soft soil and sand.
First of all, we are talking about installing a powerful thermal imager, allowing to destroy the targets with the first shot, despite the difficult weather conditions, day and night.
The missile itself has not changed, as originally was designed for use in all climatic and weather conditions, without exception.
Ukrainian scientists are intensively developing new air-based EW systems and facilities for various purposes.
Already there are developments in the direction of creating complexes of individual protection.
This is reported by the National Industrial Portal with reference to the command of the air forces of the Armed Forces.
The new on-board defense complexes used to be equipped with the upgraded MiG-29, Su-25 and Su-27 aircraft.
This complex will protect aircraft from missiles fired from enemy aircraft and ground-based air defense.
The new Ukrainian BKO to protect the aircraft from missiles of various modifications of air defense equipment, such as the S-125, S-300, S-400, Osa, Tor, Tunguska, Shilka, Kub, Buk etc.
The system of towed decoys has several “false” targets of the active type.
In case of the danger of the aircraft being destroyed, the decoy is received by the signal from the enemy radar, amplifies and re-emits the received signal, thereby simulating an echo from the aircraft that is being protected.
Thanks to the radar signature of the decoy, which is much larger than that of the airplane, the ground-based radar homing head of the missile perceives a trap for the target.
Such towed decoys repeatedly proved their effectiveness as a countermeasure against the missile threat in Kosovo, Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria.
In addition, only in Yugoslavia, they diverted themselves to at least ten anti-aircraft missiles fired by F-16 aircraft.
Now, manufacturers are working on options for independent multifunction decoys, which are dropped from the aircraft and operating in an autonomous mode.
Collective means protect not only the equipment on which they are installed, but other airplanes of the strike group.
Designers plan to place these funds in suspended containers on the underwing points of the aircraft suspension.
Suspended containers are made in the form of transitional beams, and they provide for the possibility of hanging aircraft launch devices to them.
This design allows you to maintain a regular ammunition of the aircraft’s armament.
Their principle of operation is similar to individual, but they are more powerful and able to provide protection for their group’s aircraft at a distance of up to 2 km.
Systems and means of EW of group protection are able to detect and suppress control systems for aviation and air defense, as well as for reconnaissance of air targets.
They will be installed on special aircraft of the REB, as well as on military transport aircraft.
They will receive much more powerful transmitters of active interference.
UKROBORONPROM State Enterprise “Kharkiv Morozov Machine-Building Design Bureau”, is working to create next-generation combat vehicles that are to enter into service of the Ukrainian Army in 2020.
The designers and engineers of the SE “Kharkiv Morozov Machine-Building Design Bureau” are now focusing on the creation of BMP-U, a new IFV, which is to replace BMP-1 and BMP-2.
Kharkiv Morozov Design Bureau has already developed design documentation, manufacture of the prototype and testing will take place in 2019.
BMP-U is intended for transportation and fire support of ground forces.
It provides reliable protection for the crew of 3 members and 7 paratroopers.
In addition, the engine transmission compartment is located in the front of the vehicle, which guarantees a greater level of crew protection.
The Kyiv-born aviator who fled the Bolshevik Revolution and created the helicopters that have served United States presidents from Eisenhower to Trump.
Ukraine has banned Russia’s state news agency RIA Novosti, according to a recently expanded list of prominent Russians and entities subjected to Ukrainian sanctions.
Ukraine has imposed personal sanctions against fugitive Ukrainian oligarch Serhiy Kurchenko, former business partner of ex-President Viktor Yanukovych, persons who hold offices as “energy ministers” in the so-called “Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics” , as well as Gazprom CEO Alexei Miller.
Sanctions were also imposed on a number of officials from the Russian-occupied Crimea.
The Beskydy tunnel was opened in Lviv region, western Ukraine on Thursday.
This is one of the largest constructions that appeared in Ukraine over the past 15 years.
In an effort to draw attention to the 1932-33 Holodomor famine in Ukraine, activists and students offered Brussels passersby the type of food people were forced to eat in order to survive.
Ukrainian film director Serhiy Loznitsa has won a best director prize in the Cannes film festival’s Un Certain Regard competition for Donbass, his odyssey about the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
President Vladimir Putin hailed Russia’s economic and military ties with India as he hosted the country’s prime minister in the Black Sea resort of Sochi on May 21.
President Trump on Thursday canceled the highly anticipated summit with North Korea that was set for next month, calling the talks “inappropriate” following the “hostility” displayed in the latest comments from dictator Kim Jong Un.
The Americans and the North Koreans were all set for a historic meeting.
The sun was setting, dinner was waiting and President Donald Trump was making the short walk to his private residence when, on March 8, he suddenly made a detour to the press briefing room.
The abrupt decision exposed rifts in the administration, and Trump personally dictated the cancellation letter to Kim Jong Un.
ABC News Published on May 18, 2018 President Trump is now taking steps to reassure North Korea’s Kim Jong Un after he threatened to cancel an upcoming, historic summit with Trump.
Trump’s policies are exposing the reality that China has a vested interest in a continuing North Korea crisis and diplomatic stalemate.
A top Pyongyang official lambasted “political dummy” Mike Pence and cautioned the United States against making “ignorant” remarks.
North Korean leader Kim Jong Un is reportedly anxious about a planned summit with President Donald Trump set to take place in Singapore next month.
Kim is said to be worried about a military coup or other hostile actors who might try to depose him while he’s away.
The president sought Moon Jae-in’s interpretation of North Korea’s shift to a harder-line position on denuclearization.
United States stocks fell after President Donald Trump canceled his June summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un because of the “tremendous anger and open hostility” in recent statements from Pyongyang.
Treasuries extended gains and gold rose with the yen as investors moved into safe-haven assets.
Only through a clear eyed approach to North Korea can we hope to develop strategies that will have resonance and traction and make the most of the opportunity that we may now be presented with.
South Korean President Moon Jae-in and United States President Donald Trump held discussions on Sunday to ensure that the North KoreaUnited States summit remains on track after North Korea threatened to pull out of the high-level talks.
The more prepared Trump is, then the less likely it is that the North Koreans will take him for a ride.
A training exercise involving United States B-52 bombers and South Korean planes was scrapped this week after Seoul expressed concerns that it could generate tensions before President Donald Trump’s summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un.
We should set aside for a minute our demand that it disarm before any other negotiation.
The United States and South Korea made a serious mistake in canceling a long scheduled military exercise named Max Thunder this week.
As the Wall Street Journal reports, the exercise was canceled after South Korea “expressed concerns” over North Korea’s threat to withdraw from the June 12 Singapore summit between President Trump and Kim Jong Un.
According to the Wall Street Journal, South Korea didn’t want to participate in a joint military drills with America and Japan than involved B-52 bombers — all to keep North Korea happy.
North Korea appeared to destroy at least three nuclear tunnels, observation buildings, a metal foundry and living quarters at its Punggye-ri nuclear test site on Thursday, in a process observed by invited international journalists.
The event was captured by foreign journalists, but North Korea did not invite any independent nuclear monitors to verify the dismantlement.
The defections came after North Korea declined to accept a list of South Korean journalists hoping to observe the closure of its nuclear test site.
US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said Wednesday that an incident involving a United States government employee stationed in China who reported “abnormal sensations of sound and pressure” suggesting a mild brain injury has medical indications that are “very similar” and “entirely consistent” to those experienced by American diplomats posted in Havana.
A United States government employee in southern China suffered a brain injury after reporting strange “sensations of sound and pressure,” according to the United States State Department.
The United States State Department issued a health alert after a government employee stationed in China was diagnosed with a mild traumatic brain injury.
A United States State Department employee has suffered “subtle and vague, but abnormal, sensations of sound and pressure” that later lead to a diagnosis of “mild traumatic brain injury” while working in China.
The strange trauma inflicted on the United States official there recalls a similar spat of reports from Cuba, where United States officials reported symptoms consistent with a “sonic attack” or exposure to harmful frequencies while abroad.
It warned that if you experience any “unusual acute auditory or sensory phenomena accompanied by unusual sounds or piercing noises” to leave immediately.
Beijing has repeatedly hinted that its new J-20 stealth fighters will conduct patrols in Taiwan’s airspace to coerce the island nation to reunify with China.
The move is likely to further fuel concerns about Beijing’s expansive claims over the disputed region.
China says it has landed long-range bombers for the first time on an island in the South China Sea, the latest in a series of maneuvers putting Beijing at odds with its neighbors and Washington over China’s growing military presence around disputed islands.
Chinese state media released a video showing a long-range nuclear-capable bomber landing on an island in the South China Sea for the first time, a move the Pentagon said raises tensions in the region years after China’s president pledged not to militarize the disputed area.
China’s air force has landed bombers on islands and reefs in the South China Sea as part of a training exercise in the disputed region, it said in a statement.
China’s first-ever landing of a heavy bomber on a disputed island in the South China Sea punctuates a steady buildup of military assets that has solidified Beijing’s claims to one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes.
The number of buildings on the island are about double that of China’s other large islands in the same Spratly Islands region.
Experts are concerned about the growth of China’s militarization of the South China Sea, and hosting a large number of troops on Subi Reef could be part of that plan.
President Trump was surprised and angered by a statement issued by the North’s chief nuclear negotiator, who declared that the country would not swap its nuclear weapons capability for economic aid.
The Kims of North Korea have a wearisome routine for getting concessions from the West, but this time may actually be different.
Seven Chinese military trade companies will take their best products to participate in an exhibition of weapons and military equipment to be held in Kazakhstan from May 23 to 26.
According to China’s State Administration of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defence, the exhibited Chinese military products include land, sea and air armaments, such as the FM-3000, an advanced medium range air defense missile weapon system, the Wing Loong unmanned aerial system, the JY-27A “SKYWATCH-V” radar, and the LY-80 medium range air defense missile weapon system.
This is the first exhibition held under the auspices of the Ministry of Defense and Aerospace Industry of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
It will be attended by domestic and foreign enterprises of the defense-industrial complex and space industry, leading design bureaus and research institutes.
During the years of the exhibition “KADEX” it rightfully became one of the world’s leading exhibition platforms for demonstrating weapons, military and special equipment, technologies in the field of information security.
It sees international economic competition as war by other means – and intends to win in any way it can.
The United States has withdrawn an invitation to China to participate in what has been described as the world’s largest international maritime warfare exercise, the Pentagon said on Wednesday.
The Chinese giant salamander is capable of growing up to 5. feet in length.
Australia should remove its “colored glasses” to get relations back on track with major trading partner China, the Chinese government’s top diplomat Wang Yi has told his Australian counterpart on the sidelines of a G20 meeting in Argentina.
China has issued a fresh rebuke to Australia as tensions between the two nations continue to simmer.
Rafael Advanced Defense Systems has been selected by the Australian Department of Defence to supply its Spike LR2 anti-tank guided missile for the Australian Army.
Australia becomes the second export customer for Spike LR2, after Latvia ordered an undisclosed quantity earlier this year.
The USS Milius, one of the United States Navy’s most advanced guided missile destroyers, arrived in Japan on Tuesday to reinforce defenses against any ballistic missile attacks by North Korea, or anyone else in East Asia.
United States may not be able to scuttle the planned Nord Stream 2 project to bring gas to Germany.
Russia said the situation was “rather challenging” after the United States warned it was “exerting as much persuasive power” as possible to stop Nord Stream 2.
Russia’s gas pipeline Nord Stream 2 is a geopolitical project of the Kremlin, which has nothing to do with economic and business interests, but aims to destroy the unity of Europe, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has said.
In his article for Germany’s Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper, which was published on May 18, Poroshenko emphasized that Nord Stream 2 is a tragic mistake of a historical scale with unthinkable consequences.
Today there are no grounds to think differently, until Russian aggression against Ukraine and the West is not actually stopped, and the Kremlin begins to respect international law and order,” the president wrote.
Poroshenko expressed confidence that under the current circumstances any large-scale pan-European project with the Kremlin would mean pacification of the aggressor, rather than a manifestation of force.
In addition, he warned of trust in the promises of “bright dividends” of the Kremlin.
Its reliability has been significantly compromised, and the last example is the failure of Gazprom to recognize the Stockholm arbitration decision in favor of Ukraine.
It’s hard to be a reliable partner when you are called to be an energy lever of the Kremlin in its geopolitical games,” Poroshenko said.
Russian President Vladimir Putin says that gas supplies to Europe via Ukraine may continue even after the launch of a new prospective Germany-bound pipeline under the Baltic Sea.
Russian state-owned energy firm Gazprom has reached an agreement with EU regulators, avoiding fines in an antitrust case that has dragged on for seven years.
While there may be a collective sense in Vienna and Berlin that security has worsened in Europe and the world, Russia is not seen as a major security threat.
Nicolás Maduro won a second term as president of Venezuela, in a contest that critics said was heavily rigged in his favor and which many voters shunned.
Recently, Germany gave the final green light for the construction of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline enabling the Russian state-owned gas monopoly Gazprom to double its gas supplies to Germany.
Russia will be able to use it as an instrument of hybrid warfare against the West.
Vice President Pence on Monday called Venezuela’s recent election, which saw President Nicolás Maduro win a second term, a sham.
The executive order meant to prevent the country’s leaders from liquidating assets follows an election that returned Nicolas Maduro to power amid an opposition boycott and accusations of fraud.
Operations in so-called megacities will be unavoidable in future conflicts, meaning command-and-control issues might be as well.
America’s aging workforce could limit the Pentagon’s ability to keep up with other nations, a new government report warns.
The industrial base for electronic attack and radar capabilities is potentially at risk in the future, a new report has found.
Even a new version of the Air Force’s JSTARS battlefield management and control aircraft would be vulnerable to being shot out of the sky during the opening salvo of a conflict with Russia or China.
We who have worked in EMP for professional lifetimes are enormously frustrated to see amateurs, academics, reporters, and even some scientists untrained and uninformed posturing as experts.
A test flight of the fifth generation Su-57 fighter jet with a developmental engine installed on it has been caught on camera in Russia’s Zhukovsky.
The Air Force will be making major decisions regarding its fighter jet inventory this year.
The United States Navy wants to stop production of America’s most useful long-range missile, betting that a replacement will arrive without delay.
This is when the rotors pivot, in flight, from vertical lift mode to fully forward facing.
According to the company’s press service, the flight was completed on May 11 at Bell’s assembly facility in Amarillo, Texas.
Laser weapon plus military grade ATV equals blasting enemy drones out of the sky.
This is an ingenious way to provide easily movable defense against the growing threat of attacks from enemy drones.
Terrorist drone destroying Raytheon laser weapons mounted on military Polaris Defense ATVs could soon be destroying enemy drones before they can harm United States forces with explosives.
Rapidly driving an MRZR to support an area under attack by a swarm of small drones, it will look like the warrior has something resembling “R2D2” popping his head out of the backseat.
But terrorists will quickly learn it is not a cute robot, it is a powerful drone slaying laser weapon.
Last autumn the Raytheon and Polaris team proved that destroying drones with the MRZR HEL armed weapon works.
As long as there is power, United States forces will never run out ammunition with a laser weapon.
This is an outstanding solution to immediately provide United States forces with more options to protect the force from these proliferating flying threats.
The Polaris Defense MRZR will be able to reach teams in remote areas with difficult terrain and provide them a laser weapon for their arsenal.
Raytheon’s Multi-Spectral Targeting System is a high energy laser combined with electro-optical and infrared sensors.
Delivering 20 to 30 blasts on about the same electricity as a fridge, recent reports suggest the system can already detect an enemy drone at more than 16,400 feet to blast it out of the sky.
United States forces could soon drive these to forward operating bases to protect teams there, to landing strips to protect arriving aircraft or position the MRZRs with HEL to protect MEDEVAC to make sure wounded are not prevented from reaching care by drones.
The press service of the United States Army announced on 17 May that the Fort Benning hosted a live-fire demonstration of a new Stryker weapon’s system.
According to a statement, the upgraded Striker armored fighting vehicle equipped with new medium calibre turret has demonstrated its capacity during a live-fire event held at the Fort Benning in Georgia.
The United States Army Armament Research, Development and Engineering Center in cooperation with, the CMI Defence developed new variant of Stryker armored fighting vehicle armored with medium caliber turret.
EVA presents a self-propelled autonomous artillery system with automatic loading of ammunition providing an effective fire by means of both direct and indirect aiming.
SpGH ZUZANA 2 while overtaking maximum assemblies and design solutions verified within the course of demanding testing and tender trials performed in Slovakia and abroad.
According to forecasts, the South Korean company Hanwha Defense Systems with its most advanced self-propelled anti-aircraft defence system, called the Hybrid BIHO, could outrun Russia at the arms market after Pantsir-S1’s failure in Syria.
Early, during an overnight raid on purported Iranian positions in Syria, Israeli rockets hit a Russian-made Pantsir-S1 surface-to-air missile and anti-aircraft artillery system.
A few months ago, Russian air defence system could not bring down the cruise missiles and, in addition, the Pantsir has a number of difficulties in combating lightweight drones.
Against the backdrop of problems with the Russian system, a proposal from South Korea interested a large number of potential customers.
The Hybrid BIHO consists of a 30mm self-propelled anti-aircraft defense system ‘BIHO’ combined with the portable surface-to-air guided missile system and intercepts low altitude infiltrating enemy aircraft and helicopters.
The Hybrid BIHO can carry a total of 4 guided missiles with an effective range of 5km with upgraded potential to 8-10 km.
That includes phones, smartwatches and other devices that can transmit, store and receive data.
Here’s how to secure your home network, whether or not it has already been attacked by hackers.
Britain will tackle “the Wild West elements” on the internet from cyberbullying to online child exploitation by introducing new laws for social media companies, digital minister Matt Hancock said on Sunday.
Digital Secretary Matt Hancock and Home Secretary Sajid Javid announced the move after releasing new research showing that internet users often felt threatened.
European lawmakers hit Mark Zuckerberg with a series of pointed questions at a hearing today.
The Facebook CEO responded to broad themes of questions with familiar talking points about his openness to regulation and commitment to protecting elections after complaints about misinformation campaigns and data privacy.
As he did when testifying before Congress last month, Zuckerberg talked up Facebook’s investment in security and played down concerns about its potential monopoly power.
Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg has apologized to the European Parliament for causing “harm” by failing to prevent “fake news” and allowing users’ data to be stolen.
Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg suggested most people don’t care about one of the most invasive features on Facebook.
He made his comments in Paris just a day before Europe’s strict new privacy legislation was due to kick in on May 25.
Facebook said it looked forward to the meeting and was happy for it to be live-streamed.
Far from the top-secret, covert intelligence asset the FBI has depicted him as, Stefan Halper is a long-time, well-known CIA operative with ties to the Bush family and a shady past.
The Arizona senator’s twilight struggle with Donald Trump is so bitter because they’re more alike than you think.
Ukraine’s president has lashed out at a BBC report that asserted a secret $400,000 payment was made to United States President Donald Trump’s longtime lawyer last year to set up talks between the two leaders.
News agencies say United States authorities have deported a former Russian executive previously convicted of arranging corrupt payments linked to the Russian state nuclear company Rosatom.
America’s best weapons now rely on parts from an increasingly shrinking industrial base — and in some cases, is totally reliant on Chinese-made materials.
