A timeline Ukraine crisis: A timeline Research Briefing Published Friday, 01 April, 2022 Research Briefing Europe Institutions International law International organisations Nigel Walker This paper provides a timeline of the major events in the Ukraine-Russia crisis since Crimea was annexed by Russia in 2014.
A timeline (2 MB , PDF) Download full report Download ‘Ukraine crisis: A timeline ’ report (2 MB , PDF) The 2014 Ukraine crisis In November 2013 the Ukrainian government of pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych, decided not to sign a planned Association Agreement with the European Union and demonstrations ensued in the capital Kyiv.
The ‘Euromaidan’ demonstrations turned violent in early 2014 and, in February that year, some European foreign ministers mediated a compromise, involving a unity government and early elections.
After the collapse of a power-sharing agreement on 22 February 2014, President Yanukovych disappeared from Ukraine and a new government was installed by the Ukrainian parliament.
Later that month unidentified military figures, widely thought in the West to be Russian personnel , surrounded the airports in Crimea, a majority-Russian peninsula in Ukraine and the Crimean autonomous assembly was taken over by pro-Russian forces.
In March 2014 a declaration of independence was issued by the assembly and a subsequent referendum on union with Russia was held.
Since then, Russia has maintained its control over Crimea and supported pro-Russian separatist forces who also took control of parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of eastern Ukraine in 2014.
Fighting between Russian-supported separatists and Ukrainian government forces has continued in the Donbas for the last eight years despite the negotiation of the Minsk Agreements in 2014/2015 which called for a ceasefire, the withdrawal of all foreign armed groups and constitutional reform recognising the special status of Donetsk and Luhansk.
Current crisis In early November 2021 Russia began building up military forces along the borders of Ukraine, for the second time in a year.
Over 100,000 Russian military personnel and assets were deployed in Crimea and in the Voronezh, Kursk and Bryansk regions of western Russia.
Further Russian forces were deployed to Belarus for a series of exercises close to the Ukrainian border and Russian naval assets from the Baltic and Northern fleets deployed for exercises in the Black Sea.
Tensions escalated following a United States intelligence assessment in December 2021, which suggested that Russia could be planning an invasion of Ukraine in early 2022.
On 24 February 2022 Russia launched military action in Ukraine, with forces crossing into the country from Belarus in the north, Russia in the east and Crimea in the south.
Russia’s actions came just days after President Putin officially recognised the self-declared independence of the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic , the regions of eastern Ukraine that are under the control of Russian-backed separatist forces, and deployed “peacekeeping” forces to the region.
Western sanctions are being imposed on Russia, military assistance is being provided to Ukraine, and discussions are underway between Western allies on collective next steps.
Purpose of this paper This paper provides a timeline of the major events that happened in the Ukraine-Russia crisis from November 2013 to the present.
A timeline (2 MB , PDF) Download full report Download ‘Ukraine crisis: A timeline ’ report (2 MB , PDF) Related posts NATO enlargement: Sweden and Finland This paper looks at the process for joining NATO and the expansion of the Alliance since its creation in 1949.
It discusses Sweden and Finland’s application, and how Russia views NATO enlargement.
Key issues Commonwealth leaders will meet in Rwanda from 20 to 25 June 2022.
Discussion may include global health, Rwanda's human rights record and the position of the Secretary General.
Re-use our content freely and flexibly with only a few conditions under the Open Parliament Licence.
