LCFI statements and articles from Socialist Fight Two supercarriers in 2012, the USS Abraham Lincoln and the USS John C Stennis, two of the ten nuclear-powered Nimitz-class aircraft supercarriers in service with the United States Navy.
The United States has five battleship fleets, the Second Fleet in the Atlantic, the Third Fleet in the Eastern Pacific, the Fifth Fleet in the Arabian Gulf and Indian Ocean, the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean and the Seventh Fleet in the Western Pacific.
USA 10, Italy 2, United Kingdom, 1, France 1, Russia 1, Spain 1, India 1, Brazil 1, China 1 and Thailand 1.
It is the trading currency for oil and almost every other commodity in the world.
Wars against Iraq, Libya, and Ukraine today are primarily launched to protect this privileged position which enables it to rob every other nation.
The decline is largely due to United States transnationals locating their HQs abroad for tax avoidance purposes.
Ireland’s 19 companies apparently place it in the same league as Saudi Arabia, a ridiculous comparison.
In reality up to half of those ‘Irish’ companies are not really Irish at all except in name.
And not only does the United States have all these companies located abroad but the United States dominate many others by virtue of its stock holdings.
Some statistics on this would reveal the true nature of United States imperialism’s domination of almost every aspect of the trade, commerce and lives of the majority of population of the planet.
And those it does not fully dominate it demonises, organises coups and internal wars against for regime change and/or it bombs and invades them.
Finance capital is interlinked in a global web of dominance spreading out from Wall Street and the City of London.
If we take, for example, the role of Swiss banking it is not a secret that it has strong links with the City of London.
Also important are the so-called ‘tax havens’ and money laundering centres, Luxembourg, Jersey, Guernsey, the Cayman Islands, the British Virgin Islands, etc.
Finance capital plays a major role in the Spanish banking sector for example — there is the curious phenomenon of its relations to the Basque and Catalan banks, which are not really Spanish and behind much of the separatist agitation.
Finance capital of British origin plays a big role in maintaining Gibraltar as a tax haven.
Here are the statistic for the top ten stock exchanges ($US billions) 1.
Note the two United States stock exchanges are as big as the next eight combined; with its allies it is absolutely dominant.
The ranking of countries by Gross Domestic Product, this time the top 10: , World $70,201,920.
United States 10, Italy 2, United Kingdom, 1, France 1, Sarkozy shakes hands with Mahmoud Jibril and Ali Al-Esawi, representatives of the unelected ITNC in Benghazi in Paris, March 10 where he recognised them as the legitimate government of Libya.
The NPA and the USFI demand recognition from all the Imperialist powers for these counter-revolutionaries.
Brand new military bases have been built since September 11, 2001 in seven countries.
The biggest “host” countries are those that once lost a major war in which the United States was involved.
Reply to Mike McNair By Gerry Downing M ike McNair’s Rethinking Imperialism is third campist and his long historical analogies are a-historical.
Like his AWL opponents in the original debate he reports on in 2004 his task is to deny what is specific about modern imperialism as analysed by Lenin and to elevate the secondary features to make bogus comparisons.
What is different today is the domination of finance capital and its alliance with trans-national corporations and their domination of the entire planet.
There is no historical precedent for this which begun with the Great Depression of 1873 and was completed by the early 20 th century.
His description of Lenin’s position is wrong, in order to allow him to equate it with its opposite, the Stalinist opportunist popular front alliances with the nationalist bourgeoisie and the trade Union bureaucracy to the detriment of the working class in the oppressed nation and also in the oppressor countries.
Of course Lenin insisted on the split between oppressed and oppressor nations but the whole point here was that the oppressor nations were the home of finance capital and the monopolies and the oppressed nations were its victims, including the national bourgeoisie, a “semi-oppressed, semi-oppressing” class in his marvellously dialectical phrase.
Of course Lenin understood the concept of the Aristocracy of Labour, and of course it is true that more than just a narrow layer in the Imperialist countries benefits from the booty of empire.
Nonetheless what is essential is the ideological domination of Imperialism over the whole working class and the opportunities that crises like the current one gives to revolutionaries to challenge that domination exercised today by the TU bureaucracies, from Len McCluskey to Bob Crow.
This describes unprincipled Popular Frontism and Lenin and the early Comintern were very careful to draw a very sharp distinction between the operation of both the Workers’ United Front and the Anti Imperialist United Front tactic and Menshevik-type class collaboration as practiced by Stalin and the degenerated Comintern post 1924.
Trotsky did not supersede the AIUF by a generalisation of Permanent Revolution because he did not emphasise this in his analysis of why politically capitulating to Chiang Kai-shek led to the Shanghai massacre in 1927; the forces of world Imperialism was not involved in that particular incident.
In my declaration to the bourgeois press, I said that the duty of all the workers’ organizations of China was to participate actively and in the front lines of the present war against Japan, without abandoning, for a single moment, their own program and independent activity.
Now, the war in Spain and the SinoJapanese War are both imperialist wars.
To speak of “revolutionary defeatism” in general, without distinguishing between exploiter and exploited countries, is to make a miserable caricature of Bolshevism and to put that caricature at the service of the imperialists.
The French Popular Front of 1936 and the Spanish Popular Fronts of 1936-39 the only ones claimed by their supporters as successes were, in fact, disastrous and led to massive defeats for the working class.
The dictatorship of the proletariat, which would inevitably place on the order of the day not only democratic but socialistic tasks as well, would at the same time give a powerful impetus to the international socialist revolution.
Unfortunately many who have done so have failed to apply that theory in practice to actual wars by their own bourgeoisie.
In fact that contradiction between theory and practice has now became so acute over the question of support for the Nato-rebels in Libya that one of the foremost contributors to that communist task of theoretical clarification, Stuart King, former leader of Workers Power and now of Permanent Revolution, has been forced to admit to this author that he now repudiated his own vital contribution.
Workers Power/the League for the Fifth International may be forced to ditch their identical Kinginspired if not written programme on this vital question.
Other groups like the RSO who maintain an anti imperialist line on Libya, and whose document on the AIUF was also clearly inspired iTR Sii tionals, one of their leaders informed this author.
The COFI are themselves specifically opposed to the AIUF, rigidly counterposing it to the Trotskyist theory of Permanent Revolution as the following extract shows, “We reject popular fronts between the working class and bourgeois parties.
The working class cannot share political power with even the shadow of the bourgeoisie; governmental alliances with such elements mean subordination to bourgeois politics.
Tarty members may not occupy positions in bourgeois governments — including those of “third world, ” Stalinist and post-Stalinist countries as well as in the imperialist powers.
We reject so-called anti-imperialist united fronts as a version of the popular front; they stand in absolute contradiction to the permanent revolution.
Lenin, in the Terms of Admission into Communist International, July, 1920.
We will also polemicise against the positions of both the Permanent Revolution Collective , to which Socialist Fight was linked for a period, and against the League for the Revolutionary party and its international tendency The Communist Organization for the Fourth International because the latter use the document of the former in their internal educaImperialism today Page 6 ond Congress of the Communist International, Fifth Session July 28, 1920.
In relation to those states that have a more backward, predominantly feudal, patriarchal or peasant patriarchal GENERAL ELECTION, 1918, Bridgeton Parliamentary Division.
Dear Sir or Madam, As tbo adopted Labour Candidate for the Bridgeton Division in Parliament, I have pleasure in submitting my views on some of the problems that demand immediate solution if the people are to have tlint freedom and comfort that has been absent in the past from our lives.
I have been an active worker in the cause of Education, and the interests of the children and of the teachers will always be of primary importance to I hope that my record of work for tho workers of Scotland. and the programme I submit now for your approval, will secure me your support at the forthcoming Parliamentary Election.
This obligation to offer active assistance affects — in the first place the workers of those countries on which the backward countries are in a position of colonial or financial dependence. b) An unconditional struggle must be carried out against the reactionary and medieval influence of the clergy, the Christian missions and similar elements.
So the United Front was the method of the Bolsheviks and of Comintern of the early 1920s which the Transitional Programme of Trotskyism defended and developed to win the revolutionary leadership of the working class.
The AIUF is its logical extension in the semicolonies, it recognises the changed circumstances and hence consciousness of the working class and oppressed in the ‘third world’ and likewise seeks to make a bridge from that consciousness to the revolutionary programme.
By recognising the contradictions between oppressed and oppressor nations, between Imperialist nations and semi-colonial peoples and by recognising the healthy impulse of these masses in fighting the main enemy of all oppressed humanity, imperialist finance capital and its predatory armies and their local stooges and hired thugs, we seek to win their ears for the revolutionary Trotskyist programme.
Trotsky explains the AIUF Look at how Trotsky explains the AIUF, even if he does not use the term, in these three examples from the late 1930s.
To these politicians it appears that this fact relieves the proletariat of the duty of making a choice between two dictators.
Imperialism today Page 7 A dictator can also play a very progressive role in history.
On the other hand, right in the midst of the English democracy Floyd George exercised a highly reactionary dictatorship during the war.
If Mussolini triumphs, it means the reenforcement of fascism, the strengthening of imperialism and the discouragement of the colonial peoples in Africa and elsewhere.
The victory of the Negus however, would mean a mighty blow not only at Italian imperialism but at imperialism as a whole and would lend a powerful impulsion to the rebellious forces of the oppressed peoples.
Against the Eiffelites on China, 1937 ‘In my declaration to the bourgeois press, I said that the duty of all the workers' organisations of China was to participate actively and in the front lines of the present war against Japan, without abandoning for a single moment, their own program and independent activity.
The only salvation of the workers and peasants of China is to struggle independently against the two armies, against the Chinese army in the same manner as against the Japanese army.
In Brayil there now reigns a semi fascist regime that every revolutionay can only view with hatred.
I will answer for myself personally—in this case I will be on the side of “fascist” Brayil against “democratic” Great Britain.
Because in the conflict between them it will not be a question of democracy or fascism.
If England should be victorious, she will put another fascist in Rio de Janeiro and will place double chains on Brazil.
If Brazil on the contrary should be victorious, it will give a mighty impulse to national and democratic consciousness of the country and will lead to the overthrow of the Vargas dictatorship.
The defeat of England will at the same time deliver a blow to British imperialism and will give an impulse to the revolutionary movement of the British proletariat.
Truly, one must have an empty head to reduce world antagonisms and military conflicts to the struggle between fascism and democracy.
Equating AIUF with popular frontism Everywhere the Spart “Family” equate the AIUF with popular frontism as does the CoReP, “the Anti-Imperialist United Front in Practice is the Popular Front” they say.
It is for Stalinists and those centrists who have abandoned the transitional programme and method but not for genuImperialism today Page 8 ine communists.
And this ‘orthodoxy’ far from inoculating these simon-pure doctrinaires against opportunism is in fact the cover for capitulation to great nation chauvinism under the guise of fighting capitulation to the third world dictators.
How about this for doctrinal purity, in reality backward workerism, from the ICL, In Third World countries, the pseuclo-Trotskyists invoke the “anti-imperialist united front” as a cover for supporting bourgeois regimes.
This includes support to the reactionary “Islamic Revolution” of Ayatollah Khomeini in Iran in 1979.
In the Arab world, both Stalinists and pseudoTrotskyists hailed the so-called “Arab Revolution” represented in the 1950s by Colonel Gamal Abdel Nasser in Egypt and in the 1970s by Qaddafiin Ubya.
Support to Arab nationalism has led to the bloody defeat of workers movements throughout the Near East, not least in Egypt, where Nasser rewarded the Communists for their support by imprisoning torturing and killing them.
The bourgeoisnationalist regimes of Nasser and Qaddafi inevitably failed to address the felt needs of the masses.
To the “anti-imperialist united front,” we counterpose the Trotskyist programme of permanent revolution, which holds that in the neocolonial countries, the proletariat must lead all the oppressed masses in a struggle for socialist revolution against their “own” bourgeoisie, as part of an internationalist strategy for proletarian revolution in the imperialist countries.
The Malvinas, when the asses’ ears poked through the orthodox Trotskyist hat The “Family” all have the same reactionary chauvinist positions on the Malvinas conflict.
They all refused to defend semi-colonial Argentina against imperialist Britain because ‘The Falkland war was an armed conflict between capitalist Argentina and rotten British imperialism.
At no point in this war was the national sovereignty of Argentina put into question whereas the overthrow of their respective governments was in the interests of the British and also of the Argentinean working classes.
For this reason communists put forward the position of revolutionary defeatism and fight for the defeat of their own bourgeoisie” This is only applicable to inter-imperialist wars, in a war against a semi-colony it amounts to great nation chauvinism.
This is a shameful evasion of your proletarian internationalist duty to defend a semi-colony against an imperialist attack; the evasive “capitalist Argentina”, the failure to admit United States support for “rotten imperialist Britain” and the transparent cowardly; “at no point in this war was the national sovereignty of Argentina put into question” as if this could excuse a failure to defend this semi-colony against imperialist attack.
And the rational for it all; “the overthrow of their respective governments was in the interests of the British and also of the Argentinean working classes”, is clearly wrong on both counts.
Thatcher recovered from a disastrous opinion poll position due to her destruction of British jobs and manufacturing industry to sweep the next election because of it.
This ideological victory set her up for her assault on the miners in 1985 and for her anti-union Imperialism today Page 9 laws and privatisation of public assets.
And need we point out the dire political consequence of this for the British and world working class however much imperialism’s apologists on the far left might have sought to obfuscate their treachery by trumpeting the secondary gain of the overthrow of Galtieri.
The British working class were left ideologically leaderless by the national chauvinism of Labour leader Michael Foot and the other leaders, Regan/Volker defeated the 1981-82 Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization strike while the war was going on and embarked on a simultaneous ruthless offensive against the United States working class, which set the pattern for the offensive of every capitalist class against their own working class worldwide.
All this prepared for imperialism’s crowning achievement, the worldhistorical defeat which the world working class suffered in the overthrow of the Soviet Union.
The sinking of the Belgrano on May 2 1982 was a victory for world imperialism which the Spart “Family” were unable to oppose politically; the asses’ ears of Shachtmanism poked through the orthodox Trotskyist hat.
Reaction on Immigration Controls Imperialism causes poor third world workers and peasants who are driven from their homes by starvation and oppression to seek refuge in the rich imperialist countries.
This results in the whole Spart family going soft on immigration controls to defend the privileges of the aristocracy of labour.
Alan G, 'I agree with the Spart observation you quote as it is merely a statement of fact.
I can categorically state that this does not mean any support for immigration controls by the US, Dutch or Belgian capitalist states.
Whilst the IBT never call for immigration controls they sail so close to the wind here that it becomes similar to the AWL distinction between ‘supporting’ and ‘not opposing’ the bombing of Libya.
It is a piece of reactionary hogwash designed to appeal to the backward national prejudices of the middle classes and the TU bureaucrats.
They would not cross the border unless they had good reason to suppose this gave them the chance of a better life.
And fear about “well-financed American “colonists” buying up Mexican enterprises and Imperialism today Page 10 real estate” is also bogus, as if the Rio Grande/ Bravo ever stopped them doing that anyway.
It is that united front we seek to cultivate, not that of Stalinism and petty-bourgeois nationalists which capitulates to the conjunctional and feigned antiimperialism of the nationalist bourgeoisie.
These may fight Imperialism today to preserve their own privileges by the use of anti-imperialist rhetoric only to sell out again tomorrow if the opportunity arises to enhance their privileges by another alliance with Imperialism.
We have made that distinction very clear in the course of this document.
In other words we seek to defend the method of the Transitional Programme; the AIUF is simply the logical extension of the United Front with workers in struggle just as the Comintern saw it in the early 1920s and as Trotsky defended up to his assassination in 1940.
However the United Front in its two manifestations is not ‘only’ a tactic, which may or may not be applied depending on the circumstances, which for some is never now because that involves opposition to current petty-bourgeois prejudices.
In that respect the RSO document is vacillating, allowing every concrete instance of a war on a semicolony to be characterised as an exception depending on the vagaries of ‘public opinion’, applying to Saddam but not to Gaddafi because the mood of the petty bourgeois had altered in a major collapse since the 2003 mass mobilisation against the war on Iraq.
The UF and AIUF are tactics that apply at all times except when the direct uprising takes place for the seizure of power and the masses are flocking to the revolutionary banner; in a sense it is wrong to characterise the UF as a tactic at all because it is the methodology of communism, its very mode of existence, its orientation to the global working class as a whole class, the only method that can mobilise that force that alone can overthrow capitalism.
T he global economic crisis has increased the appetites of Imperialism to appropriate the planet's riches by super exploiting the working class and recolonisation.
Capitalist governments of the world have moved enormous sums of money from state coffers to large private capitalist financial intuitions in the name of saving capitalism’s crisis cause by speculation.
Now the bourgeois governments governments to stabilise the country and keep it are seeking to recapitalise their coffers.
We do not they force the working class to pay the price of consider these processes as Arab revolution or this financial orgy.
These popular uprising fiscal adjustments, the attacks on wages, and vieare genuine expressions of the outrage at price tories over unionised labor and the attack on increases and increased oppression caused by the social security, etc.
It has also increased the cost imperialist crisis which began in 2008 but Imperiof living for the masses, and increased interahsm seek to divert these potential revolutionary Imperial competition in the semi-colonies. situations enhance and extend its dominance in In Europe, from Greece to Ireland, popular reAfiri ca and the Middle East. sistance was restrained by pro-imperialist party If Imperialism cannot take ownership peacefully leaders and trade unions.
In Latin America, so far, but country by military force and impose their fraudnot for long, the governments of the ""centre left” ul ent elections as happened in Ivory Coast.
All are delaying and dampening social conflict by the ThiSj with the support of the African Union and control they exert over mass organizathe ANC government in South Africa, tions.
Obama ordered the start of the bombing In Libya, Syria and Iran, Imperialism seeks to on Libya when he was with the pro-imperialist accomplish coups camouflaged as ""democratic"", President Dilma Vana Rousseff, in Brazil. by taking advantage of the ""popular uprising"" in In Africa the liberal bourgeois opposition to dieneighbouring countries.
In Syria United States Imperialism and its Zionist Imperialism today Page 12 enclave strive to create the same scenario of civil war to justify another military intervention.
Not only by what it did after starting the ""rebellion"", but they had also prepared beforehand.
It is the continuation of a series of attempts to restore the monarchy and tribal privileges in favour of United States and European Union, which began shortly after Gaddafi took power in 1969 and continued sporadically since then.
Rebel leaders in Libya were CIA agents from the beginning, as were the anti-Chavez coup leaders in Venezuela in 2002.
Imperialism, headed by the United States and France, seek to balkanised Libya, as it did in Yugoslavia or to dominate it together, as in Afghanistan and Iraq.
We have also have seen this in Bolivia, where Evo Morales surrendered a larger share of the revenues from gas exploration to the pro-imperialist coup makers in the east of the country.
Since the new escalation of Israeli attacks against Palestinians 20 Palestinians have been killed and 50 wounded in the worst Israeli offensive in Gaza for two years.
It is the bloodiest attack since the 2008 military operation that killed 1,400 Palestinians.
We are for the destruction of the Zionist state of Israel and for a multi-ethnic workers’ and peasants’ government a based on workers’ and peasants’ councils.
Using Gaddafi’s foolish threat of ""no mercy, and no pity” he sanctioned the bombing which will result in far more deaths than Gaddafi could have caused, but, as an ‘unintended consequence’ will put the oil resources of Libya in the hands of western Imperialism to invest in the markets of Wall street and the City of London and divert it from schools, hospitals and welfare payments in Libya and investments in other African countries.
And just so as we are left in doubt about the Labour party’s position on Imperialism’s murderers Murphy writes; “our thoughts should be with all British Forces around the world, including the more than 10,000 Britons in Afghanistan.
There is, naturally, no concern about the civilians and fighters blown to pieces ‘to save lives’ in Iraq, Afghanistan or now Libya only concern and praise for the killers.
As each day passes it becomes clearer that the native agents of Imperialism are merely open cat’s paws for multinational intervention in the country.
They are racists and xenophobes, the enemies of all black working class Saharans in Libya.
In the hunt for ""Gaddafi mercenaries” they seek to demoralise the work force in the country, preparing it for the super exploitation in a new era of extreme Imperialist plunder.
The Libyan ""rebels"" are a bunch bourgeois turncoats from Gaddafi regime in favour of big business internationally.
Political groupings claiming to be Marxists who portray the popular uprisings in the Arab world as diverted ""revolutions"" are demagogues, who flatter and stupefy the masses while new proimperialist bourgeois puppet governments are being stabilised.
But the worst is when these groups in the name of supporting the Libyan masses in their struggle for democracy, combined with Imperialist war propaganda by the world media to cover up the CIA coup.
Those who now refuse to establish a military front with Gaddafi externally and internally to defeat the interests of Imperialism, betray the struggle and the fight against global Imperialism and the genocidal state of Israel that massacres the Palestinians.
FT ; FLTI ; L5I It was the anti-working class, neoliberal policies of Gaddafi during the last decade that paved the way this reaction.
Gaddafi has established new agreements with Imperialism, destroying the gains of the process of nationalisation of the means of production and post-1969 energy resources.
Gaddafi banned trade unions and strikes and made racist anti-immigrant agreements with Berlusconi, he has sponsored the election campaign of Sarkozy and privatized and made auctions with the energy resources of Libya.
Thus, the caudillo of Tripoli has lost popularity with the Libyan and African population and fuelled the appetite of sectors of the native bourgeoisie to negotiate direcdy with Imperialism, freeing up Gaddafi clan.
Therefore we demand the arming of the whole Libyan people against Imperialism and the reactionary opposition.
We demand the unconditional defence of Libya against Imperialism and its agents.
This was the revolutionary tactics of Lenin and Trotsky before the Kornilov uprising, Kerensky's former general who tried to carry out a coup in Russia in August 1917.
The Bolsheviks called for a united front and military weapons to Kerensky demanded at the same time that Kerensky be blamed for paving the path for reaction, and thus prepared a social revolution.
Similarly, the reaction to the responsibility of Gaddafi for the coup will drive the masses to combine the tasks of the anti-imperialist struggle with the democratic and socialist to move toward the establishment of a workers and peasants government where the panArabism of Gaddafi has stopped.
The victory over the counterrevolutionary Imperialist military offensive would not only be a huge boost for the proletariat Libyan who could settle accounts with the warlord of Tripoli, but would also give a huge impetus to the struggle of workers in Tunisia, Egypt, Bahrain, Ivory Coast, Palestine, Iraq and Afghanistan against Imperialism and the native Imperialism today Page 14 capitalists.
The first step towards this is to fight in our own countries against the Imperialist bourgeoisie and semi-colonial Britain, Brazil, South Africa.
We advocate the defeat of our own governments, as allies against Imperialist recolonisation of the world proletariat.
We support the full right of the Libyan masses to seize the multinational British, Brazilian and South African companies and of all capital in Libya to nationalise them without compensation under workers' control.
Public opinion did not buy the obvious lie that the ‘war on terror’ must defeat Al-Qaeda but Assad had to go by arming Al-Qaeda.
Islamist militias manipulated by Western intelligence have been the battering ram for Western Imperialist foreign policy increasingly since the 1980s.
There would be no mass civil war in Syria without Islamists imported by Saudi, Qatar, Jordan, Turkey, and ultimately the US, UK, and France.
Despite previous brutal pro-imperialist tyranny by Assad defending Syria’s national sovereignty demands the victory of the Syrian National Army over US-sponsored forces.
The LRC fights in the labour movement for the defeat of all Imperialist-sponsored forces.
The defeat of this utterly bogus “revolution” will defend a relatively secular administration, strengthen the Syrian working class against Assad and dent chauvinism in US, Britain and France.
On horses who live on the wind and revolutions which are simultaneously counter-revolutions By Gerry Downing W hen I was a child in rural West Cork my father told me a story of a man who had a horse and no fodder for him as winter came on.
All winter long he trained his horse in this technique until spring arrived.
This tale popped into my head when I read the story as related by several of the left and selfproclaimed revolutionary left of the “revolution” in Egypt that was going so excellently well that it overthrew the dictator Morsi but then suddenly went so disastrously and inexplicably wrong, like the poor horse in West Cork.
General Abdul Fattah al-Sisi “stole” the “revolution”, the generals “hijacked” it etc.
Political idiots like the IMT’s Alan Wood could hail a reactionary populist uprising of 17 million against Morsi in Egypt as a revolution and then be left with the awful task of explaining how a “revolution” could produce such terrible counter-revolutionary results.
Wiltshire then gives up completely and adopts the ‘plague on both your houses’ Effelite position , refusing to defend the working class and poor who support the MB who are now joined by every progressive fighter in Egypt, “the two wings of the bourgeoisie, representing the army and the Muslim Brotherhood are reduced to tearing each other apart while their imperialist masters look on in disarray”, he says.
The answer to that lies in Gerry Healy’s manoeuvrings with the Arab bourgeoisie via Vanessa Redgrave, Alex Mitchell and others.
They sanctioned the mass executions of leftists and trade unionists to lionise Khomeini as above.
Millions of Iranians today follow Khomeini not because they desire the reactionary Utopia of an Imperialism today Page 16 Islamic state’ but because the Ayatollah symbolizes uncompromising opposition to the Pahlavi Dynasty and its autocratic rule.
News Line, February 28, 1983) The anti-Pabloites of this ICFI tradition had become more Pabloite than the Pabloites themselves.
Workers Power’s Marcus Halaby manages to equate the coup which overthrew Morsi and restored the army with the coup of 2011 which overthrew Mubarak, thereby making a facile equation of a powerful revolutionary upsurge which forced the hand of the army and obliged them to concede a measure of democratic rights with a counter-revolutionary mobilisation of middleclass army supporters who demanded that the army topple Morsi.
The army, of course, obliged because it had already ideologically won the mass movement to its side.
This was a populist counterrevolution which set out to restore army rule and it succeeded in its aims.
And it then immediately went on to attack its opponents, Morsi supporters in the beginning but now the whole of progressive Egypt.
He was posed the question, “Military coups usually herald the defeat of the revolutionary process—they are often the most extreme representation of the counterrevolution.
So while the military is in the streets and has overstepped the constitutional limits to its power, I believe that it will seek some means to quickly return power to a civilian authority.
But there is another horse who is alive and well, though he has suffered a serious defeat in this race won by the Egyptian army and its United States allies.
But surely it must develop a better revolutionary leadership than these idiots above who cannot distinguish genuine revolution from populist reactionary counter-revolution.
Socialist Fight 28 August 2013 HEZBDLLah W e oppose unconditionally the proposed Imperialist attack on Syria and are for its defeat.
The fundamental task of the hour for all serious socialists and anti-imperialists internationally is to defend the national sovereignty of Syria against this Imperialist attack which is launched with Zionist assistance (a big Israeli military delegation is in Washington right now discussing with Susan Rice) in order to assist their allies, the Free Syrian Army and the various al Qaeda rebels of the AlNusra Front etc.
There are no revolutionary socialists or antiimperialists fighting Assad in Syria, talk of what might have been is to support a phantom revolutionary army in the face of the very obvious reality of this Imperialist war of aggression.
We have every reason to suspect that Sarin and mustard gas (the same as used by the United States in Vietnam) which killed hundreds of people was more the work of Imperialist terrorism in the region.
Obama and the Imperialist mass media are seeking to ascribe the blame to the Syrian government and are using this to justify the attack.
And the same pro-imperialist forces, this time the KLA, fabricated a bogus tale of the Racak Massacre in Kosovo in 1999 (all the dead were KLA fighters) to justify the bombing of Yugoslavia, just exactly as they are probably doing now with their Sarin gas “red line” and the Weapons of Mass Destruction lies used to VENEZUELA ’*j Bismiltahn-Rahmani'IRahim justify invading Iraq in 2003 and the Gulf of Tonkin incident in 1964 used to justify the war in Vietnam.
It is also reminiscent of the Gleiwitz incident, a staged attack by Nazi forces posing as Poles on 31 August 1939, against the German radio station Sender G/ein’it\ in Gleiwitz, Upper Silesia, Germany on the eve of World War II in Europe.
This was used to justify the invasion of Poland in 1939. jj3] It has always been thus; the spiral of Imperialist barbarism tries to hide a crime by committing another, greater, crime.
The Imperialist terror attack using chemical weapons against hundreds of children and adults in Syria occurred immediately in the wake of a Imperialism today Page 18 blatant coup in Egypt, followed by a bloody massacre of hundreds of the Egyptian oppositionists by the new pro-imperialist coup government.
Now, to cover the second crime, Imperialism threatens to bomb Syria, accusing it in a great hullabaloo of massacring their own people, when we know that since 2011 the United States itself has been supplying arms and other assistance to the terrorist mercenaries in Syria.
The United States government has enlisted allies in the West and the Middle East and has transported huge killing machines by sea and air to commit genocide against the Arab peoples.
They have used lies and media manipulation to accomplish this as in previous operations in Kosovo, Iraq, Afghanistan and more recently in Libya.
We offer the traditional Marxist position of unconditional but critical support to Syria in this assault and in the war against the Imperialist-sponsored rebels.
We must follow the tactic of Lenin and Trotsky to the threat of Kornilov in Russia in 1917.
We demand that Assad arms the working class and call for the enlisting of all the people in the army against the mercenaries and Imperialism.
The LeninistTrotskyists have not supported in the past, do not support in the present nor will in the future support any capitalist government.
But this is not the same thing; there is a dividing line here, which is being stepped over by some Bolsheviks who fall into compromise and allow themselves to be carried away by the course of events.
We shall fight, we are fighting against Kornilov, just as Kerensky’s troops do, but we do not support Kerensky.
We reject the abject notion that Imperialism is sponsoring any type of a revolution in Syria, no more than it did in sponsoring and militarily assisting the overthrow of Gaddafi in Libya or in covertly supporting the army coup in Egypt.
Those who point to the subsequent slaying of the American Ambassador in Libya a year ago or the United States support for the Muslim Brotherhood and Morsi when he was in office forget that Imperialism has no permanent friends or enemies, only economic and geo-political interests.
The Fundamentalists it supported in Afghanistan in the 1980s and 90s fought it later in Iraq and Afghanistan itself, those it sponsored in Libya turned against it in Mali, those it is now sponsoring in Syria via its client states in the Gulf, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, will later fight it in a new arena.
That it will have facilitated the imposition of barbaric regimes who may confront Israel later is very much a secondary question for Imperialism; the CIA celebrated the fall of Kabul to the Taliban and the lynching of former President Mohammad Najibullah in Afghanistan in September 1996.
The United Nations is effectively a nursery talking shop whereby the Imperialists allow the assembled nations of the world to play with the toys of diplomacy on secondary questions whilst it gets on with its own business regardless of what they think.
Western Imperialism bombed Yugoslavia in 1999 Imperialism today Page 19 despite the fact that the UN Security Council did not sanction it.
It is nothing but a back office of the Pentagon when it decides to act for world order under United States terms.
The split on the top table, the Security Council, is unavoidable and can no longer be postponed if Imperialism is not to relinquish its all-encompassing global predatory role economically, politically and militarily.
The social consequences on every continent are nothing but collateral damage for this “alliance of robbers” as Lenin described the League of Nations in 1920.
We reject any characterisation of this attack or the war in Syria since 2011 as any type of an inter-imperialist proxy war between US-led Western Imperialism and Chinese-Russian Eastern Imperialism.
They are going to war because capitalism’s falling rate of profit means this is the only way to restore a higher rate of profit for their trans-national corporations and finance houses in Wall Street, the City of London, Paris, Hamburg and Tokyo.
The commodity hegemony of the “Seven Sisters” oil barons controlled by the United States and Britain (Exxon, Mobil, Gulf, Socal, Texaco, Shell, BP), whose main partners in the Middle East, not by chance, are Saudi Arabia, Qatar and UAE, the major direct funders of the Syrian mercenaries.
Already in London, the price of Brent crude oil for delivery in October, reached a maximum of six months, rising 26% to $ 117.34 a barrel.
This war could well be the opening volleys of WWIII in what is essentially a global war for markets between the NATO bloc and the central opposition around Russia and China.
The Chinese and Russian bourgeoisies are not strong enough to prevail in the fight for their own areas of influence.
We see this in the successive retreats forced on China in Africa, first in Libya, then in Mali and more recently in the Central African Republic.
Compared to Western Imperialism the resources of Russia and China combined are puny indeed.
This is a Western Imperialistsponsored war and a counter-revolution which is currently engaged in ethnically cleansing the Kurds in northern Syria in order to declare an Islamic state based on Sharia law with all the terrible consequences for women, gays and lesbians and all minorities who are not sufficiently of the Sunni Muslim faith.
The sponsoring of Sunni Muslim terrorism has been the main strategic orientation for the United States via the CIA since the fall of Saddam made Shi’a Iran the main objective opponent in the region.
The Special Activities Division of the CIA has carried out much Covert Action and “Special Activities” such as bombings of Shi’a civilians in Iraqi marketplaces to promote communal violence for its own ends.
That is the reason for the obviously growing popularity of the Assad government not only among all the ethnic minority communities but also among the urban Sunni Muslims who wish to defend at least the level of secular rights and freedoms they have under Assad.
We therefore reject absolutely that this is, or is degenerating into, a sectarian Sunni/ Imperialism today Page 20 Shi’a conflict no more than the conflict in the north of Ireland was/is a religious Catholic/ Protestant sectarian conflict.
Clearly the source and aggressive perpetrators are the Sunni-based A1 Nusra Front, assisted by Imperialist secret agents and the main victims are the Shi’a and all other minorities, despite some instances of sectarian atrocities on the government side.
This too parallels the course of the conflict in the north of Ireland; the pro-imperialist Loyalists are the source of sectarian divisions and the main perpetrators of atrocities.
Religion is always an ideological cloak beneath which people fight out their real material economic, social and political interests.
The dividing lines in both conflicts, as in the entire semi-colonial world, are between the forces of Imperialism and the forces of anti-imperialism.
Revolutionaries are always unequivocally anti-imperialist, just as Trotskyists were and still are unyielding defenders of the deformed and degenerate workers states.
Those who cannot seek the defeat of their own Imperialist war-mongers in this attack have fallen at the first hurdle and are of no use to the working class whatsoever.
The kindest thing that we can say about them is that they are confusing the concepts of unconditional and uncritical support.
Their main motivation in defending the bogus “Syrian Revolution” is to gain acceptance from the trade union bureaucracy, the socialimperialist layer which is the main pillar of capitalism in the ranks of the working class.
We salute the heroism of the brave soldiers of the Syrian National Army who have suffered terrible casualties (up to 50% of the war dead) in defence of their country’s right to self-determination against this Imperialistsponsored assault.
They have every right to get their arms and other assistance from Iran and Russia; Imperialist Special Forces have been on the ground in Syria since 2011.
From the ranks of these anti-imperialist working class fighters may come the forces for the future revolutionary socialist party which will in its turn deal with Assad and his reactionary bourgeois nationalists whose economic policy was as anti-working class and as neo-liberal as any Imperialist country.
We are confident that the pro-imperialist rebels and their supporters will be consigned to the dustbin of history by these antiimperialist forces.
Of course principled revolutionary socialists and anti-imperialists do not defend the record and practice of reactionary bourgeois nationalist governments like those of the “Supreme Leader” of Iran, Ali Khamenei, Saddam Hussein, Muammar Gaddafi or Bashar al-Assad.
These were and are all brutal tyrants and as pro-imperialist as domestic political conditions allow them to be.
We can never forget the favour Assad’s father Hafez al-Assad did for the Zionists and Western Imperialism in procuring the terrible massacre of the Palestinian in the Tel al-Zaatar refugee camp during the Lebanese Civil War on August 12, 1976.
And they have brutally oppressed their own working class, outlawing strikes and executing and imprisoning trade union leaders and imposing corporate state trade unions to oppress the workers.
But there are oppressed and oppressor nations; Imperialist nations and semi-colonial nations.
These humanitarian liberal social patriots who point to the terrible deeds of the semi-colonial tyrants and equate their crimes with those of Imperialism itself deserve universal contempt.
This tendency now compromises the vast majority of selfproclaimed Trotskyist groups internationally.
Imperialism today Page 21 Very few indeed continue to look on the reactionary rebels as revolutionaries or see a revolution hiding in the tail of that particular comet.
We cannot fight for socialism in our own Imperialist country and accept the booty of empire extracted from the brutal oppression of semi-colonial workers and peasants as its source.
This division is not significant from the angle of bourgeois pacifism or the philistine Utopia of peaceful competition among independent nations under capitalism, but it is most significant from the angle of the revolutionary struggle against Imperialism” If the bourgeois governments of Russia, China and Iran do not capitulate again before Imperialism, and Imperialism is consistent with their own interests, we may have a third world war.
In this conflict revolutionaries did not seek out an ideal and comfortable third camp, they cannot be mistaken as mere pacifists.
Neither do we have illusions in the bourgeoisies of Russia, China, Iran or Syria.
The outcome for humanity will be barbarism if we do not prevail in the stmggle to defeat the United States and its allies.
We put our faith in the victory of the oppressed nations and the reconstruction of the Fourth International, the world party of socialist revolution.
The past 50 years has seen the total degeneration of this organisation from the abandoning Trotskyism in favour of bourgeois nationalism and Castroism to finally becoming a voice for its own imperialist bourgeoisie.
This position by the SWP is entirely in keeping with their history, after taking a principled stand against the Shachtmanites in the 1930s they had degenerated two decades later.
Via Castro and Pabloism, Cannon arrived at exacdy the point in methodology where stood Bumham-Shachtman in 1939-40.
Instrumental in achieving this remarkable transformation was the same ‘radical milieu’ in the United States which had provided the steam for BumhamShachtman.
To insist on the independent mobilisation of the working class behind a conscious Trotskyist vanguard would draw the accusation from these middle class radicals of ‘sectarianism’ The SWP today finds itself beyond the Shachtmanite position of sitting on the fence and like Burnham before has gone over completely to the side of United States imperialism.
Unable to support the mobilisation of workers in the eastern Ukraine against the fascist squads.
Revealing the SWP’s naive appreciation of the United States propaganda machine.
It is therefore no coincidence that they should display such Russiaphobia reminiscent of the McCartherite witch hunt of the 1950s.
No mention is made in its pages of the symbolic fascist style of this massacre in Odessa, the burning of the House of Trade Unions with the anti fascists inside.
The Donetsk Peoples’ Republic has now announced this oligarch is to have his property nationalised.
The working class has actually rallied around the remnants of the October Revolution, and made progressive calls for expropriating the oligarchs.
These symbols do not just represent relics of Stalinism they also recall to the working class the progressive nature of socialised property relations and planned economy in the albeit degenerated workers state of the Soviet Union.
The SWP is of course blinded by Stalinophobia and is incapable of seeing this.
Imperialism is backing Ukrainian fascism, the small number of Russian fascists have the backing of no one.
US imperialism and its allies of the North Atlantic bloc are hell bent on exporting their finance capital to Ukraine.
Accusations of Russian ‘imperialism’ do not stand up to justification when the world economy is dominated by US finance capital, extracting interest from the majority of the nations on the planet.
This is why the American ruling class will back fascists in the Ukraine.
The SWP has crossed the class lines and joined cheerleaders of its own ruling class, for revolutionary socialists we unequivocally oppose imperialism and fascism.
Notes C Slaughter, hi Defence of Marxism, New Park Publications, London, 1971 www.themilitant.com , May 26 2014 www.themilitant.com.
Therefore any conflict between either or both of them and US-dominated global Imperialism is a conflict between rival Imperialist powers and therefore revolutionary socialists should support neither in that war.
We should advocate revolutionary defeatism for ourselves and for the Russian/Chinese working class,e. they should seek the defeat of their own bourgeoisie in order to combat the imperialist chauvinism that sweeps the masses in wartime via its main conduit in modern times, the Labour and trade union bureaucracy.
We content that this is fundamentally wrong, that neither Russia nor China are Imperialist powers in the Marxist sense and that therefore in any conflict between Imperialism and these states it is necessary to form an Anti Imperialist United Front with them either singly or together if both are simultaneously attacked.
The balance of forces internationally is nothing like in the periods before WWI or WWII when roughly equal Imperialist power blocs faced each other; now the economic and military power is overwhelmingly on the side of United States Imperialism and its NATO allies.
Now we say that in this conflict today in the Ukraine revolutionary dual defeatism is equal to national chauvinism in western imperialist countries because neither Russia or China are Imperialist countries, and it amounts to a demand that the Russian and Chinese workers refuse to defend themselves against United States aggression.
We caution newer comrades against bandying about the term “Imperialism” as groups like the AWL does in imitation to how it is used in the bourgeois mass media.
In Marxist terms “Imperialism” has a precise meaning and this is the rule of finance capital.
History has known the “imperialism” of the Roman state based on slave labor, the imperialism of feudal land-ownership, the imperialism of commercial and industrial capital, the imperialism of the Czarist monarchy, etc.
The driving force behind the Moscow bureaucracy is indubitably the tendency to expand its power, its prestige, its revenues.
This is the element of “imperialism” in the widest sense of the word which was a property in the past of all monarchies, oligarchies, ruling castes, medieval estates and classes.
To employ the term “imperialism” for the foreign policy of the Kremlin — without elucidating exactly what this signifies — means simply to identify the policy of the Bonapartist bureaucracy with the policy of monopolistic capitalism on the basis that both one and the other utilize military force for expansion.
Michael Probsting of the Austrian-based RCIT has produced a big pamphlet to prove, on behalf of the whole third campist crew, how wrong we in Socialist Fight and the LCFI are and that both are imperialist.
He even calls his work, Russia as a Great Imperialist Power, with a front cover cartoon of Uncle Sam facing a very angry Russian bear which is clearly just about to rip his head off.
We would suggest that this is an illegitimate use of imperialist propaganda in a self-proclaimed Marxist magazine.
The work is replete with extensive charts and tables to statistically prove his point that Russia and China are the new rising Imperialist powers about to dominate the planet and the USA is the declining power, soon about to be eclipsed by these bear-like and yellow menaces, which are our own and everybody’s enemies and the real danger.
Much of the work proves only that these are unequal societies, as were the former deformed and degenerated workers’ states, though not anything like as unequal as their successor capitalist states are now.
But even the more relevant statistics and charts are one sided and very misleading as to the real economic relationships between Russia and China and global imperialism and who poses the military dangers.
In sum, in less than two decades a number of Russian monopolies have been formed which exert a total grip on the country’s economy.
Russia’s capitalism is probably more monopolized than most other imperialist economies.
As we will see below in more detail, these monopolies are involved in all forms of businesses — starting with oil and gas extraction, metal mining and manufacturing, and up to finance.
Lenin’s definition of an imperialist power is obviously applicable when it comes to Russia’s monopoly capital.
The energy giant Gazprom is just over 50% state owned but most of the rest of the shares are in the hands of foreign capital.
And most of the rest of the major “monopolies” in Russia and China which are listed as “state owned” are considerably less than 50% state owned, 25% being typical and as low as 13% in some cases.
Of course western imperialists complain bitterly that this is grossly unfair, that they should be allowed free access to all shares and not just to the “B” shares that are freely floated.
And Probsting can point to foreign direct investment inward and outward and the “round tripping” of oligarch’s funds to Cyprus etc so they can reinvest them in Russia tax free but always he avoids the entire global picture in his eagerness to make his imperialist point.
For instance China and Japan are by far the two largest holders of United States government stocks and bonds, which they are obliged to buy to offload their dollar surpluses and keep open the US consumer market, by far the largest in the world.
But these stocks and bonds only pay between 1% to 2% interest whereas the FDI of the United States in Russia and China yields over 20% interest.
And the dollar as the trading currency for not only oil but most other commodities in the planet gives the United States a huge advantage; some would say the most important of all its holds over the global markets.
The continued threat to this global monopoly can be reasonably designated as the prime cause for the war against Iraq in 2003, against Libya in 2011 and against Ukraine in 2014.
If the United States loses this immense advantage their empire’s days are indeed numbered.
Combined with that are the successive bouts of Quantative Easing,e. devaluating the dollar which reduces the value of the dollar holdings of these two countries in particular, but also Japan, the Gulf States, Brazil and others.
It is mmoured that the United States looted Libya’s gold reserves at the end of the war in 2011, it has not returned to Germany its gold bullion as Merkel requested in the end of 2012 and it has just looted the entire gold reserve of the Ukraine on 7 March 2014, some $1. billion worth.
By these mechanisms the whole world is forced to subsidise the United States economy.
A large portion of that subsidy from unwilling foreign trading partners goes on the United States military which in turn is used to menace and/or invade any country that seriously threatens that monopoly.
This conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the American experience.
The total influence — economic, political, even spiritual — is felt in every city, every State house, every office of the Federal government.
Our toil, resources and livelihood are all involved; so is the very structure of our society.
In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military industrial complex.
The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist.
The MIC is now far more powerful than they were in 1961 and every United States Senator and almost all Representatives are in the pay of the MIC lobby, which needs constant wars to keep profits and shareholders’ dividends high and their employees in work, as Eric Zuesse noted above.
Imperialism today Page 27 Foreign investors continue to have a decisive influence over the Russian stock market.
According to Sberbank KIB analysts, they own about 70 percent of free floating Russian shares.
But Russian investors are still wary of the stock market after the 2008-2009 crash.
One third of investors active in Russia are United States funds; another third are funds from continental Europe; and the remaining third are U.K. funds.
This makes quite clear that far from being Imperialist powers both Russia and China are no more than semi-colonial countries, albeit very large and advanced ones.
They are not linked to the global web of United States Imperialism in the same way as minor imperialisms like Holland and Belgium or allied to it in a more equal though still subordinate way like Japan, Germany, Italy, Spain and Canada.
No, they are in the upper level of semi-colonial countries and recognise themselves as such by allying as the BRICS; Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa.
They now pit workers against one another from Bosnia to Venezuela and threaten a new world war.
The threat of such a war is most evident in the build up of United States military encirclement of China in the Pacific.
The centre ground we have listed, some of whom had shifted sharply to the left over the Ukraine and those more consistent revolutionary Trotskyists who have taken a strong anti Imperialist line on Libya and Syria from the beginning.
We have outlined our theoretical, economic and political rejection of the theories of the internaImperialism today Page 28 tional class struggle being driven by the interimperialist conflicts between Western US-led Imperialism and Eastern Imperialism of Russia and China.
This includes even Venezuela where the conflict is the result of the incursions of China into the United States backyard as the Liaison Committee of Communists ridiculously propose.
We have also proposed an Anti Imperialist United Front with the “devil and his grandmother” including Putin himself as the demands that working class should make on Russia to defend it against the fascist onslaught from Kiev.
Lasdy this orientation is primarily designed to build a new revolutionary socialist working class leadership as part of a reforged Fourth International.
A reply to Michael Calderbank, By Oliver Coxhead I n a recent post on the social networking site Facebook LRC leading member and supporter of the ‘Ukrainian Solidarity Campaign’ Michael Calderbank attempted to give political and even revolutionary weight to his reactionary position on the current crisis in Ukraine.
Trotsky was clear that independence must be bound up with preservation of planned economy and socialised property created by the OctoI The Cost of l Iving Crisis Time to end economic injustice by Michael Calderbank forward by Mark Serwotka General Secretary.
Public and Commercial Services Union ber Revolution and, as such, would mean defence of the gains in the rest of soviet territory despite the rule of the degenerate bureaucracy.
The national independence of Soviet Ukraine would mean the plan could be tailored to the needs of the Ukrainian people and not the Kremlin bureaucracy, but they would still support the plan of the rest of the LISSR because it would ‘know how to make the necessary economic agreement’ and therefore improve the rationality of the plan.
Trotsky was clear that the bureaucracy’s strangulation of the Ukraine had turned many of the masses, such as the peasantry and petty bourgeois as well as workers and emigrants of Ukraine, away from socialism which they had previously supported.
The official communist movement headed by the Kremlin bureaucracy had no answer to Ukrainian independence as it stifled national expression and implemented disastrous agricultural policies.
When the Ukrainian problem became aggravated early this year comImperialism today Page 30 munist voices were not heard at all; but the voices of the Ukrainian clericals and National Socialists were loud enough.
The answer Trotsky stressed was for the revolutionary workers’ movement to lead the desire for national independence as part of continuing socialist revolution,e. the political revolution against the Kremlin bureaucracy.
In the case of Ukraine, to demand independence from centralised bureaucratic rule while defending the gains of the revolution and improving them by fulfilling the needs of the local population and to integrate with other soviet republics as part of the ongoing development for socialism.
To ignore the desire for independence meant sections of the masses would be driven to bourgeois nationalism and fascism.
This is in complete opposition to the Ukraine envisaged by the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists led by Nazi Stepan Bandera.
This position must be seen in the context of its time, the late 1930s on the eve of imperialist war and military threats to the USSR, the world’s first workers’ state.
Now we must examine Calderbank’s use or rather misuse of Trotsky’s article today.
Firstly, he is of course using it completely in the wrong context; the USSR no longer exists and, obviously, this has thrown back consciousness of many workers’ in Ukraine and Russia.
Ukraine is independent as a bourgeois republic, not a soviet republic and its borders have altered several times since Trotsky wrote his article.
It is not Trotsky who is wrong though but Calderbank who chooses to take the article out of context as justification for adopting an antiworking class position.
In the Ukraine now we have the corrupt but elected government of the oligarch Yanukovych deposed by an unelected coup-government comprised of ultra-nationalists and Nazi descendent organisations such as Svoboda.
Yet these nationalists plan to give up even their bourgeois independence to the imperialists of the EU and United States.
It would of course then become a NATO member, strengthening United States imperialism’s military presence right up to the Russian border.
Clearly the imperialism of the United States and EU means no true independence for Ukraine.
Imperialism will mean the domination of Ukraine and Ukrainian workers by the IMF and World Bank as well as US corporations.
The economic deals local oligarchs had with Russian capitalists were more beneficial to the population than would be imperialist domination.
Russia is not an imperialist country, it is undoubtedly a capitalist one but has offered a better economic deal to Ukraine.
The EU offers de-industrialisation, privatisation, wage cuts, social security cuts and debt.
Workers in Ukraine can look to Greece, Ireland and Portugal to see their future, behind which is the finance capital and military of the U.S., ever too keen to enforce compliance using local fascist gangs.
In the Donbass region, focused around Luhgansk and Donetsk, there has been a groundswell of opposition by the working class to the Maidan and its coup-government which includes fascists.
Calderbank’s lack of dialectical thinking means that he cannot conclude that today’s officially ‘independent’ Ukraine dominated by oligarchs and facing the domination of US/EU finance capital has developed its own internal movement for regional independence in the face of this imperialist onslaught.
Trotsky’s method applied today means support for Ukrainian independence from US/EU imperialism and the self-determination of those regions which are at the forefront of the opposition to Imperialism today Page 31 imperialism and its fascist gangs.
This same proletariat has its very existence threatened and its own rights in particular the right to speak their first language.
As mentioned earlier the borders of Ukraine have altered considerably since 1939 and many Russian speakers live in the east and have intermixed with Ukrainian speakers.
The calls for Ukrainian independence and ‘national unity’ by Calderbank and the ‘Ukrainian Solidarity Campaign’ mean a centralised ultra-nationalist state which suppresses the rights of minorities.
Calderbank and his ilk would rather preserve the state boundaries as they are at the expense of the working class in eastern Ukraine, even though they have expressed their will for autonomy through a referendum on this issue.
Opportunists such as Calderbank line up with Svoboda, the United States and EU to condemn the working class resistance as ‘terrorist’ and influenced by ‘Russian agents’, yet nothing is mentioned of the fascist terror gangs, CIA agents and mercenaries operating in Ukraine.
Finance capital again uses fascism to impose its domination and, unfortunately, many on the left have chosen to support imperialism in the way they did at the start of WWI a hundred years ago, exposing themselves now as they did then as liberals and not Marxists at all.
Throughout the debates on this fundamental issue of support for the movement against imperialism in the Donbass, many leftists have been outraged at military methods and personnel being employed by the Donetsk and Luhgansk Peoples’ Republics and the fact some Kiev supporters have been kidnapped or tortured.
The liberal prejudices of these middle class liberals and individuals such as Calderbank reveal their hostility toward the working class taking up the struggle against imperialism and fascism, in the course of such struggles that would mean enemies real or suspected will be given a hard time.
They moralise about how ‘both sides are as bad’ and such arguments, the ‘moralizing philistine’s favourite method is the lumping of reaction’s conduct with that of revolution’ Trotsky noted about such leftists.
Ideologists of intermediary layers who have fallen, or are in fear of falling between the two fires.
Meanwhile the working class in the Donbass continues to fight the fascists and imperialists in its quest for survival and self-determination.
Michael Brown an unarmed Black teenager was shot by a police officer after being stopped for walking in the street.
A Pew poll shows the racial divide here, 80% of African Americans felt the shooting of Michael Brown raised important issues about race but only 37% of whites did.
Black people’s interaction with the police involves mostly disrespect, harassment and violence.
The persistence of negative stereotypes and images that perpetuates assumptions of Black inferiority reduces the chance for the majority of white people to empathize with the Black experience (Dr.
E Bonilla Silva “Racism without Racists” 2009) USA Today reported Federal Crime Stats that an unarmed Black person is killed every 28 hours by police, security guard, or selfappointed vigilante.
Michael Brown’s shooting is not an isolated event.% of the Black people killed in that period were under 21 years of age, compared to 8.7% of Whites.
Immediately after the killing of MB, the police, the politicians and the Media attempted to smear the character of Michael Brown.
Whenever there is a Black victim of police brutality the Media alivays tty to make out that it was their own fault.
Michael Brown was systematically dehumanized, the Media was invested in making the police officer the victim instead of the dead teenager.
Until the video is released, then the story changes and continues to change as more evidence is released Initially the chief of police attempted to sell the fiction that MB was stopped for strong arm robbery, when in fact he wasn’t.
The shop owner said no robbery occurred and neither the owner nor an employee called the police.
Before Ferguson police released the identity of the cop who killed Michael Brown, they released a video which was ‘edited’ by the police.
The part of the video cut out of the version released by the cops showed Brown paying for the cigars.
Law enforcement in the town were reportedly overwhelmed with complaints about racial bias, harassment, strained relations between the nearly all white police officers and a community that was 89% Black... at least five other police officers and one former officer in the town’s 53-member department have been Imperialism today Page 33 named in civil rights lawsuits alleging the use of excessive force.
Darren Wilson’s supporters have raised over half a million dollars for him on ‘gofundme’ and the Support Darren Wilson Facebook page got 42,000 “likes” in a week Historians estimate that during the late 19 th and early 20* century, 2 — 3 Black people were lynched every week in the American South.
As late as the 1920s Lynched Black bodies would be left hanging on public display for days or weeks to terrorise Black people.
In this same way Michael Brown’s body was left uncovered, his brains spilled onto the street, rotting in the baking sun for over four and a half hours.
This was one of the reasons why the execution of Michael Brown was a flashpoint because of this historical memory that it evoked) At least one so called ‘socialist’ site in their first report on the killing did not bother to state that Brown was Black.
Not to say how Brown was killed is an attempt to disconnect this from the historical narrative, the history of lynchings, Jim Crow, harassment and all kinds of terror unleashed on Black people since they were brought to America against their will.
The brave people of Ferguson peacefully protested against the murder of Michael Brown, but they were met with assault rifles, armoured tanks, rubber bullets and teargas.
Americans refuse to accept the facts of their own long history of violence.
Genocidegiving smallpox infected blankets to Native Americans and thus wiping out whole Nations.
Slavery and Jim Crow up until the 1970s, the Tuskegee experiment 1932-1974.
America has been killing and stealing from every other nation on earth.
So it is a bit rich for Americans to be blaming Black people for violence.
Of course no American alive now is responsible for what was done to the Native people etc. but they have benefited from the outcome, witnessing the injustices and the inequality they should do something about it.
More important the repression and violence that Native and Black people are being subjected to will happen to ordinary working Americans when they decide to stand up for their jobs/better working conditions/against the warmongers, or when the dollar crashes The violence in Ferguson has its roots in the lack of jobs and no way out of the poverty trap.
Black unemployment has been twice that of whites for 50 years, this gap hasn’t closed at all since 1963.
Back then, the unemployment rate was 5 percent for whites and 10. percent for blacks.
In 2011, 27. percent of black households were in poverty — nearly triple the poverty rate for whites.” 40 percent of Black children in America are growing up beneath the federal government’s notoriously inadequate poverty level.
The government’s botched priorities are evident in the fact that the Department of Defense budget request for fiscal year 2012 was for $553 billion, an increase of $22 bilImperialism today Page 34 lion over the 2010 appropriation.
This money could have been better spent creating jobs and on job training and education for people throughout America.
Some Black people are also complicit in upholding the system of racism, having internalized the idea of Black criminality/ inferiority.
Preachers/politicians/hustlers like A1 Sharpton have the nerve to lecture the people of Ferguson who are the victims of violence instead of confronting the SOURCE of that violence.
These misleaders of the Black community claim that Black people need to vote more, if they had voted then they could have had more Black policemen etc.
This nonsense is beyond belief, there are many cities with Black Mayors and Black police where Black people are treated badly, it’s not just about cops.
Black elected officials and Black cops do NOT change the nature of the Capitalist/ imperialist state.
It changes nothing in Black working class experience under persistent United States racial apartheid and inequality.
It merely serves to legitimize the armed occupation of the Black communities.
Black people are waging a struggle against systematic and institutional Racist oppression and economic exploitation and part of this is class war.
They were facing down SWAT Teams and snipers then for organizing the community against police brutality, providing free breakfast programs and free healthcare services which the state should provide but doesn’t.
Now things are so much worse with each war since then, the state has given more military hardware to local Police departments, preparing for the war to come on the Civilian population.
On October 9*2014 new protests have erupted in St Louis after an off-duty police officer working for a private security firm in St.
These murders will only end when these police are charged with murder and all costs are taken from the police pension funds.
The people of Ferguson by their determination to stand up for Justice exposed the United States police State and all its military apparatus to show the world America’s war of Terror on Black people.
Notes Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact tank that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends shaping America and the world.
They were never told they had syphilis, nor were they ever treated for it.
Segregation and the Making of the Underclass 1998 Imperialism today Page 35 NGOs and their role in former colonial countries By Ailish Dease N on Governmental Organisations are often religious based entities doing undeniably “good” work mainly in less developed countries.
But the NGOs dependence on funding from their governments and global corporations, which has interests in mining and sweatshop development in these countries means that they actually perpetuate the cycle of underdevelopment and contributes to the peoples’ suffering.
The way that NGOs are structured and the bureaucracy and paperwork involved plus the expectations of the donors makes it almost impossible for them to work with poor working class people in these countries.
NGOs tend to work with the educated elite who know what to say to please the donors and how to put things to get funding , Most NGOs ship in their own workers to the country they claim they are trying to “help” instead of using the workers already there.
Tens of thousands of people are delivering “aid” in these developing countries performing functions which should be done by the native people themselves.
The NGO view of “development” is a series of projects for the poor not a struggle for justice and rights.
The fact that poverty is structural and is produced by unequal social relations in society and in relations between rich and poor countries is ignored.
NGOs do not challenge the mining companies which displace peasants from their land in order to steal their land and destroy the environment and poison the water.
They don’t challenge the companies hiring police to mete out repression to anyone who resists this theft.
If we look at Haiti which seized Independence in 1804, (in the only successful slave rebellion in history) having been severely oppressed and underdeveloped due to the horrifying experiences of slavery colonialism and neo-colonialism.
Schwartz shows that if you track food aid that’s dumped in some parts of Haiti and look at when it was given and how it was given, it was mainly in times when Haiti’s production was strong.
There might have been a drought, a temporary drop in local production, but “aid” comes a year or so later when production has bounced back.
Haiti could be completely self sufficient in food with collectivization of resources and national investment.
But United States surplus rice subsidized at 40% of its value is dumped in Haiti, and Haitian rice farmers are not allowed to protect their own crops; this has virtually destroyed the rural economy.
The neo liberal policy has been to impoverish people in the countryside, force them into the slums (in a variation of primitive accumulation) where they will be desperate enough to work in absurd conditions for a few dollars a day.
In 1990 there was a massive popular political mobilisation in Haiti which formed a party with a clear agenda which was strong enough to win the presidency but was a threat not only to the establishment in Haiti but throughout the region.
This Movement came into being without a clear political organisation, without a military wing, with no money and no international connections.
Firstly, the political problem was how to get Imperialism today Page 36 some political unity in the parliamentary system so they could pass the legislation they had a mandate to pass.
Secondly was the military problem, if they were able to make progress on the political front, what to do about the army, which the United States had reconstructed in 1915 (when it occupied Haiti for 20 years) and which has functioned as a power broker for the local elite ever since.
In 1991 there was a political impasse which prepared the ground for a vote of no confidence in the government.
Aristide was overthrown, over 5000 people were killed, ( mainly the best grassroots activists), Aristide was forced to leave and the political organisation became fragmented.
The Movement was still strong enough to be able to solve the military problem when Aristide, in a complicated compromise, decided when it was clear there was no alternative to go back to Haiti with the support of United States soldiers, in a move that was extremely ambiguous (and which has many pros and cons) to get rid of the Haitian army.
So this has been the fundamental feature of Haitian politics since then, there is no Haitian army to pacify the people directly.
One of the key features of the right wing is to re-invent the army or to find an alternative army, whether that is a UN Occupation force or a United States force.
In 1999 international donors officially withdrew all funds from the Haitian state as well as from the UN Mission and placed the funds with the NGOs, Zanotti, L., , Donors such as the World Bank have promoted the Reverse Aid Agenda (Hoogvelt 2001 pl92) this redirects aid to private “civil” organisations such as NGOs and away from the national government.
The NGOs are actually operating a parallel government which undermines the Haitian state.
The popular Movement solved the political problem by creating a new political organisation that had a national presence.
In 2000, when Aristide won 75% of the vote at every level of government, there was a massive political international campaign to discredit the government, demonise the leader, to divide the people and to create a situation which would justify the restoration of the Haitian army or failing that the restoration of an international army.
Starting in 2001 a low level military insurgency coupled with a concerted political and economic blockade of the country starved it of money, cut government revenue by half, all international aid was suspended to prepare the ground for foreign intervention.
In 2004 an international coup d’etat led by the US (key benefactor and supporter of the 29 year brutal Duvalier dictatorship) overthrew the democratically elected government of Jean Bertrand Aristide and forced him into exile and foreign troops occupied the country.
The people are faced with a combination of foreign and local businesses buttressed by a massive international army of some tens of thousands of troops there for the long term, plus 15,000 private security guards and a profusion of other security forces.
So the majority of the people are on one side and variations of the army are on the other.
On 12 January 2010 the worst national disaster in the history of the western hemisphere, a seismic tremor of 7. magnitude shook Haiti and in 35 seconds over 230,000 people were dead and a million and a half were homeless.
Earthquakes in Chile and Japan measured higher on the Richter scale but took far fewer lives because they had adequate shelter due to high standards of building regulation.
In the aftermath of the quake the United States sent troops to Haiti unlike the Cubans and Venezuelans who sent doctors and health workers in an attempt to save as many lives as possible.
The disaster merely laid the ground for international intervention, for foreign companies to exploit the situation for their own profit in collaboration with powerful local interests.
US troops were sent to Haiti after the earthquake primarily to secure the use of cheap Haitian labour for the multinational capitalist companies Imperialism today Page 37 and to support those companies to exploit Haiti’s national resources.
Ordinary people from all over the world donated to NGOs to help the Haitian people.
The Red Cross raised $500 million in donations while CARE raised $50 million and other charities received considerable donations.
Very little of the money donated has been spent on needy Haitians, a lot of the money has been spent on building 5 star luxury hotels in Haiti.
There has been a huge gap between the generous assistance promised by the international community and the pledges honoured up to now.
The billions of dollars in aid further marginalised the state and social organisations.
The Haitian people were not allowed to collectively determine the priorities for the next phase.% of Haitians are small farmers yet less than 3% of the money pledged is to go to agriculture.
Most of the NGOs in Haiti have failed to oppose or expose institutions creating the conditions of impoverishment in the developing world.
They fail to challenge pohtical decisions made in the west that are fuelling this poverty.
Representatives of this union group were brought to Europe where they met with Caribbean Labour Solidarity and other trade union groups, they were the most reactionary group of workers we had ever met.
At points in the meeting there was total silence because we were stunned by their pro imperiakst positions.
He exposes BO relationship to the “democracy promotion” programmes of the USA in Haiti that served as a launching platform for the coup.
Verso, London Imperialism today Page 38 From back page afds sporting the Miliband slogan “cuts too far too fast” on their hi viz vests.
As we say on page 5, “In the current struggle for the leadership of the anti-cuts movement between the SWT, their right-wing plit, Connterftre, and the Socialist Tarty the game is entirely about securing the patronage of left trade union bureaucrats and reformist politicians who will ‘oppose’ the cuts, denounce them viciously and passionately but nonetheless implement them in the end (or are inplementing them now) rather than seek to mobilise their members and the mass of the working class itself to physically resist the cuts by strikes and occupations.
On May 6th the Grass Roots Left will hold its founding conference precisely to fight for that perspective.
And it is becoming clearer that not only are our ‘revolutionary Trotskyists’ not able to fight the trade union bureaucracy at home but most are unable to oppose its foreign wars in any consistent way whilst some give them outright support.
Look at the sorry tale outlined in The soft left's foolish illusions in Benghazi’s rebels on page 20.
From the far right of the spectrum, the AWL followed closely by the USFI/Socialist Resistance, the SWP, the SP, Socialist Appeal and Workers Power no one can even approximate to a revolutionary approach to this Imperialist war.
Therefore, as the first revolutions were going so well in their first stage not dominated by anti-imperialism and anti-Zionism, pro-imperialism would do just fine for now in the ‘Libyan Revolution’ for getting rid of Gaddafi; we could leave socialism to a later stage.
Sarkozy jumps in the polls having imposed his man in a French coup in the Ivory Coast, Cameron will defeat the anti-cuts movement all the more easily with the patriotic support of the TU bureaucrats and half-hearted soft left opposition to the war on Libya.
Look at the three people on the headline strap of the Coalition of Resistance’s handout on the March 26th demo.
The degeneration of the left is apparent in its failure to fight the TU bureaucracy on the cuts and the attack on Libya.
We need a new internationalist revolutionary party to fight this crisis.
We have lost many friends and allies because this crisis has forced their politics into the open.
However we are pleased to say that we have found new and better comrades in Britain, South Africa and Brazil who we are confident will not buckle under the current ideological assault of neo-liberal Imperialism.
I 'By all means,' says Capital, offering another warmed-up version of the 'trickle down' theory, the principle that the poor, who must subsist on table scraps dropped by the rich, can best be served by giving the rich bigger meals."" —William Blum, Killing Hope he capitalist crisis that began over two years ago is working its way through to the working class and poor.
At the behest of global finance capital capitalist governments across the globe are following up cuts in wage and conditions with vicious attacks on the post-war welfare states.
But bankers, still arrogantly paying themselves huge bonuses, have devastated the economies of the smaller nations, Iceland, Greece and Ireland with Portugal next for the chopping block.
And they have gone to war with Libya to rob another relatively prosperous third world country like Iraq used to be, correcdy calculating this will draw the trade union bureaucrats even closer to them.
And still the fightback is nothing like what is needed to defeat this attack.
Back in 1938 Leon Trotsky pointed to the problems and tasks facing the world working class and poor in fighting for its socialist future.
Unless revolutionaries seriously tackle the struggle against the TU bureaucracy and their parliamentary expression, the Labour parties internationally, we cannot solve the question of building a revolutionary leadership for the class.
Just to make sure that he did not whip the demonstrators into a revolutionary frenzy McCluskey had Unite’s stewards sporting the Miliband slogan “cuts too far too fast” on their hi viz vests.
We have explained how Unite General Secretary Len McCluskey makes big bluster against the cuts whilst arranging behind the scenes to implement them.
At a meeting with about fifty of its Councillors, including Council leaders and Labour group leaders, on 12 November in Leeds he got Gail Cartmell to instruct them to carry out all the cuts by setting legal budgets whilst hypocritically protesting.
In Lambeth wild rumours began to circulate that ONE Labour Councillor, Kingsley Abrams, was intending to vote against the cuts.
Such was the determination of Unite that no struggle against the cuts at all (other than puerile protests) should manifest itself that Regional Secretary Steve Hart attempted to get him to vote for the cuts.
In the end he abstained, much to the displeasure of our ‘left’ Regional Secretary.
Six ‘left’ Labour Councillors in Hackney, Barry Buitekant, Michelle Gregory, Linda Kelly, Deniz Oguzkanli, Ian Rathbone, and Patrick Vernon signed a statement against the cuts.
They would, “support a campaign to defeat the policies of this government through public protest, opposition and defiance.
We would like to see local Councils across Condon leading the charge and refusing to adopt cuts budgets as a result of government enforced policies.
