February 21 marks the sixth anniversary of the end of Ukraine’s Maidan Revolution.
Three months of largely peaceful protests concluded in a spasm of deadly violence.
President Victor Yanukovych fled Kyiv and later Ukraine, prompting the Rada to appoint acting leaders pending early elections.
Unfortunately, the country finds itself entangled in an ongoing low-intensity war with Russia, with uncertain prospects for settlement.
The Maidan Revolution Ukraine in November 2013 sat primed to sign an association agreement with the European Union, a document to establish a deep and comprehensive free trade arrangement and bring Ukraine closer to Europe.
On November 21, however, the Ukrainian government announced it would “suspend” preparations to sign the agreement.
Within hours, thousands took to the streets of Kyiv to protest, and the Maidan Revolution — also called the “Revolution of Dignity” — had begun.
Over the ensuing three months, the protests continued and morphed into a broader expression of popular discontent with Mr Yanukovych’s growing authoritarianism as well as his decision not to sign the EU association agreement.
European diplomats rushed to the Ukrainian capital and brokered overnight a settlement between Mr Yanukovych and opposition leaders.
The latter probably could not have sold the settlement to protestors in the streets, but they had little chance to try.
Mr Yanukovych signed the agreement and disappeared, turning up days later in Russia.
On February 22, the Rada appointed an acting president and acting prime minister.
They made clear their desire to get on with domestic reform and set integration with Europe — specifically, signing the association agreement with the European Union — as their top foreign policy priority.
Russian soldiers, with insignias removed from their combat fatigues, seized Crimea.
Russian President Vladimir Putin at first claimed they belonged to a local defense militia but weeks later admitted they were Russian soldiers and awarded their commanders commendations in a Kremlin ceremony.
Russia almost immediately annexed Crimea, an illegal action rejected by most of the world.
In April 2014, little green men began occupying administrative buildings in key cities and territory in the eastern Ukrainian region of Donbas.
Russia fueled things by providing leadership, funding, heavy weapons, ammunition, other supplies and, in some cases, regular units of the Russian army to the fight, now about to enter its seventh year.
The conflict has claimed some 14,000 lives as well as causing between 1. and 2 million people to abandon their homes.
While the line of contact between Ukrainian and Russian/Russian proxy forces in Donbas has largely stabilized since then, the conflict continues to simmer.
In most cases, blame for ceasefire violations and for failure to withdraw heavy weapons away from the line of contact lies with the Russians and their proxies.
Domestic Change Petro Poroshenko emerged as victor in a special presidential election in May 2014.
He and his government made early progress in tackling the country’s reform needs.
They stabilized the economy, cleaned up the government’s precarious financial situation , consolidated the banking sector, and introduced a more transparent system for government procurement.
Ukrainians questioned the lack of progress in fighting corruption, in particular the failures to rein in the country’s oligarchs and to bring to account those responsible for the 2014 shootings on the Maidan.
He lost by a landslide in an April 2019 run-off to Volodymyr Zelensky, an actor and political neophyte who promised dramatic progress on the corruption front, reforms to boost economic growth and a dedicated effort to end the conflict in Donbas.
Mr Zelensky’s political party won an absolute majority in the October 2019 parliamentary election, as a wave of young new faces entered the Rada.
First, they need to complete the critical mass of reforms and reduce corruption so that the Ukrainian economy grows faster and living standards can begin to catch up with those of Ukraine’s neighbors in Central Europe and the Baltics.
Mr Zelensky and his inner circle see ending the Donbas conflict as the most urgent priority, as Ukrainians die nearly every week along the line of contact.
The Ukrainian president held his own in a December 9, 2019 meeting with Mr Putin, also joined by the German and French leaders, but a major gulf separates Kyiv and Moscow on key issues, such as when Ukraine will regain sovereignty over all of Donbas and the ultimate status of that region.
Unfortunately, the Kremlin appears content to continue the simmering conflict as a means to pressure, destabilize and distract Kyiv and to make it harder for the Ukrainian leadership to get on with its goal of building a successful and prosperous state.
People close to the Ukrainian president suggest that, if the Russians continue their current course, Ukraine at some point may adopt a Plan B That could entail building a virtual wall along the line of contact and pushing the entire economic burden of occupied Donbas on to Russia.
They can only hope that, as the costs of occupation mount for Russia, including the costs imposed by United States and Western economic and financial sanctions, the Kremlin will look for a different course of action.
Mr Zelensky and his government can, however, effect domestic reform by themselves and take other key steps, such as curbing the oversized political influence of the country’s oligarchs.
The government has secured a number of reform laws over the past six months and has set ambitious plans for domestic and future growth.
If they can deliver on those plans — possible though not guaranteed — Ukraine will develop as a stronger and more resilient state.
That will be a state better able to withstand Russian pressure and a state reflective of the aspirations that triggered the Maidan Revolution.
