During Zelensky’s presidency, Ukraine has enacted difficult economic and European Affairs governance reforms, albeit with some resistance and delays, and grappled with the social and economic consequences of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 pandemic.
Under President Zelensky, Ukraine also has confronted Russia’s ongoing occupation of Ukraine’s Crimea region and parts of eastern Ukraine.
Zelensky has attempted to reinvigorate the conflict resolution process with regard to Russia-occupied eastern Ukraine and has drawn greater international attention to the situation in Ukraine’s occupied Crimea region.
Russia, however, appears no closer to implementing a permanent ceasefire or to withdrawing its military forces from Ukraine.
From FY2015 to FY2020, State Department and United States Agency for International Development bilateral aid allocations to Ukraine were about $418 million a year on average, plus a total of more than $350 million in humanitarian aid since 2014.
For FY2021, State Department and USAID allocations to Ukraine totaled about $464 million.
Since 2014, the United States has provided more than $2. billion in security assistance to Ukraine, mainly though the Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative and Foreign Military Financing.
An amendment to the House-passed version of the FY2022 National Defense Authorization Act would require the President to impose sanctions related to the planning, construction, or operation of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline.
A resolution introduced in the Senate would celebrate the 30th anniversary of Ukraine’s independence and affirm the United States’ “unwavering commitment” to support the Ukrainian government’s efforts to restore Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
For related information, see CRS Report R45415, United States Sanctions on Russia; CRS In Focus IF11138, Russia’s Nord Stream 2 Natural Gas Pipeline to Germany; and CRS In Focus IF11862, Ukrainian Armed Forces.
Forced to confront a Russian invasion and occupation of Ukraine’s Crimea region, a Russian-led separatist conflict in eastern Ukraine, and a tightening of Russian control in the nearby Sea of Azov and Black Sea, Ukraine has developed a military capable of territorial defense, reversed a decline in economic growth, implemented reforms, maintained a democratic path, and gained formal independence for the Orthodox Church of Ukraine.
Slightly smaller than Texas Zelensky’s presidency, Ukraine has enacted Capital: Kyiv difficult economic and governance reforms, Ethnicity: 78% Ukrainian, 17% Russian, 0.5% Crimean albeit with some resistance and delays, and Tatar grappled with the social and economic Languages: Ukrainian , Russian (regional consequences of the Coronavirus Disease status) 2019 pandemic.
State Statistics Service of Ukraine; and appears no closer to implementing a World Bank. permanent ceasefire or to withdrawing its military forces from Ukraine.
The United States has long supported Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty, democratic trajectory, and governance reforms.
Since 2014, many Members of Congress have condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, promoted sanctions against Russia for its actions, and supported increased economic and security aid to Ukraine.
In 2019, United States relations with Ukraine became a prominent issue in United States domestic affairs, as the House of Representatives agreed to articles of impeachment related in part to alleged presidential actions regarding Ukraine; the Senate acquitted President Trump of the charges in 2020.
Political Developments Ukraine, an independent country since 1991, is one of the largest successors, by territory, population, and economy, to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 1 In 2019, the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople recognized the Orthodox Church of Ukraine as an independent church, officially separate from the Russian Orthodox Church.
From Orange Revolution to Revolution of Dignity In 2004, a popular movement known as the Orange Revolution thwarted the efforts of then-President Leonid Kuchma’s team—with Russian support—to fraudulently elect as Kuchma’s successor then-Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych.
Yanukovych agreed to a deal with the opposition that was to lead to an early presidential election, but instead he departed for eastern Ukraine amid government defections.
Ukraine’s parliament voted to remove Yanukovych from office, and he left Ukraine for Russia.
Andrew Wilson, Ukraine’s Orange Revolution ; Anders Aslund and Michael McFaul, Revolution in Orange: The Origins of Ukraine’s Democratic Breakthrough ; Andrew Wilson, Ukraine Crisis: What It Means for the West ; and RFE/RL, “Ukraine Sentences Ex-President Yanukovych in Absentia to 13 Years in Prison,” January 24, 2019.
Ukraine has a mixed presidential-parliamentary system, in which the president shares power with a prime minister appointed by Ukraine’s legislature, the Verkhovna Rada.
Freedom House, Freedom in the World 2021; and Freedom House, Nations in Transit 2021.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Ukraine’s president is Volodymyr Zelensky, previously a popular actor-comedian and producer.
In April 2019, Zelensky defeated incumbent Petro Poroshenko, 73% to 24%, in a second-round presidential election.
Zelensky’s victory appeared to reflect widespread disillusionment with Ukraine’s political establishment.
Many Ukrainians believed Poroshenko had failed to combat corruption and, generally, had not done enough to restore the country’s economic health after almost five years of conflict with Russia.
Zelensky’s appeal stemmed in part from his starring role in a popular television show, Servant of the People, as a schoolteacher who is unexpectedly elected president of Ukraine after a video of him delivering an anti-corruption rant goes viral.
Zelensky is a bilingual Russian and Ukrainian speaker, is of Jewish descent, and supports closer relations with the West.
Another four parties received enough party-list votes to enter the legislature.
These are the eastern Ukrainian-based Opposition Platform–For Life; former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko’s Fatherland; ex-President Poroshenko’s European Solidarity; and Voice, a new reform party.
Poroshenko, a wealthy businessman and member of parliament who supported the Euromaidan protests, won 55% of the popular vote in a May 2014 election to succeed Viktor Yanukovych.
Shmyhal previously served as head of administration in the western Ukrainian region of Ivano-Frankivsk and then as deputy prime minister and minister for community and territorial development.
Prior to working in government, Shmyhal had worked since 2017 for DTEK, a major energy conglomerate owned by Rinat Akhmetov, who is widely considered to be Ukraine’s wealthiest individual.
Shmyhal succeeded Zelensky’s first prime minister, Oleksiy Honcharuk, whose government was in power for six months.
In March 2020, Honcharuk submitted his resignation after Zelensky expressed dissatisfaction with the cabinet.
Zelensky praised the outgoing government for being uncorrupt and hardworking but expressed a lack of confidence in its ability to address mounting challenges, including budgetary shortfalls, industrial production declines, and high utility prices.
Some observers expressed concern about Zelensky’s decision to reshuffle his first government, which had gained the support of international lenders and donors.
Some believed that the reformminded Honcharuk government was not given sufficient time to achieve results.
A related concern was that the reshuffle could strengthen oligarchic influences.
The centrist and non-ideological platform of Zelensky and Servant of the People may have helped them achieve victory in 2019.
However, two years of partially implemented or delayed reforms, a perceived resurgence of oligarchic influence, alleged mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic, and related economic woes all appear to have contributed to a decline in the government’s popularity.
Will ‘New Brains And New Hearts’ Revive the Same Old Problems in Ukraine?,” RFE/RL, March 6, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy 70% or higher.
Ihor Kolomoysky, with whom President Zelensky has had ties , and Rinat Akhmetov.
These divisions reportedly have led on occasion to the party’s inability to secure passage of legislation or approval of cabinet appointments.
In several regions and cities, other parties and political figures, often locally influential politicians, dominate.
In October 2020 local elections, Servant of the People placed first in few regional councils and did not win mayoral elections in any of Ukraine’s major cities.
During Poroshenko’s presidency, the International Monetary Fund praised key reforms, including a reduction of the fiscal deficit, increase in gas prices (retaining subsidies for lower-income households), and reform of the banking system.
Observers also noted progress in public procurement transparency, decentralization, and health care reform.
Oleg Sukhov, “Investigative Show Exposes Influence of Kolomoysky, Akhmetov on Lawmakers,” Kyiv Post, January 14, 2021.
A Reality Check for Decentralization and Electoral Reforms,” Kennan Institute, January 12, 2021.
Achievements and Challenges of Ukraine’s Local Governance Reform , Kennan Institute, July 16, 2018; and Melinda Haring, “Finally Some Good News from Ukraine,” Atlantic Council, June 26, 2018.
The IMF eventually issued two more disbursements under a four-year loan package but did not release any more funds from that package after April 2017.
After taking power in 2019, Zelensky and the Servant of the People government unveiled an ambitious reform program.
In its first several months, the new parliament passed or considered legislation to, among other aims, advance anti-corruption and judicial reforms; accelerate decentralization efforts; introduce fiscal, trade, and pro-business reforms; and pave the way for the privatization of state assets and the establishment of a land market.
Nonetheless, observers expressed concerns about various aspects of the Zelensky government’s initial reform efforts.
Some maintained the rapid pace of lawmaking led to substantive and procedural deficiencies in the legislation.
Others raised concerns about implementation of new laws, especially with regard to reforms facing resistance by wealthy businesspeople, corrupt actors, or the public.
In addition, some observers expressed disapproval of what they considered the government’s pursuit of politically motivated cases against ex-President Poroshenko.
The March 2020 government reshuffle raised concerns about the government’s commitment to reform, but some IMF-backed reform measures soon followed as the COVID-19 pandemic began to impact Ukraine.
First, the parliament dismissed two newly appointed controversial ministers of health and finance who were regarded as obstacles to reform.
Observers expressed concerns about potential backsliding in anti-corruption and judicial reforms and the government’s seeming lack of will or ability to overcome resistance to reforms by oligarchic and other corrupt actors, including within the judiciary.
In 2020, many observers noted what appeared to be increasingly overt resistance to anti-corruption reforms by members of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine and the High Council of Justice , the judiciary’s self-governing body.
Observers also expressed concern about the summer 2020 resignation of the head of the National Bank of Ukraine, Ukraine’s central bank, who said the bank, which had been praised for its independence, had become subject to political pressure.
Near the end of 2020, President Zelensky signaled the start of a new reform drive.
Cabinet reshuffles led to the replacement of three ministers—of economy, infrastructure, and health—deemed to be underperforming and, in July 2021, the resignation after seven years in office of Ukraine’s powerful but unpopular minister of internal affairs, Arsen Avakov.
Hromadske International, “Ukrainian Parliament Passes Land Market Law,” March 31, 2020; and RFE/RL, “Ukraine Allows Farmland Sales for First T ime Since Independence,” July 2, 2021.
Biden Can Help Get It Going Again,” November 19, 2020; and Daryna Krasnolutska and Volodymyr Verbyany, “Ukraine’s Leader Is Being Broken by the System He Vowed to Crush,” Bloomberg News, December 17, 2020.
It’s a Scandal that T hreatens the Country’s Economic Health,” Washington Post, July 11, 2020.
This puts Ukraine among the world’s top 20 countries with the highest number of COVID-19 cases and attributed deaths.
The Ukrainian government began to ease restrictions in summer 2020 but imposed new restrictive measures in December 2020 during an initial surge in cases.
Ukraine’s vaccination drive has lagged behind that of most other European countries.
As of the start of October 2021, about 13% of the population was fully vaccinated.
Anti-corruption Efforts After the 2014 Revolution of Dignity, the Ukrainian government made combating corruption a central focus of its reform agenda.
High levels of corruption reportedly persisted during Poroshenko’s presidency, however, and many officials resisted anti-corruption measures.
The United States and other international stakeholders strongly support Ukraine’s anti-corruption reforms.
Various obstacles have impeded the functioning of these anti-corruption institutions.
As discussed in the sections below, they have met resistance reportedly from within the judiciary and from oligarchic forces, as well as from some government officials who may seek to retain political control over these potentially powerful institutions.
National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine The National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine has encountered repeated resistance from within Ukraine’s government, reportedly due to the agency’s investigative mandate and independence.
In 2019, Ukraine’s Constitutional Court —–which includes some judges suspected of seeking to impede anti-corruption reforms—ruled that the underlying legal basis for many NABU investigations, related to the crime of illicit enrichment, was unconstitutional.
A new law on illicit enrichment enacted later in 2019 allowed new cases to proceed.
John Lough and Vladimir Dubrovskiy, Are Ukraine’s Anti-Corruption Reforms Working?, Chatham House, November 2018; and Oleg Sukhov, “Gov ernment Creates Economic Security Bureau,” Kyiv Post, May 12, 2021.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy In 2020, however, the CCU ruled that former President Poroshenko had lacked the constitutional authority to establish NABU or appoint its director.
The parliament is considering legislation to strengthen NABU’s constitutional grounding and preserve its independence, including through the participation of international experts in hiring NABU’s director.
National Agency on Corruption Prevention After the National Agency on Corruption Prevention was established, asset and income verifications of public officials moved slowly and eventually stalled.
Under Zelensky, the government restructured NAPC and appointed a new director with the aim of boosting the NAPC’s integrity and independence.
In 2020, however, the CCU issued a controversial ruling striking down legislation allowing the NACP to mandate and enforce asset declarations.
Some CCU members and opposition MPs who initiated the case reportedly were under, or faced, the prospect of NACP-related investigations.
The government and parliament restored NACP authority to collect and publish asset declarations but reduced penalties for improper disclosures.
In June 2021, the parliament passed legislation strengthening criminal liability for false declarations.
High Anti-Corruption Court After years of delay, Poroshenko agreed in 2018 to establish the High Anti-Corruption Court , after the United States, the EU, the IMF, and the World Bank called on the government to do so in line with international recommendations.
Observers generally view HACC positively, although it too has faced challenges.
The office of the prosecutor general has removed cases from HACC’s jurisdiction, and the High Council of Justice , the judiciary’s self-governing body, has disciplined a HACC judge for what some observers consider to be politically motivated purposes.
Observers have questioned the professionalism and integrity of some HACC judges.
March 1, 2019; Oleksandra Drik, “Why the West Should Be Worried About Ukraine’s Flagging Fight Against Graft,” Atlantic Council, March 12, 2019; and Ukrinform, “World Bank Welcomes Signing of Law on Illicit Enrichment in Ukraine,” November 26, 2019.
How Zelenskyy Can Save the Anti-corruption Policy of Ukraine,” New Eastern Europe, January 11, 2021.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Specialized Anti-Corruption Prosecutor’s Office During Poroshenko’s presidency, NABU and many observers believed the Specialized AntiCorruption Prosecutor’s Office head lacked sufficient political independence, and concerns emerged that he was hindering the progress of NABU-initiated investigations.
The SAPO head resigned in August 2020, three months before his term in office was to expire.
As of the start of October 2021, the selection process for a new SAPO head was ongoing.
Some contend the government has been seeking to manipulate the selection process, which includes the participation of international experts, to ensure the appointment of a politically loyal candidate.
Justice Sector Reforms Ukraine’s anti-corruption reforms are part of broader reforms to the justice sector.
Some observers and political opponents have criticized the current prosecutor general for allegedly limiting the progress of further prosecutorial reforms and sheltering some government-linked figures from justice.
High Council of Justice/High Qualifications Commission of Judges In July 2021, the parliament passed long-awaited legislation to reform the HCJ, including by establishing an ethics council to oversee appointments to the HCJ, and to reform the High Qualifications Commission of Judges , a commission that hires and fires judges.
Both 39 Oleg Sukhov and Olena Goncharova, “Anti-Corruption Prosecutor Alleged to Have Blocked Cases Against Powerful Suspects,” Kyiv Post, April 6, 2018; Olena Makarenko, “ Ukraine’s Main Anti-Corruption Prosecutor Keeps Office Despite Gross Violations of Professional Ethics,” Euromaidan Press, July 27, 2018; and Oleg Sukhov, “Criminal Case Against Anti-Corruption Prosecutor Kholodnytsky Closed,” Kyiv Post, January 29, 2019.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy the ethics council and the HQCJ hiring committee are to include international experts.
Under Zelensky, an initial judicial reform law had been enacted in 2019, but HCJ and CCU decisions prevented the law from taking effect.
After the CCU issued the above-mentioned rulings against anticorruption institutions in 2020, Zelensky called on parliament to disband the court, reform it, and repopulate it with new judges.
He then suspended the CCU chairman and, in March 2021, cancelled the 2013 decrees by which then-President Yanukovych appointed the chairman and another judge.
In July 2021, Ukraine’s Supreme Court overruled Zelensky’s order; the government has appealed the decision.
Kyiv District Administrative Court Zelensky also has said he is seeking to restructure the Kyiv District Administrative Court , which observers consider to be especially plagued by corruption.
In April 2021, the government introduced a bill to eliminate KDAC and replace it with a new court composed of new judges.
The KDAC chairman and other judges have been charged twice for crimes including obstruction of justice, bribery, and abuse of power.
Efforts to arrest or prosecute them have been unsuccessful for unclear reasons.
Atlantic Council, October 24, 2019; and Oleg Sukhov, “Constitutional Court Cancels Most of Zelensky’s Judicial Reform,” Kyiv Post, March 12, 2020.
In addition, government officials will have to report all interactions with them.
The parliament passed the law a day after one of Zelensky’s closest aides survived a shooting attack that some officials and observers speculated could be linked to the government’s efforts to reduce oligarchs’ influence.
Owned companies seized by Russian proxies in Russia-occupied eastern Ukraine. mogul) Viktor Medvedchuk.
Former for allegedly financing terrorism. governor of Dnipropetrovsk region.
Controls television station Medvedchuk and others were said to that used to air Zelensky’s media programs.
Under U.S. benefit from energy trade with the investigation and subject to United States visa sanctions.
Connected separatist regimes of eastern Ukraine companies and colleagues under Ukrainian investigation.
Friend of Russian include three television networks President Vladimir Putin.
Subject to Ukrainian and United States sanctions many considered to be sources of and under Ukrainian indictment.
Former officially owned by one of president and head of opposition European Solidarity party.
Ukrainian investigations that supporters consider to be politically motivated.
According to Forbes, seven Ukrainians were billionaires at the start of 2021; these include (in addition to Akhmetov, charges in May 2021.
Ihor Kolomoysky, with whom President Zelensky has had ties, also has been targeted, although not directly.
In 2020, legislation was enacted to prevent the possible return of PrivatBank, Ukraine’s largest commercial bank, to Kolomoysky and another previous owner.
The National Bank of Ukraine nationalized PrivatBank 52 Oleksiy Sorokin, “Security Council Says Ukraine Has 13 Oligarchs,” Kyiv Post, May 11, 2021; and InterfaxUkraine, “Rada Passes at First Reading Bill on De-Oligarchization,” July 1, 2021.
Ukraine’s President Faces a Political T rip Wire,” RFE/RL, May 14, 2021.
Authorities indicted three former PrivatBank executives on embezzlement charges.
Authorities also launched an investigation against a state-owned electricity company in which Kolomoysky previously exerted influence.
In addition, Servant of the People expelled from its parliamentary faction a leading supporter of Kolomoysky, Oleksandr Dubinsky.
A third target has been Dmytro Firtash, who reportedly has controlled much of Ukraine’s domestic gas distribution network, as well as chemical and metal companies.
In June 2021, the NSDC imposed sanctions on Firtash, who currently resides in Austria, where he is fighting extradition to the United States.
The Ukrainian government’s actions in part align with United States actions, including sanctions, against these individuals.
In 2014, the Obama Administration imposed sanctions on Medvedchuk for his role in Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and indicted Firtash on bribery-related charges.
In January 2021, the Trump Administration imposed sanctions on the Kolomoysky-linked Dubinsky in connection with “a Russia-linked foreign influence network” that allegedly sought to interfere in the 2020 United States presidential election.
Some observers have raised concerns about the Ukrainian government’s “de-oligarchization” policy.
They say it is too personalized and selective, does not address core causes of corruption or oligarchic influence in Ukrainian politics, and potentially runs afoul of free speech considerations.
Conflict with Russia65 Many observers believe that of all the post-Soviet states, Ukraine’s independence has been the most difficult for Russians to accept.
Many Russians traditionally considered much of Ukraine to be a historical province of Russia and Ukrainians to be close ethnic brethren.
Atlantic Council, July 10, 2021; and Olena Removska, “Zelenskiy’s ‘De-Oligarchization’ Goal Important, Path to Success ‘Difficult,’ United States Official Says,” RFE/RL, July 24, 2021.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Yanukovych appeared to make a decisive move toward Russia, postponing an association agreement to establish closer political and economic ties with the EU and agreeing instead to substantial financial assistance from Moscow.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine occurred soon after Yanukovych fled to Russia in February 2014.
Militants forcibly took power in several cities and towns, announced the establishment of two separatist entities (the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic, or DPR, and Luhansk People’s Republic, or LPR), and gradually expanded their control in the two regions.
Ukrainian government and volunteer forces fought back, restoring state control over a portion of each region but suffering some major defeats, including in battles in which regular Russian forces reportedly participated.
In 2019, one study estimated that about half the pre-conflict population of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions were living under the control of Russian proxies.
Many observers believe that Moscow sought to complicate Ukraine’s domestic development and foreign policy and to increase Russian leverage in potential negotiations over Ukraine’s future trajectory.
To date, the conflict has led to more than 10,000 combatant deaths and almost 3,400 civilian fatalities.
Ukraine has registered more than 1. million people as internally displaced persons.
The conflict’s intensity has declined since 2015, but sporadic fighting has continued.
A July 2020 cease-fire led to a reduced number of cease-fire violations and casualties for several months.
A new round of hostilities occurred in March 2021, as Russia amassed troops along its border with Ukraine and in occupied Crimea.
The size and sustained nature of Russian troop deployments greatly concerned Ukrainian and Western governments.
Crimea Since 2014, Russia has significantly increased its military presence in Crimea and suppressed local dissent.
Russia’s military forces in Crimea include ground, artillery, coastal defense, air defense, and fighter units.
Additionally, Russia has increased the size and capability of its Black Sea Fleet, headquartered in Sevastopol.
The Ukrainian government and state-owned companies have pursued claims in international arbitration courts concerning the violation of their rights in Crimea and in nearby maritime waters.
Much of the international community does not recognize Russia’s purported annexation of Crimea.
Many have condemned Russia’s occupation as a violation of international law and of Russia’s own international commitments.
Patrick T ucker, “ United States Intelligence Officials and Satellite Photos Detail Russian Military Buildup on Crimea,” Defense One, June 12, 2019; and Ukrinform, “Already 31,500 Russian T roops Deployed in Occupied Crimea,” November 7, 2019.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy against Ukraine.
Since 2014, the United Nations General Assembly has voted several times, most recently in 2020, to affirm Ukraine’s territorial integrity, condemn the “temporary occupation” of Crimea, and reaffirm nonrecognition of its annexation.
Eastern Ukraine In contrast to its policy toward Crimea, Moscow officially recognizes the areas it controls in eastern Ukraine as Ukrainian territory.
After the crossing points began to reopen, authorities in the Russia-controlled areas imposed new restrictions, limiting total crossings to under 100,000 per month.
The agreements are 80 T hese assurances were provided in connection with Ukraine’s assent to the removal of nuclear weapons from its territory.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy supported by a broader international grouping known as the Normandy Four (or Normandy Format): France, Germany, Russia, and Ukraine.
Minsk Agreements The Minsk agreements were signed in September 2014 and February 2015.
The 2014 agreements included the 12point Minsk Protocol, signed days after Russia-led forces defeated Ukrainian government and volunteer forces in a major battle, and a follow-up memorandum outlining measures for a cease-fire and international monitoring mission.
The Minsk Protocol failed to end fighting or prompt a political resolution to the conflict.
Leaders from Ukraine and Russia, as well as from France and Germany, met again in February 2015, amid another major battle, to develop a more detailed “package of measures” known as Minsk-2.
Although Minsk-2 established a specific timeline and/or sequencing for several of its measures, the sequencing of some key measures was ambiguous.
United Nations Security Council Resolution 2202 endorses and calls on all parties to fully implement the package of measures.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Ukrainian President Zelensky initially sought to reinvigorate what had been a relatively dormant conflict resolution process.
Although the July 2020 cease-fire was more successful than previous ones, armed hostilities have continued.
In addition, efforts to settle thornier issues, including the withdrawal of Russian forces and the legal status of Russia-controlled areas, have not been successful.
After Russia’s spring 2021 military buildup along the border with Ukraine and in Crimea, President Zelensky called for a reconsideration of the Minsk process and the expansion of the Normandy Format to include the United States and others.
Ukrainian officials have underlined the need for a permanent cease-fire and withdrawal of Russian official and unofficial forces, both on principle and as a necessary condition for establishing a secure environment to hold free and fair local elections in the Russia-controlled regions of eastern Ukraine.
The Russian government, for its part, continues to deny a substantial military presence in eastern Ukraine and disavows responsibility for cease-fire violations and the failure to withdraw heavy weapons.
Russia has called on Ukraine, irrespective of the security environment and the presence of Russian forces, to fulfill certain political measures, including a permanent grant of special status to the nongovernment-controlled areas and related constitutional reforms.
In eastern Ukraine, an international monitoring mission monitors cease-fire violations and the presence of heavy weaponry within defined security zones.
The SMM issues daily and spot monitoring reports on the security situation and facilitates the delivery of humanitarian aid.
The OSCE also operated an Observer Mission at the Russian Checkpoints Gukovo and Donetsk to monitor border crossings to and from eastern Ukraine.
In September 2021, Russian authorities announced that Russia would not support a renewal of this second mission’s mandate after September 30, 2021.
In 2018, Russian President Putin opened a 12-mile-long bridge over the Kerch Strait linking Russia to occupied Crimea.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy accommodate an existing shipping lane, but it imposed new limits on the size of ships that transit the strait and enables Russia to prevent passage to and from the Sea of Azov.
Russia interferes with commercial traffic traveling to and from Ukrainian ports on the Sea of Azov in Mariupol and Berdyansk, which export steel, grain, and coal.
In 2018, Russian forces forcibly prevented Ukrainian naval vessels from passing through the Kerch Strait to reach Ukrainian shores, illegally detained 24 crew members for 10 months, and returned their heavily damaged ships after two more months.
Ukraine and its international partners considered the incident to be a major violation of international law and an escalation in Russia’s efforts to control maritime access to eastern Ukraine.
In 2019, the U.N.-established International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea issued an order requiring Russia to release the sailors and ships.
As Russia Monopolizes Azov Sea, Mariupol Feels Heightened Danger,” Kyiv Post, August 3, 2018; Ukrinform, “How Russia Violates Security in Azov -Black Sea Region,” June 1, 2020; and Ihor Kabanenko, “Russia’s Strategy in the Sea of Azov: T he Kerch Bridge, Artificial Shipping Delays and Continued Harm to Ukraine,” Jamestown Foundation, January 14, 2021.
T he Military Aspects,” Centre for Eastern Studies , November 28, 2018; and RFE/RL, “ Ukrainian Envoy Says Russian Helicopter Fired On Navy Vessel In Black Sea In 2018 ,” February 13, 2020.
The Soviet Union’s collapse led to a severe economic contraction in Ukraine and other post-Soviet states.
Ukraine’s economy recovered for much of the 2000s but was hit hard by the 2008-2009 global financial crisis.
After returning to growth, the economy stagnated in 2012-2013 and declined again after Russia’s 2014 invasion; GDP fell by 7% in 2014 and 10% in 2015.
In recent years, Ukraine’s economy has improved, due in part to international assistance, including IMF loan disbursements worth more than $16 billion.
During these years, observers noted several positive trends, including declining inflation, rising incomes, growing retail trade, increased agricultural exports, and growing international reserves and a strengthening currency, in part due to an increase of foreign investment in Ukraine’s sovereign bonds.
In 2020, Ukraine’s GDP declined by an estimated 4% due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The World Bank stated that the economic impact of the pandemic “appears to be less 95 Ukraine’s gross domestic product reportedly dropped by over 60% from 1989 to 1999.
Modest Growth, Low Inflation, and Possible Devaluation Return,” UNIAN Information Agency, December 31, 2019; and Anders Aslund, “Ukraine’s Underrated Economy Is Poised for A Strong 2020,” Atlantic Council, January 6, 2020.
In August 2021, Ukraine’s international reserves reached their highest level since 2012.
In 2020, the National Bank of Ukraine reported that Poland was the largest source of Ukrainian remittances, followed by the United States, the United Kingdom, Russia, and the Czech Republic.1 Trade In 2020, Ukraine’s largest merchandise trading partner was the EU, which accounted for about 39% of total trade.
Ukraine’s main exports include cereals, iron and steel, sunflower oil, iron ores, electrical equipment and parts, and industrial machinery.
Ukraine is one of the world’s leading grain exporters and the world’s largest exporter of sunflower oil.
According to the National Bank of Ukraine, total FDI was $49. billion at the end of 2020.
FDI inflows in 2019 were mainly in industry, wholesale and retail trade, financial and insurance services, and real estate.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Netherlands, and Switzerland.
FDI inflows declined heavily in 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic.4 Energy Ukraine has significant energy resources, although the sector historically has performed below its potential, given an environment of low domestic energy prices, subsidies, high consumption, and corruption.
Ukraine’s primary energy mix consists of about 32% natural gas, 30% coal, and 21% nuclear.
Ukraine produces about two-thirds of its total energy supply, including about twothirds of its natural gas and 55% of its coal.6 Prior to Russia’s 2014 invasion, Ukraine depended on Russian imports for more than half its total consumption of natural gas.
Observers contend that traditionally Russia used gas price hikes, debt repayments, and cutoffs as leverage in disputes with various Ukrainian governments.
After Russia’s invasion, Ukraine’s gas usage and, consequently, dependence on Russian gas declined, due to lower industrial production, the halting of gas supplies to Russia-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine, and higher tariffs.
Ongoing priorities include strengthening the independence of the energy regulator, increasing competition and transparency in the electricity sector, and facilitating private investment in oil and natural gas development.
RFE/RL, September 15, 2019; and Ihor Orel, “Ukraine’s Plans to Get Off Energy Dependence Needle,” UNIAN Information Agency, January 22, 2020.
Alexander Query, “Ukraine’s Naftogaz Announces Completion of Gas System Unbundling,” Kyiv Post, January 2, 2020.
Observers speculated that the government wanted to install a more politically compliant official to run Naftogaz, one of Ukraine’s largest taxpayers.
Members of Naftogaz’s supervisory board announced their resignations in protest but subsequently agreed to remain in their positions for at least one year.
In June 2021, Ukraine’s National Agency on Corruption Prevention ruled that Vitrenko’s appointment was not in compliance with Ukrainian law; Naftogaz announced it would challenge the decision.
The United States, the European Union, and other international stakeholders expressed concerns about Kobolev’s dismissal.
Alexander Query, “Vitrenko In, Kobolyev Out at Naftogaz,” Kyiv Post, April 30, 2021; United States Department of State, “Secretary Antony J Blinken with Olena Frolyak of ICTV,” May 6, 2021; and Reuters, “Naftogaz Supervisory Board Head Supports New CEO’s Suspension,” June 16, 2021.
Gas Transit to Europe and the Nord Stream 2 Pipeline Ukraine is a transit state for Russian natural gas exports to Europe.
Before the 2011 opening of the first Nord Stream pipeline from Russia to Germany via the Baltic Sea, most of Russia’s natural gas exports to Europe transited Ukraine.
Since the opening of the first Nord Stream pipeline, about 40%-50% of these exports have transited Ukraine.2 In December 2019, Gazprom, Naftogaz, and a new Gas Transmission System Operator of Ukraine renewed a contract for the transit of Russian natural gas to Europe from 2020 to 2024.
In addition, Gazprom agreed to accept the ruling of an international arbitration court concerning several trade disputes with Naftogaz and paid the latter $2. billion in damages and interest.
Construction resumed at the end of 2020 and reportedly was completed in September 2021.
Additional steps, including certification by German authorities, are required before the pipeline will be able to transport gas.6 The Ukrainian government opposes the construction and operation of Nord Stream 2.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy routes that transit Ukraine.
This will not necessarily increase Ukraine’s vulnerability to energy supply cutoffs, as Ukraine stopped importing natural gas directly from Russia in 2016.
It could lead to declines in transit revenues, however, and increase Ukraine’s strategic vulnerability, if reduced dependence on transit leads Moscow to act more aggressively in Ukraine.
The EU has imposed sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine and supported Ukraine against Russia’s maritime aggression.
In addition, EU member states provided an additional €1. billion in bilateral assistance.
In 2020, the EU announced it would provide more than €190 million in emergency support to Ukraine to address the COVID-19 pandemic.
Under ex-President Yanukovych, Ukraine adopted a nonbloc status, rejecting aspirations of NATO membership.
After Russia’s 2014 invasion, Ukraine’s parliament rejected this non-bloc status.
Ukraine contributed to the International Security Assistance Force and follow-on Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan, the counterterrorism Operation Active Endeavour maritime mission, and the antipiracy Operation Ocean Shield.
Ukraine also participates in the NATO Response Force, a rapid reaction force.
In 2017, Ukraine’s parliament voted to make cooperation with NATO a foreign policy priority.7 Ukraine’s 2020 National Security Strategy includes as a priority the development of a special partnership with NATO and the pursuit of NATO membership.
In 2021, President Zelensky and other Ukrainian officials called on NATO to grant Ukraine a Membership Action Plan, which they see as a stepping stone to membership.8 Closer integration with the EU and NATO does not appear to have enabled Ukraine to improve its near-term prospects for membership in these organizations.
Kyiv Post, December 26, 2014; and RFE/RL, “Ukrainian Parliament Makes NAT O Integration a Priority,” June 8, 2017.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Ukraine also faces a challenge to NATO membership.
In 2008, NATO members formally agreed that Ukraine and Georgia would become members of NATO, but neither state has been granted a clear path to or timeline for membership.
Many observers believe NATO will not move forward with membership as long as Russia occupies Ukrainian territory and the conflict remains unresolved.
Since 2014, about 40%-50% of opinion poll respondents support membership in NATO (compared to about 25%30% against); these polls do not include occupied Crimea and Russia-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine, where support for NATO membership likely would be lower even in the absence of conflict.1 U.S.-Ukraine Relations United States relations with Ukraine are deep and multifaceted.
In September 2019, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced that the House would begin an impeachment inquiry related in part to alleged presidential actions regarding Ukraine.
The Biden Administration has sought to renew close relations with Ukraine.
Secretary of State Antony Blinken visited Ukraine in May 2021, and Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm represented the administration at the August 2021 Crimea Platform Summit in Kyiv.
United States officials also announced the extension of a U.S.-Ukraine Science and Technology Agreement and the establishment of a new secure communication line through the National and Nuclear Risk Reduction Center.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Economy,” September 1, 2021; and White House, “Background Press Call by Senior Administration Officials on the President’s Upcoming Meeting with President Zelenskyy of Ukraine,” September 1, 2021.
United States officials have called attention to Russia’s human rights abuses in occupied Crimea.
Also see United States Department of State, “SeventyFifth Anniversary of the Welles Declaration,” July 22, 2015.
Ambassador Kurt Volker resigned from this position in September 2019 prior to the start of the presidential impeachment inquiry in the House of Representatives.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy criticize Russia for failing to fulfill its commitments under the Minsk agreements and condemn Russia’s aggressive actions in and around Ukraine.
On President Trump’s last full day in office, the Trump Administration imposed sanctions on a Russian-related entity and a pipelaying vessel for participating the construction of Nord Stream 2.
The Biden Administration imposed a second round of sanctions on that entity and vessel, as well as on 21 other entities and vessels.
The Biden Administration appears to have shifted its focus away from working to prevent the completion of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline to mitigating the potential negative impacts of an operational pipeline.
This includes by issuing a U.S.-Germany joint statement in July 2021 that pledges, among other things, to bolster Ukraine’s energy security and to support sanctions in response to further acts of Russian aggression toward Ukraine.
Case of Motor Sich Since 2018, United States officials reportedly have sought to deter Ukraine from approving the sale to Chinese companies of Motor Sich, a Ukrainian company that is a major producer of airplane and helicopter engines.
In 2017, official documents revealed that a Chinese state-linked company had acquired majority ownership of Motor Sich.
A Ukrainian court froze a percentage of the Chinese-owned shares after the Security Service of Ukraine said the company was intending to move Motor Sich’s assets abroad.
U.S. officials warned Ukraine that the sale could lead China to displace Ukraine as a leading aircraft engine exporter.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky has taken further steps to prevent China’s takeover of Motor Sich.
In 2020, Ukraine’s Anti-Monopoly Committee rejected proposals to formally establish joint Chinese-Ukrainian control over Motor Sich.
In February 2021, the Ukrainian government imposed sanctions on the pertinent Chinese companies and their owners (following a United States decision to place one of the companies on the United States Military T rump Administration did not appoint a successor, and neither has the Biden Administration.
In March 2021, Ukrainian authorities said the government intended to take control of Motor Sich.
Department of Commerce, “Commerce Adds China National Offshore Oil Corporation to the Entity List and Skyrizon to the Military End-User List,” press release, January 14, 2021; and Brett Forrest and Alan Cullison, “Ukraine to Nationalize Defense Firm, Keeping China Out in a Nod to U.S.,” Wall Street Journal, March 16, 2021.
During the Obama Administration, United States officials criticized the Yanukovych government for suppressing the Euromaidan protests.
United States officials supported a negotiated resolution to Ukraine’s domestic crisis and the establishment of an interim government before Yanukovych fled to Russia in 2014.
In 2015, then-Vice President Biden reportedly told Ukrainian officials the United States would withhold a $1 billion loan guarantee if Ukraine’s thenprosecutor general did not resign.
In 2017, then-Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said, “It serves no purpose for Ukraine to fight for its body in Donbas if it loses its soul to corruption.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy The Biden Administration has stated the United States is a “full partner” in Ukraine’s domestic reform efforts.
Amounts include development and security assistance provided via regular bilateral programming accounts.
For FY2016, State/USAID amount includes a loan guarantee subsidy cost of $290 million.
United States assistance to Ukraine extends beyond State Department and USAID funding.
In all, the United States has allocated more than $2.5 billion in security assistance to Ukraine since Russia’s 2014 invasion.3 In addition, the United States government has provided more than $351 million in humanitarian assistance since FY2014 to assist internally displaced persons and other victims of conflict.4 Nonproliferation and threat reduction assistance administered by the Department of Energy and the Department of Defense has totaled more than $205 million in obligated funds since FY2014.
USAID Loan Guarantees; and USAID, “ USAID Announces United States Issuance of $1 Billion Loan Guarantee to the Government of Ukraine,” press release, September 30, 2016.
According to media reports, these missiles were to be stored away from the frontline.
Also see United States Department of State, “ United States Security Cooperation with Ukraine,” July 2, 2021.
Since 2015, United States forces from the United States Army and National Guard, together with military trainers from United States allied states, have provided training and mentoring to members of the Ukrainian Armed Forces as part of a Joint Multinational Training Group-Ukraine.4 The United States and Ukraine host regular joint military exercises in Ukraine with the participation of NATO allies and partners.
The United States and Ukraine are planning to hold a fourth Bilateral Cybersecurity Dialogue in Kyiv in October 2021.
Michael Sword, “Secretary of Army Witnesses Rapid T rident 2011 in Ukraine,” United States Army, August 5, 2011; and United States Army Europe and Africa, “Exercise Rapid T rident 20 to be Held in September,” September 14, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy interagency teams visited Ukraine in 2016 regarding 2015 cyberattacks against Ukrainian power companies.8 Bilateral Trade The United States granted Ukraine permanent normal trade relations status in 2006.
The value of United States merchandise exports to Ukraine—mostly motor vehicles, coal, and industrial machinery— was $1. billion in 2020.
The value of United States merchandise imports from Ukraine—primarily iron and steel—was $1. billion in 2020.
In 2020, United States coal accounted for about 28% of Ukraine’s total coal imports.
Stalin’s War on Ukraine ; Commission on the Ukraine Famine, Investigation of the Ukrainian Famine, 1932-1933, April 22, 1988; and Askold Krushelnycky, “How Washington Holodomor Monument Won the Race Against T ime,” Kyiv Post, February 23, 2020.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy During Ukraine’s 2014 Revolution of Dignity, Congress supported a peaceful resolution to the political turmoil.
The act required or authorized a variety of expanded sanctions; authorized increased aid to Ukraine; and authorized an expansion of RFE/RL and VOA broadcasting throughout the post-Soviet states.
For Senate resolutions, see S.Res. and S.Res. in 2014, and S.Res. and S.Res. in 2015.
In 2018, Members of the 115th Congress agreed to resolutions condemning Russia’s attack on Ukrainian naval vessels and calling for the cancellation of Nord Stream 2 and the imposition of sanctions on entities for investing in or supporting the project (H.Res.
This act would, among other measures, appoint a Special Envoy for Ukraine and authorize $300 million a year for FMF assistance and $50 million a year for other aid from FY2022 through FY2026.
This act would, among other measures, seek to deny United States visas to Russian officials if they committed particularly severe violations of religious freedom in occupied Ukrainian territory.
Khanna Leads Bipartisan Members in Condemning Anti-Semitism in Europe,” April 25, 2018; and Rep.
The E.O.s also establish sanctions on Russian government officials and persons who operate in the Russian arms sector, other key sectors of the Russian economy, or occupied Crimea.
Among those designated are Ukrainian individuals and entities, including former government officials and Russian proxy authorities in occupied Crimea and Russia-controlled areas in eastern Ukraine.
SSIDES and UFSA contain additional provisions the executive branch could use, including potentially wide-reaching secondary sanctions against foreign individuals and entities that facilitate significant transactions for Russia sanctions designees.
Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy construction of Russian energy export pipelines, including Nord Stream 2.
On January 19, 2021, the Trump Administration imposed sanctions on the Russian vessel Fortuna, which Gazprom was using to complete construction of Nord Stream 2, and its corporate owner.
PEESA, as amended, establishes sanctions on foreign persons whom the President determines have sold, leased, provided, or facilitated the provision of vessels for the purpose of subsea pipelaying activities related to the construction of Nord Stream 2 and TurkStream, or any successor pipeline.
As amended, PEESA also targets those who provide underwriting services or insurance, or who provide certain upgrades or installation services.
Sanctions do not apply to nonbusiness entities of the EU, member states, or some other non-EU governments.
In May 2021, the Administration designated 13 more vessels and 4 entities under PEESA; in August 2021, it designated another four entities and vessels.
Some Members of Congress have urged the Administration to impose additional sanctions to prevent the pipeline from becoming operational.
Ukraine and other countries, including Australia, Canada, Japan, Norway, and Switzerland, also have imposed sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine.
Outlook More than seven years after Ukraine’s Euromaidan protests and Russia’s invasion, Ukraine continues to grapple with a number of internal and external challenges.
CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress.
It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress.
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role.
However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.
