Here, Professor Serhy Yekelchyk, an expert in Ukrainian history and Russian-Ukrainian relations, explains nine milestone moments in the history of Ukraine and Russia…AdvertisementRussia and Ukraine have been embroiled in conflict for the past eight years – in 2014, Russia took advantage of political turmoil in the neighbouring country to seize and establish military control over Ukraine’s southern Crimean peninsula.
An ensuing war – between Ukraine’s military and Russian-backed rebels and Russian troops in Ukraine’s two eastern regions collectively known as the Donbas – never formally ended, and to date an estimated 14,000 people have been killed and an estimated 1. million displaced.A full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine is currently underway, following a huge build-up of troops along the Ukrainian border.
Russia’s president Putin denied planning an invasion during that troop build-up.
Russia’s Deputy Foreign Minister, Sergei Ryabkov, compared the situation to the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, a tense 13-day standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union over the placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba, which historian Mark White described as the most dangerous confrontation in human history.In January, Russian officials issued an ultimatum to the west demanding written guarantees against Nato’s further eastern expansion.
Kyivan RusAt some point in the late 9th century, a group of Norsemen calling themselves Rus established control over the East Slavic communities in what is now Northwest Russia, then moved down the Dnieper River to make the city of Kyiv, in what is now Ukraine, their capital.
Historians call this large medieval state Kyivan Rus.The Norse elite soon assimilated into the local Slavic population, which began to refer to itself as the people of Rus, or Rusyns.
The heart of the Rus state was present-day central Ukraine; Moscow was established in the 12th century in what was then a far-flung northeastern frontier.
In 988, Grand Prince Volodimer , who died in 1015, accepted Christianity from Byzantium.
Few Rusyns read or spoke the literary language of the church and state, Old Church Slavonic.
Ukraine is located in eastern Europe between Russia and the EU/Nato member states Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania.
Ukraine also has a borders with Belarus in the north and Moldova to the south.
Ukraine and Russia are two independent countries, which emerged with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
But as a former Soviet republic, Ukraine has deep social, cultural, and economic ties with Russia.
Nevertheless, until recently most urban centres and industrial areas were predominantly Russophone, except for the solidly Ukrainian-speaking westernmost regions.
This began changing in the 2000s, with new generations going through the Ukrainian school system.
Russian aggression and the subsequent introduction of Ukrainian language legislation have accelerated the switch to Ukrainian in all spheres of life.
The overwhelming majority of the world considers Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014 an unlawful occupation.
Russia’s seizure of Crimea was the first time since the Second World War that a European state annexed the territory of another.
Treaty of Pereiaslav Exploiting the late 14th-century decline of Mongol power, the Grand Principality of Moscow and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania divided the former Rus lands.
A new social group of Ukrainian Cossacks developed on the southern frontier of Poland, guarding it against Crimean Tatar raids.
By the early 17th century, the Orthodox Christian population of the Ukrainian lands had become antagonised by Catholic Poland’s religious policies and the spread of serfdom – a form of slavery in which peasants were bound to the land and sold with it.
A 1648 Cossack rebellion led by Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky became a mass social and religious war against Polish rule, resulting in the creation of the Hetmanate, a Cossack polity nominally autonomous under the Polish king but independent in fact.Searching for allies against Poland, Khmelnytsky accepted the “protection” of the Orthodox Russian tsar in the 1654 Treaty of Pereiaslav.
Keith Lowe on the long roots of the 2022 crisisPortrait of the Cossack Hetman of Ukraine Bohdan Khmelnytsky , found in the Collection of State Museum of Architecture, History and Art, Vladimir.
The Ems ActIn 1764, Catherine II abolished the Hetmanate to erase the last remnants of Ukrainian autonomy, and the Russian army destroyed the Cossack stronghold on the Dnieper.
Cossack officers could make claims to noble status – the empire agreed to accept them as equal to Russian nobles as long as they could provide the relevant paperwork – but Ukrainian peasants eventually became enserfed.During the partitions of Poland in the late 18th century, Catherine acquired a large stretch of Ukrainian lands that Poland had retained after 1654.
As the institutional legacy of the Hetmanate was being dismantled, new interest in Ukrainian history and folklore developed among intellectuals under the influence of pan-European Romanticism.
During the 1840s, Ukraine’s national bard, Taras Shevchenko , published his first poems in Ukrainian and subsequently co-founded a secret political society that discussed a free Slavic federation and the abolition of serfdom.The Ukrainian national revival was also underway in the westernmost Rus lands, which passed from Poland to the Austrian Empire.
Worried Russian authorities responded in 1863 by banning the publication of educational literature written in the Ukrainian language.
In 1876, Tsar Alexander II , while holidaying at the bathing resort of Bad Ems in Germany, signed the Ems Act, which banned all publishing in the Ukrainian language.
Ukrainian patriots now began using ‘Ukrainians’ as an ethnic designation to signify their distinctness from Russians.Portrait of Empress Catherine II in the 1780s, found in the collection of State Hermitage, St.
Ukrainian independenceWith the collapse of the Russian monarchy in 1917 under the strain of war and political discord, patriotic Ukrainians established their coordinating body, the Central Rada , which soon developed into a revolutionary parliament.
The Russian Provisional Government granted Ukraine autonomy under the name of the Ukrainian People’s Republic , but the Bolsheviks subsequently refused to recognise it and invaded Ukraine in order to include it in the Soviet state.The UNR declared full independence in January 1918 and signed a peace treaty with the Central Powers in Brest before the Bolsheviks did the same.
The UNR could not survive the titanic clash between the Russian Reds and Whites during the Russian civil war , as neither power recognised Ukrainian sovereignty, but the precedent of Ukrainian independence forced the Bolsheviks to create a Soviet Ukrainian Republic which in 1922 became a founding member of the Soviet Union.However, in the early 1930s Stalin returned to the unfinished task of crushing the Ukrainian political nation, which developed during the Revolution.
Some 4 million Ukrainian peasants perished in the state-engineered famine of 1932–33, which in Ukraine is known as the Holodomor and considered a genocide – an interpretation increasingly accepted worldwide, but which Russia rejects.
Historical author Helen Rappaport explains why the last Russian tsar and his family met a violent end in 1918 and considers whether Britain could have saved the Romanovs from their fate51945: The enlarged Ukrainian Soviet Socialist RepublicFollowing up on his agreement with Hitler on the division of East-Central Europe between them, Stalin invaded Poland in September 1939 and incorporated into the Ukrainian SSR the Ukrainian lands that Poland had kept after its brief war with the Bolsheviks in 1919, a stalemate which ended Lenin’s dream of the Red cavalry bringing the revolution to Europe.
At the Yalta Conference in 1945, Churchill and Roosevelt allowed Stalin to keep these territories.
Khrushchev thereby achieved a longstanding aim of Ukrainian patriots to create a united Ukraine, but pursued a course of cultural assimilation into Russia rather than promoting Ukrainian autonomy.
Winston Churchill, Franklin D Roosevelt and Joseph Stalin sit for photographs.954: The transfer of the Crimean PeninsulaAlthough attached by land only to Ukraine, Crimea became an autonomous republic within Russia in 1921, partly because of the peninsula’s strategic significance.
Neither Russians nor Ukrainians constituted a majority there, and in the 1920s the Soviets cultivated the culture of the Crimean Tatars, who had lived on the peninsula since the 13th century and whose Crimean Khanate the Russian Empire conquered in 1783, to impress the Western colonies and newly independent states in Asia with their seemingly benevolent policies.When the Red Army retook Crimea from Nazi Germany in 1944, however, Stalin ordered a forced deportation of the Tatars, which many historians consider genocidal.
As a result of this deportation, ethnic Russians became a numerical majority virtually overnight.
Keith Lowe explains the ways in which today’s conflict between Russia and Ukraine can be traced back to the Second World War and decisions made in the years that followed71991: The collapse of the Soviet UnionWhen Mikhail Gorbachev’s loosening of ideological controls resulted in the mass rejection of Soviet communism, Ukrainian and Russian democratic activists worked together to usher in the new politics, such as freedom of speech and free elections.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin’s administration did not try to preserve the Soviet federation but, rather, sought an independent Russia.
This made Yeltsin a natural ally of President Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine , but only as long as both rejected the Soviet legacy.The Ukrainian referendum in December 1991 spelled the end of the union, and Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus initiated its formal dissolution.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation was created on the signing by 12 founder members of the document known as the Washington Treaty on 4 April 1949.
They calculated that the local Russian majority would support the peninsula’s incorporation into Russia, attracted by higher salaries and better career options without the need to study Ukrainian.
But the sham referendum on joining Russia produced implausible results, and the world community, aside from a few pro-Russian outliers like North Korea, Syria, and Venezuela, decisively condemned the annexation.Facing punitive western sanctions, Russian authorities in Crimea began to repress local Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar activists.
Having ensured its control over Crimea, Russia also fomented rebellions in other southeastern Ukrainian provinces, where the dominant regional parties have long cultivated pro-Russian attitudes.
But this strategy only worked in the Donbas, a depressed industrial region with a Russian-speaking majority.
Heavily armed soldiers displaying no identifying insignia maintain watch in a street in the centre of Simferopol, Ukraine, the Crimean capital, 1 March 2014.
That month, Russian troops took control of Ukraine’s Crimean region before formally annexing the peninsula.
The current charter affirms the American commitment to enhancing Ukraine’s security in “countering Russian aggression”, but the specific measures listed in it focus on United States assistance in reforming the Ukrainian army and data-sharing.
No existing treaties require the United States to defend Ukraine in case of war.
Several hundred US, Canadian, British, and other European military instructors are training Ukrainian army personnel, primarily in defensive and de-mining techniques at the Yavoriv training field near the Polish border – the opposite end of the country from the conflict zone.
Almost certainly not, because nobody wants to give Russia a pretext for hostilities against the west.
Even during the Cold War, the opposing nuclear powers were careful not to fight each other directly, but always through proxies, such as pro-communist Vietnamese.
There is also no need for western troops’ involvement because Ukraine has a relatively large and battle-hardened army.
The whole reason for selecting the Yavoriv Training Field as the base of the US, British, and other western instructors was its proximity to the Polish border, which is only 20km away.
It is expected that the western instructors would be evacuated to Poland in case of war, although they might come back once the front line stabilised.
The aim of joining Nato is now enshrined in the Ukrainian Constitution, and its armed forces are gradually transitioning to Nato standards, but in 2008, the last time that Nato members discussed the idea of Ukraine’s accession, Germany and France blocked it so as not to provoke Russia.
The build-up of Russian troops and an ultimatum to the WestThe war in the Donbas never formally ended; low-intensity fire is a daily reality, and casualties are reported every week.
Late in 2021, Western and Ukrainian intelligence agencies released information about a massive build-up of Russian troops along the Ukrainian border and the preparation of infrastructure for a possible invasion.
Email addressSign UpBy entering your details, you are agreeing to our terms and conditions and privacy policy.
BBC History Magazine and BBC History Revealed are published by Immediate Media Company Limited under licence from BBC Studios Distribution.
This article contains affiliate links and we may receive a commission for purchases made.
