WELLS FARGO \ WHOLESALE BANKING ft r ^J/Vewant a banker ^'wKowill work wiiti us and he part of the team"" iiii|iii|iii[iii|ii I Asset Management*^ Capital Finance Commercial & Corporate Commercial Real Estate Government & Institutional Insurance*^ International Investment Banking & When you need someone to strategize with, we'll be ready to talk.
Our relationship managers take the time to learn your business and gain a deeper understanding of your expansion goals.
WeVe successfully partnered with mid-sized to large corporations to help them meet their global business needs.
With our full suite of products backed by our timetested strength and stability, weVe never been more ready to support your business today and for years to come.
To learn more about how our capabilities can work for you, visit national.wellsfargobank.com/EM19.
NOT FDIC-lnsured • NO Bank Guarantee • MAY Lose Value ^ Wells Fargo Asset Management is a trade name used by the asset management businesses of Wells Fargo & Company.
Certain investments are distributed by Wells Fargo Funds Distributor, LLC, Member FINRA/SIPC, a subsidiary of Wells Fargo & Company.
Using the SWIFT financial-transfer mechanism against rogue states, page 53.
Buttonwood, page 66 Decline of state companies The performance of governmentcontrolled companies has been shockingly bad, page 57.
Neither this publication nor any partofit may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of The Economist Newspaper Limited.
The Economistis a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited.
Printed by Quad/Graphics, Saratoga Springs, NY 12866 The world this week The Economist November 22nd 2014 7 Politics Five people were killed when two Palestinians attacked men at prayer in a synagogue in Jerusalem with knives and a gun.
Both assailants were subsequently killed in a shootout with the police.
The assault, at a time of heightened tension over demands by some Israelis for the right to pray at Muslim holy sites in the city, has raised concerns that the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians is taking on a religious tint.
The scale of Ebola’s economic impact was made clearer after a survey for the World Bank found that almost half of Liberians who were employed before the outbreak are now out of work.
The bank reckons, however, that the disease is now likely to trim economic output in the affected countries by about $3 billion, which is a tenth of its previous worstcase estimate.
This came after the revelation that two Frenchmen were among the militants in a video depicting the beheadings of 18 Syrians.
Also murdered by is this week was Peter Kassig, an American aid worker.
Not a good move Guerrillas belonging to the FARC, which has waged a 50-year war against the Colombian state, kidnapped a general and two companions in the western part of the country.
Colombia’s president, Juan Manuel Santos, suspended peace negotiations, which began two years ago, and said they would not resume until the captives were released.
The interruption may be brief; mediators said an agreement to free the captives had been reached.
Police investigating allegations of corruption at Petrobras, Brazil’s state-owned oil company, arrested 18 people, including a former director at the firm and executives from several big construction and engineering companies.
Marfa Jose Alvarado, who was to represent Honduras in the Miss World beauty pageant in London in December, was murdered along with her sister.
A referendum on Abenomics Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe, called a snap election for Decemberi4th after figures showed that the economy shrank by 1.6% on an annualised basis in the third quarter, after a contraction of 7.3% in the second.
An increase in the consumption tax in April has been widely blamed for the country’s slide into recession, prompting Mr Abe to announce the postponement until 2017 of plans to raise the tax again.
Police in Hong Kong began removing barricades erected by protesters who are angered by China’s plan to restrict democratic reform in the territory and have occupied some maj or roads in the city since late September.
The courts ordered the barricades to be taken down after complaints about the impact of the protests on local businesses.
A group of students who tried to travel to Beijing to raise their grievances were barred from boarding their flight.
Mahinda Rajapaksa, who has ruled Sri Lanka since November 2005, called a presidential election to let him seek an unprecedented third term, after the country’s Supreme Court cleared the way for him to stand.
The president could have waited until 2016, but an early poll lets him take advantage of a buoyant economy, weak opposition and ongoing satisfaction among fellow Sinhalese that he ended a long civil war, by crushing Tamil separatists, five years ago.
A few days later Germany’s foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, visited Moscow to meet the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, as well as Mr Putin.
The eu extended its list of named Ukrainian separatists subject to sanctions.
The European Parliament announced that it would debate a motion of no-confidence in the new president of the European Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker.
Mr Juncker, a former long-serving prime minister of Luxembourg, has been under fire over the country’s many tax-avoidance schemes.
Portugal’s interior minister, Miguel Macedo, resigned over a scandal involving official corruption in the granting of “golden visas” to wealthy non-Europeans who invest a certain amount of money in property in the country.
In a surprise result, Romanians elected Klaus lohannis, an ethnic German who is mayor of Sibiu, as their next president.
Mr lohannis handily defeated the opinion pollsters’ favourite, Victor Ponta, but Mr Ponta plans to remain Romania’s prime minister until a general election in 2016.
Barack Obama prepared to outline the details of his longpromised executive order to rewrite America’s immigration rules.
Republicans, flushed with victory in the recent mid-term elections, expressed fury even before the announcement was made, saying it would hinder bipartisan co-operation on other topics when they take control of Congress in January.
The number of foreign students at American colleges rose by 8% in the 2013-14 academic year, according to a report sponsored by the State Department.
The remark was made by Emil Michael, a senior vice-president, who said it was “born out of frustration” with media sniping about the app-based taxi service.
But even among Silicon Valley’s thrusting entrepreneurs Uber has a reputation for controversial business tactics, such as promoting rides with “incredibly hot chicks” at the wheel.
Left to its own devices Nokia surprised many tech observers by unveiling its first Android-powered tablet, the Ni, marking its return to consumer electronics.
The Finnish company left that market when it sold its wireless-devices business to Microsoft.
The Niis to be made through a licensing arrangement with Foxconn, which assembles the iPad for Apple.
Britain’s legal challenge to the European Union’s cap on bankers’ bonuses suffered an almost certainly fatal blow when the advocate-general to the European Court of Justice found that the rule that limits bonuses to ioo% of salary (or 200% with shareholders’ approval) was valid.
The Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect opened for business with much fanfare.
The scheme allows foreign investors in Hong Kong to buy A-shares on the Shanghai stock exchange without a licence and Chinese investors to tap the Hong Kong market, subject to limits.
Most of the interest lies in accessing Shanghai’s equity market, but after a boisterous start trading was subdued on the second day.
The head of Russia’s central bank defended her decision to let the rouble float, saying it had reduced speculative attacks on the currency.
The luck of the Irish Bill Ackman, an activist investor, and Valeant Pharmaceuticals saw their joint bid for Allergan, the maker of Botox, defeated by a $66 billion rival offer from Actavis.
Mr Ackman’s lengthy quest for Allergan had become increasingly hostile.
Actavis will benefit from a lower tax bill, as it has moved its tax base to Ireland through an inversion takeover.
Baker Hughes agreed to a friendly $38 billion takeover from Halliburton, its bigger rival in the oilfield-services industry.
Both companies have their roots in the oil boom of the early 20th century (part of the Baker Hughes lineage can be traced back to the family of Howard Hughes) and both have a significant presence in the fracking boom.
A report by the Senate committee on investigations sharply criticised the “massive involvement” of Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase and Morgan Stanley with physical-commodity markets.
In one focus, Goldman’s acquisition of the largest certified warehouse to store aluminium in America was described as a conflict of interest, as it was trading heavily in the metal as well as managing its availability through the storehouse.
Australia signed a free-trade deal with China, its biggest trading partner.
The agreement cuts tariffs for most Australian agricultural imports, including wine but excluding rice and sugar, into China and eases the rules for Chinese investment in Australia.
The deal is part of the Australian government’s effort to make the economy less reliant on commodities.
Those who want to end the “beer tie” say it will reduce pub prices, but big brewers argue that pubs will have to close.
Share prices swooned among the firms that own most of the tenanted pubs.
A court in Mumbai ruled in favour of Royal Dutch Shell in its $3 billion tax dispute with the Indian government.
Shell was accused of avoiding tax when transferring shares from its Indian subsidiary.
The prime minister, Narendra Modi, has promised to bring order to India’s capricious tax policies on foreign firms.
People get ready Privateer, a private-equity firm based in Seattle with roots in the cannabis industry, announced a deal with the Bob Marley estate to sell marijuana branded under the late singer’s name.
As well as selling the weed, the venture will launch products such as lip balm.
Privateer’s boss submitted that “Bob Marley started to push for legalisation more than 50 years ago.
There is the carnage in eastern Ukraine, where he is continuing to stir things up.
There are his fraught relations with the West, with even Germany turning against him now.
There is an Islamist insurgency on his borders and at home there is grumbling among the growing numbers who doubt the wisdom of his Ukraine policy.
Its oil-fired economy surged upward on rising energy prices; now that oil has tumbled, from an average of almost $110 a barrel in the first half of the year to below $80, Russia is hurting.
Western sanctions have also caused pain, as bankers have applied the restrictions not just to Mr Putin’s cronies, but to a much longer tally of Russian businesses.
More generally, years of kleptocracy have had a corrosive effect on the place.
Much of the country’s wealth has been divided among Mr Putin’s friends.
Everybody expects continued stagnation, but the conventional wisdom is that Mr Putin is strong enough to withstand this.
The falling rouble has made some export industries like farming more competitive.
These exports combined with Mr Putin’s import-blocking counter-sanctions mean Russia still has a small trade surplus.
It has a stash of foreign-exchange reserves, some $370 billion according to the central bank’s figures.
Add in the resilience of the Russian people, who are also inclined to blame deprivation on foreigners, and the view from Moscow is that Mr Putin has time to manoeuvre.
Russia’s defences are weaker than they first appear and they could be tested by any one of a succession of possibilities-another dip in the oil price, a bungled debt rescheduling by Russian firms, further Western sanctions.
When economies are on an unsustainable course, international finance often acts as a fast-forward button, pushing countries over the edge more quickly than politicians or investors expect.
But supply seems set to increase, with opec keen to defend its market share.
If global demand weakens-Japan has slipped into recession since the latest round of forecasts-the oil price could fall further.
That would immediately prompt investors to reassess Russia’s prospects.
Russia’s firms have over $500 billion in external debt outstanding, with $130 billion of it payable before the end of 2015, at a time when few Western banks want to increase their exposure to Russia.
Rosneft, an oil giant, recently asked the Kremlin to lend it $44 billion.
Mr Putin has so far resisted, but he cannot let a company that is 70% state-owned and employs 160,000 people fail.
Nonperforming loans were rising even before interest rates were raised to 9-5% to defend the rouble.
Meanwhile Russian banks are reliant on the central bank to replace deposits that their customers are understandably spiriting into dollars.
Directly or indirectly, many of these bills will end up with the Kremlin, which is why its reserves will be vital.
Of the reported $370 billion reserve pile, more than $170 billion sits in the country’s two wealth funds.
Some of their assets are iffy, including various stakes in Russia’s stateowned banks and debt issued by Ukraine that Mr Putin’s own aggression is fast rendering worthless.
All this spells trouble for Russia, but Mr Putin’s marauding foreign policy could accelerate things.
This after all is a man who has invaded other countries and lied about it.
A deeper foray into Ukraine would lead to stronger sanctions by Western countries.
Some of them, such as barring Russia’s banks from the swift international payments system , could halt Russian trade altogether.
A partial block on oil exports would fell the economy, as it did Iran’s.
And the more trouble he faces, the more likely Mr Putin is to play the nationalist card-and that means more foreign forays, and yet more sanctions.
From Russia to Rio, without much love Russia’s biggest recent economic crisis, in 1998, led to a government default.
This time a string of bank failures, corporate defaults and a deep recession look likelier.
Even so the pain from these could spread abroad quickly, both to countries that rely on Russian trade (exports to Russia account for fully 5% of gdp in the Baltics and Belarus) and through financial ripple effects.
And if firms in one badly run commodity-driven country start to default on their dollar debts, then investors will worry about otherssuch as Brazil.
If Russia’s economy looks likely to collapse, there will be inevitable calls in the West for sanctions to be cut back.
This week Mr Putin pointed out that 300,000 German jobs depend on trade with his country.
Had Mr Putin spent more of his time strengthening Russia’s economy than enriching his friends, he would not find himself so vulnerable now.
Sadly, it is an appallingly modern episode, the latest in the interminable tragedy of Jew and Arab in the promised land.
The slaughter at the Kehilat Bnei Torah synagogue-four worshippers and a policeman were killed by two Palestinian men wielding knives and guns, who were in turn shot dead-is hardly the deadliest event in the annals of Israeli-Palestinian violence.
And it pales in comparison to the mass slaughter taking place across the border in Syria and in other parts of the Middle East.
Eirst, to judge from the scenes of some Gazans handing out celebratory sweets and cartoons on social media glorifying the bloodletting, the lust for butchery that impels jihadists elsewhere is gripping Palestinians.
Second, Palestinian Jerusalemites who largely stood aside in past battles have taken up the fight.
Third, the deaths in a house of prayer come at a time when Jerusalem is already astir over the status of holy sites.
The conflict is thus being pushed further from a dispute over rival nationalism and closer to one about religions and Jerusalem.
It is still just about possible to imagine a peace settlement to resolve the nationalist strife through some kind of partition of the land between the Mediterranean Sea and the Jordan river.
But the more religion infuses the dispute, the more impossible it is to find a deal.
That is why the status of Jerusalem has always been one of the hardest issues to crack.
Jews, after all, pray for the restoration of the temple every day; for Palestinians, the al-Aqsa mosque, built atop the ruins of the Jewish temple, is the third-holiest site in Islam.
Religious conflict would spread trouble beyond the holy land and would bring a world of horrors.
It was glimpsed in 1994, when a Jew killed dozens of Palestinians at prayer in Hebron; it was glimpsed again this week in Jerusalem.
Summoning God sanctifies violence and intransigence; an equitable peace becomes impossible when compromise is blasphemy.
A dry crust and peace Eor Binyamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, this week’s murders were the result of incitement by the Palestinian leader, Mahmoud Abbas, who urged Palestinians to defend alAqsa.
Eor Mr Abbas the real problem is provocation by Jews seeking the right to pray at the al-Aqsa compound (some want to rebuild the temple there), in a growing campaign abetted by members of Mr Netanyahu’s government and his Likud party.
At such a moment it seems pointless to advocate a return to peace talks.
Yet the need for a settlement, including a means for Israelis and Palestinians to share Jerusalem, is more apparent than ever.
Eor now both leaders should at least avoid demonising each other because that only makes it harder to talk tomorrow.
Mr Abbas must tell Palestinians that, no matter the injustices under occupation, targeting innocent civilians is always unacceptable.
Mr Netanyahu must yet again make clear that the religious status quo on the Temple Mount will not change; that Jewish attacks will be punished just as severely as Arab ones; and that there is a dignified place for Palestinians in a shared Jerusalem.
They must abjure inflammatory language, resist overreaction and collective punishments-and stand up to radicals in their midst.
November 24th is the cut-off for a deal to ensure that Iran’s nuclear programme is peaceful.
Third, it wants the prospect of being treated as a “normal” signatory of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, with the right to a decent civil nuclear programme.
Eor the rest of the world the goal is simply to increase the time it would take for Iran to produce enough fissile material to fuel a bomb.
Today that could be as little as two months; it should be at least a year, so that any attempt at “breakout” or “sneakout” would be caught in good time.
Only then would there be an opportunity to deter Iran through more sanctions or the credible threat of military action.
A deal also needs to have a long enough time-horizon to establish that Iran no longer wishes to preserve the option of building nuclear weapons.
There is now a plan to con►► PASSPORT LINDA WALKER Wiect FIRST CHECKED BAG FREE ■ GROUP 1 BOARDING ■ DOUBLE MILES OPPORTUNITY The Citi® / AAdvantage® Platinum Select® card offers benefits that enhance your travel experience.
Plus, you’ll earn AAdvantage® miles for your purchases, making it even easier to get to your next adventure, whether it’s across the country or around the globe.
American Aiiiines AAdvantage ^ LEARN MORE at citi.com/passport Baggage fee waiver is for domestic travel and does not apply to oversized or overweight bags.
American Airlines reserves the right to change the AAdvantage® program and its terms and conditions at any time without notice, and to end the AAdvantage® program with six months notice.
American Airlines is not responsible for products or services offered by other participating companies| For complete AAdvantage® program details, visit aa.com/aadvantage.
American Airlines, AAdvantage and the Flight Symbol logo are trademarks of American Airlines, Inc.
Citibank is not responsible for products or services offered by other companies.
Citi, Citibank, Citi with Arc Design and Platinum Select are registered service marks of Citigroup Inc.
MasterCard and the MasterCard Brand Mark are registered trademarks of MasterCard International Incorporated.
The sticking point is Iran’s uranium-enrichment capacity, which, with the size of its stockpile of low-enriched uranium , determines how fast it can make the high-enriched stuff that goes into bombs.
The Russian option America and its partners say that Iran’s needs for the Tehran Research Reactor and Arak, if it becomes a light-water reactor, can be met with fewer than 2,000 first-generation centrifugesfar fewer than the 10,200 now running and the 9,000 installed but not yet spinning.
America wants constraints on Iran’s centrifuges to last for up to 20 years.
Iran counters that it will not dismantle any of its centrifuges and that it needs more-to fuel Bushehr when a contract with Russia ends in 2021.
That would, it says, take at least a tenfold increase in its capacity plus some new technology.
If Iran were to agree to send its leu routinely to Russia to be made into fuel rods, which cannot easily be further enriched into bomb-fuel, its negotiating partners would agree to its keeping about half its operating centrifuges.
The rest would be mothballed at a secure site monitored by nuclear inspectors.
Iran’s research into newer, more efficient centrifuges, which could help it build a small secret enrichment plant (a big worry for Western spooks), would be rigorously monitored.
After, say, ten years, some constraints could relax in phases-though only if the International Atomic Energy Agency could certify that Iran was honouring the agreement.
To that end, Iran would have to submit to a uniquely intrusive inspection regime.
Lastly and crucially, Iran must demonstrate its faith in the deal by admitting its past work on weaponisation.
The IAEA could treat such declarations in confidence-saying only that it had received a full accounting.
Some unilateral sanctions could be eased quite quickly because both the European Union and America could reimpose them were Iran to cheat.
The un sanctions should be the last to go because they would be the hardest to restore.
Such a compromise would fall well short of the maximalist demands of Iranian hardliners, including the supreme leader.
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, who continue to believe that Iran should have a nuclear-weapons option, if not the bomb itself.
It would also provoke outrage among sceptical members of America’s Congress and Israel’s prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, who insist that Iran’s record of cheating means it should have no enrichment programme at all.
But that is the nature of compromises; neither side will get all it seeks.
For all its protests, Israel would be much safer from attack than it is now; so indeed would the whole region.
It could keep an option on nuclear weapons, but suffer poverty; or it can rejoin the global economy and still have the prospect of the peaceful nuclear programme it says it has wanted all along.
This week, just two years on, the prime minister dissolved the Diet’s lower house and declared a snap election for December 14th.
Not surprisingly, many Japanese think they are being asked to buy the same horse twice.
Mr Abe’s popularity has tumbled from the gravity-defying levels he enjoyed until this autumn.
The opposition is in disarray, unable even to field enough candidates for the vote.
Some of Mr Abe’s people hope that the ldp might actually add seats and govern without the help of Komeito, its junior partner.
Mr Abe is running on a promise to revive the economy because his attempts to do so the first time round have largely failed.
Countless times he claimed to be putting an end to years of deflation and reviving the economy.
The Economist was among those who gave him the benefit of the doubt by endorsing “Abenomics”, a slickly presented campaign promoting radical monetary easing, more government spending and far-reaching structural reforms.
And many Japanese households feel squeezed because wages are not keeping pace with prices.
The first round of easing in 2013 did nudge inflation expectations upwards.
Its second round in late October was also right, because the economy had stopped in its tracks, while core inflation, which had been moving up to the central bank’s target of 2%, had slipped.
In a stagnant economy put►► Our service is all about you Experience our premium service as you relax at the Celestial Bar We will do everything to meet your highest expectations.
Up here^ the whole world revolves around you. 45th Excellence in Flight KSRE^KAIR www.korcanair.com 14 Leaders The Economist November 22nd 2014 ► ting fiscal consolidation before recovery can prove disastrous.
Monetary and fiscal policy will remain loose after Mr Abe is re-elected.
Perhaps its chief intention, in the words of one adviser, was as a “psychology-management exercise” to boost the stockmarket and shake Japanese households and businesses out of their deflationary gloom.
The Bank of Japan can act yet more boldly, but it will become harder to shock and awe.
That leaves structural reform, the third dimension to the plan to raise Japan’s long-run rate of growth.
The government announced fine-sounding proposals to improve a rigid employment system, open markets and even allow in more foreigners.
Year-end bonuses at big companies are likely to be generous, thanks to profits from a weak yen.
In Nagoya, for instance, wages for bar workers have doubled in the past year as construction firms have snapped up casual labour.
Time to upset people In the long run, however, Japan can grow faster only if it has a leader who is prepared to make changes that upset old ways of doing things.
Mr Abe has radical ideas, but he is too averse to spending his political capital to implement them.
Policy announcements are rare and, if they are offered, come at unpredictable hours, often over the weekend.
Sudden shifts in the value of the yuan always bear the central bank’s fingerprints, but are infrequently explained.
Since June the central bank is widely reported to have injected as much as 1. trillion yuan to prop up the slowing economy through a mix of targeted liquidity facilities.
That is a lot of money, equivalent to more than three months of quantitative easing at the peak of the Bed’s bond-buying programme.
But only in early November, half a year after rumours started, did the central bank provide some confirmation of its actions, and even then it was only partial.
Worse, the pbo c deliberately chooses convoluted means to loosen monetary conditions-in essence providing cheaper medium-term money to some banks, not others.
Elsewhere, central banks cut interest rates close to zero before turning to unconventional policies.
It would be better if China loosened monetary policy the traditional way-by cutting interest rates.
It has been the boldest of China’s regulators in trying to curb soaring debts in the shadow banking system.
It worries that a rate cut would be seen as a u-turn, signalling a retreat from its quest to rein in borrowing excesses.
Eirst, the central bank’s meddlesome approach to providing liquidity risks undermining its own reformist agenda.
Instead of letting the market allocate resources, the central bank is choosing which banks should be the beneficiaries of easing, and how they should direct their lending.
It has, for instance, specified that a big chunk of its cash injections must go to the construction of public housing.
That may be a laudable goal for the government, but not the central bank.
Second, the failure to explain what it is doing diminishes the central bank’s effectiveness.
The point of easing is not just to pump money into the economy, but also to instil confidence in companies and consumers.
By spelling out what they are doing and why, central bankers help steer markets and reduce uncertainty.
The recent slide in China’s growth shows that the PBOC is struggling to hit its mark.
Short-term money rates have declined, but real bank-lending rates have risen.
The case for cutting and talking These shortcomings hurt China’s economy.
Even as it slows, China still generates over a quarter of the world’s growth.
Its financial system, sealed off behind capital controls for decades, is increasingly open.
As of this week, anyone with a Hong Kong brokerage account can invest on the Shanghai stock exchange.
And the yuan is being used more widely; central banks from Erance to Nigeria now hold the Chinese currency in their foreign-exchange reserves.
As a central bank of global consequence, the pboc needs to adopt the best practices of its peers.
That means loosening monetary conditions transparently and harnessing the power of communication.
It should combine a cut in interest rates with a clear explanation of why it is cutting (to ward off the threat of deflation) and a promise to greet any rush to greater leverage with much stricter credit rules.
Other big central banks have turned such “forward guidance” into a powerful policy tool.
JUNE 28 -JULY 3, 2015 Join us for our exclusive 5-night retreat hosted at the recently ranked #1 Resort in Colorado Featured speakers include David McCullough The Art of Discovery Sylvia Earle Wonders of the Ocean Jason Silva Digital Transcendence ■Brian Greene Chasing Quantum Realities hosted at ^ G A T E W A Canyons.
COLORADO Resorr & Spa gatewaycanyons.com Sij Traveler t Readers’ Choice Awards Limited to 70 participants.
Their study does not cover the significant non-fiscal costs of the resulting population growth.
Each added resident brings forward the need for increased capital spending on services.
Britain’s high-speed train projects are always justified by already overcrowded network capacity.
Because of budgetary constraints hospital beds and school places are in short supply and becoming ever harder to find.
The supply of some assets, such as beaches and beauty spots, cannot be increased, so they become crowded.
More development to house more people brings large financial costs through the environmental damage that the loss of countryside will bring.
Less net immigration would have meant these problems would now be smaller; net emigration could have helped cure them at low cost.
The study by Messrs Dustmann and Frattini is about the quality of immigrants.
The sacrifice of a few lives may be a necessary evil for the development of a drug to save thousands, which we have the ability to do right now at the early stage of Ebola’s Spread.
Any delay be it months, weeks, or even a few days, could cause thousands of deaths.
Throughout history we have sent soldiers to sacrifice their lives in battle for a greater good, but in this case we recoil at the thought.
With conscription a man has as much control over his participation in war as victims of Ebola have over their catching the disease.
We should not be so quick to reject this notion of sacrifice, for the result could make a monumental difference.
BRIENCOMEY Gambler, Ohio SIR To your list of diseases in Africa that have killed more people than Ebola you might add tuberculosis, which according to the World Health Organisation, killed over 10,000 in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia in 2013, about twice the number of deaths currently reported from Ebola.
Because sales and investment between states in America is banned it remains a local industry that maintains a high quality.
There are dozens of examples of mass-produced cannabis products that are bland, tasteless reflections of what was once crafted or cultivated with care.
W.J.TATE IV Ewing, New Jersey SIR The United States has almost twice the rate of marijuana use as the Netherlands, where the drug has been legally available for decades.
The criminalisation of people who prefer marijuana to martinis has no basis in science.
The war on cannabis is a failed cultural inquisition, not an evidence-based public-health campaign.
It is time to stop the pointless arrests and instead legalise cannabis and tax it.
The culture of both big parties has changed for the worse over the past 15 years by becoming more extreme in its views.
Like most organisational culture issues this one is driven by the leadership of each party.
Harry Reid, Nancy Pelosi, John Boehner and Mitch McConnell have proved to be hateful, bitter politicians who seem to be more focused on their own hubris and the Schadenfreude of their political foes than on helping their 316m fellow citizens.
But the “sand in the cogs” of American politics that you described is made worse by a shameful undercurrent of prejudice against Barack Obama.
When you take these factors into consideration the only hope America has to mend its bent political process is new leadership on both sides, which will be extremely difficult to achieve because we have no congressional term limits.
I am not sure what it will take to wake up my fellow citizens from their political apathy but until that happens I see little hope in progress.
JAMES WILTON Anthem, Arizona SIR The award for funniest campaign advertisement ever (“Of bridal dresses and sweatshirts”, November 8th) must go to Tom McClintock, who created the fictional Cousin Angus McClintock to attest to the veteran politician’s innate understanding of thrift, given his Scottish heritage.
With a bellow on his bagpipe, the kilted Cousin Angus proclaimed that Mr McClintock was “as tight as a bullfrog’s behind.
Wealth trumped thrift, however, as Mr McClintock lost to a venture capitalist in that campaign.
SUNITASOHRABJI Fremont, Caiifornia Political spinning SIR “Let them fly” (November 8th) welcomed the arrival of a “centrifugal mood” towards decentralisation in British politics.
I found myself puzzled, as a centrifugal force is either fictitious (a physicist’s trick to account for how a problem is framed) or is an opposing reaction to a centripetal force, in which case it, literally, leaves you going around in circles.
Advise senior management on protection and human rights issues, as applicable to children, and represent UNICEF in all relevant protection and human rights inter-agency forums.
Ensure that programme delivery, evaluation and reporting are earned out efficientlv. rigorously and transparently in compliance with the established guidelines and procedures * Provide technical leadership and coordiristion to key Child Protection programme/project docu merits, reports, plan of action, and targeted training/learning programmes, ensuring promotiorv of effective knowledge management.
Provide strategic guidance on all issues pertaining to the implementation of the Monitoring Rep^oiting Mechanism (MRM} in Syria.
Conduct orientation and (raining programme to help build capacity of Government counterparts Strengthen partnerships with the stakeholders.
Social Science, or a heldtsl relevant to international development assistance.
Visit us at www^unlcaf.ofii/aboiuit/einploy to register in our eRecruitment system and search for the detailed Vacancy Announcement using key words ""Demascus"" or “Education"" unite for children unicef # I unite for children unicef# Chief of Social Policy, Monitoring & Evaluation, P-5 Location: Damascus, Syria Duration: 1 year renewable.
Visit us at www.unkef.ofg/about/empioy to register in our e-Recruitirierit system and search for the detailed Vacancy Announcement using key words ""Damascus* or ""Social Policy* Chief of WASH, P-5 Location: Syria and Iraq Dura tic rt: 1 year reriewabie.
The UNICEF WASH candidate will manage programmes in one of the following two countries; Syria and Iraq.
UNICEF's global goals effectively promoted through advocacy and policy dialogue in the WASH sector.
Visit United States at www^untoiEcNg/about/affipIciv to register in our eRecry rtment system and search for the detailed Vacancy Announcement using key words 'WASH7 ""Syria* or ""Iraq* The Economist November 22nd 2014 18 Executive Focus gEORgETOH^lJNryERSITY School of Foreign Service in Qatar r o rn c ^v A7 i er SyiRV We cAre Qrowing, Join Us, Building on a decade of success, Georgetown Univcrsit}^ School of Foreign Service in Qatar is hiring economists.
VC Al>i:\llCJOBSNI INK.OKC/AJO/jOBS/49 1 4 \/ To learn more about our rich academic and research culture please visit: QVTAH.SI S.Gt ORGOOVWJ |)U + 9744457^^*242 ® @ @ guqatar georgetownqatar guqatar guqatar tit The Commonwealth As tHe irfter-goverfimferitaii bcxJy of the Comnrkoriiwealth, comprising 53 Independent sovereign states, our aim is to provide sustainable and people -centied development through professional advice, transit of best practice and the enhancement of skills and knowledge.
Economic Adviser, Climate Finance £7 1 J30pa plus benefits With a relevant post-graduate degree arxj at least ten years' experience in analysis and policy formuiatJoncorcerning climate ftr^rx:ing and development, you are ready to progress our work on climate finarxieMaking the most of your r»-deptH knowledge of the challenges and priorities of small and vulnerable states in developing low^emlssion, climate -resilient ecoromles and the context of climate financing, you will provide policy, technical and hstltutior^ support.
This will involve working with governments. professJor^ bodies, regional and internatiofial development partners and organisations Cbsing date Tuesday 25 November 2014.
You will be making the most of your ten years experience of building partnerships, mobilising resources, cient management and influencing at high level Your abiity to develop inrKivative relationsNpfs with traditional and new partners and awareness of the serrsltivities and potential of intergovernmental relations will be stretched in Identifying, developing and managing the oversight of existing ard new relationships The dosing date is Sur^ay 50 November 2014.
TB and Malaria, as wqII as prgvontion corninoditiiaSi comoiibidilies and co-infeciiona signihcani to thasa thres dsaases.
The mm of its interventions is to substantially improve public health outeoiTies for populations in low and lower-middla income countries.
UNITAID has a unigue funding model, based on an air ticket levy and long-term contributions froni governments to secure steady, reliable and sizeable funding, Since its esiabkshment in 3006, UNITAiD has recei^ $3. biion of contributions from donors.
MALARIA AND TUBERCULOSIS * Develops, leads and manages UNlTAlD'e finance department including the Trust Fund which lAsburses 10 grarils, as werfi as the administrative, HR and support swices teams.
A new report estimates that there are 35m people around the world working in some form of enslaved labour When wireless worlds collide There are reckoned to be 47m Wi-Fi hotspots around the world.
Mobile-network operators are increasingly reliant on these hotspots as a cheap way to reduce pressure on their cellular-data networks Enfant de la Patrie The video of beheadings released on November 16th by Islamic State showed two Frenchjihadists among the killers.
The world reshaped The population pyramid, the t r a di ti 0 n a I way of vi s u a li si n g t h e age structure of society, is losing its distinctive shape.
Trends in low places Fear of inflation has keptinvestors bearish on European government bonds this year.
A voice to the voiceless A new book on the plight of Tamil refugees in Sri Lanka after 25 years of civil war depicts lives that have been almost swallowed whole by low-key brutality ^ Catalonia's future Let them vote 3 The APEC summit and the Pacific rim Bridge over troubled water 4 Schumpeter A Nordic mystery Economic consequences of Ebola The ignorance epidemic ""A species evolves to deal with the choUenges in its environment When change is rapid, the species can rarely adapt quickly enough.
TheAoven Rosetta Stone method will help the special person on your shopping list to start with the basics and progress toward conversational skills.
And advanced speech -recognition technology makes It easy to/ine-tune pronuficistion.
So why not impress someone with a gift that says all jUie right t hi ngt»Hn anew language.
Not any more M ALINA, a trendy restaurant in a city south of Moscow, was empty on a recent Thursday evening.
The signs of a country in the economic doldrums are visible in Moscow, too.
Tour operators are going out of business; shops and small businesses are up for sale; led displays outside bureaux de change send spirits sinking.
The central bank says it expects the next two years to bring no growth.
The rouble has lost 30% of its value since the start of the year, and with it the faith of the country’s businessmen.
Banks have been cut off from Western capital markets, and the price of oil-Russia’s most important export commodity-has fallen hard.
Consumption, the main driver of growth in the previous decade, is slumping.
This is not the mid-1980s, when a collapse in the oil price paved the way for perestroika and the eventual collapse of the Soviet Union.
While the overall mood is clearly depressed, it is a long way from panic.
Russia’s total foreign debt is just 35% of GDP; it has a private sector which can be surprisingly agile and adaptable and is contributing some growth by substituting things made at home for imported goods; most importantly, it has a floating exchange rate that mitigates some of the oil-price shock.
No longer affordable But the oil-backed consumption-led economy which has provided nearly 15 years of growth (it took a stumble in 2008-09, during the global financial crisis) has hit the buffers.
It was already slowing before the oil price began to fall and adventurism in Ukraine was met by Western sanctions.
Thomson Reuters Also in this section 22 The state of the reserves 24 Struggling for success woes-an attempt to shore up through patriotic fervour the support that president Vladimir Putin can no longer buy by boosting living standards.
Between 2010 and 2013, when oil prices were high, the country’s net outflow of capital was $232 billion-20 times what it was between 2004 and 2008.
Russian economists are now debating how long before the economy faces collapse.
When the oil price falls, so does the rouble; thus in rouble terms the amount of money the oil brings in stays roughly the same.
Russia imports a great deal-the total value of imported goods, $45 billion in 2000, was $341 billion in 2013-and so a devalued rouble quickly stokes inflation.
It is predicted to reach 9% by the end of this year; for food the rate is higher still.
If it is to compensate the population for this loss in its spending power, the government will have to run a bigger deficit.
Russia’s sovereign debt is just $57 billion, but its corporate debt is ten times as high.
Some of it has been racked up by state corporations and national energy companies, which gives it a quasi-sovereign status.
And by the end of 2015 Russian firms will have to repay about $130 billion of foreign debt.
Mr Putin, who came to power in the wake of the 1998 default, knows the value of money and believes enough of it solves everything.
He started off strongly averse to low reserves and high debt, and saw that the country’s reserves built up accordingly.
In the run-up to the global financial crisis Russia had reserves of $570 billionalmost a third of gdp.
This served the country well after the crisis hit; the government spent $220 billion refinancing banks and defending the rouble.
In 2011, though, despite the high oil price, Russia’s reserves stopped increasing.
Money was spent instead on raising salaries and pensions and financing the armed forces.
The increase in military spending, up 30% since 2008, was the main reason Alexei Kudrin, Russia’s prudent finance minister, chose to resign in 2011.
They have increased their foreign-currency debt by some $170 billion in the past two years.
Yevgeny Gavrilenkov, the chief economist at Sberbank GIB, the largest state bank, says most of this money settled offshore; only a very small part was invested in the Russian economy.
Kirill Rogov of the Gaidar Institute for Economic Policy points to one of the reasons why.
When a company can be swallowed by the state at any time, more debt will make it less appetising prey.
In the past year Russia’s foreignexchange reserves have fallen by 20% as the central bank has tried to prop up the rouble.
Eoreign-exchange reserves have assumed a new importance for Russia in recent months.
As Western sanctions have shut Russian companies out of foreign debt markets, they struggle to raise money.
That makes it harder to pay back the $130 billion of external debt that comes due between now and the end of next year.
Some people argue that Russia’s reserves are so big that they can accommodate such demands and weather the economic storm.
About $170 billion of its assets sit in two giant wealth funds, the Reserve Eund and the National Wealth Eund , and much of what is in these funds could prove illiquid or inaccessible if called on to meet short-term financing needs.
Cash from the $82 billion nwf is committed to long-term infrastructure projects, says Sergei Guriev of Sciences-Po, a Erench university.
Bank of Russia Rights and IMF reserves money to veb, the Russian development bank, to finance construction at the Sochi Olympics.
The loans by which it did so have been “restructured” to allow delayed repayment.
In terms of money that could actually be put to use, Russia’s reserves could be more than $100 billion lower than the headline figures suggest.
Mikhail Zadornov, a former finance minister, said in a recent interview with Dozhd, a television channel, that the usable amount could be as low as $200 billion.
That is bad news for a country that will struggle to find cash elsewhere. debt meant, Mr Rogov notes, that instead of preparing itself for a crisis, Russia has prepared a crisis for itself This does not mean that Russia is anywhere close to a sovereign default like that of 1998.
Today Russia is still running a current-account surplus of about $50 billion because it is importing less.
Mr Putin’s restrictions on food imports, presented as tit-for-tat counter-sanctions, are more a way of preserving currency reserves and stimulating farms; Russia imports half its food.
Pood production is now growing at between 6% and 10%, albeit from a very low base.
Other imports, such as medicines, are not so quickly replaced; as in Soviet days, petrodollars keep the shelves stocked.
The drop in oil prices in 2008-09 was met with a 40% increase in government spending.
With reserves lower, and with the government needing to either keep those reserves available for bail-outs or to risk some big companies and banks going bust, that is not an option this time.
Renewed growth will require new investment and, most crucially, reform.
A game of favourites At a recent conference German Gref, the head of Sberbank, remarked that “[Soviet leaders] didn’t respect the laws of economic development.
Even more, they didn’t know them, and in the end this caught up with them.
Even though his state is as reliant on oil money as the Soviet Union was, Mr Putin thinks he has done some of that learning.
But as someone who believes that the state must keep tabs on everything, including the free market, he remains mistrustful of open competition.
While Russia has a nominally fre e-market economy, it is one highly skewed by the misallocation of capital and resources to firms run by cronies.
The Kremlin distributes oil rent via state banks to firms and projects which it selects on the basis of their political importance and their pro-Putin stance.
Most of the contractors for the Sochi Olympics, which cost Russia a staggering $50 billion, were firms run by Mr Putin’s friends; most of the money took the form of credit from state banks.
Indeed, such loans are one of the reasons why the central bank has been forced to triple its provision of liquidity to the banks since the middle of last year.
Most of this money provided by the central bank, says Mr Gavrilenkov, ended up on the foreign-exchange market, putting pressure on the rouble.
Combinable seats convert to a double bed suite and enjoy access to an exclusive bar, BUSINESS CLASS: Herringbone seatifig cx)nfiguration provides every passer>gef with aisle access and fully redinabte 180* flat bed seat • ALL CLASSES: In-fl^ht WiFi with power outlets for personal electronics, and a personal entertainment center, COMPLIMENTARY LIMO SERVICE: Your own private driver to and from Shanghai Pudong airport and JFK is available for first/business class passengers with advanced reservation.
CHINA EASTERN Wofift-class Hostsitaity wtth Eastam Chann us.ceair.com 24 Briefing The Russian economy The Economist November 22nd 2014 ► corridor, the banks could place one-way bets on the devaluation of the rouble.
In the past few weeks the central bank said it will intervene in an ad hoc way with as much money as it sees fit.
If it can stick to this in the face of lobbying pressure from state firms and banks demanding cheap liquidity and fresh equity, the currency could stabilise.
That pressure, however, will be immense, particularly if the economy starts to shrink.
Pumping money into Rosneft would be exactly the sort of misallocation that underlies the economy’s weakness.
The energy sector, which accounts for 20% of gdp, grew by a meagre 1% on average over the past decade.
The industry has not been cutting costs or developing new production; it has been busy being nationalised instead, and offers textbook examples of the woes of state-owned enterprises While the state still had money, it could afford to buy out private owners, as it did in the case of tnk-bp.
Now it simply wrestles oil firms away from their owners, as it is doing in the case of Bashneft, a medium-sized but fast-growing oil firm which is being expropriated from Vladimir Yevtushenkov, a billionaire who is under house arrest.
Political loyalty-and Mr Yevtushenkov was certainly loyal-is no protection against raiding.
Now he will face a tough decision whether to support the inefficient energy sector and the military-industrial complex with public money or rely on the more dynamic flexible small and medium-sized companies to pull Russia out of the crisis.
There have been reports that Mr Putin plans to give a speech on economic liberalisation to parliament next month.
But, if he runs true to form, when faced with a crisis he will stick with the state sector run by his friends rather than ceding control and trusting private firms which will demand reforms and, in the end, political freedoms.
The echo of 1913 The state of the Russian economy will affect Russia’s actions beyond its borders.
In 2013 the Russian people were better off than at any previous point in history.
In the Soviet days 80% of Kaluga’s economy served the military-industrial complex.
Now it is home to global car manufacturers, including Volkswagen, Volvo and Renault, as well as high-end pharmaceutical companies.
Mr Artamonov’s parents were farmMr Artamonov looks out for opportunity priorities, says Mikhail Dmitriev, the head of New Economic Growth, a think-tank, switched from economic survival to imperial resurgence.
Mr Dmitriev compares the moment to 1913-the Russian economy’s last successful year before the first world war and the Bolshevik revolution.
Then, too, there was patriotic euphoria; it did not survive the onset of losses in the war.
While people still support Mr Putin and Russia’s annexation of Crimea, they are starting to calculate the costs.
Mr Dmitriev, who accurately predicted street protests in Moscow in 2011, argues that economic dissatisfaction is growing, although support for Mr Putin remains at a record high.
At that point he turned himself into a businessman and then a governor.
He and his team copied things they saw working in Turkey, China, America and South Korea.
Kaluga has built industrial parks and technical colleges to supply qualified labour.
To do all this Mr Artamonov has run up debt equivalent to 54% of the region’s annual tax take.
He is now focusing on agricultural investment, subsidising equipment for dairy farms.
In the next few months Kaluga will have its own international airport to receive the private jets of foreign geos.
Western sanctions, economic stagnation and the fall in the oil price puts everything Kaluga has achieved at risk.
The car industry has been hit by the double whammy of slumping demand and the rising price of imported parts.
In the past few months Volkswagen has twice stopped its production line.
The Western hope is that people like Mr Artamonov will start putting pressure on the Kremlin to scale back its aggression.
Protests driven by economic and also social issues have already started.
Even in Moscow where the mood for protest is low, teachers and doctors have come out onto the streets to protest against pay cuts and restructuring.
Opinion polls show that most people neither support a real war in Ukraine nor are prepared for their children to fight in it.
That image may have been halfway accurate when heroin first ravaged America’s inner cities in the 1960s and 1970s.
But Ms Scudo, a smartly dressed young grandmother from a middle-class Denver suburb, knows that these days it is not always like that.
Until not so long ago, she was a heroin addict herself The face of heroin use in America has changed utterly.
The spread of heroin to a new market of relatively afQuent, suburban whites has allowed the drug to make a comeback, after decades of decline.
Over the past six years the number of annual users has almost doubled, from 370,000 in 2007 to 680,000 in 2013.
But heroin’s resurgence means that, by some measures, it is more popular than crack cocaine, the bogeyman of the 1980s and 1990s.
Its increased popularity in America contrasts strongly with Europe, where the number of users has fallen by a third in the past decade.
A shot in the arm Like many of America’s new generation of users, Ms Scudo never intended to take up the drug.
Her addiction began in 2000 when, after a hip injury, a doctor prescribed her “anything and everything” to relieve the pain.
JAMA Psychiatry Also in this section 26 The Keystone XL pipeline 27 Infrastructure spending 28 Atlanta's new trams 28 Urban crime rates 29 Campaign contributions 30 Lexington: Barack Obama runs a red light For daily analysis and debate on America, visit Economist.com/unitedstates Economist.com/blogs/democracyinamerica of OxyContin, a popular brand of opioid pill.
On the black market OxyContin pills cost $80 each, more than she could afford to cover her sixa-day habit; so she began selling her pills and using the proceeds to buy cheaper heroin.
The 1990s saw a big increase in prescriptions of opioids for chronic pain.
In some states the number of opioid prescriptions written each year now exceeds the number of people.
People who would never dream of injecting heroin seem to assume that opioids in packets are safe.
In 2012 prescription painkillers accounted for 16,000 deathsnearly four out of every ten fatal drug overdoses in America.
In many places doctors must now check databases to make sure the patient has not already been prescribed painkillers by another clinic.
Prescriptions have been cut down to as little as a single pill, to reduce the supply of unfinished packets.
JAMA Psychiatry ► has risen, many addicts have turned to heroin to satisfy their craving more cheaply “We saw it coming at us at 9omph, like a freight train,” says Meghan Ralston of the Drug Policy Alliance, a drug-reform pressure group.
The number of deaths from heroin overdoses doubled between 2010 and 2012, and many of those attending addiction clinics are college-age, middle-class types who started on prescription pills.
The Mexican wave Just as the demand side of America’s heroin market was heating up, so too was supply.
Though Afghanistan accounts for 80% of global opium production, America gets most of its heroin from Mexico.
Historically that has checked consumption, since Mexico has long been a relatively small producer of opium poppies.
One of the many unintended consequences of Mexico’s war on organised crime in urban hotspots, such as Ciudad Juarez, was that the army was diverted from poppy eradication in the countryside.
Although production has fallen back in the past few years, Mexico is now the world’s third-biggest producer of opium, after Afghanistan and Myanmar.
Policy changes in America have given Mexico’s narco-farmers further incentives to focus on opium.
Until not so long ago, Mexican traffickers made a lot of their money from cannabis.
Nearly half the states have legalised medical marijuana, and four have voted to legalise it outright.
Exporting pot to the United States is now like taking tequila to Mexico.
Facing a glut in the cannabis market, Mexican farmers have turned to poppies.
Seizures of heroin at the border with Mexico have risen from 560kg in 2008 to about 2,100kg last year.
Now sometimes we’re finding 2olb,” says Kevin Merrill, the assistant special agent in charge of the Drug Enforcement Administration on the outskirts of Denver.
The low transport costs faced by Mexican traffickers, who need only drive from Sinaloa to the border, mean that their heroin is far cheaper than the Colombian or Asian sort.
A gram of pure heroin in America now costs about $400, less than half the price, in real terms, that it cost in the 1980s.
And whereas much of the heroin in the past was of the “black tar” variety, which is usually injected, there is a trend towards brown heroin, which lends itself better to snorting and smoking.
That matters to novice heroin users, who may be skittish about needles.
As fewer people are introduced to prescription opioids, the number who are vulnerable to heroin addiction will also eventually fall.
Those with no money or insurance are more likely to be put on methadone, a heroin substitute which sates cravings but does not stop them.
Now that heroin addiction is no longer a disease only of the urban poor, however, attitudes are changing.
Needle-exchange services, which have cut rates of hepatitis and hiv among drug users in Europe, are expanding.
Barbara Boxer of California, also a Democrat, says that the pipeline would bring Shanghailike smog to America-her point illustrated with a huge picture of Chinese people in facemasks.
So goes the hyperbole which surrounds the proposed pipeline, which is intended to link Canadian oilfields and tar sands with American refineries.
On November 18th the Senate narrowly failed (59 votes to 41, 60 being required) to pass a bill that would have authorised its construction.
The tight vote, with 14 Democrats joining all the Republicans to try to push it through, gave a hint of what may happen when the Republicans take over the Senate in January.
The vote was mostly the work of Mary Landrieu, a centrist Democrat from Louisiana.
She is fighting a run-off election for her seat against Bill Cassidy, a Republican congressman who sponsored the passage of the same legislation through the House.
Harry Reid, the Senate majority leader, apparently allowed the vote to bolster her campaign.
A pipeline carrying Canadian oil to Gulf coast refineries would lower the cost of getting such oil to market, so it might encourage energy firms to extract more.
Some also suggest the pipeline will reduce America’s dependence on oil from the Middle East and lower petrol prices for Americans in the states where the oil will be refined.
A few, such as Mr Cassidy, deny that global warming is a problem at all.
Yet the curious reality is that few experts think the pipeline is all that important, either way.
Canadian oil is already getting to market, points out Charles Ebinger of the Brookings Institution, a thinktank-j ust mostly by barge and train.
A new pipeline would ease the strain on Canada’s railways and increase the profitability of extracting the oil.
But compared with swings in global oil prices, the effect will be E nergy has been an economic bonanza for Texas in recent years, and a financial headache for its transport planners.
The state recently forecast that maintaining the roads and bridges that serve its oiland gasfields and wind farms, along with the rest of the state’s vast network of highways, would outstrip dedicated transport revenues by $5 billion a year.
On November 4th Texan voters agreed to steer $1. billion of oiland gas-production taxes towards the highway fund.
By the middle of December the state hopes to start doling out the money to local governments for highway expansions, repairs and other much-needed projects.
Our piece on the mid-terms in the November 8th issue said that CarL DeMaio, a gay Republican in California, had been elected to Congress.
Most of those 42,000 are temporary posts; just 35 full-time permanent employees will be needed to run the pipeline.
Allowing the pipeline to be built now would not just upset the president’s few remaining fans, especially when he is trying to cheer them up with immigration reform ; it would also throw away a bargaining chip that could be useful in the future.
When Republicans take control of the Senate, Mr Obama will want as many of those available as possible. ■ the wisdom of government spending, but the tangible appeal of better roads and transport crosses party lines.
On the same day that Texas voted for more spending, voters in Maryland and Wisconsin passed constitutional amendments to stop politicians raiding highway funds for other purposes-as they regularly do.
State and local initiatives are becoming increasingly important because federal spending on transport is hamstrung.
Of the $142 billion that government spent on roads in 2012, the last year for which data are available, the federal government contributed 28%, almost all of it from the highway trust fund.
That fund is financed principally by a petrol tax that has not risen since 1993.
Petrol-tax revenue peaked in 2006, and has since declined because cars are more fuel-efficient and younger people are driving less.
That has left a gap between federal highway commitments and the money available.
Since Congress dare not incur drivers’ wrath by raising the petrol tax, it scrounges money from elsewhere to fill the gap.
The latest deviousness came in July, when an accounting gimmick was used to cover a $10. billion shortfall and keep the fund going until May.
The gap will only grow in coming years, reaching $120 billion by 2024, according to the Congressional Budget Office.
That guarantees a near-permanent cloud of uncertainty over whether federal financing will flow.
Publicly-approved bond issues and partnerships with private consortia can support upfront capital outlays.
In the past three years six states have raised fuel taxes, two have introduced wholesale taxes and four have brought in, or considered bringing in, a dedicated sales tax for transport, according to Ken Orski, who writes a newsletter advocating more infrastructure.
In 2010 Clayton County, a suburb of Atlanta which includes its airport, elimi►► On the banks of the Ohio Infrastructure Going their separate ways WASHINGTON, DC States and cities seize the initiative on transport funding 28 United States The Economist November 22nd 2014 ► nated its entire public-transport system to cope with a budget crisis.
On election day this year its voters agreed to a one-cent sales-tax increase to restore it.
On the other side of the country voters in Alameda County, California approved a half-cent increase in the sales tax to finance transport improvements.
Voters may be happier paying their state and local governments for transport because they see the benefits directly.
This has prompted some to suggest that the federal government should get out of the business altogether.
A TINY scarlet hut on Auburn Avenue an Atlanta, Thelma’s Kitchen and Rib Shack, serves up world-beating catfish and grits.
The 2.7-mile route will bring new commuters, customers and visitors to the district, and to Thelma’s.
Americans are slowly warming to public transport, and used it for a record 10. billion trips last year.
Even those living in the South and south-westhome to some of the country’s most sprawling cities-are getting more of a taste for it.
In Tucson, Arizona, Orlando, Florida and Dallas, Texas, light-rail systems have been expanded recently, according to Art Guzzetti, a vice-president of the American Public Transport Association.
He reckons transport links in Charlotte, North Carolina are among the best in the country.
A child born into a family with an income in the bottom fifth has just a 4.5% chance of making it into the top fifth; a baby born in San Francisco has a 12.2% chance.
Many poor families are stuck, unable to get good jobs, partly because of the lack of public transport.
The new streetcar should help by connecting residents to the city’s main MARTA transport system.
In 2010 campaigners chanting the Brookings Institution, a think-tank, is that federal funding makes interstate highways a priority, as the backbone of crosscountry trade; states, left to their own devices, might not.
The other drawback is that states may not relish taking on the whole transport burden, since they too often face resistance to taxes.
In 2013 Massachusetts indexed its petrol tax to inflation; this year, voters repealed that.
One reason that Texas tapped oil and gas producers for road money is that legislators dare not raise the state petrol tax, frozen since 1991, or the vehicle-registration fee, largely unchanged since 1987.
But now a private company intends to open All Aboard Florida, a passenger-rail project between Miami and Orlando; parts of the line will welcome travellers by the end of 2016.
The Texas Central Railway wants to build a high-speed line too, with trains travelling at up to 20smph, to link Dallas and Houston by 2021.
Demographic trends make publictransport projects increasingly attractive to private firms.
Criminal cities The secret of success NEWARK AND PHILADELPHIA America’s great crime wave is receding from some cities faster than others B etween getting out of his car and starting work in the morning, Bashir Akinyele, a beret-wearing history teacher in Newark, New Jersey, passes the sites of two murders.
His school, Weequahic High, once taught Philip Roth, a giant among America’s novelists.
Its entrance is now blocked by a metal detector; armed cops share the corridors with teenage girls.
In the streets nearby almost every intersection has been the site of a shooting.
On a night out in Brooklyn, the main threat is getting caught in a boring conversation with a hipster.
In Newark, when darkness fell, your correspondent was ushered back downtown by police.
Over the past 20 years, crime has fallen spectacularly in America and across the rich world.
Criminologists have countless plausible theories to explain this, ranging from less lead-poisoning to the rise of car immobilisers.
In Los Angeles gang warfare has largely given way to organic coffee bars, and burglaries and robberies have become rare.
Yet cities like Philadelphia and Chicago have experienced more modest improvements.
And in places like Baltimore, Newark and Detroit some crime rates have barely fallen.
They reckoned that residents had to trust the police for crime to fallwhich meant purging corruption-and that criminals had to be deprived of convenient places to hang out.
In Newark, by contrast, Sharpe James, the mayor until 2006, was imprisoned in 2008 on fraud charges.
When The Economist visited, the new police director and police chief led officers on a “community walk” around a sketchy neighbourhood.
They seemed to spend much of their time telling people how excellent the new mayor is.
In Philadelphia most homicides stem from stupid arguments, often between ex-convicts, says Lieutenant John Stanford of the local police.
Newark has 278,000 people yet, each month, 1,400 prisoners are released from the local jail.
However, incarceration rates are high throughout America, so this cannot explain the specific ills of its most crime-ridden cities.
Rather, according to John Roman, a researcher at the Urban Institute, a think-tank, crime is like a contagious disease.
People who are vulnerable to criminality-poor, badly-educated young men-are far more likely to become criminals when they are surrounded by men much like themselves.
The presence of ambitious new immigrants in deprived neighbourhoods provides an Campaign contributions Live together, vote together WASHINGTON, DC The cosy political leanings of city residents and firms’ employees A DEMOCRAT running for office in .northern California might consider targeting the money pots of San Francisco or San Jose.
Palo Alto’s residents gave 3. times more per head than San Franciscans during the mid-terms campaign, and three-quarters of the total went to Democrats.
Americans who live and work together are often politically like-minded, according to The Economist's analysis of more than 1.7m individual contributions of $200 or more made during the 2014 election cycle.
The analysis also reveals which cities and companies are most politically engaged, financially speaking.
Famously liberal cities like Berkeley, California and Cambridge, Massachusetts gave overwhelmingly (94% and 96% respectively) to Democrats.
Older, whiter, conservative cities like Wichita, Kansas and Oklahoma City donated almost exclusively to Republicans.
Citizens of San Jose, Philadelphia and San Francisco gave to Democrats by a factor of three to one; the three largest cities in Texas, Houston, San Antonio and Dallas, favoured Republicans by the same margins.
Employees of tech companies, universities and law firms favoured the Democrats.
The contributions from Google employees averaged $2,000, with three-quarters going to Democrats.
Employees of financial firms, energy companies and military contractors largely supported the Republicans.
Donors at Goldman Sachs far outspent their peers, with most of their average donations of $3,000 flowing to Republicans.
Employees of Morgan Stanley and Citigroup gave almost equally to both parties, however.
And the good folk of Bain Capital, solid supporters of their former boss Mitt Romney in 2012, gave 65% of their money to the Democrats.
Low property prices provide little incentive for people to clean up blight.
In Philadelphia crime rates, though still high, dropped sharply last year.
At a police town-hall meeting in the west of the city, people complain about noisy bars, troublesome children and illegal parking.
A new charter school and a growing student population are changing the neighbourhood.
Shootings are still frighteningly common, admits the local police captain, but milder worries are creeping in.
That may well be history’s judgment on President Barack Obama’s plan to shield millions of immigrants from deportation.
Mr Obama’s executive action, due to be unveiled in a televised address on November 20th as this newspaper went to press, answers compelling calls to bring more order, compassion and even natural justice to a broken immigration system.
The political system-indeed the social contract that binds America’s leaders and an unhappy, anxious electorate-is already in fragile shape.
The president has spotted a real ill in the way that immigration laws function.
He seems set to grant legal papers to millions of foreigners, notably the parents of children who are citizens or legal residents.
The reaction from opponents in Congress and the country may leave deep scars.
If congressional Republicans attempt even a fraction of what the hard right is demanding as revenge-from impeachment hearings to passing bills that defund what they call an unconstitutional “amnesty”-historians may pinpoint this tv address as the moment that hopes for substantial bipartisan co-operation faded, just i6 days after mid-term elections that saw Republicans take the Senate and increase their maj ority in the House of Representatives.
Before history-writers set to work, it is worth considering how Mr Obama decided that this was the right thing to do.
Successive governments have stood by as America became home to more thannm illegal residents.
That is a huge number in a country ruled by law, and tantamount to a “de facto amnesty” as both Republican and Democratic advocates for reform have said.
Many of those foreigners arrived years ago, working hard and bringing up American children.
But their families have enjoyed only provisional futures, overshadowed by the original sin of a parent or parents who arrived without the right papers.
A traffic stop by police or a raid on a workplace has been enough to drag car mechanics, plumbers and waitresses into a deportation system meant to target convicted felons, recent border-crossers and threats to public safety.
Every country has the right to police its borders. but those removals divided a lot of otherwise law-abiding families, punishing youngsters who had done no wrong.
Congress could and should have passed a comprehensive law that made Mr Obama’s unilateral actions unnecessary.
In June 2013 a bipartisan majority of senators passed an immigration reform that-though unwieldy-would have brought millions of migrants in from the shadows and eased rules for some legal workers while boosting the funds spent on border security.
Alas, the plan was deemed too close to an “amnesty” in the House, a body crammed with members in super-safe districts whose main fear is not general elections but internal party rivals trying to grab their seats.
Congress is maddening, but it can’t just be ignored Even before the president unveiled his plans.
But it is possible for predictions of future doom to be both hypocritical and correct.
Yes, as White House aides never tire of pointing out, other presidents back to Eisenhower have deferred deportation for specific groups facing wars or persecution.
In 1990 George Bush senior also decreed that the spouses and children of people legalised under a 1986 immigration act should not be deported.
But Mr Obama’s actions are set to dwarf anything tried before, and unlike Mr Bush’s 1990 move, are not a tweak to fix an ill-drafted law.
Centrist Republicans who favour immigration reform (not least because yelling about “amnesty” repels Hispanic voters) fret that Mr Obama is going to awaken their party’s angry nativists-but it is hardly the president’s job to save Republicans from themselves.
A spokesman for John Boehner, the Republican Speaker of the House, said on November 19th that if “Emperor Obama” ignores his previous qualms about the limits of presidential power, he will “ruin the chances” for congressional action on immigrationthough there is no evidence that Mr Boehner was about to ask his fractious members to help Mr Obama pass ambitious reforms.
It is his apparent certainty that he hears a mandate to act in the national interest, because the country is tired of gridlock.
Mr Obama is right that presidents enjoy a unique role in American democracy.
If he misreads his mandate and overreaches, even in the best of causes, he may do real harm.
On Novemberi3th several thousand gathered outside the Casa Rosada, the president’s residence, in Buenos Aires to protest against corruption, runaway inflation, crime and above all the government of Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner.
Judging by their chants, ''Argentina sin Cristina” (Argentina without Cristina) was their principal demand.
But the crowd was nowhere near as large as the million who rallied in 2013.
The vice-president, Amado Boudou, has been indicted twice this year, once for corruption and once for fraud, but continues in office.
Argentina’s economy is suffering from a combination of a global slowdown and a series of selfinflicted wounds, including the imposition of exchange controls, which worsened a crisis of confidence in the peso, and a debt default in July, which sapped confidence further and intensified the recession.
Official numbers say that the unemployment rate climbed from 6.8% in the third quarter of 2013 to 7.5% a year later.
But it is really 1.5-2 percentage points higher, private-sector economists believe.
The country’s inflation rate has soared from 28% in 2013 to an annualised 41% so far this year.
In real terms wages were 6.7% lower this September than they were last year, according to ACM, an economic consultancy.
Even more worrying is the slide in spending at supermarkets, which dropped by 4.3% year-on-year from September 2013, according to EconViews, a consultancy.
It has expanded state employment by nearly 5% this year to blunt the rise in joblessness.
But the deficits needed to pay for this are being financed by printing pesos, which worsens inflation.
Import restrictions to control the trade deficit are causing shortages of both consumer goods and the supplies that manufacturers need to maintain production.
The great deceleration For daily analysis and debate on the Americas, visit Economist.com/americas mium-the gap between the official rate for the United States dollar and the parallel free-market rate-dropped from 90% in September to 70% now.
That improvement may reflect a currency swap with China, which has eased fears of a devaluation.
It is when Argentines hoping to treat their families to holiday gifts and meals feel most stretched and summer heatwaves trigger power cuts.
For the past two Decembers, police officers in various provinces have gone on strike for higher pay.
Last year more than a dozen people were killed in looting during the police walkout.
A weeklong strike by police in Santa Cruz, starting last month, was a bad omen; it ended when the governor threatened them with sedition charges.
The next big test will come in January, when the government must decide whether to resume talks with creditors who hold bonds on which Argentina has defaulted.
There is an opening, provided by the expiry on December 31st of the “Rights Upon Future Offers” clause of the bond contracts, which bars the government from offering one group of bondholders a better deal than the terms others received during earlier debt restructurings.
Argentina defaulted rather than make an improved offer that had to be open to all bondholders.
A deal with creditors could bring relief, however, by giving the country access to dollars, which would in turn allow it to ease controls on imports and on capital.
But Ms Fernandez’s government has sent ►► The Economist November 22nd 2014 The Americas 33 ► mixed signals about whether it will talk to the bondholders who refused earlier deals.
The next presidential election, to be held in October 2015, will bring about a bigger change, with luck for the better.
All three leading candidates say they would break with the populism and protectionism that have prevailed during the presidency of Ms Fernandez and that of her husband, Nestor Kirchner, who governed from 2003 to 2007 and died in 2010.
He would maintain the popular social programmes she introduced and would not reverse the nationalisation of YPF, the biggest energy company.
He faces a charismatic rival in Sergio Massa, a congressman who broke away from the fpv last year, more to distance himself from Ms Fernandez than because of any profound disagreement with her.
So far his candidacy has revolved more around his personality than his ideas.
The biggest and perhaps most encouraging change would come from Mauricio Macri, the popular mayor of the city of Buenos Aires and the only non-Peronist in the race.
Republican Proposal, the centreright party he founded, is pro-market and favours greater openness to global and regional trading partners.
Much will depend on how the economy fares between now and next October.
Further misery would play into the hands of his rivals-and bring out the pot-bangers.
But a short flight away indigenous communities living amid fearsome overcrowding on the tropical islands of Guna Yala are so poor and malnourished that their young children can die for lack of a boat fare to get to the nearest health clinic.
Salud Mesoamerica 2015 *Selected poor areas the parlous situation of the poorest is prevalent across Central America.
But until recently the IDB says it has never been measured or dealt with directly.
Bill Gates, a founder of Microsoft, and Carlos Slim, a Mexican telecoms magnate.
Together with the government of Spain, the IDB and eight regional health authorities, their charitable foundations set out in 2010 to survey and tackle the problem.
It has revealed the depth of the inequality and shown how entrepreneurial thinking can be applied to seemingly intractable problems.
The programme, called Salud Mesoamerica 2015, began by introducing the first large-scale health surveys of the poorest one-fifth of the population in Panama, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala, Belize and the southernmost Mexican state of Chiapas.
In indigenous parts of Guatemala, for example, rates of stunting and anaemia among infants match those of some of the poorest areas of sub-Saharan Africa.
In remote Panamanian areas like Guna Yala less than 10% of children under five are fully vaccinated.
Mothers of the poorest children in Panama, Guatemala and Chiapas have far less access to family planning and hospitals than the rest of their compatriots.
Yet because national averages show impressive improvement, those on the margins receive scant attention.
Armed with the data, the donors and the IDB agreed on stringent 18-month targets for improvement with the eight regional health authorities, giving them the freedom to design their own approaches to ►► 34 The Americas ► meet the goals.
The total programme was backed with $i42m from the donors, and $54m from local governments.
Those countries that met their targets were to receive half of their own disbursement back for unrestricted use within the health services.
In all countries, officials say, there were striking improvements, but not everyone met the targets.
El Salvador, for example. took just four months to grant regulatory approval for distribution of multivitamins to the poor.
Women in remote villages in Nicaragua who had given birth to more children than they had wanted-because of the huge distances they needed to travel to obtain contraceptives-nominated one person to be paid a stipend to make the j ourney on their b ehalf IDE officials, though advocates of “results-based financing”, say money was not the only motivator-indeed the cost of the programme was less thani% of the region’s total health spending.
National pride was also at stake because countries competed Belloj The great deceleration The region’s economies have slowed far more abruptly than anyone expected I T WAS great while it lasted.
In a golden period from 2003 to 2010 Latin America’s economies grew at an annual average rate of close to 5%, wages rose and unemployment fell, more than 50m people were lifted out of poverty and the middle class swelled to more than a third of the population.
What some worried would be a “new normal” of expansion of 3% a year is turning out to be far worse.
The region’s economies will on average grow by only around 1.3% this year.
Latin America is decelerating faster than much of the rest of the emerging world, points out Augusto de la Torre, the bank’s chief economist for the region.
Alejandro Werner, his counterpart at the IMF, sees growth averaging just 2.7% over the next five years.
As China’s growth slackens, commodity prices have slumped back to their lowest levels since the 2009 world recession.
Now the oil price has been hit, too, thanks mainly to increased output in the United States.
All this has hurt the commodity-producing economies of South America, though some benefit from cheaper oil.
The outlook for Mexico, with its structural reforms and manufacturing ties to North America, is slightly brighter.
Worst off are those countries with populist governments that squandered the windfall from the boom.
Eorecasters see no let-up in the stagflation afflicting Venezuela and Argentina.
Sep 2011 —Oct 2012 Oct 2013 Apr 2014 —Oct 2014 Source: IMF will barely grow this year and faces a fiscal squeeze in 2015.
The high-flying and well-run economies of Chile, Peru and Colombia are all suffering.
Contrast that with sub-Saharan Africa, which is also a big commodity producer and where the imf expects growth of 5.1% this year and 5.8% next.
A second oft-cited cause of the Latin doldrums is the move to normal monetary policy in the United States, which will raise the cost of borrowing in the region.
Some economists now reckon that the boom masked deep-rooted structural problems.
Latin America’s record in productivity may have been even worse than the data seemed to indicate, says Mr de la Torre.
The effect of changes in the terms of trade, and the weight of service businesses and of the informal economy in the region, makes this especially hard to calculate.
One called it the “Concacaf of health”, after the region’s World Cup qualifying tournament.
The health officials of the countries have since met in Panama City to swap ideas.
Those whose countries missed the targets can improve their performance and move on with the other countries to a more exacting set of 18-month targets that have fresh incentives.
The biggest challenge of all will be to keep the programme going without the billionaires’ support.
But if the lesson is learned that averages should not be the sole basis for making policy decisions, it will have been a step in the right direction. ■ that the region’s poor education and skills shortage have caught up with it.
To watch and wait as staff in shops or at telecoms companies battle with it equipment that either they don’t know how to operate or is frequently out of order is to wonder whether technology is enhancing or undermining productivity.
The second is that the failure to invest in public transport means that the region’s big cities, clogged with the new cars the boom afforded, reap fewer economies of scale and specialisation, because people find it so difficult to move around.
What does seem clear is that the region is suffering a structural supply-side shock.
Many economies have been operating close to capacity, points out Mr Werner.
So demand-priming stimulus-such as Brazil’s loose fiscal policy or Peru’s recent giveaway of an extra bonus to public employees-looks mistaken.
Eiscal balances have weakened by an average of three points of GDP since the 2009 recession.
Nevertheless, low debt, stronger banks and more reserves permit looser monetary policy in some places.
With borrowing costs still low, now is the time for these countries to step up investment in infrastructure.
Such investments, like much-needed efforts to improve education and training, take years to bear fruit.
The problem is that Latin America’s leaders confront a mobilised population that has grown used to the good times.
Where it is absent, Latin America may become more combustible in the next few years.
Asia The Economist November 22nd 2014 35 Japanese politics Taking up arms TOKYO Shinzo Abe is preparing to do battle in a snap general election.
But the bigger struggle will be over economic reform T he announcement on November i8th by Shinzo Abe, Japan’s prime minister, that he was calling a snap general election was made to sound a bold one.
The poll would in effect be a referendum on postponing a planned second rise in the consumption tax, Mr Abe declared-as if to show that he was defying his country’s fiscal hawks.
He also urged citizens to use their vote to show what they thought of his reform policies, commonly known as Abenomics, which he has presented as Japan’s only means of ending years of stagnation.
It was stirring rhetoric, yet in reality there is little call for an election just nowand little risk of Mr Abe being defeated.
After the surprise news a day earlier that Japan had slipped into a technical recession over the summer, not even opposition parties now oppose delaying the tax increase.
The elections will reconstitute the lower house of Japan’s parliament, the Diet.
But Mr Abe’s government already wields a powerful maj ority in both houses that is guaranteed until 2016.
This followed a contraction of 7.3% in the second quarter that many blamed on an initial rise in the consumption tax, from 5% to 8%, in April.
That made it easy for Mr Abe to delay the next tax hike until April 2017, when nothing short of a full-blown financial crisis, he pledged, would prevent a further rise-vital, as the fiscal conservatives see it, to repairing Japan’s parlous public finances.
Many politicians are ill-prepared for the rapid-fire campaign due to unfold after December 2nd, the official start, mps were not expecting a snap election until next summer, after a series of local polls in the spring.
The news of recession certainly makes it tricky to produce a slick campaign message about Abenomics.
The government had been expecting growth of around 1% in the third quarter.
Politicians could then have asserted that the economy had pulled clear of the gloom that followed the first consumption-tax rise.
Ashraf Ghani against the chaos For daily analysis and debate on Asia, visit Economist.com/asia Economist.com/blogs/banyan weak to stand up to a second consumption-tax rise even a year from now would appear to signal that Abenomics is failing.
Hence the immediate reaction to the news of a snap poll was one of bemusement.
In Gifu prefecture, in central Japan, a party chapter adopted a formal resolution to oppose holding a national poll.
It urged the government to dedicate itself to economic recovery instead of risking a political vacuum.
Mr Abe already has strong backing for delaying the tax increase, but his election may have other uses.
Many Japanese hope that if he emerges, as expected, with a renewed mandate, extended for another four years, he may at last muster the courage to get on with badly needed reforms to the labour market and to Japan’s agriculture.
Yet Ishin no To’s more right-leaning leader, Tom Hashimoto, is resisting.
Voters’ lack of enthusiasm may not harm the ldp and its coalition partner, Komeito.
Since Mr Abe’s popularity has been falling in recent months, the ldp will probably lose some of that huge haul, particularly from the proportional-representation ►► 36 Asia The Economist November 22nd 2014 ► slice of the vote, which elects i8o members.
Yet if Mr Abe can limit the losses to fewer than 40 seats he will keep a satisfactory majority.
A strong result would help to strengthen Mr Abe’s position within his own party, says Kozo Yamamoto, an ldp politician who helped design Mr Abe’s economic strategy last year.
This would strengthen his hand in shaking up his cabinet, which has been battered by scandals and resignations since a reshufQe in September.
But there is still a risk that opponents of Abenomics could muster enough strength to weaken Mr Abe.
The loss of an election for the governorship of Okinawa on Novemberi6th, though chiefly the result of local opposition to the American army’s outsized presence on the island chain, showed that the ldp is vulnerable.
For those hoping that a strong election result might re-energise Mr Abe’s reform agenda, it was dispiriting that he made little direct mention of reforms this week.
Mr Zaenal, who fishes for tuna and bonefish off the coast of east Java, was glum and worried.
Overnight the price of filling up his 1,000-litre tank had risen by 2m rupiah.
Indonesia’s fuel subsidies are wasteful, expensive and poorly targetedbenefits overwhelmingly accrue to the country’s middle and upper classes, rather than the car-less poor.
Between 2009 and 2013 Indonesia spent more on fuel subsidies than it did on infrastructure and social-welfare programmes combined.
Subsidies threatened to eat up more than 10% of total government spending next year, imperilling the country’s ability to pay for the ambitious and necessary health-care, education and infrastructure programmes that Jokowi promised in his election campaign.
A series of reform bills, including one dedicated to women’s empowerment in the economy (a cherished project of Mr Abe’s and one where much has been accomplished) now face deletion from the legislative calendar because of the looming poll.
Yet in delaying the consumption-tax rise against the wishes of the powerful finance ministry Mr Abe has shown that he can face down bureaucrats.
It is inside the ministries and the ldp that he encounters the most entrenched resistance to his efforts at reform.
His advisers are privately making comparisons to the decision in 2005 by a predecessor, Junichiro Koizumi, to call a snap election to seek backing for privatising the postal service.
Nothing as yet suggests that December’s election will bring Mr Abe quite the mandate that Mr Koizumi won.
But it would make little sense for Mr Abe to seek re-endorsement by voters unless he had a grand purpose.
That was not just because of the budgetary impact of this decision, sizeable though it is.
The increase also showed that Jokowi had the stomach to take politically risky but economically necessary decisions-an all-too-rare trait among Indonesian politicians, and a necessary one for a president with reformist ambitions.
Fuel subsidies are popular (seemingly free money usually is), and politicians cut them at their peril.
Jokowi’s predecessor, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, raised fuel prices in 2013.
He was greeted with street protests that were tumultuous enough that when Jokowi asked him to raise prices again as he was leaving office, he demurred.
Jokowi’s announcement also sparked anger-protests, largely peaceful, broke out in cities across Indonesia, and public-bus and minivan drivers threatened to strikehut was not a surprise.
His finance minister, Bambang Brodjonegro, said in Brisbane that the rise would be no more than 3,000 rupiah per litre; pegging the increase at 2,000 may have removed some of the political sting.
Subsidised petrol now costs 8,500 rupiah per litre-not far off the price of higher-octane, unsubsidised petrol which, thanks to low oil prices, is selling for as low as 10,200 rupiah per litre.
Another reason markets rejoiced was the swift action of Indonesia’s central bank.
To limit the inflation likely to result from Jokowi’s action, the bank raised its policy rate to 775% on November 18th, the first such increase in more than a year.
Despite the protests, Indonesians seemed largely resigned to higher prices.
Even Mr Zaenal said he understood why fuel had to cost more, though now he says that he wishes the government could set the market price of fish.
To rub his message in, Mr Obama worried about the “incredible natural glory of the Great Barrier Reef”, off the coast of Queensland, which is threatened by global warming.
Three days earlier, Mr Obama had struck a deal with Xi Jinping, China’s president, at another summit in Beijing, in which the world’s two biggest emitters of carbon set targets to lower their outputs of greenhouse gases.
He had wanted to limit the G20’s climate commitments to a line about energy efficiency.
Eew can recall such a sharp public rebuke from Australia’s main strategic ally.
Australia is responsible for ah out 1.5% of global carbon emissions; measured by its output per person, it is one of the highest polluters.
Yet Mr Abbott has staked his political career on a combative approach to climate action.
Mr Abbott won power last year after waging a scare campaign against a carbon tax Labor had introduced instead; his government has since abolished it.
Mr Abbott argued in Brisbane that climate talks should happen elsewhere, not at meetings of the G20.
Mr Obama pointedly used his speech in Brisbane to announce a $3 billion contribution to the Green Climate Eund, a un body to help poor countries deal with climate change.
Mr Abbott felt in warmer company after Mr Xi and Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister, left Brisbane to address Australia’s parliament separately in Canberra.
It includes tariff cuts on Australian shipments of coal, demand for which in China has grown rapidly in recent years.
But the summitry has left him with difficult choices over Australia’s position on global warming as countries prepare for another summit in Paris next year-devoted entirely to the climate.
Spring saw students occupying the legislature for more than three weeks in protest against his efforts to forge closer ties with China; thousands took to the streets to back them.
With presidential elections due in January 2016, the polls will be closely watched.
By then Mr Ma will have served two terms in office. so he will be constitutionally obliged to step down.
The contest for the post of mayor in the capital, Taipei, will be especially important.
The city has remained a stronghold of the KMT ever since the party was forced to flee to the island from the mainland in 1949 at the end of the Chinese civil war.
Now Ko Wen-je , an eminent surgeon who is without political experience and is running as an independent, is polling higher than Sean Lien, a scion of one of the kmt’s richest political families.
The KMT chose Mr Lien as its candidate through a ballot of its members in the capital.
Lien Chan, is a former vice-president who has helped forge closer ties between the KMT and China.
The younger Mr Lien decided to enter politics after a lone gunman shot him at an election rally in 2010.
Before that he worked in business, including in investment banking-experience, he says, that will help him manage Taipei’s economy.
But many of Taipei’s young people, who were out on the streets in strength during the “sunflower movement” in and around the legislature in spring, resent the business elite.
Mr Ko, who is often affectionately called “Ko P” , appeals to those Taiwanese who are fed up with bickering between the two main parties.
The DPP decided not to field a candidate in Taipei after the party’s polls showed that Mr Ko was more popular within the dpp than any candidate it could field itself.
Mr Ko appeals not only to middle-of-the-road voters, but also to some in the DPP who want formal independence for the island.
Mr Ko has given support in the past to the dpp but has tried to avoid the question of independence during his campaign.
The ruling party is also lagging behind in the contest for mayor in the central city of Taichung, which it has held since 2001.
Meanwhile dpp candidates in the south, where the opposition is at its strongest, still enjoy comfortable support.
Being local elections, this month’s votes are more about housing and city infrastructure than relations with China.
Although the dpp is more accommodating towards China than it was before Mr Ma took office, if it gains a boost, China will look askance at it.
Afghanistan’s new president, a frail figure in white salwar kameez, grins, eyes twinkling, tantalised by the suggestion.
On the basis of his first month in office and, more important, his two years as finance minister in the government of warlords and technocrats formed after the Taliban’s fall, Afghanistan would be in much better shape than it is.
That is not only because Mr Ghani achieved a lot in a short time, setting up computer systems and a single Treasury account where there had been only paper files and broken chairs.
It was also because the former World Banker had a vision for how Afghanistan should seize the great opportunity, including billions in aid money, suddenly afforded it.
He offended Afghanistan’s benefactors and neighbours even as, presiding over corrupt elections and a spreading kleptocracy, he encouraged Afghans to consider their democracy a fraud.
Today’s strongmen control more than border trade; they have grabbed property in Kabul worth billions of dollars, run a drugs business equal to perhaps 15% of economic output and enjoy blissful impunity-as displayed in the protracted theft of nearly a billion dollars from Kabul Bank.
Despite the trillion-dollar cost of Afghanistan’s 13-year war and reconstruction, the poverty rate has been static-at around 36%-for years.
That is fuel for an insurgency which, even as foreign troops withdraw, ravages the country.
That is even before considering the weakness of his government, which, after a dispute over the election result, Mr Ghani will preside over with his erstwhile rival and now chief executive, Abdullah Abdullah.
Yet Mr Ghani, who has co-written a thoughtful book on fixing failed states, relishes his task.
Given better government, he believes, most Afghans would embrace the rule of law.
He has reformed the attorney-general’s office and set about appointing new Supreme Court judges.
Bigger reforms, including to tax collection and the land registry, will follow.
In Saudi Arabia he made plain that, though partly Western-educated and married to a Lebanese Christian-whom, momentously, he thanked in his inauguration speech-he is a Muslim leader.
In Beijing he raised access to Afghanistan’s mineral resources and the mutual threat of jihadism; both reasons, he suggested, for China to lean on Pakistan to stop succouring the Taliban.
Where Mr Karzai called the Taliban his brothers and berated the Western troops who shed much blood, including their own, Mr Ghani has signed a defence pact with America and praised the sacrifices of Western and Afghan soldiers.
The Taliban are his foe-yet he promises a fresh push for a negotiated peace.
A merit-based failing state These are big claims for a man battling to form a government, a deadline for the new cabinet having lapsed as negotiations between Mr Ghani and Mr Abdullah drag on.
Mr Ghani retorts that relations between the two men are excellent and thatis new ministers will be named before a conference of donor countries in London on December 4th.
In due course he promises a bigger clear-out-“the government is dysfunctional.
That was typical Ghani-learned, right-minded and defiant; but also prone to a sort of development gobbledygook that can raise doubts about the feasibility of his plans.
Perhaps it will turn out he never was the right man to lead Afghanistan.
Yet the cautious, court politics many of his critics advocated was exemplified by Mr Karzai.
In his analysis of Afghanistan’s problems and the likeliest solutions, moreover, Mr Ghani has the advantage of being right.
That is why Afghans, the subject of all manner of half-baked experiments, are right to be hopeful.
In his second coming, Mr Ghani could again leave Afghanistan looking much better than when he found it.
Little about his ornamentation hints at Mr Shi’s i8 years in America, where, like thousands of Chinese students, he decamped for graduate study in the early 1990s.
He was one of the most famous Chinese scholars to do so; an emblem for the government’s attempts to match its academic achievements to its economic ones.
Sending students abroad has been central to China’s efforts to improve its education since the late 1970s, when it began trying to repair the damage wrought by Mao’s destruction of the country’s academic institutions.
Chinese youths make up over a fifth of all international students in higher education in the oecd, a club mostly of rich countries.
What makes China different is that most of these bright minds have stayed away.
Only a third have come back, according to the Ministry of Education; fewer by some counts.
A study this year by a scholar at America’s Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education found that 85% of those who gained their doctorate in America in 2006 were still there in 2011.
To lure experts to Chinese universities, the government has launched a series of schemes since the mid-1990s.
These have offered some combination of a one-off bonus of up to im yuan , promotion, an assured salary and a housing allowance or even a free apartment.
Some of the best universities have built homes for academics to rent or buy at a discount.
In 2005-2012 published research articles from higher-education institutions rose by 54%; patents granted went up eightfold.
Pulling some star scholars back from abroad will not be enough to turn China into an academic giant.
They typically target full professors whose more productive, innovative years may already be behind them.
It sends the message to today’s best and brightest that they should still spend their most productive years abroad.
Many grants are allocated by administrators who lack expertise in evaluating proposals, rather than by open, competitive peer review.
Staff are not encouraged to be sceptical about existing theories, especially those held by senior staff who control resources, says Mr Cao.
But letting officials decide on research is a poor recipe for innovation.
Until recently universities routinely hired their own students upon graduating.
Many staff did not have doctorates, lecturers were given jobs for life with no motivation to excel and all promotion was internal.
Some universities are changing the way they recruit and hence finding it easier to attract staff from abroad.
They advertise jobs and academics apply for promotion and are rewarded according to their achievements.
Departments such as Mr Shi’s at Tsinghua have attracted private funding to top up salaries for tenured positions.
Assistant professors at some elite institutions are paid as much as $70,000-80,000 a year, up to 80% of which comes from donations.
But academic institutions the world over are notoriously slow to reform.
China has more than 2,400 universities and research facilities-and so far only a few minds have been changed.
Many people complain bitterly that courts often pay more heed to the whims of officials than to the law.
The country’s statutes on inheritance remain little changed from the days when few had any property to bequeath.
The rapid emergence in recent years of a large middle-class with complex property claims has been fuelling inheritance disputes.
Today’s inheritance law was adopted in 1985 when divorce and remarriage were rare and international marriage nearly unknown.
The law does at least grant men and women equal rights to their kin’s estates, but otherwise it is based largely on tradition.
It is specific when it comes to handing down “forest trees, livestock and poultry” but runs out of steam when it comes to newfangled notions such as intellectual property; never mind domain names and digital photographs.
A sweeping reference to “other lawful property” is its unhelpful attempt to cover all eventualities.
Modest changes were approved in 2003, but woolly areas remain such as in procedures for registering wills.
This has led to rancorous court cases like one that last month attracted much public attention.
Since the last revisions to the law, society has kept up its blistering pace of change.
Thus there are now ex-spouses and stepchildren among those squabbling over estates.
China’s embrace of globalisation means that some assets are located in other countries.
State media reported on a car crash in 2012 in which both parents died several hours before their sole child, a six-year-old girl.
She automatically inherited their assets in that short interval but had no legal heir herself, meaning the assets went to the state instead of other kin.
Once hysterical about the territory’s pro-democracy protests, their commentators are now smugly dismissive and condescending.
A few days earlier Global Times, a nationalist newspaper in Beijing, had crowed that the protesters had been “forgotten” by the world.
Nearly two months after the use of tear gas by police drew more than 100,000 demonstrators onto the streets and prompted protesters to set up barricaded encampments on several major roads, the authorities are beginning once again to step up pressure, this time with little resistance.
On November 18th police, enforcing a court order, quietly cleared some of the barricades from in front of an office building near the government’s headquarters.
It looks like the beginning of the end for the unexpectedly protracted standoff.
They still have the support of younger Hong Kong residents, who resent China’s refusal to allow free elections for the territory’s leader.
More than four-fifths of respondents in a recent poll wanted the demonstrators to go home.
A handful of protesters chafed at the meek response to the police action.
After midnight on November 19th a small group of masked demonstrators tried to ram their way into the offices of the nearby Legislative Council building, using a metal barricade to smash a glass entrance.
Police used pepper spray and batons to stop them and arrested six people.
But the protesters’ three encampments look unlikely to last for much longer.
Since the police’s counter-productive tear-gas attack on September 28th the government has tried to wait out the “Umbrella Movement”, as it was dubbed because of protesters’ use of umbrellas to protect themselves.
The government hoped that the public would grow impatient with the disruption to traffic and business.
But it was a far cry from the carnage on November i8th, when emergency workers found victims lying in pools of blood, still wrapped in their prayer shawls, with phylacteries wound around their arms and heads.
Residents said life must go on, even after the murder of four worshippers and a policeman; the two attackers, cousins belonging to an ostensibly leftist Palestinian faction, were shot dead by police.
Jerusalem is living its worst days of violence after many years as an island of relative calm amid the violent turmoil in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
Nine Israelis have been killed in a rash of stabbings, shootings and hit-and-run attacks in Jerusalem over the past month.
In Jewish districts, concrete barriers have been erected to shield commuters standing at light-rail stations.
Israeli commuters disembark from the light railway before it crosses Palestinian areas, fearing that the train will be attacked with stones and firebombs.
The violence has also changed life in Palestinian areas of Jerusalem, home to all of the attackers.
In Jabal al-Mukaber, where the synagogue attackers lived, bulldozers laid concrete blocks to cut off roads; for the first time in decades, police established checkpoints at the entrances to other districts.
On November 19th Israel blew up the third-floor apartment of Abdel-Rahman alShalloudi, who had killed two people on October 22nd by ramming them with a car.
It marked a full return to the practice of punitive home demolitions (initiated by the British) that had been mostly halted since 2005, when the army concluded they had little deterrent value.
Israel also declined to release the bodies of the synagogue attackers to their families.
None of this has stanched the violence, nor reassured Jerusalem’s jittery residents.
The unrest in the city started in July, after the murder of a Palestinian teenager burned alive in an act of revenge for the killing of three Jewish seminary students in the occupied West Bank.
Large-scale riots followed for a week, and smaller clashes have continued almost every night since.
Such turmoil has become a growing liability for the Israeli prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, who has made security the centrepiece of his tenure.
His allies in government have blamed many groups for inciting the violence-Hamas, Islamic Jihad, even European diplomats-but it is the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, on whom the vitriol is now concentrated.
Mr Abbas condemned the synagogue attack, reportedly under pressure from America, but his statement also urged Israel to halt its “provocations” at the Haram al-Sharif, the “Noble Sanctuary”, the thirdholiest place in Islam, built atop the ruins of the former Jewish temple.
Last month a Palestinian shot and wounded a leading temple campaigner, Yehuda Glide.
Mr Netanyahu has said, ever more firmly that he will not change the status quo, a message he repeated in an Arabic-language video.
Palestinians do not trust him, though, and the call to defend the Muslim holy places has featured in the propaganda of Hamas, an Islamist movement, and other groups.
Mr Netanyahu said the synagogue attack was a “direct result” of Mr Abbas’s words, though the charge was apparently contested by the head of the Shin Bet intelligence service.
Yet Mr Abbas has little influence in Jerusalem, a city he cannot visit without Israeli permission.
Its Palestinian residents, living in worse conditions than their Israeli neighbours, scarcely look to him for guidance; on the contrary, many feel Mr Abbas has been too pliant and is concerned only with his fief in the West Bank.
Rami Hamdallah, paid a condolence visit to the family of the teenager killed by Jewish extremists, neighbours heckled his motorcade.
Just as worrying as the rising bloodshed is the fact that the attacks do not seem to be directed by anyone.
General Martin Dempsey, America’s chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, on November 15th told American troops in Iraq that the battle is “starting to turn”though it will take time to defeat the jihadists.
The UN’s envoy for Iraq, Nickolay Mladenov, assured the Security Council that the strategy of enlisting local forces was showing signs of progress.
After months of setbacks the wobbly American-led coalition battling is has halted the group’s momentum and begun to seize the initiative.
Relentless air attacks have depleted the group’s arsenals, reduced its mobility and reportedly killed several of its senior commanders.
A single raid on November 19th, targeting a complex of is fortifications north-west of Kirkuk, involved aircraft from seven countries.
The success not only returned a big economic asset to government hands, but also severed the link between a pocket of is forces in Tikrit and a larger zone under its sway to the north.
Kurdish and Iraqi government forces and allied militias are said to be poised for an offensive from the east into this area.
Tikrit, largely abandoned by its people, may not stay long in is hands.
Unlike its narrowmindedly pro-Shia predecessor, the government of Haider al-Abadi has made an effort to win over the minority Sunnis, whose anger at being marginalised fuelled is’s rise.
It has also acted to heal rifts with the Kurds’ autonomous region, transferring an initial $500m tranche of federal funds that had been withheld by Baghdad in protest against Kurdish efforts to exploit their own oil resources.
This improving political climate should foster closer military co-operation between the Kurds and the central government, and raises the chance that more Sunni tribes can be coaxed onto the government’s side in a repeat of America’s belated but ultimately successful effort to subdue restless Sunni regions during its occupation of Iraq.
Coalition bombing in Syria, meanwhile, has sharply reduced the flow of contraband oil, a big source of is funding.
Local Syrian Kurdish forces, now reinforced by other Syrian rebels and Peshmerga troops supplied by Iraqi Kurdistan, are slowly pushing IS fighters out of the besieged city.
That said, while a winning strategy in Iraq seems to be in sight, the same is not true of Syria, where there are few ground forces to take on is.
The policy of focusing only on is (and at times on another jihadist group, Jabhat al-Nusra), while leaving President Bashar Assad undisturbed, risks weakening mainstream rebels and causing a dangerous Sunni backlash.
Eor now, faced with worsening odds in battle, IS has responded with more intense propaganda.
Countering rumours that he had been injured or killed, the is “caliph”, Abu Baler al-Baghdadi, vowed on November 13th in a rare recorded speech that his men would fight to the death.
A later is propaganda video showcased the group’s gore, including carefully choreographed slow-motion close-ups of the beheading of 18 captured Syrian air force officers (see picture, above) and the purportedly severed head of an American ex-soldier turned aid worker, Peter Kassig. is’s unflinching killers included several Western recruits.
The videos sought to project terror by suggesting the widening reach of is.
Mr Baghdadi stressed his mission’s pan-Islamic nature by calling on Sunnis in Yemen and in “the Land of the Sanctuaries”, ie, Saudi Arabia, to kill Shias in their midst.
Masked gunmen, probably inspired by similar views, did in fact kill five Shia worshippers in Saudi Arabia on November 4th.
But the attack, as well as is’s own actions, has generated public revulsion rather than admiration.
Eear of is has also spurred Gulf states on November 16th to end a bitter dispute between Qatar and its neighbours over the small emirate’s alleged support for Islamist groups.
In honour of the occasion, the East African nation came together to rewrite its 1977 constitution.
But instead of strengthening the union, the process may be tearing it apart.
Opposition parties abandoned the process amid allegations of intimidation and abuse.
At the centre of the dispute is Zanzibar’s desire for greater autonomy.
At the moment Zanzibar has its own semi-autonomous government, but many islanders feel that the mainland still wields far too much power.
The Constitutional Review Commission, which held public consultations and wrote a working draft of the new constitution, found that at least 6o% of Zanzibaris were unhappy with the terms of the union.
Rather than the two-tier status quo, the commission proposed implementing a three-tier structure with semi-autonomous governments for both mainland Tanganyika and Zanzibar, and an overarching Tanzanian government.
The ruling party argued this would lead to increased demands for Zanzibari independence and the eventual dissolution of the union.
Critics claim that ccm is opposed to the new structure because it would make it more difficult for it to retain power.
The dust-up over Zanzibar has overshadowed a number of improvements to the constitution, in the areas of human rights and gender equality.
However, critics say that not enough has been done to limit the president’s powers.
Provisions for a limited tenure for members of parliament, mechanisms for recall, elections and an independent public service commission-which had all been suggested by the review commission-failed to make it into the final draft.
Most go straight to dvd to be sold on the streets for the equivalent of a couple of dollars.
Taiwo, a hawker in the commercial capital, says that on a good day he might sell five films.
Nollywood is a big business-contributing 1.2% to Nigeria’s gross domestic product Full stream ahead and employing more than a million people-but the distribution of its films poses a barrier to the industry’s growth.
Sales of DVDS account for more than 90% of revenue but film-makers complain that poor regulation of street markets leaves them open to piracy.
That, combined with often low sales volumes, means that little cash reaches their pockets.
The saving grace is that most of Nollywood’s output is shot on a minuscule budget.
Nollywood productions, including series such as “BlackBerry Babes” or “Lekki Wives”, are often filmed in just ten days and cost some $40,000, yielding notoriously low-end content.
Across the world, the film industry has been threatened by online distribution, which leads to plummeting dvd sales, falling cinema attendance and internet piracy.
But Nollywood is hopeful that the internet could be the answer, not the problem.
Streaming services have been operating in Nigeria for several years, but are only now beginning to gather momentum.
The biggest of those is iROKOtv, which has made some 5,000 titles available to online audiences.
Others such as Pana tv, which secured the rights to stream “Half of a Yellow Sun”, a film based on a Nigerian novel, and iBAKATV are expanding fast.
Jason Njoku, the British-Nigerian founder of iROKO, said that when he first started buying streaming rights from Nigerian film-makers four years ago, the industry had almost no concept of online distribution.
Today online portals are a crucial source of cash, iroko, for instance, pays between $8,000 and $25,000 per film for a set period of time.
Eilm directors like Mr Emelonye often sell to several online platforms.
It is also giving film-makers the chance to export their art. iROico has more viewers in London today than in Nigeria.
Witnessing the appetite for such content among diaspora communities, Africa Magic, a pay-xv channel airing African movies and soaps, has also launched a streaming service for Africans living abroad.
So far, video-on-demand services have struggled to create much of a market at home, where power is intermittent and the vast majority of the population does not have access to a computer.
Streaming to the loom smartphones in sub-Saharan Africa is a mouth-watering prospect.
As internet access rises, directors are hoping that new distribution avenues will unleash the potential of Nigeria’s film industry.
In the past week insurgents and government troops have traded possession of urban districts and surrounding farmland, leaving much of it burnt.
The Nigerian army, one of the biggest in Africa, should have little difficulty scattering the amateur jihadists.
Hence the government’s decision to spend $1 billion on new aircraft and training, among other things.
Critics question how much will go towards appropriate kit (never mind how much gets stolen by corrupt generals) and whether it is sensible to lavish resources on a force implicated in atrocities and human-rights abuses.
Two out of three African countries have substantially increased military spending over the past decade; the continent as a whole raised military expenditure by 65%, after it had stagnated for the previous 15 years.
Angola’s defence budget increased by more than one-third in 2013, to $6 billion, overtaking South Africa as the biggest spender in sub-Saharan Africa.
Other countries with rocketing defence budgets include Burkina Faso, Ghana, Namibia, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Coastal states such as Cameroon, Mozambique, Senegal and Tanzania are sprucing up their navies.
Angola has even looked at buying a used aircraft-carrier from Spain or Italy.
Cameroon and Ghana are importing transport planes to boost their ability to move troops around and deploy them abroad, which they have been ill-equipped to do.
For peacekeeping duties they generally ask friendly Western governments for help in airlifting troops, or charter civilian planes.
Despite such handicaps, many are participating in a growing number of African Union and un peacekeeping missions.
Once rarely seen in blue helmets, sub-Saharan soldiers are increasingly replacing troops from Europe and Asia.
Ethiopians and Rwandans have acquired a reputation as reliable peacekeepers, all the while benefiting from training as well as from reimbursements for purchases of weapons.
Their troops are more often paid on time, get decent food and go on regular leave, all of which boosts morale and discipline.
A big issue is whether troops have enough training to handle sophisticated new gear.
Chad makes good use of its Sukhoi su-25 jets-with the help of mercenaries.
On the other hand, Congo-Brazzaville only manages to get its Mirage fighter jets into the air for national-day celebrations.
South Africa bought 26 Gripen combat aircraft from Sweden but has mothballed half of them because of budget cuts.
Uganda spent hundreds of millions of dollars on Sukhoi su-30 combat aircraft but little on the precision weapons to go with them.
High commodity prices over the past decade (they are now falling) have filled the coffers of many.
Other are suspected of inflating deals to siphon off money for themselves.
Tanks for everything But some spending is prompted by genuine security threats.
Offshore discoveries of oil and gas have increased the need for maritime security.
More traditional threats, internal as well as external, persist in countries such as South Sudan, where the government is fighting rebels while also facing a hostile northern neighbour.
A huge South African purchase of arms from, among others, Germany and Britain, agreed to more than a decade ago, included promises of “offsets” whereby local firms would help assemble jets and ships.
Antonov is going into Sudan; Eurocopter is in Kenya’s capital, Nairobi; Fincantieri, an Italian shipbuilder, is in the country’s main port, Mombasa; and Saab is setting up a plant for its military aircraft in Botswana.
Ambitious officers may misinterpret new might for political right-and may be tempted to seize power, as many have done before.
Sophisticated arms may also fall into the wrong hands; witness the array of Libyan weapons that have fuelled conflicts across Africa, from Mali to the Central African Republic, since the fall of Muammar Oaddafi.
These structural changes to African armies may gradually alter the type of war that could be fought on the continent.
Since the anti-colonial guerrilla wars of the past century, most African conflicts have been internal.
Few countries previously had the ability, let alone the inclination, to fight their neighbours.
In the late 1990s, several countries, including Angola and Zimbabwe, sent forces to take part in Congo’s civil war-to little avail.
Tanzania sent its army into Uganda, along with guerrillas returning from exile, to overthrow Idi Amin in 1978.
In general, however, few disputes between African countries have been liable to spark wars.
In the third quarter the euro zone grew by just6% at an annualised rate.
This sluggishness was not primarily due to the countries hit hardest by the crisis-Greece’s economy grew faster than any other euro-zone country (see page 68), and Spain and Ireland are recovering.
Rather, it is the core countries that are exhausted-and few more so than the biggest, Germany.
It grew by justi% in the third quarter, after contracting by the same amount in the previous three months.
Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, has been subject to a rising chorus of foreign criticism.
Germany should do more to stimulate domestic consumption and investment, goes the refrain.
This would help countries like Erance and Italy as they undergo tough structural reforms.
Higher imports would also reduce Germany’s current-account surplus, the largest in the world and a cause of imbalances within Europe and beyond.
Stimulating demand would push up prices, which could save the euro zone from tipping into deflation.
Marcel Eratzscher, an adviser to Sigmar Gabriel, the economics minister, says that Germany should boost investment for its own good.
Much of Germany’s recent success, he argues, has been an “illusion” bought by underinvestment in everything from roads to education to factories.
Wolfgang Schauble, the finance minister, has responded by pledging an extra €10 billion in investment by the federal government over three years from 2016, on top of €5 billion already earmarked for roads and bridges.
Germany’s municipal governments, not the federal one, should be the ones to raise public investment.
But the bigger problem, he thinks, is that private investment is too low.
In a free-market economy such as Germany’s, the government cannot command firms to invest more at home than abroad.
If businesses have chosen another course, he says, it must be because, for whatever reasons, they find Germany an unrewarding place for investment.
As it may indeed be, Mr Schmidt’s council of five sages scolded Mrs Merkel’s government this month.
Businesses worry about its largesse in public pensions, which defies Germany’s mix of an ageing population and shrinldng workforce.
Her coalition with the centre-left Social Democrats is raising pensions for mothers and letting people retire as young as 63 if they have worked for long enough.
Entrepreneurs also fret about the new minimum wage, due to take effect in January at the relatively high level of €8.50 an hour.
Contrary to hopes that this might boost domestic demand, says Mr Schmidt, some workers will simply lose their jobs.
Moreover, those whose pay goes up will then claim less in welfare top-ups, so they will not have much extra income to spend.
A further misstep, Mr Schmidt believes, is a muddled energy policy-subsidising solar and wind power and phasing out nuclearthat is merely raising companies’ energy costs.
And yet another is a law to cap rising rents, which is likely just to discourage the building of new properties.
The differences between foreign economists who want more stimulus and German ones who think the problems lie elsewhere partly reflect diverging philosophies.
Anglo-Saxon economists assess the problems of Europe and Germany ►► 46 Europe The Economist November 22nd 2014 ► in terms of insufficient demand.
German economists worry more about the conditions, or “order” of the economy, in the tradition of Ordoliberalism that disdains state intervention and dates back to an early 20th-century economist, Walter Eucken.
Demand-side sceptics respond that “Keynesianism is not the answer” when what is most urgently needed is structural reform in crisis-hit countries.
Yet low inflation in Germany is both a sign of weakness and a source of pain for peripheral countries.
The ultimate aim of reforms, says Mr Sinn, is to lower prices in the south of the euro zone relative to those in the north, so as to reflect lower productivity.
He reckons that would require German inflation of 5% for ten years, or a similar level of deflation in the south, or some combination of the two.
The economics think-tank of the Hans-Bockler foundation, which is tied to the trade unions, says German wages are growing only slightly faster than the euro-zone average.
Unit labour costs in Germany rose by 2.3% in 2013 and 1.7% in the first half of 2014, compared with the euro zone’s 1.2% and 0.7%, respectively.
I am very serious and determined,” said Klaus lohannis, the liberal mayor of Sibiu, in Transylvania.
He is the first Romanian from the country’s ethnic German Protestant minority to be elected president.
That is quite a shock for such a conservative, majority-Orthodox country.
That Mr lohannis won on November 16th was thanks largely to a turnout of 62%, the highest in 14 years.
This reflected a protest vote against Victor Ponta, the Socialist prime minister who was the front-runner in all the opinion polls and ran a fiercely lohannis, a Teutonic winner nationalist campaign.
Another factor was the sight of thousands of Romanians abroad queuing for hours at overcrowded embassies and unable to cast their votes, which encouraged more voters at home.
Despite protesters against Mr Ponta claiming electoral fraud, Mr lohannis emerged as a big winner, with 54.5% of the vote.
Germany has not ceased to be admired as a modernising force in this part of Europe,” says Tom Gallagher, an Edinburgh-based political analyst.
He adds that Mr lohannis’s record in Sibiu eclipses anything that Mr Ponta managed as prime minister.
Mr lohannis promises to “change the way we make politics,” with a focus on the rule of law and safeguarding the independence of the judiciary, perceived as vulnerable had Mr Ponta won.
He wants to stick to a strongly pro-Western foreign policy, after attempts by Mr Ponta at opening up to China, and to a lesser extent, Russia.
With a general election due only in late 2016, the new president must now work with a Ponta-led government.
One of the president’s promises has already been fulfilled with the withdrawal of a draft bill that would have freed convicted criminals, including high-level politicians jailed for corruption.
The Romanian parliament has also lifted the immunity of several mps under investigation for corruption.
He has told party rebels to “have the wisdom to shut up” and insists that, as long as he has a big parliamentary majority, he will carry on as prime minister.
But he has taken a one-week holiday, citing his sadness after losing the presidential election.
He says the most pressing challenge for the government is the budget for 2015, since the figures for this year were massaged to look good for the election.
Mr Ponta riposted with figures from the statistical office showing that gdp rose by 1.9% in the third quarter over the previous one.
The imp, whose precautionary loan programme with Romania is due to expire next year, is urging the government to keep a tight lid on spending.
In the campaign Mr Ponta promised an increase in pensions next year and accused Mr lohannis of wanting to slash them.
Ironically, it may now fall to him as prime minister to push through more cuts in 2015.
More than 10,000 gathered outside the parliament in Budapest on November 17th to protest against alleged corruption and the centralisation of power.
Similar protests took place in other cities, including Miskolc in the east and Szeged and Pecs in the south.
Hungary’s protesters were encouraged partly by America’s rising criticism of their government.
Six Hungarian officials have been banned from entering the United States on suspicion of corruption, a rare rebuff to a NATO ally.
However Ildiko Vida, head of the tax authority, told Magijar Nemzet, a pro-government newspaper, that she was one.
Hungarian officials have asked for more information from the Americans.
The protests are ►► The Economist November 22nd 2014 Europe 47 Budapest boogie-woogie ► proof that Hungary remains a democracy, where people are free to express their opinion as long as they abide by the law, says Antal Rogan, parliamentary leader of the ruling right-wing Fidesz party This week’s protests followed a bigger one on October 28th, when as many as 100,000 people filled central Budapest to demand the cancellation of an internet tax that they saw as an attack on free speech.
The crowds were mostly young, educated and middle class, the sort of people that Fidesz needs to attract.
And they forced a rare u-turn by the government, when Viktor Orban, Hungary’s prime minister, said the internet tax would be dropped in its current form.
Instead he would launch a “national consultation” to consider ways in which to tax online profits.
The latest protesters have a harder task because their demands, including the resignation of the government, are unrealistic.
As the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe noted, the victories were due in part to the government’s tinkering with election rules in its favour.
Yet the fractured liberal and left-wing opposition means that the alternative lacks appeal.
The Hungarian embassy in London says that around 100,000 Hungarian citizens live in Britain, but the true figure could be higher.
Many expatriate Magyars are young, multilingual, educated and entrepreneurial.
A good number have left Hungary because they see no future under Fidesz rule.
Instead, as the entry-ban row shows, the pressure is mostly coming from America.
President Barack Obama recently bracketed Hungary with Egypt and Azerbaijan as countries in which civil society felt intimidated.
Concerns are growing inside Fidesz about the wisdom of taking on the world’s superpower.
Younger members of Fidesz are critical of the government’s policies, says Akos Balogh, of Mandiner.hu, an influential conservative blog.
It will struggle on the European and world stage if it acts with the arrogance that Fidesz shows at home.
On November 29th the party will elect a new leader and the same politician, Nicolas Sarkozy, is (one French presidency later) again campaigning for the post.
But the contest is not turning out to be quite the landslide he had expected.
When Mr Sarkozy first announced his political comeback, in September, the polls made him the hands-down favourite among party supporters.
Neither of his two rivals, Bruno Le Maire and Herve Mariton, both one-time ministers, had captured the public imagination.
The party seemed in need of a strong unifying figure after the in-fighting that followed the resignation of its previous head, Jean-Frangois Cope, amid party-financing irregularities.
More than a dozen town-hall meetings around the country later, however, Mr Sarkozy’s campaign is not running as smoothly as he might have hoped.
In October his popularity among ump supporters dropped by 13 points from the previous month, to 71%, according to bva, a pollster.
He was overtaken by Alain Juppe, a former prime minister, who is not running for the party leadership but is a rival candidate for the 2017 presidential nomination.
Among UMP deputies, Mr Sarkozy’s return has not been universally welcomed.
Mr Sarkozy was not at his best during a television interview last month.
This week he prompted consternation, even among some supporters, by suggesting that he might repeal the law legalising gay marriage.
Yet he has put in energetic performances in school gyms and exhibition halls around France, and at times been an incisive critic of President Francois Hollande’s unpopular Socialist government.
The difficulty for Mr Sarkozy is that a less convincing win in 2014 than the one he achieved in 2004 will reflect the tougher battle that he faces on the way to the presidential election.
Mr Juppe, formerly his foreign minister, and Francois Fillon, who was his prime minister for five years.
Mr Sarkozy has been well served, however, by a recent scandal involving Mr Fillon and Jean-Pierre Jouyet, an old friend of Mr Hollande and the president’s chief of staff, who despite his ties to the left served as Europe minister when Mr Fillon was in office.
Mr Fillon this week sued two journalists at Le Monde, as well as Mr Jouyet, for libel.
The journalists claimed that Mr Jouyet told them that, during a lunch in June, Mr Fillon had asked him to speed up judicial investigations involving Mr Sarkozy.
Having initially denied that the subject was even raised, Mr Jouyet admitted that it was-but stressed that the judiciary was independent.
The affair has grabbed headlines in France, and distracted attention from the substance of Mr Sarkozy’s judicial tangles, which could yet be the main obstacle between him and the presidency.
A scandal that involves France’s inward-looking web of elitist cross-party ties is also a gift to Marine Le Pen’s populist National Front.
But after Spain’s radical Podemos party chose its leaders on November 15th it remained remarkably thin on policy “There is still much to do,” admitted the party leader, Pablo Iglesias, after 89% of the party’s 107,000 internet voters had ticked his name.
The rise of Podemos is a triumph for Mr Iglesias and the technologically astute university lecturers and activists who designed, launched and kept control of the party in its first ten months.
It also marks the resurgence of the indignados, protesters who peacefully took over city squares in May 2011, two-and-a-half years after Spain first plunged into the economic dumps.
It has taken years of chronic unemployment, a banking bail-out, a second dip into recession and a flood of corruption cases to see the amorphous indignados take shape in party politics.
Podemos stood for its first elections, to the European Parliament, in May and took 8% of the vote.
Mr Iglesias promises a new politics, bePODEMOS Asamblaa Ciudadana yond the left-right paradigm.
Some senior party members come from groups with names like Youth with No Euture or the Anti-Capitalist Left.
The guest speaker was Alexis Tsipras, leader of Greece’s radical Syriza party.
Mr Iglesias’s main demand is for a rewrite of Spain’s constitution to scrap the “regime of 1978” and get rid of a casta of supposedly self-serving, corrupt politicians.
Podemos would solve the Catalan problem by allowing an independence vote.
On the economy, Mr Iglesias wants a restructuring of Spain’s public debt, government intervention and tax rises (especially for the rich) to pay for better public services.
Economists whom he cites include such wellknown names as Joseph Stiglitz, Paul Krugman and Kenneth Rogoff. lu and the Socialists are watching Podemos closely.
The head of lu, Cayo Lara, announced on November 16th that he would not lead the party into elections next November.
Mr Lara is likely to be replaced by a 29-year-old economist, Alberto Garzon, who is another star from the ranks of the indignados.
Mr Garzon is even younger than the most visible Podemos leaders, who are mostly in their 30s.
Like the ponytailed Mr Iglesias, he is popular on television talk shows.
The pp sees Podemos as a radical party that weakens its main Socialist rival.
Mr Rajoy is a dogged devotee of the constitution and a system that has seen the pp and the Socialists take it in turns to rule Spain for 32 years.
He accuses Podemos of seeking to destroy progress made since Spain shed dictatorship.
In return for investments totalling over €1 billion , the Portuguese authorities have issued 1,775 “golden visas” in the past two years, four-fifths of them to Chinese investors.
But success turned to scandal on Novemberi3th, when the police detained u people, including the head of Portugal’s border agency.
The police are understood to suspect that some properties supposedly bought to obtain a golden visa may have gone for far less than the €500,000 minimum the scheme requires; some of the difference may have been used to finance dodgy payoffs.
The investigation in Portugal could have wider ramifications across Europe, where countries from Greece and Spain to Latvia and Hungary run similar schemes.
As in these countries, Portugal was trying to make up for a sharp drop in investment during its economic crisis.
Under the scheme, a minimum amount spent buying a property entitles nonEuropean families to live in the country for five years, after which they can apply for permanent residence.
Paulo Portas, deputy prime minister and main advocate of the Portuguese scheme, credits it with reviving a moribund property market.
The entire concept of trading residence permits for cash, albeit in the form of property investment, has long been under attack.
With poor migrants risking their lives daily to enter Europe, she asks if it is morally right to give the well-off unequal treatment.
Neither Mr Macedo nor any other minister is suspected of direct involvement in the deals being looked at by the police, according to the attorney-general’s office.
But the case is still an embarrassment for the prime minister, Pedro Passos Coelho, whose government had trumpeted golden visas as a resounding success.
The scheme has cost him a minister less than a year before an election.
Only a few months ago Portugal triumphantly exited its bail-out programme.
Hey, Pablo Iglesias Europe 49 The Economist November 22nd 2014 Charlemagne | Cold comfort Russia will be the biggest test for Europe’s new foreign-policy supremo ALL of Europe rejoiced when the European Space Agency de-/xposited Philae, a probe the size of a kitchen appliance, on the surface of a comet 300m miles from the Earth.
It was like throwing a dart blindfolded across an ocean and hitting the bullseye.
Philae fell silent soon afterwards, but not before dispatching reams of data and a shot of optimism to a continent that has had little to cheer.
Closer to home the European Union finds it harder to exert influence-even over its neighbourhood.
Russia’s intervention in Ukraine is providing an early test for the Eu’s new high representative for foreign policy, Eederica Mogherini, who previously served as Italy’s foreign minister, nato is warning of a renewed build-up of Russian troops and kit in eastern Ukraine.
The recent sham elections in two pro-Russian separatist regions in the Donbas were “respected” if not recognised by Moscow.
The Minsk ceasefire accords signed in September by Ukraine, Russia and the separatists are being honoured only in the breach.
The implication is that with the right policies Ukraine’s turn from its European destiny may be corrected.
It was this thought that inspired the brave protesters, many flying eu flags, who filled the Maidan in Kiev a year ago.
They sought not just the downfall of Mr Poroshenko’s predecessor, Viktor Yanukovych, who had bowed to Russian pressure to reject an eu trade deal, but an end to the corruption and thievery that had defined their country since independence.
The real battle-cry of the Maidan was for a modern, European-style state.
Instead, Ukraine has become a bloody war zone and an economic basket-case.
By late 2004, when the Orange revolution brought pro-Europeans to power in Kiev, the EU had begun its expansion to the east.
Then “enlargement fatigue” left poorer ex-Soviet countries like Ukraine in the cold.
The European neighbourhood policy, designed to bring about political and economic change in the eu’s neighbours without the offer of membership, was a dismal failure.
It substituted technocratic gradualism for hard-headed politics and so failed to respond to the needs of individual countries and regions.
Vladimir Putin decided that a Europ e-leaning Ukraine was a threat to Russian interests.
His meddling, notably the annexation of Crimea and the invasion of the east, has been unpredictable and opportunistic, and emblazoned with nationalist ideology, whether revanchist talk of Novorossiya or attacks on America.
His “Eurasian Economic Union” has ambitions to rival the eu, even if its membership is limited so far to Armenia, Belarus and Kazakhstan.
On November 16th Mr Putin left a G20 summit early after being harangued by his fellow leaders.
Soon afterwards Angela Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, issued an unusually forthright assessment of the Russian threat, not only to Ukraine but also to Georgia, Moldova and the Balkans.
Mr Putin’s willingness to escalate in Ukraine has outstripped Europe’s ability to respond, notwithstanding the sanctions the eu has put in place.
At their meeting this week eu foreign ministers agreed merely to condemn the Donbas votes and to extend sanctions to a few more separatists.
This was also the first foreign ministers’ meeting to be chaired by the redoubtable Ms Mogherini.
Many analysts, and even some EU governments, were against choosing her, fearing that she would exemplify her country’s long-standing pro-Kremlin tilt.
Some added that, like her predecessor, Cathy Ashton, she was too inexperienced for the job-though she has a long political and international background on Italy’s centre-left.
As well as convincing naysayers, she faces the hard task of maintaining unity among eu member countries.
Many chafe against the damage that they claim sanctions on Russia are causing to their economies.
With Europe’s larger countries, now including Germany, increasingly forging their own foreign policy it is not clear what difference Brussels can make.
Ms Mogherini has many “instruments”, in the jargon, at her disposal, including a well-staffed, brainy diplomatic service and the European Commission’s financial clout.
She is a commission vice-president, who despite her peripatetic job promises to attend every weekly meeting of the college.
She has some shrewd ideas about how to make best use of the eu’s unwieldy bureaucracy.
Senior officials hint that they are ready to provide more economic assistance if the Ukrainians get serious about judicial reform, business liberalisation and so on.
Yet it is hard to think of a country in which Europe’s money, or the power of its example, has proven transformative without there being an offer of membership, however remote.
Mr Putin’s endgame is not clear, perhaps even to himself Some fear that he wants a land bridge to Crimea.
Others suggest that, despite appearances, he may be starting to engage more with the West.
Perhaps most likely is a continuation of low-level fighting, as the separatists try to secure or expand their territory.
The eu’s sanctions will remain in place until next spring, and may well be extended.
Andrew Wilson, a Ukraine expert at the European Council on Eoreign Relations, a think-tank, suggests that Russia may then be more vulnerable to pressure, particularly if oil prices stay low.
Yet, as with many religions, passionate devotion can often stand in the way of serious analysis.
Public discussion is too often reduced to an absurd competition about who can express support for the institutions of the nhs in the most unqualified terms, says Stephen Dorrell, a former Conservative health secretary.
With a general election looming, all parties want to look righteous, and are not thinking critically.
The Tories, though supportive of the service, don’t want to talk about it.
Tight budgets and increasing demand from Britain’s greying population have put the NHS under huge strain.
But unlike other departments, forced to cut and reform, it lacks a clear consensus and firm direction on how it should adjust to straitened times.
National targets for waiting times and length of stay in hospital do not necessarily lead to better care.
Yet the nhs wastes over £2 billion ($3. billion) a year on expensive or unnecessary treatments, like overprescribed drugs and pointless x-rays, according to the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges.
While politicians, afraid of being accused of heresy, make timid suggestions, Simon Stevens, the NHS’s innovative new boss, has offered his own ideas for reform.
NHS spending is up 3.6% in real terms since the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government came to power in 2010, according to the King’s Eund, a thinktank.
But with 3m people still waiting for care, the highest total in six years, more is needed.
Even if spending keeps up with inflation, the nhs claims its budget may fall short by £30 billion a year by 2021.
The Conservatives’ main move has been to back away from their own reforms, passed in 2012, which increased competition, gave health officials more autonomy and handed control over the purchase of care to groups of local doctors.
Never understood by voters, these are now seen as a political disaster.
But some aspects-like experiments in integrating services and moving care out of hospitals-deserve support.
Labour, meanwhile, wants to merge the NHS with “social care”-looking after the elderly, disabled and mentally illwhich is run by local authorities and is also cash-strapped.
That is a laudable goal, but it would probably involve another reorganisation and huge cost.
So would a plan by Andy Burnham, the shadow health secretary, to take the service back in time by favouring NHS providers over private competitors for contracts.
Spending on non-NHS services ticked up slightly, to 9.5% of net NHS expenditure in the last financial year, according to Reform, a think-tank.
Otherwise, the parties have simply promised to throw more money at the problem.
Labour says it would boost the NHS’s budget, which sits at £110 billion, by £2. billion a year if it wins the election.
The Conservatives say they would continue with real-term increases, which have averaged £1 billion a year under this government.
England spends just over 6% of national in►► The Economist November 22nd 2014 Britain 51 ► come on the nhs.
If this continues the share would rise to 20% and account for half of government spending by 2061.
Defenders of the nhs have had suspicions about Mr Stevens ever since he started work in April.
Recognising that advocating change to the NHS is inevitably political, he has stepped carefully.
Nevertheless the five-year plan he published last month looks to change the service in a big way.
Mr Stevens reckons he can save £22 billion a year by 2021 through curbing hospital admissions and limiting demand for services.
This would involve better publichealth efforts, but also a major restructuring of existing institutions to break down barriers between family doctors and hospitals, physical and mental health, and health and social care.
For this he will rely on local efforts, but he has given officials a menu of models from which they could choose.
These include allowing hospitals more freedom to provide primary care and helping them to support care homes to prevent emergency admissions.
Others involve allowing local doctors to provide some services normally done in hospital and getting smaller hospitals to team up and share administrative costs.
But many of its ambitions can be achieved only through greater use of the private sector, says Thomas Cawston of Policy Exchange, a centre-right think-tank.
Mr Stevens also calls for consolidating services, pointing to how 32 stroke units in London were reduced to eight, with positive results.
Nor does he propose ending favourable contracts for staff, or consider controversial user charges and higher taxes to make up the remaining £8 billion gap.
Mr Stevens has so far avoided any big fights, but he will face resistance from entrenched interests.
Take the situation in Bedfordshire, where the group responsible for purchasing services has bundled 20 contracts for musculoskeletal care into one that was won by Circle, a commercial health group.
But the local nhs hospital has so far refused to work with Circle, lest it lose customers (ie, patients) and upset its balance-sheet, on which hospitals are, in part, judged.
For now, though, it is perhaps enough that Mr Stevens has pleased the politicians.
Labour and the Tories continue to spar over the nhs, but both parties have expressed support for his plan.
The difference this time, says Mr Stevens, is that the nhs has little choice.
Space factory north of London, scientists are working on LISA Pathfinder (pictured), a hexagon-shaped satellite due to be launched next year.
The aim of the ambitious space mission is to try, for the first time, to find and measure gravitational waves-ripples in space-time predicted by Einstein’s general theory of relativity.
If that’s possible, earthlings would have further evidence that the theory is true, and they should also, eventually, be able to locate black holes more accurately.
To do all that, however, lisa first has to get to a “Lagrange point”, a place where spacecraft can float stably while getting no farther from the earth.
The only force that could then rufQe lisa would be solar wind, explains Justin Byrne, a deputy director of ads.
It would take 1,000 of the thrusters developed for lisa to lift a single piece of paper; LISA has just four.
This is the kind of technological achievement that has made Britain a leader in satellite design and construction.
The probe, Philae, that landed on the comet, was assembled largely in Germany.
But Rosetta itself was, for the most part, constructed in the same clean room where LISA is being built; Mr Byrne himself was one of the designers of Rosetta when the mission was first conceived about 20 years ago.
Altogether ten British companies were involved in the Rosetta mission, making up 20% of the contractors used among 14 European countries.
This outsized contribution to the Rosetta mission is now typical of Britain’s place in the firmament of satellite construction.
About one-quarter of the world’s commercial communication satellites are built in Britain and 40% of the world’s small satellites.
Most of those are built by Airbus’s Surrey Satellite Technology Limited , the world leader in the field.
The whole space sector directly employs 35,000 people, and the supply-chain accounts for thousands more jobs.
London-based Inmarsat is one of the world’s largest satellite operators, specialising in mobile telephony.
The ADS plant in Stevenage has itself been a graveyard for Britain’s ambitions in air and space.
Originally owned by De Havilland, an aircraft company, it was here during the 1950s that parts for the Comet, the world’s first passenger jet, were made.
Several fatal crashes, however, ended production of the Comet and, with it, Britain’s lead in commercial airliners.
Blue Streak was cancelled due to spiralling costs, effectively ending the country’s interest in launching rockets.
Silver lining These were disasters at the time, but in retrospect also rather fortuitous.
Britain’s space industry was consequently forced to look at small-scale projects and to survive on tight budgets, unlike America’s.
It also made the British more commercially minded in financing the industry.
It has virtually invented the niche market for less expensive, smaller satellites, selling a lot to developing countries.
Mr Byrne also argues that ADS has been successful partly because it has a good commercial business, making big satellites for customers like BSkyB, a broadcaster.
The innovative technology developed for the governmentfunded science projects like Rosetta is transferable to business, maximising the return on the intellectual investment.
Yet the business school, a faculty of the elite Indian Institute of Technology in Delhi, is one of India’s best and its students among India’s-which means the world’s-brightest and most driven.
All computer aces-the school specialises in data analytics-its students are typically in their mid-twenties and have spent a couple of years with a top Indian technology company.
After their mb a, they go on to global it or consulting firms, such as Accenture or kpmg.
They are the sort of high-flying Indians who helped build Silicon Valley, are remaking India’s global image and whom David Cameron yearns to impress.
Wooing the new India is “at the top of the priorities of the uic’s foreign policy,” the prime minister told his Indian counterpart, Narendra Modi, on Novemberi6th.
A group of students gathered to enlighten your columnist after hearing a pitch from an American analytics firm.
But he was there to listen, and what he heard was a masala of ideas about Britain which, though mostly positive, had bad news for Mr Cameron.
Twothirds wanted to work in America, and a third in Europe, which generally meant Britain.
Of 34 students, 21 had a “strongly positive” impression of Britain and nine a “positive” one.
Just as Britons often overestimate how well they understand India because of this, so the students had one or two odd notions.
Yet the advantage Britain enjoys from its far-flung culture was more obvious.
It was the country most of the students most wanted to visit on holiday-to see Stonehenge, Old Trafford, the home of Manchester United, and Lord’s Cricket Ground.
Some said they wanted to watch India play Australia there, which represented either the apogee of global sporting culture, or poor knowledge of India’s favourite game.
Yet there was a cloud on their western horizon, in the form of Mr Cameron’s immigration policy.
As Britain’s visa regime has tightened on his watch, the number of Indians studying in British universities has more than halved.
Rahul was offered a place by the London School of Economics, but denied a visa to take it up“because they didn’t think I would leave, even though I go to one of the best business schools in India,” he said crossly.
Most said Britain was still accessible for study but, because foreign students must find employment within a month of graduating, hard to work in.
When Mr Cameron, in opposition, pledged to bring annual net migration below 100,000, Britain’s net immigration from eu countries, which it cannot control, was around 60,000.
Because of the euro crisis, it has soared, to around 130,000 immigrants this year, forcing the Tories to squeeze non-EU immigration in a failing effort to keep their pledge.
On his first visit as prime minister, Mr Cameron dared to imagine a new “special relationship” with India; on two later trips he was barracked over visas.
Viewed generously, his recent pledge to curtail eu freedom of movement is an effort to fix this.
With other European governments primed to slam Mr Cameron’s proposals, which he promises to unveil shortly, it risks leading Britain out of the eu.
That is not something Mr Cameron or most of his ministers want; Philip Hammond, the Eurosceptic foreign secretary, may be a strangely placed exception.
Another problem is that, even if Mr Cameron believes he is attacking Britain’s policy of open borders in order to improve it, most people only see the attack.
Listen to what the geeks are saying “Britain is becoming more closed as an economy,” said Konark.
Asked whether India was well understood in the West, they shook their heads.
Mr Cameron should worry a lot more about competitiveness, and not trash the global brand Britons are lucky to have.
Today the electronic financial-messaging system of the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication transmits more than 5 billion bank-to-bank messages each year.
In 2013 it oiled the transfer of trillions of dollars globally by the 10,500 banks, asset managers and firms that are its members, swift does not initiate transfers, hold customers’ money, or clear or settle payments.
Rather, it provides a template that helps international transfers flow smoothly and be tracked.
Without SWIFT, global trade and investment would be slower, costlier and less reliable.
But the network’s very usefulness means it is increasingly being cast in a new role, as a tool of international sanctions.
In 2012 it was obliged, under European law, to cut off access for Iranian banks that had been subj ected to sanctions by the European Union.
Now there are calls for Russian banks to be banned from swift in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
A group of American senators is arguing for the measure, which could be inserted into a broader bill on sanctions against Russia that has a good chance of being passed in the next session of Congress.
The European Parliament passed a resolution in September calling on the eu to consider mandating a cut-off.
European governments are divided, with Britain and Poland among the keenest.
The earlier swift ban is widely seen as having helped persuade Iran’s government to negotiate over its nuclear programme.
The ban was one of the first sanctions Tehran asked to be lifted, points out Mark Dubowitz of the Foundation for Defence of Democracies, a Washingtonbased think-tank.
Though some of the banks blocked from swift managed to keep moving money by leasing telephone and fax lines from peers in Dubai, Turkey and China, or (according to a Turkish prosecutor’s report) by using non-expelled Iranian banks as conduits, such workarounds are a slow and expensive pain.
And the sanctions prompted Western banks to stop conducting other business with the targeted banks.
The impact of a reprise on Russia’s already fragile economy would be huge.
Its banks are more connected to international trade and capital markets than Iran’s were.
They are heavy users not only of swift itself but also of other payment systems to which it connects them, such as America’s Fedwire and the European Central Bank’s Target2.
Kommersant, a Russian newspaper, has reported that more than 90% of transactions involving Russian banks cross borders.
Countries that trade heavily with Russia, such as Germany and Italy, are therefore none too keen.
Nor are many in the financial sector, swift is less insulated from such pressure than its counterparts in other sectors, such as the International Telecommunication Union, a un agency which is governed by an international convention.
But it is a crucial part of the world’s financial plumbing system. swift’s own rules allow it to cut off banks involved in illegal activity, and it has occasionally done so.
But if it ends up being used frequently for sanctions, it could come to be seen as an instrument of foreign policy, thereby weakening its cherished neutrality.
Another risk is that using swift in this way could lead to the creation of a rival.
Russia’s central bank is pre-emptively working to develop an alternative network; China has also shown interest in shifting the world’s financial centre of gravity eastward.
Earlier this year it cofounded a BRIGS development bank with Russia, India, China and South Africa, and its UnionPay service, set up in 2002, has loosened the stranglehold of MasterCard and Visa on card payments.
If China and other countries that feared being subjected to future Western sanctions joined the Russian venture, it might become an alternative to swiFT-and one less concerned with preventing money laundering and the financing of terrorism.
Since 2010 America has shared this information with its European allies.
According to a recent European Commission document, between October 2012 and Eebruary of this year information from SWIFT, including account numbers, names, addresses, transaction amounts and branch locations, produced 5,421 separate counter-terrorism leads for eu states and Europol.
Such data are rarely enough alone to give a clear picture of a terror cell’s activities, but they sometimes provide missing links in investigative chains.
Dragging swift further into sanctions could upset this fruitful arrangement.
Some worry that this might hamper attempts to track the finances of Islamic State.
Though most of the terrorist group’s funding comes from local oil revenues, ransoms and shakedowns of businesses in territories that is controls, it is hard to imagine the group operating without having to make or receive at least occasional international bank transfers.
To avoid collateral damage and thus maximise legitimacy, better to target only those banks linked to specific illicit activities, he argues.
The Iranian banks hit by sanctions had been accused of involvement in funding terrorists or the Revolutionary Guards, a branch of Iran’s military, or nuclear proliferation.
The Russian equivalent might be banks linked to organised crime rings or kleptocratic energy deals.
An alternative would be for America to label some Russian banks as “primary money-laundering concerns” under the Patriot Act, which would in effect cut them off from transactions with Western banks.
Call the plumber America’s current crop of senior Treasury officials are similarly cautious, despite being vocal proponents of sanctions in general.
Blocking access to swift, he frets, could mean that traffic shifts to networks that are less secure and easier to disrupt-and thus make life easier for criminals and cyberterrorists, including those in rogue governments.
Against those who threaten global security, a SWIFT ban is a powerful and proven weapon.
There might have been dodgy dealing, perhaps even criminal behaviour, on the part of a few of those involved-hut not enough to justify rerunning the bids.
On November 13th it described the results of an internal investigation into the bidding process as having mostly cleared itself and the host countries of wrongdoing.
It was not published, despite pleas from some fifa officials and Mr Garcia himself.
Two whistle-blowers have since said that Mr Eckert tarnished and misrepresented them.
Mr Garcia has appealed against Mr Eckert’s interpretation of his report-to another FIFA committee.
Ever since Russia and Qatar won the hosting rights in 2010, there have been allegations of funny business.
In June the Sunday Times, a British newspaper, published e-mails detailing lavish campaigning by Mohamed bin Hammam, a disgraced former fifa bigwig from Qatar, ahead of the vote for his country.
Lord Triesman, who led England’s bid for the 2018 tournament, has said fifa officials asked him for bribes.
So it may seem odd that England was the country most harshly criticised by Mr Eckert.
Its bid committee had accommodated unethical requests from corrupt fifa officials, he said.
Qatar, too, had committed some violations, but according to Mr Eckert its actions “were, all in all, not suited to compromise the integrity” of the process.
Russia was let off the hook, even though investigators had limited access to its documents because the computers its officials used had been destroyed.
Dismayed by the findings and the lack of transparency, some football officials are daring to peek above the parapet.
Mr Eckert’s summary was “a joke”, says Greg Dyke, the chairman of England’s Eootball Association.
His predecessor, David Bernstein, has called for uefa, European football’s governing body, to boycott the World Cup in protest.
Reinhard Rauball, the head of Germany’s soccer federation, has suggested that UEFA might leave fifa if Mr Garcia’s full findings are not published.
Michel Platini, the head of uefa, who has himself had to deny allegations of corruption, voted for Qatar.
Europe’s football associations benefit from hosting World Cup qualifiers and the sponsorship deals that come with playing on the tournament’s big stage.
Poorer nations are even ►► The Economist November 22nd 2014 International 55 ► less likely to challenge fifa, as they benefit from its handouts.
The money sloshing around feeds a perception that at least some of it is used to buy favours or votes.
The fbi is investigating allegations of corruption against FIFA, and Mr Garcia can still recommend cases against individual officials.
If they start to abandon fifa and its World Cup, it will prove wishful thinking.
On current trends, almost half of the world’s adults will be fat by 2030.
Over the past three decades, according to a study in the Lancet, a medical journal, no nation has slimmed down.
But a new study from the McKinsey Global Institute , the consultancy’s research arm, offers some hope.
It looks at 74 anti-obesity measures around the world, and judges the cost and impact of the 44 for which there were sufficient data.
None alone could do much, it concludes, but all 44 together could mean about a fifth of overweight people achieving a reasonable waistline within five to ten years.
Others are less paternalistic, such as having grocery stores promote healthy products instead of sugary ones.
But leaving it to individuals to slim down through dieting and exercise without any such help, MGI concludes, consistently fails.
How much governments should do to promote healthier lifestyles sparks vigorous debate, especially among Americans, who prize freedom as much as freedom fries.
In Europe a number of countries have all but rid foods of trans fats, which have particularly potent artery-clogging effects.
John Stuart Mill, the liberty-loving 19thcentury philosopher, saw state action as justifiable to prevent deeds harmful to others.
Rich countries devote 2-7% of their health spending to the problem, and up to 20% if you include treatment of associated diseases, such as diabetes.
The economic burden of obesity, MGI estimates, is 2.8% of global gdp, roughly equal to that of smoking or war.
Almost all the measures analysed in the report are cost-effective, offering healthcare savings and productivity gains that would outweigh their cost over the lifetime of the target population.
If they were all deployed in Britain, which it uses as a worked example, the economic benefit would be around $25 billion a year.
Yet Britain currently spends less than $1 billion a year on weight-management programmes, public-health campaigns and the like.
And it focuses on behaviour, rather than clinical questions such as the role of specific nutrients or genetics in obesity.
McKinsey *Years of life Lost to ill health, disability and early death, over lifetime of 2014 population Paydays and mortality Cash to crash Why getting paid can kill you G etting paid is generally good for the health.
Those who are earning can buy better food and live in greater comfort; joblessness is associated with a host of ills, from heart disease to depression.
But a new paper* finds that the consequences of actually receiving your salary can be fatal.
The authors looked at Sweden’s public-sector employees, who make up a fifth of the country’s workforce, over a six-year period.
Regional variations in paydays allowed them to strip out the effects on mortality rates of the seasons, days of the week and the timing of public holidays.
They found a 23% increase in the chance of dying on paydays, without a matching fall on the days following.
That suggests that the deaths were “extra”, and not merely the slightly accelerated demise of frail individuals who would have died anyway in the coming days.
These patterns, the authors say, suggest that increased spending on food and leisure-take-out meals, trips to football matches and the like-caused a sudden spike in activity, which led to the extra deaths.
Poorer and younger workers, having cut back on fun as their bank balances dwindled during the month, went on a consumption spree once they were topped up.
In this respect, at least, a return to 19th-century ways might save lives.
From public private partnerships to tax reform, the conference will address how countries and companies can effectively balance government and growth.
Register today and gain a clearer sense of how to navigate the changing economy and how to design more successful global investment strategies.
Short-termism has its good points Government-controlled firms State capitalism in the dock NEWYORK The performance of state-owned enterprises has been shockingly bad O N NOVEMBER 14th Brazilian police raided the offices of Petrobras, a vast state-controlled oil firm at the centre of a corruption scandal.
It conducted the largest global equity raising on record, to pay for the development of fields off Brazil’s coast.
Its balance-sheet is shot, former executives have been arrested and its accounts may be restated.
Across the world, big, listed state-owned enterprises that were floated, or raised mountains of equity, between 2000 and 2010 have had a dismal time.
Their share of global market capitalisation has shrunk from a peak of 22% in 2007 to 13% today.
Measured by profits their decline is less stark, mainly because big Chinese banks continue to report inflated profits that do not accurately reflect their rotten books.
India’s mismanaged state-owned banks command miserly valuations compared with their private peers.
Since 2009 the Shenzhen stockmarket’s index, which is dominated by private firms, has rocketed past that of its rival in Shanghai, which is mainly made up of state companies, notes Sanford C Bernstein, an analysis firm.
Once, investors swooned at the rise of China Mobile, a state-owned operator.
As the West slipped into a crisis in 2007-08, state capitalism supposedly took the business world by storm, particularly in the emerging world.
Sovereign wealth funds gathered the excess savings that oil-rich and Asian countries accumulated, investing them overseas.
When Europe and Latin America privatised firms in the 1980s and 1990s, they often went the whole hog, with the state selling out completely-think of British Gas or telecoms in Brazil.
But in the 2000s private investors were invited to play only a subordinate role, with the state keeping a controlling stake and making enlightened decisions in the interests of all.
As trade surpluses and commodity prices have fallen, swfs have accumulated cash at a slower rate and spent less on buying stakes in firms.
But at the root of the underperfor►► 58 Business The Economist November 22nd 2014 ► mance is what looks like a huge misallocation of capital by soes.
Given licence by politicians, and with little need to pacify stroppy investors, their capital investment surged, accounting for over 30% of the global total by big listed firms.
More than $2. trillion has been invested in telecoms networks, hydrocarbons fields and other projects by soes since 2007.
Etisalat, a telecoms firm in the United Arab Emirates, blew $8oom on an operation in India whose licence was cancelled after an anti-graft inquiry.
To counteract the global slowdown after 2007-08, state banks went on a lending binge in China, India, Russia, Brazil and Vietnam.
As the balance-sheets of soes have grown faster than profits, return on equity has slumped from 16% in 2007 to 12% today, less than the 13% achieved by private firms.
However, the ipo, in which a stake of just 3.5% of the airline was on offer, attracted not one foreign investor.
State-owned enterprises account for about a third of Vietnam’s gdp, in industries ranging from finance to fabrics, seafood-processing to shipbuilding.
Nevertheless, the opaque bureaucracies at most SOES make them breedinggrounds for graft and mismanagement.
In the most prominent example, in 2010 Vinashin, a shipbuilder, defaulted on a foreign loan, triggering a downgrade of Vietnam’s sovereign debt.
The state firms’ poor performance means that Vietnam’s gdp growth, now around 5.5% a year, is weaker than it should be, given its young and educated population, and its wealth of natural resources.
Unusually for a communist country, the prime minister, Nguyen Tan Dung, had to endure a confidence vote in the National Assembly last year over his economic record-and he did poorly.
This year, besides restoring his popularity by standing up to China in a territorial dispute, Mr Dung has breathed new life into a long-standing plan to sell minority stakes in soes to private investors, in the hope of making them more businesslike.
Ones with ipos planned for t \ Not such a smooth take-off next year include Vietnam National Shipping Lines-two of whose former executives were sentenced to death last year in a drive against corruption.
If floating soes made them more efficient, they would need fewer handouts.
It would then be easier for Vietnam to sign up to an eventual TPP deal, enabling it to enj oy wider market access for its exports.
Vietnam’s stockmarket remains one of Asia’s smallest, and foreign investors are reluctant to buy shares in firms the state will continue to control, especially those in such areas as energy and transport that it regards as strategic, meaning prone to meddling. flated earnings, flatter this picture.
Elabby and stingy, soes are now priced by investors at about their liquidation value.
Eor governments and managers of soes the immediate task is firefighting.
While SOES’ aggregate balance-sheet is passable, some companies are too indebted.
Petrobras has net debt equivalent to four times its gross operating profit.
Rosneft, a Russian oil firm, must refinance $21 billion of bonds before April.
Next, investment levels and costs need to be cut, so as to lift returns on capital.
Natural-resources soes will probably be slower to react to lower commodity prices than their private-sector peers.
Those in industries facing disruption from the web, particularly banking and telecoms, will probably need redundancy schemes.
Interviewed by The Economist in April, Xi Guohua, the chairman of China Mobile, talked of introducing incentive-based pay, awarding staff shares and establishing stand-alone units with freedom to innovate.
China Mobile’s efforts are part of a wider drive in China to make soes more efficient by deregulating prices and interest rates, introducing more private investors and increasing competition.
Narendra Modi, India’s newish prime minister, has a similar plan to open up Coal India, a notoriously inept monopolist, to competition and to resuscitate India’s state-run banks.
Only some countries have resolved this, either by the state selling out completely, or by establishing robust mechanisms to keep firms at arms’ length from the government, such as at Temasek, Singapore’s state holding company.
Until this question is resolved the valuedestroying impulses of soes will remain, and investors will be wary of both established firms and newcomers.
It has raised $1. billion in venture capital and reached a valuation of more than $17 billion.
It is rumoured to be bringing in gross revenues of almost $1 billion a month.
But it now seems, in record time, to have gone from hero to villain in the eyes of much of the technology press.
Praised in its early days for disrupting unreliable, high-cost local taxi monopolies, Uber now stands accused of using unfair tactics against both rivals and critics.
On November 17th it emerged that an Uber executive, Emil Michael, had said at a private dinner that the firm should consider spending $im to dig up dirt on its critics in the media, in particular Sarah Lacy, the editor of Pando, a tech-news site.
Travis Kalanick, Uber’s boss, said on Twitter that his remarks showed “a lack of humanity and a departure from our values and ideals”, but brushed off calls for Mr Michael to resign.
Although it is hardly an excuse, the remarks were a reaction to a series of highly critical articles on Uber, in particular by Ms Lacy and her publication.
She has argued that Mr Kalanick, known for his libertarian views and combativeness, is an example of Silicon Valley’s “asshole problem”, meaning that venture capitalists increasingly invest in entrepreneurs who know neither scruples nor social graces.
Most recently, she accused the firm of “sexism and misogyny” because its branch in Lyon, Prance, had offered to pair passengers with “hot chick” drivers.
In its drive to disrupt taxi markets it has often ignored local regulations, leading to courtordered bans on its services.
It has emerged that the firm has sent “brand ambassadors” to hire cabs through Lyft, a rival app, who would then either cancel them, or press their drivers to defect to Uber.
Mr Kalanick has also admitted to having intervened in its rival’s fund-raising attempts by telling potential investors that his firm was also about to raise large amounts of capital.
That winners and losers emerge so quickly explains the need for a degree of ruthlessness.
Whether it is Uber’s attempt to get one over its rivals, Pacebook’s tinkering with users’ privacy settings or Amazon’s tough negotiating tactics in its now-resolved price dispute with Hachette, a publisher, ambitious tech firms often seem quite purposefully to be testing the conventions of acceptability.
But perhaps they have taken note of how the most thick-skinned of low-cost airlines-such as Spirit Airlines and Ryanair-are constantly cursed by customers and media commentators, and yet are highly successful.
People may say they are outraged but if the service on offer is cheap and convenient, it will be hard to resist.
But if, as a chief executive, you want to earn more, then it makes sense to hire a compensation consultant.
Though its findings hardly seem a shock, previous studies that tried to link bosses’ pay and the use of consultants had found no significant effect.
However, this new research was made possible by a rule brought in by America’s Securities and Exchange Commission in 2009.
It says that when a company hires a consultant for advice on both compensation and other matters, it must disclose the fees paid in each case.
When consultants are hired solely to give advice on compensation, the fee need not be disclosed.
The reason for this asymmetric rule was that the sec feared some bosses were in effect bribing consultants to recommend them for pay rises by bunging them lots of other, more lucrative work.
Making the fee structure more transparent would discourage the practice, the regulator hoped.
Pirst, they compared companies that kept their “multi-service” advisers after 2009 with those that switched to using specialist compensation consultants to advise them on executive pay.
Those that switched were found to be paying their ceos almost 10% more than similar firms that had hung on to their multi-service consultants.
One obvious explanation is that the switchers were those firms that had been offering extra business to their consultants mainly to influence their advice on executive payfor as long as they could do so without revealing it-and that this had worked.
The second test was to look at who chose any specialist pay advisers hired after the rule change.
In firms in which the consultants were only chosen by the board, the ceo was paid about 13% less than at similar firms whose ceo also hired a second set of pay advisers.
When ceos get big pay rises their companies are less likely to replace their consultants in the following year.
All told, the academics found that firms that hire compensation consultants paid their ceos 7.5% more than those that did not.
These findings make it a little harder to argue that higher ceo pay is linked to shareholder returns or to greater talent; if that were the case, one would not expect such a clear correlation between pay and the use of consultants.
The job of drilling, and constructing and maintaining wells is largely delegated to oilfield-services firms.
In a deal agreed on November 17th Halliburton, the second-largest of these in the world, by market capitalisation, is set to buy Baker Hughes, the thirdlargest, for $38 billion in cash and shares.
Drilling for oil may be grubby but mastering the technology is lucrative.
Schlumberger of France, the biggest of the bunch, made profits of $7 billion on revenues of $45 billion in 2013.
The combined revenues of the American firms will be greater, and together they may match its performance.
Margins are similar in America, where Halliburton and Schlumberger are equal competitors.
In the rest of the world the French firm is bigger, and more profitable.
A marriage with Baker Hughes will give Halliburton economies of scale and the ability to spread its costs more widely.
The new firm will also match Schlumberger in the breadth of services it offers.
Joining forces will help the two firms cope with an expected downturn in the industry’s fortunes.
As a result most big Western oil companies intend to cut capital spendingwhich means a drop in revenues for the oilfield-services firms.
Becoming a one-stop shop on the scale of Schlumberger will make it easier to win contracts from state-owned national oil companies , which are an increasingly important source of business.
While the oil majors suffer, the nogs are expanding, nogs control most of the world’s known reserves, and their oil and gas is generally cheap to extract, and thus less sensitive to price swings.
Firms under the control of politicians often have other motivations for maintaining investment, such as preserving jobs.
Saudi Arabia is pouring cash into drilling for gas to run its power stations.
Oil companies and antitrust authorities are bound to worry about a deal that will cut the number of big competitors in the industry.
To appease them, Halliburton is promising to sell businesses with annual revenues of up to $7. billion if the takeover goes through.
Brad Handler of Jefferies, an investment bank, thinks oil firms may not kick up too much fuss, since they will be less in need of the services companies for the foreseeable future.
As the weak oil price drags down the shares of oilfield-services firms, others may be bought.
General Electric has already invested heavily in the business of making drilling equipment, and may thus be keen on buying into the services side.
National Oilwell Varco, the biggest rig-hire firm, also plans to diversify.
VGChartz *Estimate The releases Last November of Sony's PlayStation 4 and Microsoft's Xbox One were seen as the Last hurrah of high-end home games consoles.
The previous versions of each device had been roundly beaten by the Lower-tech Nintendo Wii.
And simpler games played on smartphones and tablets were rapidly gaining popularity.
Sony's strategy was to make its new console a more sophisticated, specialist device aimed at hard-core gamers.
Microsoftwentthe other way, m a ki n g t h e n ew Xbox a versati Le m u Lti media device, aimed at a broader market.
But a year on from the Launches, Sony is stillfar ahead, andiHS, a market researcher, predicts it will stay that way.
Still, the Xbox One now outsells the Latest version of the Wii, and has done betterthan previous Xboxes.
Mobile telecoms The endangered SIM card Moves to reinvent, or even abolish, the SIM card could have big consequences A PPLE revolutionised online music with X^the iPod and iTunes.
It may be about to transform the payments business, given the successful launch last month of Apple Pay.
And the next set of businesses to have their applecarts overturned may be the mobile-telecoms operators.
Some of Apple’s latest iPads have a new type of sim card that lets users switch easily between operators without replacing the card.
This could seriously wealcen the operators’ grip on their marlcet, especially if Apple were to follow up by putting the new sims in iPhones or replacing them with software.
The job of the sim (subscriber identity module) is to store some unique numbers and an encryption key, which are used to identify the subscriber when the device is communicating with the network.
For as long as wireless networks carried mostly voice calls, sims worked well.
Since only mobile operators were allowed to issue sims, and were given much leeway over the terms on which they did so, they were able to create monthly payment schemes which subsidised the upfront cost of a handset.
This helped mobile telephony to get going, and thereafter provided a mechanism for persuading consumers to keep on trading their old phones for ever more sophisticated new ones.
However, now that most mobile devices can connect through Wi-Fi, their sim cards no longer seem quite so indispensable.
Most tablets, even those with sim card slots, are not bought from a mobile operator; and the cost and hassle of signing up for a SIM card, so as to use the device when there is no Wi-Fi available, is too much for many buyers.
So, Apple’s new SIMS are meant to make it easier to sign up for a mobile operator-and to encourage people to choose the pricier iPad models that contain them.
Re-programmable sims may also help bring about the “internet of things”, in which all sorts of devices, from fridges to cars, will be connected up.
Carmakers, for example, would be able to glue the cards into place so they do not shalce loose, and also be able to switch to a different operator for their connected-car services without drivers having to install new cards.
There's havingyour dream, and then there's dealing with the day-to-day realities to make it happen.
Get a $300 account credit for your business when you trade in your old smartphone and purchase a new4G LTE smartphone.
New 2-yr activation req'd. or^oio For the dream and the reality, choose Verizon..800.
VZW.4BIZ vzw.com/livethedream ^LiveTheDream ^Results based on third-party study.
Credit will be removed from account if line is suspended or changed to nonqualifying price plan after activation.
Offers £2 coverage, varying by svc, not available everywhere; see vzw.com.
Alcateh Lucent & 62 Business The Economist November 22nd 2014 ► erators are wary of the innovation.
Most would need to make big changes to their billing systems and other back-office functions to adapt to a world in which customers bought their connectivity one gigabyte at a time from a variety of operators, rather than signing a long-term contract.
But their biggest fear is that, as they lose control of the customer relationship, margins would surely suffer.
Now that Apple is trying out a gadget containing such a card, the operators are watching nervously, to see how consumers react.
Of the four biggest wireless carriers in America, only x-Mobile us fully supports Apple’s experiment.
And those who select Sprint will have to go through a further registration process to activate the service.
Whatever the outcome, re-programmable cards are bound to spread, predicts Philippe Vallee of Gemalto, the world’s biggest maker of sims.
All sorts of new connected devices are coming along, and operators will have fewer objections to these having the new type of sim in them.
For instance, Gemalto is supplying re-programmable SIMS for a “smart watch” being made by Limmex, a Swiss firm.
The new type of card will gain further momentum if more countries follow the example of the Netherlands, which has just begun to let organisations other than operators issue sims, such as utilities and car companies.
If its giant carmakers issued their own sims, and rented spare capacity on the operators’ wireless infrastructure, they could together save €2 billion a year through lower prices and more flexible contracts, estimates Rudolf van der Berg of the OECD, a think-tank based in Paris.
Going soft The biggest question is whether re-programmable SIMS will find their way into smartphones-and in what form.
Apple fans predict that the firm will soon release an iPhone with a pre-installed card that lets them switch providers.
Some hope it will eventually take the next logical step, and replace the card with a softsiM, a piece of software code that does the same job.
Operators would put up stiff resistance to putting re-programmable sims, let alone softsiMS, into phones, says Dean Bubley of Disruptive Analysis, a consulting firm.
In 2010 Apple was believed to be developing an iPhone that came with such a sim, but it was reportedly scared off by operators threatening to stop promoting its handsets.
Managing sims for phones that handle voice calls is much more complex than it is for data-only devices.
In many countries, for instance, people have to show an identity card when signing up.
The operators’ security worries about softsiMS would be even greater than those for re-programmable cards, says Mr Bubley.
Those hoping for the death of the sim N OWY stye, a Polish company that is Europe’s fourth-largest maker of office furniture, recently bought two small German rivals.
The firm’s boss, Adam Krzanowski, was asked by a German friend if he was pleased with his purchase.
He had to send a team from his factory in Poland to bring his new German workers up to speed on the latest manufacturing methods.
Polish firms have grown in size and confidence along with the economy, which after years of expansion is twice the size, in real terms, that it was when democracy was restored in 1989.
Now, at last, some of its firms are looking beyond the domestic market and going global.
InPost is rolling out its automated parcel lockers in nine countries, including Britain , to grab a share of the rapidly growing business of making deliveries for e-commerce firms.
Comarch, a Polish it firm, has set up two data-processing centres in Germany. card in its current, inflexible form should be careful what they wish for, and not just for security reasons.
Operators would lose control of the market, but Apple and other device-makers might gain it.
They would, if regulators let them, be able to choose which operators appeared on the menu when buyers of their phones and tablets were setting them up.
The risk would then be that the sim card’s demise leads to less choice, and higher prices for users.
A decade ago the most notable foreign ventures by Polish businesses were the result of a strong prod from the government, usually applied to state-controlled firms with political objectives in mind.
In 2004 pro Bank Polski was encouraged to invest in Ukraine, Poland’s poorer neighbour to the south-east, during its Orange revolution.
In Ukraine’s subsequent economic slump, the small bank pro had bought, Kredobank, suffered a drastic rise in bad loans, eventually forcing pro to bail it out.
In 2006 PRN Orlen, a state oil refiner, invested $3. billion in a Lithuanian plant, with the aim of helping the Baltic states loosen their dependence on Russia.
After ►► Companies in Poland Growing the Polish Apple WARSAW After years of steady growth at home, firms are venturing abroad The Economist November 22nd 2014 Business 63 ► years of losses, Orlen has written off most of its investment.
Now, the Polish firms venturing abroad, even the state-backed ones, are driven by profits rather than politics.
In September KGHM, a copper miner in which the state has a 32% stake, began shipments from a Chilean mine jointly owned with Sumitomo of Japan.
This follows kghm’s purchase, in 2012, of Quadra fmx, a Canadian copper and silver miner.
In October Grupa Azoty, a fertiliser-maker, announced a plan to make up to ten foreign acquisitions, in Africa and South America as well as in central Europe, to maintain its position in an industry that is consolidating rapidly.
Although a few Polish firms are gaining a profile outside their home country, they are still the exceptions.
Of those local manufacturers that export, many are proF EW governments have aligned their interests so closely to those of their country’s energy and mining firms as Canada’s Conservative administration.
Under the banner of “responsible resource development”, his government has done its best to ease the way for minerals firms, at home and abroad, including directing some foreign aid to countries where Canadian firms wanted to drill.
Ministers point with pride to the C$174 billion in export revenues from sales of minerals, oil and gas in 2013 and to the fact that Canada is home to more than half of the world’s publicly listed exploration and mining companies.
So the government has recently begun to reduce that vulnerability by taking a stricter line on corporate social responsibility and bribery by Canadian firms operating abroad.
Protecting the national brand is “a huge part of it,” says Andrew Bauer of the Natural Resource Governance Institute, a group that monitors the industry and lobbies for openness.
Ed East, the international trade minister, admitted as much on Novemberi4th, as he introduced new rules that require Canadian resources firms involved in disputes with local communities to take part in a ducing materials or parts that end up deep in German cars or consumer products.
One problem is that even the largest Polish firms are small by global standards.
Another is that most have been reluctant to invest in the research and development needed to take on sophisticated foreign rivals.
In another decade, given Poland’s rapid economic growth compared with western Europe’s, its businesses may become large enough that foreign ventures like those of Nowy Styl will become common.
If so, more German workers will have to get used to Polish bosses. ■ resolution process.
If any firms refuse, the government will withdraw its economic diplomacy on their behalf In Mr Past’s eyes, Canada’s brand shines like a freshly minted ingot, and simply needs to be preserved rather than restored.
They note a slew of protests against Canadian firms’ projects, from Romania , where environmentalists are objecting to plans for an opencast gold mine, to Guatemala, where guards at a nickel mine have been accused of gang rape.
The government is also promising to strengthen the mandate of its official “csr counsellor”, whose job is to advise resources firms and mediate in their disputes.
The post has been vacant for a year, and the previous incumbent made little progress because the companies were not obliged to co-operate.
The move did not go far enough for some campaigners, who had wanted the counsellor to be made independent of government.
Still, they had better luck with a new law introduced last month, to curb bribery by mining and energy firms by demanding more transparency from them.
The law, which still must be fleshed out in detailed regulations, requires them to disclose all payments made to domestic and foreign governments.
It brings Canada broadly into line with British legislation and with rules being contemplated by the us Securities and Exchange Commission.
It helped that the law was backed by an unusual coalition of non-government organisations and mining companies themselves.
The legislation “is pretty faithful to our recommendations”, says Pierre Gratton, head of the Mining Association of Canada.
It seems that the miners’ experience in dealing with local communities is making them more sensitive to their concerns about corruption and other ills.
In contrast, the oil and gas firms are lobbying for the transparency law to be weakened.
They want to be given exemptions in countries whose local laws conveniently prohibit the disclosure of such payments.
They also want to avoid having to give a project-byproject breakdown of their payments, without which the information would be of little use.
There is still room for backsliding by a government that is unashamedly business-friendly.
But a public plea for it to stand firm, from a former Shell executive, may yet stiffen ministers’ spines.
A watered-down transparency law would certainly take the shine off Canada’s brand.
The Harvard Business Review constantly thunders against the evils of short-termism.
Bosses of listed companies give off-the-record briefings to journalists bemoaning shareholders’ inability to see beyond the ends of their noses.
In the continental European model of capitalism, long-termism means that businesses will prosper by pursuing the enduring interests of all their “stakeholders”, workers and suppliers included.
Policymakers are drawing up plans to give long-term investors more shares, more voting power or tax incentives.
France already has a rule that gives extra voting rights to long-term shareholders; and the European Commission is mulling something similar.
The Delaware Supreme Courtwhich sets the tone of much American corporate law because so many companies are registered in that state-has endorsed the view that a firm’s owners are those who have held its shares for a long time , rather than those who happen to own them at any given moment.
Repeated financial-market crises, including the one in 2007-08, have reinforced a view that short-term traders are nothing but trouble.
Germany’s relatively strong performance over the past decade seems to be an affirmation of its stolid corporate virtues.
In the 1980s fans of Japan’s economic model argued that it would pull ahead of America because its firms preferred slow consensus-building and could rely on their core shareholders, the banks, to stand by them for the long term.
The book describes 18 companies whose shares had consistently outperformed stockmarket indices over decades, in large part because they invested heavily in such things as research and training, and set goals that were also measured in decades, not quarters.
But a follow-up study five years later discovered that only eight of them had kept on outperforming the market.
Nokia, a Finnish mobile-phone giant, left a floundering boss, Olli-Pekka Kallasvuo, in place for four years despite growing protests from investors.
By the time it got around to replacing him in 2010 the company was damaged almost beyond repair.
Shortterm demands such as quarterly reporting schedules can force problems out in the open, the quicker to get them fixed.
We might still be in the dark about Tesco’s accounting fiasco if the British grocer did not have to update investors on its performance every few months.
More important, short-termism can allow “creative destruction” to work its magic.
The United States has been better than other countries at producing world-beating startups because it is better at shifting capital quickly to new opportunities.
Perhaps the strongest argument for rewarding long-term investors is that they think more about sustained growth, whereas short-term ones will sacrifice this for a quick buck.
This is true if companies do not trade in their own shares, says Jesse Fried of Harvard Law School.
However, what is more important is that the cash they spend on repurchases could often have been used on expanding into new markets, or on research and development, to generate long-term growth.
One study found that a doubling of repurchases leads to an 8% fall in spending on r&d.
Longtermism and short-termism both have their virtues and vicesand these depend on context.
Long-termism works well in stable industries that reward incremental innovation.
But it is a recipe for failure in such businesses as social media, where firms are constantly forced to abandon their plans and “pivot” to a new strategy, in markets that can change in the blink of an eye.
General Electric, often praised for its long-term perspective, is trying to run itself more like a startup, to combat bureaucratic bloat.
In recent years activist investors have repeatedly bought stakes in big firms, from Yahoo to Fortune Brands, and agitated for a shake-up.
Long-term institutional investors, seeing the merits of their arguments, have often backed them.
But it is a poor way of analysing the dynamics of wealth creation-and it is an even worse way of designing corporate policies.
Central bankers' foibles 67 Corporate venture capital booms 67 TheABCof BDCs 68 Greece's economy stirs 68 Proof that bankers are untrustworthy 71 A rush into mobile transfers 72 Free exchange: Demography's role in secular stagnation For daily analysis and debate on economics, visit Economist.com/economics The People's Bank of China Covert operations BEIJING China’s central bank is wary of easing monetary policy, but that is what the economy needs I N BEIJING, a city of grandiose government offices, the central bank stands out for its modesty.
Its headquarters are small and dated; plans for a big, gleaming extension have so far come to nothing.
Cramped as they are, however, these digs are an apt symbol of the central bank’s restraint.
For nearly four years the People’s Bank of China has classified monetary policy as “prudent”, which is supposedly a neutral stance-not too tight, not too loose.
In reality it has been tightening, to cool an overheated property market and slow the alarming accretion of debt.
At the same time, the central bank has chipped away at vestiges of central planning with changes to its currency and interest-rate regimes.
The PBOC is far from independent, but under Zhou Xiaochuan , its governor since 2002, it has acquired real clout as it has doggedly pursued its dual objectives of restraint and reform.
These two aims were complementary in 20U, when the central bank first embraced prudence.
Nominal growth was still running at 18%, a heady pace even by Chinese standards; slowing breakneck investment was essential.
The economy is now on track for its weakest year since 1990, sliding below the government’s goal of 7.5% growth; inflation is at a five-year low, nearly two percentage points below the official 3.5% target.
The central bank’s answer to this dilemma has been to loosen monetary policy, but in a covert fashion.
It lent the stateowned China Development Bank one trillion yuan , according to rumours that dribbled into local media in June.
But whereas central banks in developed economies have explained every step of their oe schemes to markets, the pboc did not even bother to announce its activity.
Then, in September and October, it launched a “medium-term lending faciliI Business as usual China's money and lending rates, % 12 ty”, inj ecting a further whack of cash-769. billion yuan, it turns out-into the economy via loans to commercial banks.
Rumours spread for weeks before the central bank confirmed them on November 6th.
As for the initial trillion-yuan loan, it eventually acknowledged the operation, though declined to say how much it had lent, at what rate or even to which bank.
The combined amount of the infusions, if as big as reported, would be huge-equal to more than three months of America’s now-completed oe scheme when it was at its height, or to five months of Japan’s current programme.
A recent Barclays survey ranked the pboc third-worst of 14 big central banks in terms of communication, behind only Turkey’s and Russia’s.
Even when providing partial confirmation of its covert easing, the pboc’s message was muddled.
The purpose was “to guide banks to lower lending rates”, it said, an apparent indication of an intention to relax policy.
But in the next breath it added that the easing was to compensate for a decline in capital inflows, in order to “maintain a neutral, appropriate level of liquidity”-that is, to keep policy unchanged.
Increases of that ►► 66 Finance and economics ► magnitude have presaged financial crises in other countries, so tighter policy would seem in order.
Yet real interest rates have climbed to more than 8% for industrial companies, since the prices at which they sell their wares are actually declining.
Cutting interest rates while enforcing capital rules to prevent banks from issuing a gusher of new loans would be a better way to rein in debt.
The loan to China Development Bank appears to have been earmarked for public housing, which local governments have struggled to fund.
To borrow from the “medium-term facility” banks were said to be obliged to reduce mortgage rates.
In other words, having let air out of the property market, the pboc now seems to be pumping it up again.
They are feeling their way through,” says Zhang Bin of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.
In the background are questions about the future of the long-serving Mr Zhou.
He was due to step down in 2013, having The Economist November 22 nd 2014 reached the official retirement age of 65.
When his term was extended, it was seen as an endorsement of his reformist agenda.
But a few months ago, word spread in Beijing that he might soon be replaced.
Some even suggested that he had pushed too hard to deregulate interest rates.
People familiar with the pboc say that talk of Mr Zhou’s imminent retirement has since died down.
Politicians demand that they control inflation, keep the economy growing and the financial sector stable.
Sometimes politicians seem to be sabotaging the central bankers, tightening fiscal policy when the banks are easing to help the economy.
That is the theme of a recent, thoughtful speech* from Andrew Haldane, the Bank of England’s chief economist.
There are various mechanisms to ensure the bank acts in a considered and rigorous manner.
Its goals are set by Parliament and if it misses its inflation target, the governor has to write a letter to the chancellor of the exchequer, Britain’s finance minister, explaining why.
Decisions on interest rates are made by a committee, which includes academics and economists from outside the institution-a way of avoiding groupthink.
At least one member of the committee has dissented at around half of all meetings.
It is obvious in retrospect that problems were building in the banking sector in 2005-06.
Leverage had risen and the regulations of the time served to obscure the nature of the risks the banks were taking.
Mr Haldane has emphasised how important banks were in fuelling the crisis in an earlier speech.
Given the scale of its interventions, it was imperative for the bank to get its economic forecasts right.
Before 2007, during the period known as the Great Moderation, the bank’s forecasts were highly accurate.
Its inflation report shows fan charts showing the likely outcomes for economic variables; since the crisis, half of all outcomes have occurred in the outer 20% of its forecasts.
The central bank took no action to bring inflation back down during that time, on the understandable grounds that tightening policy would cause considerable economic damage.
Still, it is hard to describe something as a “target” in such circumstances.
Were a husband to tell his wife that he had a target of being faithful, had failed to meet it over the previous four years, but hoped to do so over the following two, the marriage would be pretty short-lived.
On the one hand, the bank’s every statement is pored over by the markets for signs of future policy changes, so the publication of out-of-the-box thinking might only lead to confusion in investors’ minds.
On the other hand, the central bank may well need fresh thinking to get its forecasts right.
The big new hope for monetary policy is “forward guidance”-a steer from the bank on the outlook for interest rates two years, rather than just one month, ahead.
Eorward guidance is useless if the bank has no better vision of the future than a funfair psychic.
Intel Capital, the venturecapital VC unit of the American technology giant, is not quite sure yet but it wants to find out.
It recently announced it was taking stakes in i6 startups, including the firms making these products.
Intel has been in the venture-capital business for over 20 years, and has invested in more than 1,300 companies in 56 countries.
Over that time corporate enthusiasm for venture capital has waxed and waned-but has seldom been greater than it is now.
Companies as diverse as convenience stores , chemists , financial firms and carmakers are all getting into the game.
In return, the startups they invest in benefit from their capital, expertise and connections.
Over the past five years the number of corporate-venture units worldwide has doubled to 1,100; 25 of the 30 firms that comprise the Dow Jones Industrial Average have one.
The $6. billion such units have invested so far this year is over 60% more than they did in 2012.
America’s corporate investors have been involved in 18% of the country’s venture-capital deals this year.
Three previous booms, which coincided with ones in conventional venture capital, ended in tears-in the late 1960s, the early 1980s and, most spectacularly, during the dotcom bubble, when a staggering $21 billion was invested in 2000 alone.
Believers say the likes of Intel Capital and Google Ventures have learned to use their expertise rather than just their deep pockets.
This boom is also driven by necessity, says Dorte Hoppner of the European Venture Capital Association.
Disruptive innovation has become the single biggest worry for many firms.
Setting up vc arms is a way to identify life-threatening changes to their business early, so that they can adapt or, better yet, get in on the act, says Ben Veghte of America’s National Venture Capital Association, whose membership has mushroomed in recent years.
It has already invested in Welltok, a health-care startup which has invented an app which uses the technology to analyse users’ habits and give medical advice.
There are some indications that corporate VC is working better than in the past.
Startups backed by firms are more likely to list their shares than those championed by conventional venture groups.
In America, one beneficiary of this unfortunate squeeze on credit is a form of mutual fund that lends to businesses, known as a business-development company . bdcs have been around since the 1980s but have recently multiplied.
MLV & Co *As of November 19th BDCS are allowed to borrow as much money as they raise from shareholders, usually through fixed-rate bonds, so the total amount at their disposal is approximately $70 billion.
The industry’s total valuation is only a quarter of Citigroup’s, and were they to lend out this entire sum, it would equal just 4% of America’s commercial and industrial loans.
In reality, some of their money is invested in shares and some goes into property, so their impact is even smaller.
That is more than four times the dividend on the average stock and more than double the yield of even a junk bond.
Because bdcs are classified as a fund, they pay no corporate tax, unlike a bank.
To preserve this status, they must distribute 90% or more of their income each year.
So too is finding good customers for loans, since they do not offer the prosaic products like current and payroll accounts through which banks typically acquire their customers.
Many bdcs specialise in financing the acquisitions of private-equity firms.
That helps to keep down costs, as they make big loans to just a few customers.
But it can also suppress returns, as there is lots of competition to back private-equity deals.
Although BDC’s limited borrowing makes them safer than banks, they also suffer from higher defaults.
As a result, when the financial markets become volatile, and in particular when the market for high-yield debt wobbles, their shares slump and they struggle to raise capital.
Another quirk is that all but a handful of BDCS do not have internal managers; instead, they farm out their management to notionally independent firms.
The managers’ compensation under such deals is often opaque but lavish.
Indeed, charges akin to the “2 and 20” that hedge-fund managers once typically extracted (a man68 Finance and economics The Economist November 22nd 2014 The Greek economy Grecovery Political uncertainty could trip up the euro zone’s new star performer T he euro area stayed in the doldrums in the third quarter, according to data released on Novemberi4th.
Output rose by 0.2% compared to the second quarter, equivalent to just6% on an annualised basis.
It turns out that the Greek recovery started in the first quarter of this year, when it grew even faster, by 0.8%, according to the new figures (for technical reasons quarterly figures had been suspended since 2011); it then slowed to 0.3% in the second quarter.
Apart from a blip in early 2010 just before the first of two bail-outs, this is Greece’s first spell of annual growth since the start of 2008.
GDP, % change general government on a year earlier gross debt, % of GDP Sources: Eurostat; European Commission; Haver Analytics *Forecast end of last year, gdp contracted by 27%, a decline rivalling America’s in the early 1930s.
Even though the euro zone as a whole is doing badly, the Greek recovery looks set to continue, at least in the short-term.
Since the indicator tends to track GDP growth this suggests a decent start to the current quarter.
Growth would come from higher household consumption and investment, as austerity eases, together with a boost from net exports.
That upbeat outlook may be undermined by political uncertainty, however.
The coalition government led by Antonis Samaras, which steered the country away from the abyss after two fraught elections in 2012, could fall next year, possibly as early as Eebruary.
Opinion polls suggest that the next one may be led by Syriza, a left-wing party whose policies would put it on a collision course with the euro zone’s creditor countries, especially Germany.
Already, ten-year government-bond yields, which had fallen below 6% during the summer, have risen above 8% as investors worry about the country’s political prospects.
The foundations of this year’s growth were laid when the threat of a Grexit was removed.
Should the jitters return, the Grecovery will surely wobble too. ► agement fee of 2% of assets and a performance fee of 20% of profits beyond a certain threshold) remain common.
Last year it returned 18% on equity by backing private companies in the region, with both debt and equity.
It is managed in-house, and provides transparent accounts, complete with details on managers’ pay.
Triangle’s market capitalisation is far greater than the value of its assets; bdcs with external managers typically trade at a discount.
Second, they should ally with banks, which have lots of loan-hungry clients but less appetite for risk.
Regulators are keen on the idea of transferring risk from outfits with flighty, government-insured funding, such as deposits at banks, to ones with more stable, loss-absorbing backers, such as the shareholders of bdcs.
Building arrangements of that sort on any scale will take time, but a foundation is starting to emerge.
The “control” group was asked a series of anodyne questionsfor instance, how many hours of television they watched each week.
Each banker was then asked to toss a coin in private ten times and report the results.
The bankers reported the results of their ten flips on a computer, and received payment automatically.
With enough lucky flips-or shameless lying-a banker could easily make $200 in a matter of seconds.
In both groups, workers from the redblooded bit of banking-traders and the like-were more dishonest than those in ancillary jobs.
The treatment group, in contrast, said that they had got lucky 58% of the time.
Nearly a tenth of the treatment group claimed the full $200, despite there being a one-in-a-thousand chance of this happening to an honest flipper.
PIMCO We work every day with the single goal of protecting and growing the retirement savings and investments for millions of people around the world.
That promise to our clients defines who we are. p I M c O' I Your Global In vestment Authority’” wearepimCO.com alternatives, bonds, covimodities, equities.
With more than 2% expected growth next year, the IMF has characterised Canada's economy as solid.
However, declining exports, a changing energy industry and a shrinking manufacturing sector have left many wondering where this growth will come from.
On December 3rd, editors from The Economist, senior business executives and government leaders will gather to discuss Canada's future.
Register today to take a deeper look at Canada's economy, identify new areas of opportunity and find out how innovation could change the country for ever.
Koji Asada President and chief executive Bank of Tokyo, Canada Jeff Lehrmann President Chevron Canada Stephen Poloz Governor Bank of Canada John Weekes Former Canadian chief negotiator NAFTA Space is limited.
Another possibility, about which the authors are sceptical, is H andling small transfers between individuals is not an especially big or lucrative part of the financial system, but it is a faddish one.
The news comes hot on the heels of the announcement from Groupe bpce, a French bank, that its customers will soon be able to send each other money via Twitter, a microblogging service.
Facebook, a social network, has similar plans; Apple, which recently launched a payment service, may also join the fray.
Last year Forrester, a market-research firm, prethat the people in the treatment group were more prepared to lie because their professional identity had taken centrestage; the feelings of the person inside the suit became less important.
But it may not be the bankers who are the problem so much as the setting. ■ dieted that mobile p 2 p payments in America would amount to only $4 billion a year by 2017.
Now it expects the market to reach $5 billion this year and to grow by 26% a year, to reach $17 billion by the end of 2019.
Venmo, a P 2 P startup now owned by PayPal, an online-payments firm, says that it transferred $700m in the third quarter of the year, 50% more than in the second.
Launched in 2007, it is now used by more than 17m Kenyans, equivalent to more than two-thirds of the adult population.
PayPal has had a mobilepayments app for some time and is the market leader in America.
Big banks have also entered the p2p business, with services such as Popmoney in America and Paym in Britain.
What is changing is that such services are getting ever easier and faster to use, with some now offering instantaneous payments.
Snapcash allows users to flick money to their friends by dragging images of notes around the screen of their smartphone.
The app lets users send messages along with payments (“To Misha and Nina, for such a fun evening”) and make them-although not the sum involvedvisible to friends.
Although all this may make older users yawn or cringe, younger ones, the majority of Venmo’s customers, seem to like it.
But providers point out that their services run on regulated payment platforms, where all the sensitive data are kept.
Snapehat, for instance, uses Square, a payments firm, which also operates Square Cash.
Others may introduce premium services, try to monetise the data they gather on payments or sell advertising.
But consumers, at least for domestic transfers, will come to expect real-time, free p2p services, predicts Denee Carrington of Forrester.
Our chart on page 4 of Last week's special report on the Pacific contained two errors.
It mixed up the direction of eastbound and westbound trade; and its definition of Europe understated the Level of trade between that region and the Americas.
Mobile payments The cheque is in the tweet SAN FRANCISCO Sending and receiving money on your smartphone is getting easier 72 Finance and economics The Economist November 22nd 2014 Free exchange | No country for young people Demography may explain secular stagnation I N THE late 1930s economists trying to explain how a depression could drag on for nearly a decade wondered if the problem was a shortage of people.
Weak demand and excess savings were making it impossible to stimulate growth with the usual tool of low short-term interest rates, he argued.
Demographics may play a central role in the ailment Mr Summers described-indeed, a more central one than in the 1930s.
An ageing population could hold down growth and interest rates through several channels.
An economy’s potential output depends on the number of workers and their productivity.
Britain’s potential workforce will stop growing in coming decades; America’s will grow at barely a third of the 0.9% rate that prevailed from 2000 to 2013.
All else being equal, a half percentage-point drop in the growth of the labour force will trim economic growth by a similar amount.
But the recession may have accelerated the process by encouraging many workers to take early retirement.
In America the first baby boomers qualified for Social Security, the public pension, in 2008, on turning 62.
The size and age of the population also influences how many customers and workers businesses can tap, and so how much they will invest.
World Bank *Excluding Britain Online: For an explanation of secular stagnation m graphics, visit Economist.com/stagl4 lation would need fewer of the products American factories made.
Contemporary models of economic growth assume that firms need a given stock of capital per worker-equipment, buildings, land and intellectual property-to produce a unit of output.
In a research note, Eugenio Pinto and Stacey Tevlin of the Eederal Reserve note that net investment (gross investment minus depreciation) is close to its lowest as a share of the total capital stock since the second world war.
This is partly cyclical, since the recession led businesses to curtail expansion plans.
Growth of the capital stock slowed from 3.1% a year in 1994-2003 to 1.6% in the subsequent decade.
The economists attribute about a third of the deceleration to slower growth in the workforce, and the rest to less innovation.
In other words, businesses are buying less machinery because they have fewer workers to operate it and fewer technological breakthroughs to exploit.
A borrower’s world The third means by which demography can influence growth and interest rates is through saving.
Individuals typically borrow heavily in early adulthood to pay for education, a house and babies, save heavily from middle age onwards, and spend those savings in retirement.
Higher population growth and shorter retirements require less saving; older populations more.
But as the population aged, its growth slowed and time in retirement lengthened thanks to increased lifespans, the required level of savings rose to 52% of gdp in 2010.
The simultaneous effort by so many countries to save for retirement, combined with weak investment, slowing potential growth, fiscal retrenchment, corporate cash hoarding and inequality (which leaves more of the national income in the hands of the high-saving rich) is depressing the “equilibrium” interest rate that brings investment and saving into balance.
Moreover, at some point, an ageing population starts to use up the savings it has accumulated.
Charles Goodhart and Philipp Erfurth of Morgan Stanley note that the ratio of workers to retirees is now plunging in most developed countries and soon will in many emerging markets.
Japan is already liquidating the foreign assets its people acquired during their high-saving years; China and South Korea are starting to do so and Germany will soon.
This, they predict, will drag real interest rates, which are now negative, back to the historical equilibrium of 2.5-3% by 2025.
For a fraction of the cost, enjoy the privacy and rtexibihty of your furnished Mayfair apartment and the ease of fulFservice luxury living without the high costs associated with both.
With a limited number of fractions remaining and prices starting at £ II 7^000* a closer look is worth your time.
Mqyfair * Loitifd'n GRAND RESIDENCIES BY MARRIOTT OmPmiicim Yiauip>F«wR riiflritiatt3ftRTri ilMate wil»Ma<d Rid«Mita&CQ^ Rjntliiori(Md»{indiiingbii(rarimilM]lQ,countRiwtf»ilQwtrarhig^ TQfi 9 «idi«yairdRi(AflKionf^ acxmt iienlk^aid eIMi you iti^wnta toffM GPramAlteriMHRgiril lunq Em«i Ui BaiiRd'i m SOLOTiieTHESAlJ Of fRACTKMALRESIDOICE CU£l€m Subject IQ TTti ArMMwvdtRlDflirwiMiclIMttbuytorMdencinjurRdcM Prtcttsteubiid Ibdanoe ¥tt itfcimnan leavel^ iet*ist brcra^47 PsicSDeetj^ai^ Mayter.
It is 28 years since the world’s worst nuclear accident, at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in northern Ukraine, but visitors are still told to be careful.
Though much of the plant (at which, even now, 3,000 people work) has been decontaminated, and the roads cleaned up, the surrounding forest has hotspots where fragments of debris and nuclear fuel, ejected by the explosion that destroyed reactor number four on April 26th 1986, emit dangerous radiation.
At the moment, the reactor’s remains are sealed in by a concrete and steel structure known officially as the Shelter Object and colloquially as the sarcophagus.
This has done its job for nearly three decades, but there are doubts it can manage a fourth.
Wind, rain, rust and time have taken their toll, and the radiation level within it makes maintenance near-impossible.
That is why visitors to Chernobyl these days will see a huge and growing building looming in front of reactor four’s remains.
It is in essence, as the picture shows, a giant doubleskinned stainless-steel Nissen hut, which will have flat walls at each end.
It was scheduled for completion in 2005, but political foot-dragging and wrangling over who would pay have delayed its construction by more than a decade.
When it is finished, though-probably in 2017-it will protect the sarcophagus from the ravages of the weather and ensure that, even if that older container does fall down, no radiation will escape.
Baba Yaga’s hut Even now, so long after the explosion, too much radioactivity streams through the sarcophagus from the reactor’s ruined core to allow the nsc to be built in situ.
Instead, it is being constructed a few hundred metres away and will be slid into place on rails-making it, Novarka reckons, the biggest movable structure ever built.
The railway must be flat, so every metre it is extended means removing and disposing of more tonnes of radioactive soil.
Rather than do that, Novarka has built a special concrete radiation shield in front of the sarcophagus, to provide additional protection for its workers.
This, though, is a compromise too, for the shield is necessarily far shorter than the nsc’s arch will be at full height.
To overcome that, the nsc is composed of two sections-each, in turn, made of linked panels, so that they can remain flat, under the shield’s protection, until raised by special jacks.
To complicate matter further, reactor four shares a building with reactor three, which did not blow up and is not covered by the sarcophagus.
The wall at that end of it thus has a hole through which the building fits, and which will have to be sealed to the building by a membrane when everything is in place.
Even when that has happened, however, only half of the contract will have been fulfilled.
The other half-keeping the thing standing for the century specified in its blueprintswill be a challenge.
Many large steel structures, such as the Forth Bridge, in Britain, have survived for more than a century.
But, as Nicolas Caille, the project’s director at Novarka, points out, these rely on regular repainting to protect them from the elements.
Instead, the plan (besides using stainless rather than normal steel for part of its construction) is to pump warm, dry air between its inner and outer skins.
As long as this ventilation system can keep the air’s relative humidity below 40%, the non-stainless bolts and beams that hold the structure together should not rust.
For the plan to work, though, the dehumidifiers will have to be kept supplied with power for the whole period.
Then there is the question of what to do with the radioactive junk inside.
The ultimate goal is to disassemble the sarcophagus and then cut up and dispose of the remains of the reactor.
The nsc is therefore being built with several internal, remotely operable cranes, and the plan is, one day, to ►► The Economist November 22nd 2014 Science and technology 75 » i -& rHow Tibet was won The barley mow BEIJING The settlement of Tibet depended on an exotic crop from the West T hat agriculture permitted the human population to expand its size is obvious.
That it permitted the population to expand its range as well is a more subtle point.
A new crop not only allowed people to colonise the highest reaches of Tibet, but let them do so at a time when the weather was actually getting colder.
Archaeology suggests that humans have been visiting the Tibetan plateau for at least 20,000 years.
For most of this time, though, these visits were seasonalprobably in search of game such as goats, sheep, asses and yak.
The lower slopes of the plateau started to be settled by farmers about 5,500 years ago.
But these farmers, Dr Chen and Dr Dong discovered after reviewing artefacts, plant remains, animal bones and teeth from 53 sites in the north-east of the plateau, failed to establish themselves above 3,000 metres ► use these and robots to do the j oh.
The inside of reactor four is a mess of twisted metal, naked nuclear fuel and lumps of “corium”, a lava-like substance formed when reactor fuel melted and mixed with the concrete floor of the reactor building.
This building is so radioactive that anyone walking around in it would accumulate a lethal dose in minutes.
Even robots working there will need to be hardened against the radiation, and also dexterous enough to navigate through what is, essentially, a bomb site.
Those involved concede that the technology needed to do this does not yet exist.
But once the nsc is in place, there will be plenty of time to invent it. until about 3,600 years ago.
Only then did farming spread to cover places with an altitude of up to 4,700 metres.
This is odd, because 4,000 years ago the climate in the area became distinctly colder.
If anything, the maximum altitude of farms would have been expected to fall, not rise.
Though barley has a longer growing season than millet, it is more tolerant of the cold.
Barley was part of a farming revolution that happened in the Middle East as millet and rice were spreading in China.
Tibet’s farmers were able to expand confidently upwards instead of being forced downhill, and the roof of the world, a habitat about as different from the African savannah in which Homo sapiens evolved as it is possible to imagine, was nevertheless absorbed successfully into the human empire.
Once the nsc is finished, and there is no longer a risk of radiation escaping, the problem of deconstructing the sagging sarcophagus and clearing out the reactor building will become less urgent.
There are many other calls on the Ukrainian government’s money, and foreign donors may decide they have higher priorities.
Ms Kemper works at Medimmune, a subsidiary of AstraZeneca based in Gaithersburg, Maryland.
Her laboratory contains 40 bioreactors-fluid-filled tanks of about three litres’ capacity.
Paddles within them whirl around a mixture of nutrient broth and specially engineered hamster cells that are busy making human antibodies.
It is also part of a new front in the ancient war between man and microbe, for the antibodies Ms Kemper’s cells produce are designed to attack bacteria, and thus back up conventional antibiotics, some of which are failing in the face of rising bacterial resistance.
In America alone, at least 2m illnesses a year-and 23,000 deaths-are caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
Besides the human suffering this inflicts, it adds $20 billion to the annual cost of health care.
The toll is such that, in September, Barack Obama directed federal agencies to take action against antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
And the Department of Health and Human Services is putting up a $2om prize for a rapid, diagnostic test for such bacteria.
Horse sense Antibodies are proteins that have special sites on them which can vary in shape in myriad ways.
Each variation is tailored to stick to one or a handful of specific other molecules, known as antigens, and neutralise them.
If an antigen is part of a bacterium or virus, that gets neutralised too.
The first Nobel prize in medicine, awarded in 1901, went to Emil von Behring for discovering how to employ antitoxins, as he called them, to treat diphtheria.
Von Behring found he could transfer them from infected horses to sick people by injecting those people with horse-blood serum.
In the wake of this discovery, serum therapy became, until the invention of antibiotics, the main way of treating not only diphtheria but also tetanus, scarlet fever and meningitis.
It faded into the background after the invention of antibiotics, but is still employed for neutralising snake venom and-albeit experimentally-for treating Ebola fever.
How►► 76 Science and technology The Economist November 22nd 2014 ► ever, now that biotechnology allows particular antibodies to be created in laboratories like Ms Kemper’s, the technique is poised to return to wider use, albeit in a slightly different guise.
Merck, a large American drug company, is testing a combination of two antibodies against toxins made by Clostridium difficile, a bacterium that plagues hospitals and which can be hard to treat with conventional antibiotics.
The past few years have seen a particularly virulent strain of this bug emerge, and death rates have increased.
Early trials of Merck’s treatment suggest that, when used alongside conventional antibiotics, antibody therapy reduces the recurrence of infection.
Medimmune’s antibodies, known for the moment as MED13902 and MED14893, are aimed respectively at Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus and bind, in the former case, to bugs themselves and in the latter to human cells, shielding them from bacterial toxins.
Pseudomonas and Staphylococcus are bacteria that particularly plague intensive-care units, sometimes causing stays in hospital to be five to eight times longer than they need be.
For that reason, and the lack of alternative therapies, America’s Food and Drug Administration has recently agreed to expedite the review process for these two potential treatments.
Unlike most antibodies, MED13902 is bi-specific-meaning it has been engineered to bind to two different targets.
One of these is on Pseudomonas's tip, the site that injects toxins into an infected individual’s body cells.
It stops bacteria it is attached to interacting with, and thus harming, body cells.
It also brings the bugs in question to the notice of the body’s defences, such as white blood cells called macrophages, which then eat them.
It also prevents the bug rupturing those cells’ membranes and killing them.
And Merck and Medimmune are not the only companies involved in this area.
Sanofi, a French firm, is also working on an antibody that kills Staphylococcus by attracting it to the attention of macrophages.
All these new treatments will, if they work, be useful in hospitals-particularly to treat infections that are resistant to antibiotics and thus hard to get rid of.
But they might also be used prophylactically, as conventional antibiotics already sometimes are, before someone undergoes surgery.
They may, indeed, prove to be a way of sparing the routine use of antibiotics, thus reducing the selective pressure on bacteria to evolve resistance to those drugs-for the reason resistance is such a problem in hospitals is that there are an awful lot of antibiotics sloshing around in them.
Evolution being what it is, bacteria will no doubt find ways around antibodies, as they have with antibiotics.
But the wider the range of weapons available for deployment in the conflict, the harder life will be for them.
As Steve Projan, who oversees Medimmune’s antibody project, eloquently puts it, “I’ve been working on staph for 34 years.
On November 12th the European Space Agency announced, with a mixture of relief and triumph, that Philae, a robotic probe, had landed on its target, a 4km-wide comet called 67P/ChuryumovGerasimenko.
But, as the minutes and hours passed, it became clear that things had not gone entirely to plan.
Philae was indeed down, but it was down in the wrong place, and suffering from a serious shortage of sunshine to boot.
Anything lifting off from its surface at a speed greater than about one metre a second will zoom away into space.
It was vital, then, that Philae make a gentle landing, and have some means of staying put once it was down.
First, a small rocket intended to fire on touchdown to push the craft downwards in order to stop it rebounding, failed before Philae separated from its mother ship, Rosetta.
ESA’s mission controllers decided to go ahead anyway, relying on a pair of harpoons designed to fire into the comet’s surface and anchor Philae in place.
When Philae hit the surface, its flexible legs absorbed some of the impact energy-hut not enough to prevent a bounce.
Even a small j olt was enough to send it rebounding hundreds of metres back into space.
When it did come to rest, two hours later , it was far from its planned landing site.
Its solar panels were illuminated for just an hour and a half out of every 12hour cometary day.
With insufficient sunlight to recharge the craft’s batteries, mission controllers had to husband carefully what juice they had.
On November 14th, with the batteries running low, esa decided to try deploying Philae's soil penetrator, but it seems not to have accomplished much.
Then, with the collected data safely transmitted to Earth and the batteries deep in the red, the controllers moved the craft slightly to try to improve the amount of sunlight it received.
And Philae seems undamaged by its ordeal, esa hopes that, as 67P falls towards the sun and Philae's solar panels are consequently able to harvest more and more photons, the probe might one day bring itself back to life.
Last week we said that, before Philae' s Landing on comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko, no craft had made a soft Landing on an astronomicaL body other than a pLanet or a moon.
Two craft, NEAR Shoemaker, an American mission, and Hayabusa, a Japanese one, have Landed on asteroids.
Russia’s swift annexation of Crimea and its subsequent proxy-war in the south-east of Ukraine have turned Mr Putin into a national hero in the eyes of many Russians, including some former protesters.
It is also a guide to the crony capitalism that grew out of the nexus of Mr Putin’s plutocratic interests, his shady past and authoritarian rule.
When Mr Putin became president he was seen as a pro-Western, economic liberal.
He pledged to clamp down on the oligarchs who wielded power in the 1990s, and to restore the role of the state as chief arbiter.
The result is that no individuals control 35% of Russia’s wealth, according to Ms Dawisha.
Most of them are secretive, unremarkable, grey men, with backgrounds in the security services.
They prospered, not by building new businesses, but by suffocating existing ones and picking up the pieces or sucking money out of the state.
In the mid-1990s Yegor Gaidar, the architect of Russian market reforms, feared that the repressive Soviet bureaucracy could morph into a mafia system.
Ms Dawisha’s book describes the fusion between the secret police, the mafia and the oligarchs with tentacles that stretch into almost every aspect of life in Russia and beyond.
Ms Dawisha traces their influence to the last days of the Soviet empire, when the KGB was put in charge of the Communist party’s foreign bank accounts and set up joint ventures with Western firms.
In the late 1980s Mr Also in this section 78 Quantum biology comes of age 78 Germany's unfathomable history 79 Tove Jansson, one of a kind 80 The story of English family life 80 First editions, second thoughts For daily analysis and debate on books, arts and culture, visit Economist.com/culture Putin was a junior officer.
By 1990 he was formally in charge of external trade relationships in the office of the mayor of St Petersburg.
In practice, this meant he was part of all trade deals with foreigners.
When Mr Putin moved to Moscow, serving in the Kremlin’s administration and then as the head of the fsb, the kgb’s successor, before becoming prime minister and then president, his friends followed.
Some have become billionaires controlling the distribution of the oil rents.
Mr Putin also exploited the traditional links between the kgb and organised crime.
British libel laws have no doubt contributed to a sense of intimidation.
Russian oligarchs have been able to take advantage of them, but may find that harder now that many appear on a sanctions list and are unable to travel to Europe and America.
In 2009 The Economist settled a libel action, which Ms Dawisha refers to in her book.
It was brought by Gennady Timchenko, a former owner of Gunvor, a commodities-trading firm.
Ms Dawisha’s work is largely based on open sources, chiefly investigations by Russian and foreign journalists and published in Russian newspapers, journals and books.
Furthermore, the system that has emerged in Russia was created by a group of men who followed Mr Putin.
Ms Dawisha imposes her view of today’s Russia on to the time when Mr Putin came to power.
In fact, Russia’s descent into the corporatist, nationalist state that it has now become was by no means predetermined.
In a pluralistic state, the scandalous, ugly stories about Mr Putin and his associates would bring down the government.
The vast increase in incomes, particularly in large cities, has also made people more tolerant of corruption.
It was not just Mr Putin’s cronies who benefited from the rising oil prices.
Russia’s aggression in Ukraine and the propaganda that accompanied it struck a chord with people keen for an imperial resurgence.
But as the economy slows down and real incomes start to fall, the focus may shift back to the issue that sparked the protest in 2011.
If so, the stories that Ms Dawisha tells may start to resonate more loudly.
For years, scattered views from the fringes have attempted to explain such phenomena using quantum mechanics, a weird bit of physics that predicts oddities such as particles being in multiple places at once, eerily connected across vast distances or tunnelling through seemingly insuperable barriers.
Yet a growing body of experimental evidence suggests that quantum oddities may really be responsible for many of life’s engineering successes.
Quantum biology, the name given to the nascent field that draws these diverse data together, is moving in from the fringes and becoming established.
Quantum mechanics is one of science’s most successful theories, superseding Sir Isaac Newton’s “classical” physics, the workaday version taught at school.
The theory’s weirder predictions-spooky connections, tunnelling and the like-are not part of people’s everyday experience.
They happen at a microscopic level and, it was thought, only under precisely controlled conditions.
Experiments were done by the steadiest hands in the darkest labs at the lowest achievable temperatures.
Plants and animals are warmed and lit by the sun, mostly, and tend to be squidgy, moving and watery.
It had long been assumed that a living being is a poor laboratory in which to carry out quantum experiments.
In effect, the energy is in multiple places at the same time and “finds” the most efficient route from where it is collected to where it is put to use.
This first credible example inspired other scientists to follow similarly bold avenues of enquiry.
To grasp these new threads in quantum biology is to grasp a quantity of quantum theory; the coherence is just one of the complex phenomena that Jim Al-Khalili and Johnjoe McFadden set out to teach the reader.
They succeed by using delightfully revealing analogies and similes, some borrowed from their prior work, that make slippery concepts sit still for study.
The notion of “quantum entanglement” makes more sense when depicted as a pair of loaded dice.
Molecules with leftand right-handed forms that vibrate in identical ways become left-handed Jimi Hendrix and right-handed Eric Clapton playing the same tune.
Once the quantum genie is out of the bottle, it is tempting to use it to explain all manner of phenomena.
The book suggests that a molecule in birds’ eyes might be the site of a quantum effect that permits them to “see” a magnetic field and thereby to navigate.
Subatomic particles tunnelling across gaps in the nose when aroma molecules are around may be the first step in how animals sense scent.
Quantum weirdness, after all, has long been used to excuse all sorts of questionable science.
In 1989 Roger Penrose, an Oxford mathematician, proposed a quantum mechanism for consciousness that was met with deep scepticism.
Yet Messrs Al-Khalili and McFadden go on to revise Mr Penrose’s theory in light of more recent experiments.
The authors themselves are leading the search for a quantum mechanism in genetic mutations, which might be giving evolution itself a helping hand.
That quantum effects are an incontrovertible part of some of life’s machinery is reason enough to go looking for more examples.
The ideas in “Life on the Edge” may be dead ends, or they may be just the beginning.
And given the enormity of what happened during that period, it is easy to see why writers return to it over and over again to try to understand the incomprehensible.
Stephen Green, a self-confessed lifelong Germanophile (as well as a former chairman of hsbc, a one-time trade minister in the British government and an ordained priest in the Church of England), offers some of his own explanations in this very personal take on the country.
The idea is to show that the roots of that dismal period go a long way back and its effects still resonate 70 years on.
Among those roots, he argues, is a sense of victimhood that eventually sees the victim turn aggressor.
In Germany this made an early appearance with Hermann, on whom the Romans got their revenge a few years after his famous victory.
More recently the country saw itself as the main victim of the appalling Thirty Years War of 1618-48; of French aggression, from Louis XIV to Napoleon; and, most devastatingly of the Treaty of Versailles, in which the victors of the first world war imposed a crushing settlement on the vanquished.
Lord Green also traces the prolonged and difficult search for a German identity through the country’s religious, philosophical and artistic heritage.
A key concept in German moral thought is duty, extolled by thinkers from Martin Luther to Immanuel Kant.
Such explanations may throw some light on the origins of the Holocaust, but they leave huge lacunae.
There was some opposition, which generally proved fatal-the July 20th plot to assassinate Hitler, the White Rose dissident group, the Lutheran pastor Dietrich Bonhoeffer and his supporters-but they were drops in an ocean of acquiescence.
It seemed as though a nation’s collective conscience had been switched off.
Come the end of the war, it became plain that the whole thing had been a chimera.
The Germans found themselves presiding over a devastated country and a mountain of guilt.
The miracle, as Lord Green rightly points out, is that from this state of total collapse, Germany (with the help of generous Marshall aid from America and a sensible currency reform) rose again to become a country with model democratic institutions and a highly successful economy.
It is now living at peace with its neighbours for the first time in many centuries.
Any remaining shadows of the Third Reich were swept away when the Berlin Wall came down 25 years ago and East and West Germany were united.
Instead, they should marvel at this reformed character in their midst, be thankful-and learn from it.
The MifQes were the lonely, timid ones, and their fear was important, she said.
At first glance, this sits oddly with the easy-going charm of Moominland where, in spite of disasters and the Groke and the sinister Hattifatteners, civility and good humour always prevail.
Work and Love”, translated from the Finnish, radically shifts that perspective, at least for English-speakers who are unfamiliar with the origins of Jansson’s stories.
Jansson grew up in the shadow of the Russian revolution, which spilled over into bitter civil war in Finland in 1918.
Her father fought on the anti-communist side, and one of her best adult stories describes her child-self watching him carousing with his old war comrades and, at a certain moment, ritualistically bayoneting a wicker chair.
Many thousands died in that war, and although the anticommunists won, the country remained divided-increasingly so with the rise of Nazi Germany in the 1930s.
During the 1930s Jansson studied at the Academy of Fine Arts in Helsinki and became a passionate anti-Nazi pacifist.
It was in 1934, while staying with an aunt in Germany, that she painted one of her first versions of a Moomin, a strangely menacing scene featuring a long-snouted creature, black and red-eyed.
At the time she was also designing covers for a satirical magazine, Garm, in which she mercilessly caricatured both Hitler and Stalin.
Again, small Moomin-like figures make an appearance, sometimes black, and sometimes as they appeared later, pale and plump.
Much later, left-wing Finnish critics would accuse Jansson of bourgeois escapism.
But, in a sense, the very act of imagining was political, a gesture of defiance.
The Moomins stood for something in a brutal world, though she would never quite have said so.
She exhibited frequently in Finland, and won awards and commissions for large public murals.
Her reputation there as a writer lagged far behind the rest of the world.
Ms Karjalainen is a historian of Finnish art, and although she covers Jansson’s writing, it is the paintings that really interest her.
Jansson was a more interesting writer than a painter, and her life sheds much light on her particular quality as a storyteller.
Everywhere in her fiction there is the same sense of deflection and indirection.
But few of her family left any trace beyond census returns and registrations of baptism, marriage and death.
But the point of her book lies not so much in its individual characters as in the patterns they make.
They were constantly on the move, tramping the roads, in and out of employment, sliding around the social scale.
A telephone clerk becomes a railway porter; a bricklayer becomes a navy cook’s mate; a schoolmaster’s daughter sews shirts; a master-baker becomes a grocer and dies in the workhouse.
Ms Light’s research into the historical context of her family is wide and various.
Their streets and houses, their occupations, the impacts on them of laissez-faire economics, of population growth, of punitive Poor Laws, and so on-all these are richly chronicled.
One answer, perhaps, is that it is precisely there, at the level of the family, that a generic concept, such as “the play of forces”, is at its least generic.
By the same token, she familiarises history itself, brings it home-where, crucially, it touches a nerve.
One great-grandmother was born in a workhouse, entered domestic service as a child, married, had children and died in a mental asylum.
Eamily history, thanks to the internet, has become a hugely popular pastime.
Eighteen months ago Rick Gekoski, a London-based antiquarian bookdealer, persuaded 50 authors to scribble second thoughts in first editions of their most famous works.
Rowling wrote in “Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone”, Kazuo Ishiguro in “The Remains of the Day”, his obsessive tale of an English butler in thrall to duty.
Lionel Shriver annotated a copy of her 2003 bestseller, “We Need to Talk about Kevin”, and the book was snapped up by the Dobkin Eamily Collection of Eeminism as a totem of its kind.
The average price at the auction was $10,000, though for the “Harry Potter” the hammer went down at $235,000.
The sale raised $690,000 for PEN, an association that promotes freedom of expression around the world.
Now Mr Gekoski’s wife, Belinda Kitchin, has revisited the idea in aid of pen America.
Eor artists such as Kiki Smith, Richard Serra and Ed Ruscha, who have long been influenced by books and paper, the auction has been an opportunity to roll up their creative sleeves.
Marina Abramovic, a performance artist, has done something rather different.
Eor the pen auction Ms Abramovic has annotated a copy of the book , then tied it up with hair-like black thread, to which a broken brass key is attached.
Like so many dreams, the book is unopenable, destined for ever to be a mystery.
If the artists have looked forward, the writers, for the most part, have used the auction to look back at their younger selves, not knowing how like themselves they had already become.
Malcolm Gladwell is the Imelda Marcos of trainers; he buys two dozen pairs a year.
Much older and retired from writing, Philip Roth is mightily pleased with what he has achieved.
Rated 4th in the world in The Financial Times Executive MBA Ranking 2014, you will earn not one^ but two world-class MBAs.
It did for Mike Cagney, MSx Class of 2011, and now cofounder and CEO of SoFi.
The idea for disrupting the student loan market hit him during finance class.
He worked with classmates in entrepreneurship to revise and refine the business.
Today, SoFi is the largest provider of student loan refinancing with a revolutionary approach to underwriting and a unique investment model that creates a positive social impact.
STANFORDii MSx BUSINESSsi Program StanfordMSx.com The Economist November 22nd 2014 82 Courses Meet us in Oxford on 4 February 2015 for our open evening; www.sbs.oxford.edu/mpm Oxford MSc Major Programme Management Major projects are high-risk and complex -technically and politically.
They also present substantial opportunities for transformational outcomes, A two-year part-time MSc for experienced executives delivering major projects and programmes.
You need to master the numbers — and see beyond the numbers' In Yale's executive MBA program in asset management, you’ll learn investment fundamentals from Yale experts, while expanding your management / and leadership skills.
A business education fium Fletcher— America's oldest exclushfely gjiduate school of Intemaliofial Affairs— Is now more essential than mi The MIB Integnates concrete business sblls and r^uances of global fortes and geopolitics.
Graduates tatmch international careers that span borders and dhdplines^ in consulting, h nance, poficy, MHCs, MK the UN. and more.
GLOBAL EXPRESSION OF INTEREST With mference to our Global Expression of Interest published in this publication on 15* November, 2014 me dosmg date for submi^ion of proposal is extetxted up to 5* December, 2014 instead of 30* of November 2014.
Any cMicatiofis be sought at cnnbantecK@yahoo.co. in All other tenns and conditions rennain un-aftered.
C O W MOI CE AND TOUeiSM; AND LONO TEAW THADE FACILITATXTN AND NON'TARIFF BAAniERS EXPERT WINnTTTY OF FOREIOfI AFFAJR8 & INTERNATICNAL TRADE NUIABER; PRQ2Q1iM12 ThaWteMliryArEaiitAticanAliAi.
Corntnam BrtoTbunamPCinfaAftoMvMlry iriPiHBqnAtinieiriiridJonal toMi Napoli kom TnutoMnA EaR AAtoa OMCA) wcM to Angaga an IniPviduAi conwivaA tor tw tolowA^ TndtUrioTtoirv atTfadeCMit 1 LixigTcnnTiaitoPoNcy toritoMaislrirofEiat Attoan Ainrs.
Ltd. seeks a majority stake in a U.K. paediatric-oriented pharmaceutical company for mutually beneficent investment and development.
The Economist Newspaper Limited shall not be liable to any person for loss or damage incurred or suffered as a result of his/her accepting or offering to accept an invitation contained in any advertisement published in The Economist.
The Economist November 22nd 2014 Economic and finandal indicators 85 Markets % change on Dec 31st 2013 Index Nov 19th one week in local in $ currency terms United States 17,685.
I Global business barometer Executives around the world remain upbeat aboutthe prospects for business butthis optimism is on the wane, according to the latest Economist/ FT survey of around 1,500 senior managers, conducted by the Economist Intelligence Unit.
The balance of respondents who think that global business conditions will soon improve has fallen by 29 percentage points from the beginning oftheyearto 13.
Almost half of respondents expect the Federal Reserve to be the first central bank to raise interest rates while more than two-thirds expect the European Central Bankto begin quantitative easing in 2015.
The Economist/ FT survey Interactive: Track global business confidence with our barometer at Economist.com/bizbaro Other markets % change on Dec 31st 2013 Index one in local in $ Nov 19th week currency terms United States 2,048.
The joy of glass Donald Stookey, glass chemist, died on November 4th, aged 99 ALTHOUGH the man in the street may /xnot know it, modern life is full of the inventions of Donald Stookey.
His ingenuity lies behind the screens of tablets and mobile phones; behind glasses that fade to black as the sun comes out; behind the nose-cones of guided missiles, and cookware so sturdy that you can broil it in the oven, plunge it in the fridge and drop it on a stone floor, with damage to nothing but the soufQe that was in it.
Interesting, then, that Dr Stookey saw himself less as a scientist than an alchemist.
This was because his field was glass, a material so unique and strange-not solid, liquid or gas, but a liquid frozen in an unstable state-that in 3,500 years of history it had kept its secrets intact.
He also saw himself as an explorer, the sort he had loved to read about in childhood, opening doors into unseen worlds; or, being an avid hunter and fisherman, as a tracker of elusive prey.
Hence his original venture into glass, as he left mix in 1940 with a doctorate but with job offers only from Corning and Nabisco, a bakery company.
He did not want to bake, so chose to do research into milky white opal glass.
He knew nothing of either the substance or the chemistry, but found it mysterious and beautiful and hoped it might be useful.
The job was still almost artisan, with his glass samples heated in one-pound batches in clay crucibles by a gruff old glass-blower.
But he succeeded after some years in making opal glass photosensitive, so that three-dimensional designs could be etched into it by the action of light.
Taking clues from nature, he made this “Fotoform” glass resemble frost-lace, spiders’ webs and a honeycomb, in which honeybees actually produced honey.
A nucleus of gold The joy of glass, he soon discovered, lay not only in its resilience and transparency but in its very instability, and its yearning to reach a lower-energy crystalline state.
Every one of his inventions depended on a process called “nucleation”, in which the smallest stable trace of any element, added to molten glass, became a nucleus round which crystals would grow until, by coolThe Economist November 22 nd 2014 ing, he chose to stop them.
Tiny light-scattering particles of sodium fluoride made opal glass; mites of copper or gold made the ruby glass he so admired.
These too he rendered photosensitive, so that after exposure to ultraviolet light photographs could appear within them.
One of his first attempts was a paperweight containing a photograph of his wife Ruth in her wedding gown; and in wartime the Treasury Department almost took up his idea of making pennies not of scarce copper but of copper ruby glass, with Lincoln’s portrait magically suspended in them.
Indeed some folk at Corning thought Dr Stookey was just playing around, making things that were decorative rather than commercial.
His natural shyness, reinforced by partial blindness, did not help; but with every prod something extraordinary appeared.
He made glass with thousands of holes per square inch, to guide electron beams for colour television sets, by dissolving a crystallised photograph of a vast array of dots from Fotoform glass with hydrofluoric acid.
He imagined a future in which glass, with its raw material so abundant everywhere, could replace not only petrochemical plastics but also metal and wood.
This was glass-ceramic, patented in i960 as Fotoceram and marketed as indestructible Corningware dishes, so popular in America that by the 1980s six pieces of it could have graced every household.
Dr Stookey invented this by accident when, having left a piece of Fotoform glass in too hot a furnace, he found it had turned milky and bounced off the floor when, cursing, he tried to yank it out.
This glass had so intensely crystallised on reheating that it dropped with a clang like steel.
Much of his spare time was spent on or by water, itself glass-like, and in search of the secretive elements-this time panfish, trout and marlin-lurking within.
And so it must have been, he reflected, for those other alchemists, bent over their alembics long ago.
The Economist Espresso Our new daily app for smartphones With clarity, brevity and wit, our new daily app delivers a stimulating shot of analysis and insight every morning.
Digital subscribers to The Economist enjoy full access Simply download, then Log in to the app using your registered e-mail address and password.
For delivery direct to your inbox each morning, you can also opt in to receive Espresso via e-mail.
Download The Economist Espresso today For more information visit economist.com/digital ^ Cixiglf ptay The Economist luu wmudu UTh me» AppStore You never actually own a Patek Philippe.
