THE DEVOLUTION OF UNCONVENTIONAL WARFARE by Timothy S Ball December 2016 Thesis Advisor: Anna Simons Second Reader: Michael Richardson Approved for public release.
ABSTRACT Unconventional warfare originated in World War II as a defensive tactic, utilized to assist an occupied ally during a conventional war.
Special Forces has changed the definition of UW to include offensive regime change as a strategic option.
This type of UW was practiced extensively by the Central Intelligence Agency during the Cold War with poor results.
The use of offensive UW by the United States is problematic for a variety of reasons, ranging from unreliable proxy forces to unpredictable results and negative international perception.
The use of defensive UW under certain conditions remains justified and practical, but retains many of the same issues.
After examining the history of the United States’ use of UW, this thesis concludes that Special Forces better serves the nation’s interests by promoting itself as the premier combined force of the United States military.
SUBJECT TERMS Special Forces, unconventional warfare, covert action, nation-building, irregular forces, proxy forces, partner forces, foreign internal defense, security force assistance, Jedburgh, TP AJAX, PBSUCCESS, BGFIEND, intervention 18.
SPONSORING / MONITORING AGENCY REPORT NUMBER 1 THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 11 Approved for public release.
John Arquilla Chair, Department of Defense Analysis THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK IV ABSTRACT Unconventional warfare originated in World War II as a defensive tactic, utilized to assist an occupied ally during a conventional war.
Since then, Special Forces has changed the definition of UW to include offensive regime change as a strategic option.
The soldiers ranged from officers and non-commissioned officers with years of combat experience in Iraq and Afghanistan, to baby-faced enlisted men with less time in the Army than some of the veterans had in combat deployments.
Regardless of experience, the soldiers were there for a common purpose.
He welcomed the students and reminded them that they were not done with the course yet.
This last stage would test the skills they had learned in the previous phases, and provide a final evaluation as to whether or not they deserved to graduate.
The Master Sergeant then began an impassioned speech about why Robin Sage was so important.
The Arab Spring was sweeping across North Africa and parts of the Middle East.
Protests had recently erupted in Syria, with the Assad regime responding with deadly force.
After decades of oppression by dictator Muammar Gaddafi, the people of Libya wanted freedom.
Other special operations forces include units such as the United States Army Rangers and United States Navy SEALs.
Green Berets were not chosen to conduct UW in Libya, because they had forgotten how.
Robin Sage was vital because it would remind students that UW was their primary mission, and they had to be ready to execute it at any given time.
Unfortunately, despite his well-intended bravado, the Master Sergeant had just mischaracterized and oversimplified a mission, UW, which has been repeatedly changed, expanded, and molded to fit real and perceived threats to the United States as they occurred over the last seven decades.
This thesis will contend that when utilized in a preemptive or offensive manner, UW often results in unintended consequences that prove detrimental to the long-term strategic interests of the United States.
It is therefore vital that United States policy makers understand the limited scenarios in which the use of UW is appropriate, while still recognizing the potential pitfalls that come with supporting a proxy force.
It is important to note that the scope of this thesis is limited to the use of UW by the United States since 1945, and not by other countries elsewhere in the world.
The Current Dilemma,” slideshow presentation delivered to the author on 04 October 2016.
THE OSS AND THE JEDBURGHS—PLAYING DEFENSE The Office of Strategic Services was established on 13 June 1942 under William Donovan.
While its primary mission was to conduct intelligence operations, the OSS conducted “unconventional warfare” as its secondary task.
The original concept for such special forces in World War II Europe was to support British Prime Minister Winston Churchill’s idea of engaging the people of occupied Europe in a guerrilla war against the Germans.
In this way, Churchill hoped to tie down enemy forces by compelling them to engage in counter-guerrilla operations far from the front lines.
Guerrillas could also sabotage railways and ambush enemy columns, delaying reinforcements from reaching the front and improving the prospect for Allied victory and a reduction in Allied casualties.
Far from being the main effort in pushing the Germans out of occupied France, or overthrowing the Vichy government, these original units were meant to sabotage and distract German forces to ease the advance of the main Allied force.
Many of the teams were dropped into occupied France, where they linked up with various French resistance groups, organized arms drops, and conducted sabotage operations against the Germans as the main Allied force advanced from the Normandy coast.
Today, the OSS continues to be revered by the Special Forces community.
The Jedburghs of 1944 were meant to do no more than assist French resistance forces in guerrilla-type operations against the Germans.
This tacticallevel tasking was their definition of unconventional warfare.
Today, the doctrinal definition of unconventional warfare has expanded to the point that proponents of the strategy admit that the UW mission is now a “US national strategic mission,” that requires interagency and Department of Defense cooperation.
THE CREATION OF THE CIA AND COVERT ACTION While World War II continued to rage across Europe in 1944, Bill Donovan had already started advocating for a post-war version of the OSS to continue its intelligence operations.
The CIA’s creation led to further debate, this time over the proposed use of covert action, and who would be responsible for it.
At the time, the Joint Chiefs of Staff thought that propaganda and covert activities were more suited to the State Department than to the Department of Defense.
However, Secretary of State George Marshall made it quite clear that he and the State Department wanted nothing to do with covert action.
The second relates to the purpose, which is to exert American influence over another government, organization, or individual.
It is this second shared feature that ties covert action to today’s definition of unconventional warfare.
SPECIAL FORCES AND THE ORIGINAL DEFINITION OF UW While the CIA began to experiment with offensive covert action in the years following World War II, another Jedburgh veteran was establishing a new unit within the United States Army.
Colonel Aaron Bank officially established the 10 th Special Forces Group in the summer of 1952.
Bragg, the Group soon moved to Bad Tolz, Germany in order to be better positioned to accomplish its mission.
This was a less-than-ideal solution that assumed future conflicts would involve declared wars, most likely involving the Soviet Union.
The OSS veterans who had joined Special Forces objected to this split, but nonetheless began to produce doctrine that would help define their mission and purpose.
The chapters in the early Special Forces field manuals were devoted to subjects like guerrilla communications, logistics, and the selection and set-up of resupply drop zones.
Unlike their brethren in the CIA, the original members of Special Forces did not immediately try to adapt unconventional warfare into an offensive mission.
The original Green Berets fell into the “break glass in case of emergency” category.
Their posture in Germany was primarily defensive, and their original mission was only to be executed in the event of a Soviet offensive.
Over 60 years later, the concept of unconventional warfare is now the subject of a joint publication that fully embraces UW as a strategy, not a tactic.
The first is defined as a supporting line of operation within a broader military campaign.
This is essentially a replica of the Jedburgh experience in World War II, and has merit in the event of a United States ally being invaded or occupied.
This is also the type of UW that has resulted in long-term strategic failure for the United States over the past 70 years.
THE CIA TAKES UW ON THE OFFENSIVE AGAINST COMMUNISM As the newly formed 10 th Special Forces Group was building its capacity to assist partisans behind Soviet lines, the CIA embarked on a period of experimentation with offensive unconventional warfare.
Some of its missions achieved immediate tactical success for the CIA, leading to the false assumption that UW could be used throughout the Cold War at minimal cost to the United States.
ITALY 1948 As the United States began implementing the Marshall Plan to help bring some level of stability back to post-World War II Europe, Italy emerged as a battleground in what would become a half century-long Cold War against communism.
Viewing the emergence of an Italian communist government as a threat to the stability of the surrounding region and the rebuilding of Europe as a whole, Truman authorized actions to prevent the communists from winning, which led to the CIA’s initial foray into unconventional warfare.
Still in its infancy, the exact role of the CIA was still being heavily debated; it had no specific authorization to conduct covert operations.
The Truman Administration’s primary efforts were concentrated on overt political actions, sponsoring a “massive propaganda effort,” 35 while pledging military support and funds on the condition that the communists were not elected.
The smaller, covert portion of this strategy began with the CIA’s creation of the Special Procedures Group in late 1947, a group specifically tasked to intervene in 33 Nutter, CIA’s Black Ops, 51.
Utilizing a $10 million budget, the SPG began laundering money and delivering it to anti-communist political organizations, 38 while also launching a disinformation campaign involving promises of a Soviet-controlled government if the PCI was to win.
The result of these efforts was the defeat of the PCI in the 1948 elections.
ALBANIA AND BGFIEND As the 1950s began, the CIA had yet another opportunity to recognize some of the drawbacks of unconventional warfare.
Albania had fallen under Soviet influence after World War II, and was being run by a communist government under Enver Hoxha 42 In conjunction with Britain’s MI6, the CIA launched BGFIEND, an operation designed to overthrow Hoxha and eliminate communist influence in Albania.
BGFIEND’s planners regarded the operation as a case study to be learned from rather than an indicator that an offensive UW mission has inherent flaws.
Determined to learn from its mistakes in BGFIEND, the CIA decided to try again.
FALSE HOPE FOR UW During Dwight Eisenhower’s 1952 presidential campaign, future Secretary of State John Foster Dulles criticized the Truman administration for failing to stop communist influence in Iran.
Dulles’ brother, Allen, was also slated to become the director of the CIA under Eisenhower.
Sharing the Dulles brothers’ concern about the spread of communism, Eisenhower utilized the CIA to conduct preemptive unconventional warfare throughout his presidency.
The removal of Third World leaders whose nonaligned stances left their countries vulnerable to communist takeover, and the subsequent replacement of those leaders with strongly pro-Western successors who could be relied upon to pursue policies that were compatible with American interests, if not always with the interests of the populations that they represented.
Mosaddeq moved quickly to end British exploitation of Iran, in which a British company, the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company , earned ten times as much profit as it paid in royalties to Iran.
Britain organized a boycott of Iranian oil, but this failed to have immediate political effect, so it then turned to the United States, and the CIA for help.
The coup itself was successful—Mossadeq was ousted and replaced by the Shah with the support of General Fazlullah Zahedi, a former Nazi sympathizer whose less appealing character traits were ignored by Foster Dulles in favor of General Zahedi’s eagerness to appease his American sponsors.
In moves that should have surprised no one, Zahedi began to consolidate power around the Shah after the coup, eliminating political competitors and contributing to the environment that would eventually lead to the Iranian Revolution.
The irony in the fact that the United States had successfully ousted a democratically elected government, only to replace it with an authoritarian monarchy, was apparently lost on the Eisenhower Administration as well as on the participants in the 49 Donald Newton Wilber, Overthrow of Premier Mossadeq of Iran, November 1952-August 1953, Clandestine Service History , iii.
By ‘you’ he meant me and the two countries—Great Britain and the United States—I was representing.
Originally considered an asset by the CIA and the United States government, the Shah had since become a liability.
Once in power, the Shah proved less interested in doing what the United States wanted him to, and more interested in consolidating that power through the elimination of competitors and the oppression of his people.
Many Iranians blamed this on the United States, arguing that the 1953 coup and the extensive United States support for the shah in subsequent years were largely responsible for the shah’s arbitrary rule.
As a result, the revolution had a deeply anti-American character, and U.S.-Iran relations have remained tense ever since.
Indeed, the coup has had such a powerful impact on Iran’s political consciousness that many Iranians today still believe the United States is working covertly to undermine or overthrow their government.
As he watched the 1978-1979 Iranian Revolution nullify the success achieved by TP AJAX, Roosevelt was quick to bookend his account of the operation with both excuses and blame.
According to Roosevelt, the fact that the Shah was viewed by his people as an American puppet contributed nothing to the Iranian Revolution.
Neither did his authoritarian crackdowns and elimination of political rivals.
Instead, it was “the growth of political ambitions” that brought down a man who Roosevelt regarded as the second most successful leader in Iranian history.
Describing him as a smiling, purring cat, Roosevelt claimed that Dulles simply did not want to listen to warnings about the difficulty of future UW endeavors, and was instead eager to embark on them.
Roosevelt tried to warn Dulles one last time, telling him, “If our analysis had been wrong, we’d have fallen flat on our, er, faces.
If we, the CIA, are ever going to try something like this again, we must be absolutely sure that the people and army want what we want.
Despite the fact that TP AJAX involved rigged elections, staged protests, and a massive misinformation campaign, Roosevelt confidently told Eisenhower that, “With some help from us,” the Iranian people freely chose an authoritarian monarch over their democratically elected prime minister.
Yes, Operation TP AJAX secured Iran as an ally for the United States for roughly 25 years.
However, the adversarial relationship between the two countries is now approaching 40 years in length.
Since the Iranian revolution, Iran has become a major power broker in the Middle East that has consistently antagonized the United States and, in some cases, killed American service members.
The failed Iranian hostage rescue, Operation EAGLE CLAW, resulted in the death of eight Americans and the public humiliation of the country.
The Iran-Iraq War resulted in dozens more American casualties, and another international embarrassment for the United States when a United States Navy destroyer shot down an Iranian commercial airliner, killing all onboard.
After being declared a member of the “Axis of Evil” by President George W Bush in 2002, Iran became all the more eager to assist insurgents fighting against United States forces in Iraq following the 2003 invasion.
Exact numbers are difficult to determine, but Iranian training and equipment from the Quds Force is estimated to have caused hundreds of American deaths during the Iraq War.
When the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria reemerged in 2014, Suleimani was quickly spotted on the ground in Iraq, advising Shi’a militias while further complicating the relationship between the United States and the heavily Iranian-influenced Iraqi government.
Of course, at the time of the 1953 coup, none of these prospects was envisioned by the Eisenhower Administration.
However, appreciating that unpredictability is crucial when weighing whether or not unconventional warfare is a viable strategy.
When an overthrow is successful, history has shown that there is little to no control over the installed replacement.
Whether that replacement is the result of unconventional warfare, as in the case of the Shah, or is instead the product of a full-scale conventional invasion as in the case of former Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, there is no guarantee that the new leader will continue to do what the United States government wants him to do once he is in power.
PBSUCCESS While Roosevelt’s descriptions of the over-eager, cat-like John Foster Dulles are amusing, decisions made following TPAJAX reveal that his assessment of the Secretary of State was correct.
The Eisenhower Administration considered TPAJAX a major success, leading to Eisenhower’s subsequent approval of Operation PBSUCCESS, a plan to overthrow the democratically elected government of Guatemala.
As with TPAJAX, the exact specifics of the overthrow are less important to the study of unconventional warfare than the results of the operation.
Responding to this threat, UFCO not only dispatched some of its executives to meet with high-ranking officials in the State Department and the CIA, but also unleashed a propaganda campaign designed to promote the narrative that Arbenz’s government was moving toward communism.
In the waning days of the Truman Administration, the CIA had executed Operation PBFORTUNE in an effort to provide arms to dissidents and assist them in overthrowing Arbenz.
However, word of America’s involvement in arming the rebels quickly spread, causing Secretary of State Dean Acheson to terminate the operation.
It was thought that the same template used in Iran could be applied to Guatemala.
This “triumph confirmed the belief of many in the Eisenhower administration that covert operations offered a safe, inexpensive substitute 64 Ibid.
The aftermath of PBSUCCESS did not result in the same long-term adversarial relationship that TPAJAX produced, but the consequences of the coup were embarrassing to the United States nonetheless.
Within three years of the coup, Arbenz’s successor was assassinated, resulting in decades of dictatorships and turmoil in Guatemala.
Thanks to American involvement in the coup, other countries viewed any American activity abroad with suspicion.
Eisenhower himself never showed any remorse for the violence and destruction resulting from PBSUCCESS, leading President Bill Clinton finally to apologize to the Guatemalan people during a 1999 visit.
The tactical successes claimed for TPAJAX and PBSUCCESS emboldened the American government to continue its use of unconventional warfare in various forms over the next five decades.
Scholars have noted that the perceived achievements of TPAJAX and PBSUCCESS were primary contributors to later decisions to conduct UW operations such as the Bay of Pigs.
Like the coups in Iran and Guatemala, the operations that followed would occasionally yield what appeared to be immediate success, only to later lead to complications and embarrassment for the United States.
Indeed, after the perceived success of TPAJAX and PBSUCCESS, the United States spent the next four decades investing in unconventional warfare campaigns, mainly 71 Ibid.
In 2009, the United States John F Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School released the publication, A Leader’s Handbook to Unconventional Warfare.
This handbook is designed to offer a quick overview of UW, but also includes nearly six pages of UW history.
The author, Lieutenant Colonel Mark Grdovic, lists UW campaigns from the end of World War II through the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
The details of each of these campaigns are beyond the scope of this thesis, but it is interesting to note how he describes each effort.
By the end of this effort, the United States had abandoned the Tibetan resistance forces in order to re-establish diplomatic relations with China.
The campaign was soon shut down, with the United States embarrassed once again as its involvement in the coup was exposed.
The revelation of United States involvement also provided Achmed Sukarno, the very person the CIA was attempting to overthrow, the opportunity to extort food and weapons from the United States in exchange for silence about the event.
Grdovic notes that, “operational security in the United States was a complete failure” 81 in the lead up to the operation itself.
The CIA attempted to establish networks in North Vietnam, but only managed to produce an infiltrated operation full of double agents.
Special Forces became involved and helped parachute the agents into North Vietnam.
Incredibly, after inserting the agents, all support was cut off, with efforts shifting towards information operations aimed at convincing the North Vietnamese that there was a resistance force present amongst its people.
Grdovic explains that the Contras were more paid mercenaries than actual revolutionaries concerned about their country.
The Iran-Contra scandal exposed what was supposed to be a covert operation, once again embarrassing the United States and causing it to terminate operations.
After the Soviets invaded Afghanistan, the United States started funneling money, weapons, and training to groups of Islamic freedom fighters known as the mujahedeen.
While the mujahedeen successfully engaged the Soviets in a long guerrilla war, the aftermath quickly spun out of control.
Following the Soviet withdrawal, Afghanistan was plunged into a civil war, with some mujahedeen forming the Taliban and seizing control of the government.
The Taliban would eventually welcome Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda into the country, allowing Afghanistan to be used as a planning base for the 9/11 attacks.
Fifteen years after those attacks, the United States remains engaged in Afghanistan, spending money and lives fighting the Taliban.
SPECIAL FORCES MOVES TO OFFENSIVE UNCONVENTIONAL WARFARE As the CIA began to wage offensive unconventional warfare against communists, Special Forces’ role remained to conduct UW only during a time of war.
One sees this transition not only in the changing doctrinal definition of unconventional warfare, but in several key events as well.
FROM GUERRILLA WARFARE TO AN OFFENSIVE ASYMMETRIC OPTION As previously mentioned, after reaching a stalemate with the CIA over roles and responsibilities, SF added the term “unconventional warfare” to their doctrine in 1955.
In 1961, the Army associated the relatively new Special Forces with guerrilla warfare, or resistance operations, 87 reflected in the title of its special operations field manual, Guerrilla Warfare and Special Operations.
Unconventional warfare operations are conducted in enemy or enemy controlled territory by predominately indigenous personnel usually supported and directed in varying degrees by an external source.
Special Forces spent the majority of the war in a counterinsurgency role blended with foreign internal defense , while some members of the Special Operations Group conducted direct action missions.
However, as the Cold War came to an end, unconventional warfare was given a revised definition and meaning for the Department of Defense.
However, the new United States policy of supporting selected anti-communist resistance movements requires SF to focus on UW during conflicts short of war.
Moreover, global urbanization dictates a shift in emphasis from rural GW to all aspects of clandestine resistance.
The 1990 field manual for Special Forces lays claim to SF conducting unconventional warfare in both wartime and in peacetime, and also declares SF capable of conducting UW independent from conventional operations.
From the vantage point of this thesis, this marks an important step in SF’s evolving view of UW as an offensive tool.
However, the 1990 manual fails to account for the complexities of the UW mission.
It states explicitly that, “SF units do not create resistance movements.
The proactive form of UW articulated in the 1990 field manual would require very different procedures, particularly in terms of finding and contacting viable resistance forces.
In it, the definition of UW remains almost identical to the 1990 version, but the 2001 manual pushes the concept of UW even further towards preemptive offensive action.
The manual also discusses UW across a broad spectrum of conflict, and notes that it can be used anywhere along that spectrum, thereby reinforcing the idea that SF can conduct UW in situations short of declared war.
Just as the UW forces of potential adversaries have gained in relevance and importance, so has Army SF—the UW force of the United States.
SF provides an effective capability to counter the emerging unconventional threat, as well as an increasingly viable and offensive asymmetric option for employing United States military power.
With this statement, SF identifies itself not just as the UW force of the Army, or even of the Department of Defense, but as the UW force of the entire United States.
AFGHANISTAN, 2001 In the days immediately following 9/11, Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld looked to United States Central Command and its commander, General Tommy Franks, for a response to the attacks.
Franks and his staff quickly realized that they had no existing plans to conduct ground operations in Afghanistan, where Osama bin Faden and the rest of al-Qaeda were based.
While the Department of Defense struggled to find ways to infiltrate Afghanistan, the CIA presented its own plan to President George W Bush, proposing an unconventional warfare campaign using CIA assets, airpower, special operations teams, and indigenous Afghan forces.
CIA operatives received Special Forces Operational Detachment Alphas on the ground in Afghanistan and linked them up with warlords and fighters from the Northern Alliance.
The ODAs, from 5 th Special Forces Group , coordinated airstrikes while accompanying and advising their Afghan partners in battles against al-Qaeda and the Taliban government.
Within weeks, the Taliban had been driven from power as bin Faden fled the area and went into hiding.
Back in the United States, the first images from the newly declared “Global War on Terrorism'’ were riveting.
Instead of the stereotypical soldiers with close-cropped hair and matching uniforms being accompanied by armored vehicles and tanks, Americans saw something much different.
Green Berets with long hair and shaggy beards, wearing baseball hats instead of helmets and civilian hiking shoes instead of combat boots, rode on horses alongside their Afghan partners.
Not only had Special Forces and the CIA successfully overthrown a sitting government, but they had done so with the full approval of the international community.
The United States Army in Operation ENDURING FREEDOM October 2001-September 2005 (Ft.
UW AS A SUPPORTING EFFORT TO A PREEMPTIVE ATTACK Before the dust had even settled in Afghanistan, CENTCOM planners were ordered by the Bush Administration to prepare for an invasion of Iraq.
Still riding a wave of international support and sympathy from the 9/11 attacks, President Bush declared Iraq as a member of an “Axis of Evil” in his 2002 State of the Union address, and mobili z ed a “Coalition of the Willing” to support the upcoming invasion.
As part of the plan to invade Iraq, Task Force VIKING was assembled to tie up Iraqi forces north of Baghdad, while conventional forces invaded from the south.
While American news networks focused mainly on the conventional assault force coming in through southern Iraq, TF VIKING proved to be yet another successagainst-all-odds story for Special Forces.
Making use of roughly 50,000 Kurdish Peshmerga fighters, TF VIKING effectively neutralized 13 Iraqi divisions and took two of the largest cities in Iraq.
UNCONVENTIONAL WARFARE MEETS THE BUSH DOCTRINE The success of SF in Afghanistan and Iraq reinvigorated discussions about UW, and what SF’s UW role should be.
A broad spectrum of military and paramilitary operations, predominantly conducted through, with, or by indigenous or surrogate forces organized, trained, equipped, supported and directed in varying degrees by an external source.
The Bush Administration’s response to 9/11 had become heavily influenced by a group of neoconservatives whose philosophy was centered around utilizing preemptive force to promote American values around the globe.
This thinking found favor with President Bush, and became enshrined in the 2002 National Security Strategy.
What became known as the “Bush Doctrine” lent primacy to preemptive warfare—waging war against state and non-state actors in order to prevent them from attacking the United States first.
Yet, after the successful invasions in Afghanistan and Iraq, the rebuilding of each country took a dark turn.
Insurgencies blossomed and networks of irregulars, generally described as “terrorists” by the American government, began launching attacks on civilians and deployed American troops.
As the Department of Defense and the conventional military struggled to learn counterinsurgency, elements of the SOF community that specialized in counterterrorism techniques found their niche.
Kinetic, direct action operations emerged as the preferred mission across SOF, to include for Green Berets whose role had previously been envisioned as that of trainers and advisors as opposed to “door kickers” and assault troops.
Observing how various SOF elements were likely to continue to be employed in the Global War on Terror, discussions began at the United States Army Special Operations Command about whether the definition of unconventional warfare needed to be clarified.
Mark Grdovic notes that leaders in the Special Forces community worried that SF was being pushed to the side as the wars in Afghanistan and 11(1 Department of the Army, Special Forces Unconventional Warfare Options, Field Manual 3-05.201 , 1-1.
This thinking was the catalyst for the flawed arguments to change UW to include operations against terrorists and insurgents.
This perspective failed to account for existing charter that included CT and FID as primary missions for SF, as well as a misunderstanding of the environmental conditions and associated activities required to conduct UW successfully.
Leaders in the community became more interested in figuring out how to relabel these types of efforts as UW and claim a proprietary ownership to the methodology of working alongside irregular forces.
Instead of focusing on what SF could do to contribute in a CT or COIN campaign, leaders tried to find ways to make UW fit within the CT plan against al-Qaeda.
In theory, this would bring SF back to the center of the conversation, since SF now claimed itself to be the country’s UW force.
However, instead of clarifying SF’s role under the Bush Doctrine, reconceiving UW simply generated more debate.
America had been attacked, there were two wars underway, and a nearly blank check had been given to the military to wage those wars.
As the different branches of the military sought continued relevance and funding, each sought to stay as involved as possible in the ground wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
However, this latest version of the definition also included conventional military operations, which allowed UW to apply to nearly any operation being executed with a partner force.
As a result, other SOF units began to add UW to the lists of their core tasks.
The reality at the time was that nearly every military element deployed to Afghanistan or Iraq was working with surrogates in one form or another, to include the conventional military.
For instance, when the Sunni Awakening began in Iraq in 2007, conventional infantry units found themselves working with Sunni militias—or irregulars.
This meant that, according to the doctrinal definition of UW, regular infantry units were conducting UW on a daily basis.
Interestingly, the 2007 definition of UW was internally produced and never approved by the Army doctrine writers at Ft.
For instance, in 2016, while attending a Naval War College course for joint accreditation, my class received a capabilities brief for United States Navy SEALs.
Despite the SEALs being a force primarily dedicated to maritime interdiction, the capabilities brief listed unconventional warfare as one of their core competencies.
According to the 2007 definition, SEALs too could claim unconventional warfare as an area of expertise after working extensively with Iraqi and Afghan partner units.
THE CURRENT DEFINITION OF UW EMERGES In 2009 came a new American foreign policy.
President Barack Obama was elected to office, having mn on the promise to end the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and to avoid committing United States troops and resources to messy nation-building campaigns.
President Obama’s campaign promises were a direct repudiation of the Bush Doctrine.
Already, USASOC had begun to realize its 2007 definition of UW was causing major issues.
In response, a working group of about 10 people was formed to try and re-clarify the definition once and for all.
Activities to enable a resistance movement or insurgency to coerce, disrupt, or overthrow a government or occupying power by operating with an underground, auxiliary, or guerrilla force in a denied area.
Members of the working group crafted their definition to include only very specific activities, limiting what could be considered unconventional warfare.
However, their definition still showed traces of the preemptive warfare thinking that had dominated the Global War on Terror strategy for nearly a decade.
The new definition restored the UW partner force to being a resistance movement or insurgency, and utilized language that allowed for the use of offensive unconventional warfare.
By stating that the goal was to “coerce, disrupt, or overthrow an occupying power or government ,” the definition allowed for the possibility that UW could be used as a tool for preemptive regime change against an undesirable government, which rendered it nearly identical in concept to the CIA’s covert operations during the Cold War.
However, one sovereign nation rarely invades and occupies another in today’s world.
Some members of the working group thought the inclusion of the word overthrow would be politically disastrous.
The more palatable trio of “coerce, disrupt, or defeat ” was suggested instead, but defeat was determined to be too difficult to quantify.
Consequently, overthrow was used, helping to form the perception that SF, the UW force of the United States, exists to utilize proxy forces to overthrow sitting governments.
Ironically, had this same definition been produced in 2003 or 2004, it would have fit perfectly with the American foreign policy mindset at the time.
USASOC had just defined the parameters of a task that nobody in the Obama Administration seemed eager to embrace.
When one considers some of the problems that have emerged in the wake of offensive unconventional warfare , the Obama Administration’s hesitation should not be surprising.
It is a simple and obvious statement, especially when looking at an American-style democracy.
The role of senior military leaders is to provide sound advice about how to prosecute wars.
The military does not decide when and where to wage those war, but is instead directed by its civilian masters.
For instance, if the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff entered the Oval Office and advocated for using a nuclear first-strike option to deal with the Syrian Civil War or Russian aggression in Ukraine, he would not only be laughed out of the room, but likely relieved of his duties for providing poor advice.
It seems a ridiculous scenario, but illustrates how the Chairman and other senior military leaders must provide valid and feasible options in order to have their advice listened to and considered by civilian policymakers.
To properly analyze the problems posed by unconventional warfare as a modernday policy option, we must split UW into two types.
This thesis has referred to the first type as offensive UW— coercing, disrupting, or overthrowing a government without declaring war in order to further the interests of the United States.
The second type pertains to the execution of UW during a declared conflict or war.
One might call this defensive UW , so long as the United States is responding to an aggressor or occupying power.
THE COVERT PROBLEM Most historical examples listed in UW manuals are actually CIA covert operations, meant to conceal United States sponsorship.
In accordance with today’s definition, the purpose of UW in an offensive scenario would be to coerce, disrupt, or overthrow another government.
Exposing United States sponsorship of these activities when the United States has not declared war has been, and will continue to be, massively embarrassing for the United States.
The United States projects itself around the world as a promoter of democracy and contends that people should have the right to choose their own government.
If the United States is caught interfering in someone else’s government, that makes the “shining city on the hill” narrative much harder to sustain.
Russia is currently providing an example of what happens when you get caught coercing or disrupting another government.
On 07 October 2016, the United States Director of National Intelligence released a statement directly accusing the Russian government of orchestrating a string of email hacks on high-level political organizations and persons.
It has now become apparent that Russia worked directly with Julian Assange’s Wiki L eaks to release those hacked emails in a manner that undermined the 2016 presidential election by attempting to sow doubts in the minds of the American populace about their political process.
The email leaks were aimed exclusively at the Democratic National Committee and the campaign staff of Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton.
Democrats, however, were not the only ones to express their outrage over Russian intervention.
Republican Senators Ben Sasse and Marco Rubio also denounced the Wiki L eaks attacks, and called on their party to do the same.
Say the United States decided to do in Russia what it did in Italy in the late 1940s.
The United States executed regime changes in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Libya over the past 15 years, yet still lays claim to the moral high ground internationally.
The problems that can emerge from this claim can be seen in Turkish President Recep Erdogan’s response to United States efforts trying to keep Turkey from becoming overly involved in the battle for Mosul.
As details of the story continued to emerge, it was not only learned that SEAL Team Six executed the raid, but that the assault force had been hand-picked from within the unit.
SEAL Team Six itself is one of the most secretive units in the United States military.
Surely operational security could be ensured by hand-picking the assault force and including only the most mature and professional operators.
However, just over a year after the raid, assaulter Matt Bissonnette published his book, No Easy Day, under the pseudonym Mark Owen.
The book was a tell-all about the raid and was immediately controversial since it came from a community that is supposed to value quiet professionalism.
While it is impossible to prove that the military cannot find individuals capable of conducting a covert operation and remaining silent, one needs only to peruse the “Military” section in any Bames and Nobles bookstore to find dozens of tell-all memoirs written by the special operations community.
The number of special operations personnel without a Facebook page or Twitter account is dwindling.
The Special Forces battalion that I was previously assigned to has its own Facebook page, open to the public, despite containing pictures of members of the unit and their families.
Websites like SOFREP.com and Facebook’s Operator As F*** have emerged, giving special operations personnel forums in which they talk about their exploits and complain about current government and military leaders.
THE AMERICAN VALUES PROBLEM George Marshall’s objection to having the State Department run covert operations was his belief that any ability to conduct diplomacy would be compromised by his organization’s meddling in other governments’ affairs.
He feared that the United States would be seen as promoting a certain set of values abroad, while executing operations that directly conflicted with those same values.
Tellingly, while he was initially a proponent of unconventional warfare, George Kennan ultimately dismissed it as being in direct violation of American principles.
George Ball likewise expressed his concern that if the United States participated in unconventional warfare, it would be no different than the Soviet Union.
Ball explicitly lists “noninterference in the affairs of other nations, respect for their sovereignty and selfdetermination” as some of the important American principles that would be compromised by conducting unconventional warfare.
The counterargument to this concern over American values was presented to President Eisenhower in a report from Lieutenant General James Doolittle in 1954.
This “standard” is said to have been the justification used by Eisenhower and subsequent presidents when they assented to unconventional warfare.
It is impossible to determine whether the formation of communist governments in Third World countries posed a true existential threat to the United States, since relatively few succumbed to communism.
However, trying to apply the Doolittle Standard today does not seem to work.
Russia remains an adversary of the United States, but appears to be more focused on gaining influence in Eastern Europe and parts of the Middle East than militarily threatening the United States Radical Islamic terrorism has resulted in the tragic death of American citizens, but has never actually threatened the existence of the United States.
An argument can be made that today’s international stage simply does not justify the United States disregarding its own values in order to save itself from perceived extermination.
In fact, conducting unconventional warfare in the gray zone has been occurring since the start of the Cold War.
Indeed, the Cold War itself can be described as almost exclusively a gray zone competition between the United States and the Soviet Union, with unconventional warfare in the Third World serving as both countries’ weapon of choice.
The use of UW was meant to avoid conflict spilling out of the gray zone and into a full-blown conventional or nuclear war between the United States and the Soviets.
One problem that arises from conducting UW in the gray zone is that the consequences of the action are unpredictable.
As an example, while addressing the historical failures of UW, Will Irwin notes that, “proactive political and unconventional warfare can be enormously effective in furthering United States interests.
Additionally, the Jedburghs were successful despite conducting operations that were both limited and reactive.
Because timing plays such a decisively important role in UW, the ability to recognize and act upon indicators of UW windows of opportunity is imperative.
This calls for an estimative intelligence capability focused specifically on structured and continual analysis of the prospects for or existence of internal dissent in the face of authoritarian rule.
We must become much better at not only recognizing the conditions for domestic unrest , but at detecting the presence of nascent clandestine opposition, the emerging shape and scope of that opposition, the character and agenda of its leadership, the substance of its narrative, and the pace and trajectory of its development.
An early and growing in-depth understanding of such a movement can help determine if a benefactor-proxy relationship would serve United States interests.
Religious sects and factions, diaspora populations, kinship networks, human rights groups, the urban poor and other underprivileged and neglected population groups, political constituencies, the media, economic and trade elites, corruption victim groups, political activists, women’s rights groups, trade unions, teacher associations, student activist groups, veterans’ organizations, and activist clergy groups.
Simmering ethnic, clan, or geographical tensions and rivalries need to be fully appreciated.
To accomplish this, a never-ending process of analysis must be used to continuously update the United States’ understanding of vulnerable populations.
Such ethnographic sensing would also allow “discrete contact with an inchoate movement— still in the latent and incipient stages of development,” in order to begin shaping the movement into the United States’ desired resistance.
By the time one reaches the moment of decision for initiating an unconventional warfare campaign or operation, it is too late to successfully conduct preparatory actions to understand a target population.
However, the feasibility of the United States conducting this preparation continuously around the world is doubtful.
In order to assist a movement or social network in another country, a third party must cultivate at least some level of trust, to include person-based trust.
To build person-based trust, communication and similarity are two important factors.
In other words, if you speak the language and look like the person you are dealing with, you have a better chance of quickly building trust with that person.
E Lawrence successfully influencing local populations despite their status as foreigners , tasking United States SOF to actively and continuously map human networks, cultivate social movements, and build resistance groups in the gray zone may be a step too far.
The difficulty in accomplishing this mission is further exacerbated by the fact that the United States has built a special operations community that is overwhelmingly white and male.
Within Special Forces, the unit that would be expected to conduct this preparation, roughly 85% of the officers and enlisted men are white.
This puts SF personnel at a severe disadvantage if they were to attempt to map human networks or cultivate movements in vulnerable populations in regions like the Middle East.
When competing for trust and influence among Arabs, it is reasonable to conclude that white, Christian American SF personnel would not gain as much traction as, say, Americans of Arab, North African, or Muslim descent.
At least the latter would be able to point to a shared region and religion, as opposed to the white Christian who grew up in the suburbs of Dallas.
Again, this is far different from what was asked of the multi-national Jedburgh teams, or the Eastern European Lodge Act Soldiers who made up the bulk of 10 th Special Forces Group during the early days of the Cold War.
JUSTIFIED, BUT STILL MESSY The case against offensive unconventional warfare seems clear given its history.
However, the question of whether there is a role for defensive UW remains open.
Two such scenarios can be found in the recent actions of Syrian president Bashar al Assad and in those by Russian president Vladimir Putin.
Assad’s response to protests in his country ignited a civil war, which is today approaching its sixth year.
The resulting chaos allowed ISIS to expand out of Iraq and seize terrain in Syria.
Meanwhile, Putin’s seizure of Crimea in 2014 and subsequent sponsorship of the war in Donbass signaled to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization that Russia would not tolerate its eastward expansion, and also augured the possibility of similar actions against NATO’s Baltic State members.
UW would be ideal for assisting an oppressed population against a dictator who proved increasingly willing to kill his own citizens in order to retain power.
FID, or COIN is applied only if the ousted governing body starts its own resistance campaign against the newly formed transitional government.
At this point, it is critical to shift efforts from defeating the adversary regime to protecting the newly installed government and its security personnel from insurgency, lawlessness, and subversion by former regime elements that attempt to organize resistance.
While the joint publication focuses on “former regime elements,” it fails to mention the possibility that external third parties may challenge the new government.
The joint publication underscores this argument by suggesting that any relationship with resistance elements can simply be terminated, sent into dormancy, or given to other agencies within the United States government.
History has revealed the transition phase to be the most difficult, and likely the most important, phase of a conflict.
For instance, TPAJAX’s transition plan installed a leader who was viewed as an American puppet by his own people.
Operational planners failed to consider the long-term effects of overthrowing a democratically elected government, leading to an eventual revolution against the Shah.
Likewise, those behind PBSUCCESS failed to account for the consolidation of power and the oppression of the Guatemalan people that occurred in the subsequent years.
As for the joint publication’s claim that relationships with insurgents can simply be terminated or laid to rest, a very recent example reminds us of the dangers involved in abandoning a resistance after you have cultivated it.
Bush publicly called for the Iraqi people to rise up in rebellion against Saddam Hussein.
Kurdish and Shia forces heeded this call and attempted to oust the Baathist regime, only to have the United States pull its support.
Hussein crushed both insurgencies, creating a Kurdish exodus that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees at the time called the largest in its 40-year history.
Admittedly, “the day after” problem is not limited to unconventional warfare, but is applicable to any type of United States intervention.
The inability to predict what will take the place of a deposed government continues to plague policy makers and academic scholars, and has been said to have paralyzed the Obama Administration’s current response to the Syrian crisis.
In particular, I’ve yet to see any of the advocates of intervention lay out a plausible blueprint for a post-civil war political order in Syria and a plausible path for getting there.
The United States remains committed to dismantling Bashar al-Assad’s regime (for reasons that are not hard to understand), but we lack a serious notion of what will replace it.
Getting rid of the bad guy and his henchman was the easy part, but we hadn’t the foggiest notion of what to put in their place.
Despite the degree to which transition challenges should be a major source of concern for decision makers, some advocates attempt to sell UW by simply ignoring the requirement for transition altogether.
Even if it were the intent of the United States to simply walk away, this does not mean that others, either participants or opponents, would allow that to happen in a clean and simple manner.
For instance, in a 2016 article, Max Boot and Michael Miklaucic write that the United States Agency for International Development should be reconfigured in order to nation-build across the world in troubled countries.
Boot doubles down on this argument in a recent article in Commentary magazine, contending that the United States is a “nation-builder in denial,” and that more positive results would have occurred in Iraq and Afghanistan had the United States kept troops there for an indefinite period of time.
Trying to install some friendly autocrat after a United States intervention won’t work anymore: It would stoke distrust, invite uprisings, increase tensions with other major powers, and alarm many Americans unwilling to get into the business of permanent occupation.
United States interests are better served by cultivating legitimate leaders.
Regardless, if the United States chooses to conduct UW, it seems likely that a serious investment and possible expansion of government would be necessary for the sole purpose of addressing the transition phase.
However, even if this was done, no level of investment or infrastructure can guarantee predictable behavior from the proxy force.
Here, responsibility for governance is supposed to shift from local organizations to an established and functioning national government, while economic development is expected to expand from local markets to formal regional integration.
During Robin Sage, the culminating exercise of the Special Forces Qualification Course, a popular scenario is presented to students as they train their guerrillas.
The scenario varies from class to class, but the general script involves the guerrillas conducting, or attempting to conduct, a human rights violation.
Often, a “captured pilot” is dragged into the “G-Base,” and the guerrillas are eager to conduct a public execution.
My own team had parachuted into the exercise with pre-made “Laws of Land Warfare” cards.
We handed these out to our guerrillas and then conducted a short class.
There were minor objections and some accusations of hypocrisy ( United States detainees in Guantanamo were the subject of choice), but in the end, our conveniently compliant guerrillas agreed to behave like professional soldiers.
In late 2015, a small scandal erupted as news emerged that two Special Forces soldiers had been disciplined for beating up a local Afghan security forces commander.
Other commanders stole money, raped their way through villages, and conducted “honor killings” of their own daughters.
The issues were raised through the chain of command, but the Special Forces team was told leave local grievances alone, and to allow the locals to resolve them.
The breaking point came as the Green Berets were informed that one of their militia commanders had kidnapped a young boy from a local village, chained him to a bed, and repeatedly raped him.
After the militia commander laughed at the Green Berets’ attempts to intervene and stop the behavior, they reacted physically.
One of the Green Berets was relieved from command for striking the militia commander, while the Army attempted to forcibly retire the other for assisting.
For instance, Lieutenant Colonel John Paul Vann and his fellow advisors witnessed atrocities in Vietnam while advising those who belonged to what was supposedly an already-professional, uniformed military force.
Soldiers, to include officers, from the Army of the Republic of Vietnam were known to torture captured North Vietnamese guerillas by dislocating their shoulders, cutting them with Bowie knives, or forcing them to sit on the handle end of an entrenching tool.
Incidents like these do not bode well for the eventual acceptance of the security force by the populace after United States involvement ends.
Indeed, this presents a major challenge when working with indigenous forces; while their objectives may line up with United States objectives, there is often no way to control their actions, particularly when those actions may be in contravention of American values or morals.
The current fight against ISIS in Syria and Iraq is already beginning to manifest related issues that come with working with indigenous forces.
As the training and equipping of rebel forces by the Pentagon and the CIA ramped up in 2016, it was reported that rebels backed by the CIA were actively fighting other groups that were backed by the Pentagon.
When identifying a resistance or guerrilla force to work with, the assessment seldom includes whether or not those forces will be capable of running a government as the conflict abates.
The primary concern, instead, is to find groups willing to take up arms and fight against the occupying power or hostile government.
The Syrian Democratic Forces currently receive support from the U.S., but consist mainly of Kurds and a small minority of Arabs.
While its use is clearly justified, the issue of preparation again comes into play.
With no prior knowledge of any of the resistance forces, the United States vetted its Syrian partner forces as individuals, not as units.
There was no indigenous chain of command established, with a strategic leader on the Syrian side to vouch for the conduct of his forces.
As a result, different groups with different objectives and agendas continue to compete—sometimes viciously.
UW advocates might claim that this could be resolved via the continuous preparation discussed previously.
EQUIPPING THE PARTNER FORCE—FLOODING THE BATTLEFIELD WITH WEAPONS Equipping a sponsored force can also create problems once the conflict ends.
For example, it is estimated that over the past 15 years the United States provided nearly 1. mi llion firearms to Iraqi and Afghan forces.
Hundreds of thousands of these weapons are no longer accounted for, though many have been seen in the hands of ISIS fighters in pictures and video footage.
While plans for unconventional warfare call for the disarmament of guerilla fighters at the end of hostilities, it is difficult, if not impossible, to ensure that weapons provided by a sponsor do not reemerge in the hands of enemies in future conflicts.
MISALIGNMENT OF OBJECTIVES Beyond the inability to control individual surrogate behavior, when objectives are not aligned between a sponsor and its proxy force, priorities will not align either.
The United States strives to create stable, independent countries that can stand on their own.
The successful hegemon has to create dependent allies to avoid relying on a temporary coincidence of interests; this is particularly the case in the absence of long-term shared enemies.
The end of the Cold War might for this reason have made the task of the hegemon all the more complicated.
However, once the conflicts in Iraq, Syria, or Afghanistan end, it is not clear what the United States and those it supports will continue to have in common.
DEFINITELY, MAYBE In early 2014, Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych was ousted from power.
In the resulting chaos, it took Russia only months to annex the Crimean Peninsula and initiate a civil war in Eastern Ukraine.
Russia achieved its objective of maintaining access to a warm-water port, while preventing Ukraine from aligning itself with NATO and the West, by utilizing special operations forces, supplemented with conventional units.
As Crimea was annexed and Ukraine imploded, NATO and United States European Command grappled with what would come next.
The initial prediction was that Russia would soon use similar techniques in the Baltic States Estonia, Latvia, or Lithuania.
NATO planners worried that by utilizing plain-clothed, covert SOF operatives, Russia could incite the same sort of chaos within a NATO country.
According to the thinking at the time, by not undertaking conventional military action, Putin would count on NATO not invoking Article V, and consequently, NATO would fail to properly defend one of its member states.
Instead, NATO responded to the fear of Russian actions splintering the Alliance by increasing combined exercises across Europe.
Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine, edited by Colby Howard and Ruslan Pukhov.
In Estonia, the Estonian Defense League holds weekend military exercises and competitions, designed to teach its citizens how to become guerrillas in the event of an invasion.
In Lithuania, authorities recently issued a manual to their citizens advising them on how to contribute to resistance movements against a Russian incursion.
The prospect of a Russian invasion of the Baltics mirrors the threat faced by United States Special Forces soldiers in Europe early in the Cold War.
As previously noted, the first members of 10 th Special Forces Group were meant to be stay-behind fighters in Europe to organize resistance movements after a Soviet invasion.
The first response to a Russian invasion would be the invoking of Article V Given the acute awareness about the techniques used in Crimea and Ukraine, there would be little debate today about whether the presence of “Little Green Men” meets the threshold for NATO members to agree that an attack had occurred.
NATO’s actions over the last three years have clearly signaled to its members that Russian aggression against the Alliance will not be tolerated.
This response would not be a unilateral effort organized solely by the United States.
JFC-Brunssum is currently commanded by an Italian 4-star general officer.
After all, the resistance force would need to synchronize its unconventional warfare campaign with the NRF counter-attack in order to maximize both forces’ effectiveness.
In other words, resistance plans would need to be coordinated and synchronized with NATO response plans, which requires more than just the United States working separately with individual countries.
Effective lines of communication should be established not just within an occupied or attacked country, but among neighbors and their resistance forces as well.
Remote as the occupation of Estonia might seem, such a scenario offers a clear window into the kinds of circumstances under which unconventional warfare is most likely to work in the future.
Not surprisingly, this is not dissimilar to the successful Jedburgh efforts of World War II, when the United States did not act alone, but instead contributed to a multilateral effort.
Not only would those conducting UW would have a shared adversary and shared objectives, but the campaign would also be completely justified in the eyes of the international community.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, it would be defensive in nature.
The purpose would not be to overthrow a sitting regime, but instead to defend an ally from an outside aggressor.
The Jedburghs succeeded in part thanks to their multinational teams, since at least one member was from the country in which they operated.
This ensured at least some level of cultural connectivity to the population being assisted.
Marriages of convenience should be avoided at all costs since they will simply lead to more complex problem sets following the UW campaign.
The United States coordinating potential resistance activities with Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia through a shared command, such as the NATO Special Operations Headquarters would be a good example of this.
This leader has to be able to coordinate with NATO, the United States, or a coalition, and have a high level of control of the resistance forces to prevent post-conflict issues.
The never-ending nature of the debate over UW can be seen most recently in the response to a recent War on the Rocks article, written by Captain Andrea Filozof.
Captain Filozof s article notes that proxy forces are unpredictable and often have longterm policy objectives that do not align with United States objectives.
She also uses the term, “policy blowback,” to describe situations in which long-term success is sacrificed for short-term solutions.
This doctrine holds that the United States can exert its influence through limited involvement to achieve its policy objectives, sidestepping the publicly unpalatable notion of large and prolonged military commitments.
Yet the perception that unconventional warfare requires only limited involvement is a dangerous illusion.
Not only does training and equipping proxy forces still exact a heavy financial cost, but the operational success of proxy forces often does not lead to the desired political outcome.
Without organic political solutions to accompany unconventional warfare campaigns, the United States will at best waste vast amounts of defense spending; at worst, it will find itself entangled in the same costly, long-term operations it has endured in Iraq and Afghanistan with little to show for its efforts.
Within hours of the article being published, Colonel Dave Maxwell provided his comments and critique.
According to Grdovic, the purpose of the working group was to clarify the definition of UW, not to change it.
Or, as Maxwell tries to point out to Captain Filozof, “It is not UW that is the problem.
As this thesis has tried to make clear, the definition is problematic, further complicated by Special Forces’ claim that they are the nation’s UW force.
Of course, the real issue can be illustrated in the example of a United States embassy team, trying to work daily with its host nation government to further United States interests abroad.
In a recent PowerPoint brief to my peer group, the Commander of Special Operations Command Africa displayed unconventional warfare as a grayed-out capability; this, he explained, was to prevent audiences from associating UW with SOF activities on the continent.
This is because the Alliance is built on the concept of collective defense , and does not want to entertain the notion of offensively interfering with other countries, especially when some NATO members are more worried about UW being used against them.
If no one outside of SF wishes to entertain the idea of engaging in UW as it is currently defined, then perhaps UW is the problem, at least as it has been defined in SF doctrine over the last 20 years.
Put more simply, if you are the only person in the room advocating for an offensive UW mission that no one else wants to undertake, then maybe it is time to reevaluate offensive UW and its utility in today’s environment.
As for the argument that what is needed is a coherent national strategy and policy to govern UW, consider the Cold War, during which the United States consistently used UW as part of its national strategy against communism to avoid conventional or nuclear war.
During the 1950s, “Eisenhower was very cautious about committing military forces, understanding from experience the risks of unintended consequences.
For instance, a chess grandmaster strategizes not by only thinking about his next move, but by planning three or four moves in ahead.
Based on his experience and the rules of chess, the grandmaster tries to predict what his moves will provoke his opponent to do.
But, no matter how good a grandmaster might be at chess, strategizing is not likely to work if his every move throws the playing field into total disarray, or if the game has no rules at all.
Even the best planned, most well-intentioned UW campaigns will create some level of instability as the efforts undertaken begin to affect the targeted government.
Knowing how to conduct UW is still valuable in the event that it is needed.
However, it needs to be acknowledged that offensive UW is one of the least likely missions SF will be asked to perform.
Indeed, short of defending an occupied ally, it is likely that engaging in UW will do more harm than good.
Because of this, UW is not the mission set that SF should prioritize, or claim as its core competency.
While equipment and training has been updated through the years, the basic organization of a Special Forces ODA, or A-Team, has not been significantly altered since 1952.
The CIA’s own historical archives describe its UW efforts during the Cold War as having produced mixed results at best.
Many examples exist of successful, long-duration, low visibility United States SOF-centric FID operations in Latin America, Asia, and Africa.
From 1980 through 1991, United States support to the government of El Salvador fighting an insurgency in that country included an advisory force that never exceeded 55 personnel.
Similar success against lower level insurgencies took place in neighboring Honduras and Guatemala.
More recently, United States SOF have played a central role in effective long-term FID efforts conducted in support of the governments of Colombia and the Philippines.
When it came time to build an Afghan National Army, the mission went to Task Force PHOENIX, commanded by then-Colonel Mark Milley, the commander of 2 nd Brigade, 10 th Mountain Division.
By the time Task Force PHOENIX II assumed this training mission, even the regular Army could not be bothered to participate, handing what was arguably the most important tasking at that time over to the Army National Guard.
As an infantry lieutenant assigned to the 82 nd Airborne Division in 2006, I and my platoon were tasked with training an entire Kurdish battalion during our 15-month deployment.
SOF sought to only train other SOF, while the conventional military would stand up and train the Afghan National Army and the Iraqi Army.
This was the division of labor, despite the fact that conventional units like mine were devoid of cultural knowledge or local language capability, and were trained only for unilateral operations.
To make matters worse, most conventional units were more focused on learning how to conduct counterinsurgency operations, leaving the training of their partner force as a lower priority.
After the Iraqi Army nearly collapsed in the face of an ISIS offensive in 2014, the United States launched Operation INHERENT RESOLVE, and once again deployed troops to Iraq.
The first unit chosen to execute this mission was 3 ld Brigade, 82 nd Airborne Division, a conventional military unit.
Or, should the task instead go to a specially selected, and well trained, Green Beret.
By requirement, the Green Beret is an NCO with cultural and language training, in addition to possessing knowledge about small unit tactics.
That question deserves deeper study and discussion, but the answer should already be known by every senior decision maker, whether civilian or military.
Thus, instead of declaring itself to be the UW force for the United States, Special Forces should consider promoting itself as the premier combined force of choice for the United States military.
By shifting the narrative away from UW and back to combined missions, Special Forces would not only increase its relevance amongst today’s Special Operations Forces, but it would also take important steps toward regaining its autonomy in operations around the world.
Initially in Vietnam, Green Berets were dispatched as advisors, but were trusted to train and accompany their partner forces as they saw fit.
These partners ranged from conventional Army of the Republic of Vietnam battalions to irregular Montagnard Civilian Irregular Defense units.
Provided a host nation agrees, today’s Special Forces should be given the same level of autonomy and trust to perform their advisory missions in any conditions.
COUNTER-UNCONVENTIONAL WARFARE One aim of this thesis has been to call into question the wisdom of the United States conducting offensive unconventional warfare.
Iran continues to use proxy forces across the Middle East to further its interests, sometimes attempting to coerce or disrupt governments that the United States is working to assist and stabilize.
These adversaries clearly do not have the same political, ethical, or diplomatic concerns as the United States does when it comes to conducting unconventional warfare.
Because of this, counter -unconventional warfare also warrants further discussion and study.
However, simply understanding how to execute a tactic does not necessarily mean you are the best at countering its use.
As important as these questions are, Army Special Forces should also evaluate whether their force structure and knowledge of UW makes them the optimal force for countering an adversary’s UW efforts.
The answer can only be found in an additional hardnosed, unsentimental study.
The CIA’s Classified Account of its Operations in Guatemala, 1952-1954.
In Mohammad Mosaddeq and the 1953 Coup in Iran, edited by Mark Gasiorowski and Malcom Byrne, 231.
Advisory Missions and the Struggle for Hegemony in Afghanistan and Beyond.
United States Army John F Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School, November 2009.
Robertson, Nic, Antonia Mortensen, Elizabeth Roberts, and Woj Treszczynski.
Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, Joint Publication 1-02.
Testimony before the Subcommittee on National Security, Emerging Threats, and International Relations, Committee on Government Reform, House of Representatives.
Wright, Donald P., James R Bird, Steven E Clay, Peter W Connors, Scott C Farquhar, Lynne Chandler Garcia, and Dennis F Van Wey.
The United States Army in Operation ENDURING FREEDOM October 2001September 2005.
