The occupation of Crimea has become one of the most severe militarypolitical crises of the last decade.
Along with the widespread use of methods and tools of information warfare, Russia used the units of the Black Sea Fleet stationed in Crimea and the forces additionally transferred to the peninsula.
One of the main ways of moving those forces was by aerial military transport.
In addition, helicopters were deployed to block the Ukrainian garrisons in Crimea.
During the Crimean crisis, Ukrainian military aviation, much like other components of the Ukrainian Armed Forces, remained utterly passive.
Instead, the Russian Federation’s Armed Forces promptly stationed a powerful aviation group in occupied Crimea.
Ocuparea Crimeii a devenit una dintre cele mai severe crize militare-politice din ultimul deceniu.
Una dintre principalele modalități de deplasare a acestor forțe a fost transportul militar aerian.
Totodată, au fost utilizate elicoptere pentru a bloca garnizoanele ucrainene din Crimeea.
Although the intensity of hostilities has significantly decreased recently (compared to 2014-2015), military actions along the front line in eastern Ukraine continue, and the prospects for a peaceful resolution remain uncertain.
The issue of Russia’s annexation of Crimea and occupation of a part of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions remains unresolved.
The Russian Federation’s annexation of Crimea (more precisely, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, separate administrative entities under Ukrainian law) in February 2014 sparked the Russian-Ukrainian war.
Despite Russian claims that the annexation was “peaceful” and based on the “will” of the local population, the operation was essentially military and resulted in the forceful occupation by Russian forces of a part of Ukraine’s internationally recognised territory.
Many studies, particularly those by Oleksandr Marusiak, use these facts considerably.
The overall historical aspect of the occupation of Crimea has been adequately addressed in the studies of Pavlo Hai-Nyzhnyk, Yaroslav Mykolaienko, Gennadiy Zhyrov, Paul A Eden, and others; thus, it will not be highlighted further.
Taras Berezovets’ study, which examines in detail the mechanisms and technologies of the hybrid war waged by Russian Federation troops on the territory of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, deserves special attention.
The first article on the role of aviation in the occupation of Crimea was written by Oleksandr Kotlobovskyi and Rostyslav Maraiev.
It covers Russian troops’ military actions (with a focus on aviation) during the peninsula’s annexation, specifically the use of military transport aircraft to transfer forces to the Hvardiiske airfield and the use of helicopters to capture the Feodosiia Marine Battalion and other Ukrainian military units.
The main focus is on the fate of the Ukrainian aircraft units stationed in Crimea.
Foreign publications describing the role of aviation during the Crimean Crisis initially focused on the chronology of events.
The authors tried to keep a close eye on the developments on the peninsula and keep Western readers informed.
Among later publications, Vladimir Trendafilovskyi’s study on the deployment of the Ukrainian 10 th Marine Aviation Brigade from Crimea to the mainland of Ukraine deserves special mention.
The first one is Dmitry Boltenkov’s work covering the history of the Russian troops’ deployment in Crimea.
The second one is Anton Lavrov’s article, which exclusively focused on the aviation component of the Crimean occupation campaign.
The facts mentioned in the paper indicate the Russian Armed Forces’ direct and active involvement in the military actions on the peninsula.
The author lists the units of land forces, airborne troops, and marines that took part in the occupation of Crimea.
However, the article does not contain precise information about the aviation component of the invading force – the author only mentions the presence of Russian transport aircraft for the transfer of troops and helicopters to Crimea to block the Ukrainian ships and garrisons.
This study aims to analyse the military component of the occupation of the peninsula, namely the presence of military aircraft, from both Russia and Ukraine.
The term “Ukrainian military aviation” refers to the aviation of all security forces of Ukraine, including the Air Force, Army Air Force, Naval Aviation, aviation of the State Border Guard Service, and the State Emergency Service.
On the Russian side, Air Force and Navy aircraft have been deployed to occupy Crimea.
Although a peninsula from a geographical point of view, Crimea is an island from the military-strategic perspective.
History and Disposition of Russian Forces in Crimea, in “Brothers Armed.
Thus, in planning the operation to occupy Crimea, the Russian military leadership understood that it would be impossible to quickly increase the Russian military contingent on the peninsula and seize critical points in Crimea without the use of transport aviation.
On the other hand, the Ukrainian military aviation stationed in Crimea would undoubtedly have fought, but that never happened.
AVIATION UNITS IN CRIMEA ON THE EVE OF THE CRISIS Two countries’ aviation forces – Ukraine and the Russian Federation – were stationed on Crimea’s territory at the start of 2014.
The “Crimea” tactical group of the Air Command “South” served as the foundation for the Ukrainian Armed Forces’ aviation group on the peninsula.
It was previously part of the Air Force, but it has been operationally subordinated to the Ukrainian Navy since September 1, 2012, and was led by Major General Oleh Strutsynskyi.
This group’s primary mission was to provide air defence for strategic facilities in Crimea.
The “Crimean” tactical group also included several smaller units and the State Aviation Research and Testing Centre.
This centre, located at the Kirovske airfield, was engaged in testing new and modernised aircraft and training test pilots.
However, most fighters were defective due to chronic underfunding, and L-39M1 planes were used to maintain pilot skills.
And according to Anton Lavrov, fewer than ten planes were suitable for flying, including four or six МіG-29s and four L-39M1s.
Another Ukrainian aviation unit in Crimea was the 10 th Marine Aviation Brigade stationed at the Saki-Novofedorivka airfield.
Formed in 2004 as a result of the reorganisation and reduction of the Ukrainian Navy, it united all aircraft of the Ukrainian Navy.
The Brigade consisted of two squadrons (aeroplanes and helicopters), specialised support units and a parachute rescue team.
However, only three aircraft (two Аn26s and one Bе-12) and five helicopters were operational.
The aircraft of the other Ukrainian military and paramilitary agencies – the Land Forces, the State Border Guard Service, and the State Emergency Service – were not permanently stationed in Crimea.
However, their helicopters and aeroplanes periodically were used on the peninsula – for example, to participate in military exercises or tests.
Furthermore, at the beginning of 2014, two aviation units were located near Crimea.
It is the only unit in the Air Force of Ukraine equipped with close air 7 B Taghavaee, Be’lbek.
The 11 th Army Aviation Brigade of the Land Forces was stationed at the Kherson-Chornobaivka airfield armed with Mi-24 attack helicopters and Mi8 transport helicopters.
In addition, a separate aviation squadron of the State Border Guard Service (DA 42NG patrol aircraft, Аn-24RV transport aircraft, and helicopters Mi-8) was deployed in Odesa.
It provided air patrolling of the state border and the maritime exclusive economic zone.
As a result of the constant lack of funding, the Air Force of Ukraine was in poor condition on the day before the Russian invasion.
Following the interstate agreements, Russian troops, or more precisely, the Black Sea Fleet units, were present in Crimea.
The Constitution of Ukraine (Article 17), adopted on June 28, 1996, prohibits the deployment of foreign military bases on the territory of Ukraine.
The Russian Black Sea Fleet, on the other hand, was granted an exception.
After several years of negotiations, an agreement on the conditions for the Russian Fleet to be based in Ukraine was signed on May 28, 1997.17 The agreement’s term was set at 20 years – until 2017.
Ukraine blocked all Russian attempts to improve the air forces units located at Crimean airfields for some time.
Therefore, obsolete types of aircraft that had already been withdrawn from service in all the other parts of Russian military aviation, such as Su-17М4 fighter-bombers and Bе-12 antisubmarine aircraft, continued to be operated by the Black Sea Fleet aviation.
In 2000 Ukraine unblocked the process of renewing the Black Sea Fleet aviation in Crimea.
In particular, that allowed replacing Su-17М4 aircraft with more modern Su-24 bombers and Su-24МR reconnaissance aircraft.
Colonel Hennadii Zahonov commanded the aviation of the Black Sea Fleet, and the commander of the 7057th Air Base was Lieutenant Colonel Anatolii Stepanov.
During the reorganisation of the Black Sea Fleet in December 2011, all aviation units stationed in Crimea were integrated into a single structure, the 7057th Air Base.
It included three squadrons, two of which were deployed at the Kacha airfield (a mixed aviation group comprised of Аn-26 transport aircraft and Bе-12 anti-submarine aircraft, a helicopter group consisting of approximately 20 helicopters Ka-27 and Mi-8), and the third – an assault squadron – in Hvardiiske .23 Russia concentrated a much more powerful aviation group in the Southern Military District near Crimea, the territories of Krasnodar and Stavropol, and the Rostov region.
Each of these bases roughly matched the Ukrainian tactical aviation brigade in terms of quantity, but the real combat potential was significantly higher.
Russia substantially renewed the structure of those units in the years preceding the occupation of Crimea.
In particular, the share of new helicopters in army aviation reached 90%.24 At the very least, the military aviation facility at Korenovsk airfield is an example of a thorough approach to fleet renewal.
It acquired new Мі-28N attack helicopters in 2010, Мі-8АМТSh transport helicopters started arriving in 2011, the first Mi-35M arrived in 2012, and by spring 2013 the base had received 16 Ka-52 helicopters.
Thus, outdated helicopters such as attack Mi-24 and transport Mi-8 of early modifications were wholly replaced in Korenovsk.
Meanwhile, such aircraft remained in service with Ukraine’s army aviation, with no plans to replace them.
Such a transfer could be conducted only with the help of military transport aircraft.
On February 26, 2014, Russian Federation President Vladimir Putin ordered a “surprise inspection of operational readiness” of the Western Military District troops and, to a lesser extent, the Central Military District.
As part of this “inspection”, about 40 Il-76 military transport planes took off from Ulyanovsk Air Base on February 26 and 27.
More than 10 of them landed at the Anapa Airport on the Caucasus coast, near Crimea.
According to other sources, about 8 Іl-76 aircraft landed at the airport that day.
The invading forces were transferred by air and partly by sea, via amphibious assault ships of the Black Sea Fleet and ferries of the Kerch Sea ferry system, due to the availability of airfields on the peninsula controlled by the Black Sea Fleet, allowing them to avoid the traditional parachute landing.
In total, 11 battalion tactical groups of airborne troops comprising nearly 6000 people were transferred to Crimea.
Ukrainian air defence and fighter aircraft remained passive without receiving any explicit instructions from the country’s military-political leadership.
The only reaction was the deployment of two Su-27 fighters from mainland Ukraine.
The planes were in the air a few hours after the Russians had started landing but did not interfere with the actions of the Russians.
The Black Sea Fleet’s aircraft stationed in Crimea did not have such aircraft, but they were needed to block the Ukrainian garrisons and ships.
On the morning of February 28, a group of Russian helicopters (eight Mi35Ms and three Mi-8s) flying from the side of Anapa violated the state border of Ukraine in the Kerch region.
From February 28 to March 11, the State Border Guard Service registered 14 occurrences of violations of Ukraine’s state border in Crimea by groups or single units of Russian aircraft.
Unauthorised landings at Crimean airfields were made by 48 planes and helicopters.
One of the priority tasks assigned to the Russian troops operating without identification marks was to block the Belbek airfield.
At about 15:00 on February 28, a convoy consisting of three Russian armoured 28 Crisis in Crimea…, 5.
The “green men” entered the facility through unguarded technical gates and blocked the runway, the aircraft parking zone, and the ammunition depot.
Around the same time, a company of Russian soldiers seized Simferopol civil airport and its dispatch office.
On March 1, the Russians blocked all three Ukrainian anti-aircraft missile regiments and several air-defence radar posts.
Novofedorivka airfield, where the 10th Marine Aviation Brigade was located, had also been secured.
According to Acting Minister of Defence of Ukraine Ihor Teniukh, at the time of the Russian invasion, Ukraine had 15000 servicemen, but only 1500-2000 of them were ready to carry out the order to use weapons.
On March 1, 2014, Acting President of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov appointed Rear Admiral Denys Berezovsky as Commander of the Ukrainian Navy.
This was a key position because all Ukrainian troops in Crimea were directly or operatively subordinated to him.
However, the next day Denys Berezovsky betrayed the oath by siding with the aggressor.
He ordered the Ukrainian military units in Crimea not to resist Russian Federation troops and to lay down their arms.
The further fate of the Ukrainian air units blocked in Crimea depended entirely on the initiative of their commanders and the decision of the personnel.
The commanders of both air brigades stationed on the peninsula did not obey Berezovskyi’s order and tried to oppose the Russians, and their chosen tactics proved superior.
The 10th Marine Aviation Brigade commander, Colonel Ihor Bedzai, attempted to protect the equipment from being captured by the Russians by flying all the capable aircraft and helicopters to the mainland of Ukraine.
The destinations were Odesa International Airport and MykolaivKulbakine Air Base.
In five minutes, two Аn-26s were taken to the runway and flew toward the sea with a two-minute interval.
The whole operation lasted no more than 20 minutes, and Russian troops blocking the airfield could not prevent it.
To intercept Ukrainian helicopters, the Russians sent two Mi-35Ms from Hvardiiske airfield, but they were unable to detect their targets because the Ukrainian helicopters were flying at low altitudes along the coastline, keeping radio silence.
On March 7, another Ка27PL helicopter was moved from Novofedorivka to Kulbakine, and again the Russians were unable to prevent it.
As a result of the active position of the commander of the 10 th Marine Aviation Brigade and his subordinates, all serviceable planes and helicopters were able to be evacuated to the mainland of Ukraine.
That was Ukraine’s first victory in its battle against Russian aggression.
Colonel Yulii Mamchur, Brigade Commander, resorted to psychological warfare on March 4 by leading a group of unarmed personnel to the parking grounds of Russian-controlled planes.
Ukrainian military marched while singing the national anthem beneath the State and Brigade flags.
Ukraine’s military-political leadership responded to Russia’s occupation of Crimea by urging the international community to condemn Russia’s aggression.
To begin, the Ukrainian side made every effort to retain the garrisons and military sites in Crimea under its control, which had been isolated and obstructed by the Russians.
Four Su-27 fighters from the 801st Tactical Aviation Brigade were redeployed from Myrhorod to Kulbakine airfield for this purpose.
Thirdly, the Armed Forces of Ukraine on mainland Ukraine were placed on alert, anticipating a surge in Russian aggression.
For military aviation, it meant intensifying training flights and putting at least a part of the available planes and helicopters on alert as soon as possible.
Despite the aggravation of the situation and the inability of the Ukrainian Armed Forces to repel full-scale Russian aggression, the Ukrainian command did not attempt to fly military aircraft or helicopters in the airspace over Crimea.
Instead, helicopters of the State Emergency Service continued to operate in the area.
The incident on March 6, 2014, when the Mi-8 helicopter of this service landed on the site of the Sevastopol aircraft repair plant on the shore of Krugla bay, became widely known.
The helicopter took a group of journalists to Sevastopol, but its crew was detained by “unknown persons”, and two Russian Mi35Ms that had taken off from Kacha airfield appeared over the site.
Eventually, the incident was settled peacefully, and the helicopter transporting journalists took off for mainland Ukraine that evening.
State Emergency Service Mi-8 helicopters flew over Crimea, and later – for example, on March 8, such a helicopter delivered a diesel generator to the garrison in Feodosiya where the Ukrainian Marine Battalion had been blocked.
The State Border Guard Service’s aviation was another active participant.
On March 8, one of its DA 42NG planes came upon small-arms fire while patrolling over the Perekop Isthmus.
The helicopter flew down to a very low altitude and was able to avoid getting shot with a sharp turn.
On March 15, Russia launched military operations along the border between occupied Crimea and mainland Ukraine.
Strilkove is located on the Spit of Arbatska Strilka and does not belong to the Autonomous Republic of Crimea but rather the Kherson region.
The State Border Guard Service Units and the Armed Forces of Ukraine blocked the paratroopers.
Russian Mi-35M attack helicopters with suspended missile blocks performed demonstration flights near Ukrainian checkpoints.
The Russian occupation of the Strilkove district lasted until December 2014.
Ukraine’s previously minimal odds of retaking Crimea by force have now become close to none.
On the other hand, the Russian Federation strived to complete the process of incorporating the occupied territories as soon as possible.
On March 16, 2014, a “referendum” was held in Crimea on the status of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, which was organised in violation of Ukraine’s Constitution and the position of the UN Security Council.
On March 18, an agreement for the admission of Crimea and Sevastopol to the Russian Federation was signed in Moscow.
The position of Ukrainian forces in Crimea had deteriorated to the point that the Russian government saw every reason to seize Ukrainian garrisons and ships by force.
Special Forces units took control of several command posts, including the Ukrainian Navy headquarters (where Navy Commander Rear Admiral Serhii Haiduk had been appointed to replace deserter Berezovskyi) and a reserve command post of the “Crimea” tactical group.
Ukrainian garrisons and ships were taken over one by one, mostly without resistance.
On March 24, two Mi-35M and two Mi-8 helicopters were involved in the capture of the military Marine Battalion in the town of Feodosiya.
The helicopters did not deploy ammunition on either occasion, putting psychological pressure on the Ukrainian troops.
There is no evidence of the use of aircraft or helicopters from the 7057th Air Base.
These functions proved crucial in assisting the troops that took part in the occupation.
It was no surprise that all personnel at the 7057 th Air Base were awarded medals “For the occupation of Crimea”.49 47 A Lavrov, Russian Again..., 175.
Both Ukrainian air brigades were evacuated by land to the nearest airbase Kulbakine in Crimea.
However, at Novofedorivka, 89 technicians were still engaged in preparing aircraft and other equipment for shipment.
Major Stanislav Karachevskyi, a serviceman of the 10th Marine Aviation Brigade, was killed while preparing to leave for the mainland of Ukraine.
The murder took place outside of the service at the dormitory where Major Karachevsky lived.
The last soldiers of the tactical group “Crimea” left the peninsula on April 11, except for technical specialists who provided equipment evacuation.
Road transport has been used to move aircraft and helicopters from Crimea.
Groups of technicians partially dismantled some parts of planes and helicopters.
For example, they disconnected wing consoles and keels and removed engines and radars from the МіG-29.
The fuselage was loaded onto a dedicated trailer while the remaining components were transported separately.
By that time, 82 aircraft had been evacuated from Crimea – 59 planes and 23 helicopters.
Six aircraft and 14 helicopters belonged to the 10th Marine Aviation Brigade.
Only four unusable Bе-12s and one Mi-8 were not able to be removed in time.
The 204th Tactical Aviation Brigade managed to evacuate 43 МіG-29 and МіG-29UB fighters (including seven aircraft from the former aerobatic team “Ukrainian Falcons” that were under conservation at the Kirovske airfield) and one L-39M1.
The Brigade had 12 aircraft left in Crimea – seven МіG-29s, two МіG-29UBs, and three L-39M1s.
The rest of the evacuated aircraft –nine different types of planes and seven helicopters – belonged to the State Aviation Research Centre.
The evacuated units’ operational readiness had to be restored as soon as possible.
The situation was more manageable with the 10th Marine Aviation Brigade because several of its planes and helicopters had returned from Crimea in flying conditions in early March.
However, restoring the helicopters was more difficult since, before the occupation of Crimea, Ka-27 and Mi-14 aircraft were repaired at the factory in Sevastopol.
On April 24, the crews of the 10 th Brigade resumed Аn-26 and Bе-12training flights.
In April 2014, as a temporary measure, a group of pilots from this Brigade was relocated to Vasylkiv, near Kyiv, where the 40th Tactical Aviation Brigade was stationed.
The first МіG-29 mounted in Kulbakine after the evacuation from Crimea flew on July 31, 2014.
However, the vast majority of fighters taken out of Crimea could not be restored by the technical staff of the Brigade – they needed repairing at the aircraft repair factory.
The Russian Federation quickly created a potent aviation group in Crimea.
Already in March 2014, four Su-27 fighters assigned from the 3 rd Guards Mixed Air Regiment took up combat duty at the Gvardiiske airfield.
And on June 1, 2014, the territory of the occupied Crimea was officially included in the area of responsibility of the 4 th Air Force and Air Defence Command.
In July, the four Su-27 fighters were replaced by three new Su-30М2 fighters relocated to the former Belbek airfield in Ukraine.
Aircraft delivery continued, and as of 2016, the regiment had 31 aircraft (12 Su-27s, 12 Su-27SМs, two Su-27UBs, and five Su30М2s).61 In November 2014, the 37 th Mixed Air Regiment (12 bombers Su-24М and 12 attack aircraft Su-25SМ) was formed at the Hvardiiske airfield, and in December the 39th Helicopter Regiment was formed at the Dzhankoi Airfield.
Its first squadron received 12 Ka-52 helicopters, its second acquired 12 Mi-35Ms and four Mi-28Ns, and its third squadron received 12 Mi-8AMTShs.
To command the regiments, the headquarters of the 27 th Mixed Aviation Division were established at Belbek airfield.
The 7057th Air Base of the Black Sea Fleet was decommissioned on July 1, 2013, and two regiments were formed instead.
The 43rd Separate Naval Assault 59 M Gawęda, MiG-29 w konflikcie o Donbas…, 60.
By 2016, the old Su-24 bombers had been replaced by Su-24М bombers and new Su-30SМ multi-purpose aircraft.
The 318th Separate Mixed Air-Regiment was formed with An-26, Be-12 planes and helicopters stationed at Kachi.
CONCLUSIONS The Russian Federation’s occupation of Crimea in February-March 2014 was carried out with the active employment of aircraft.
At the outset, the operations of military transport aircraft were crucial – their task was to bring additional military contingents to the peninsula.
Later, until the order to evacuate Ukrainian troops from Crimea was given, helicopters, mainly attack helicopters, played the crucial role, exerting psychological pressure on the blocked Ukrainian garrisons and ship crews.
Because the Ukrainian side did not reply with armed resistance, jet combat aircraft were also never deployed.
Ukrainian aviation remained largely inactive throughout the occupation of Crimea, except for the 10th Marine Aviation Brigade flying planes and helicopters to Ukraine’s mainland.
Following the evacuation of the aviation units from Crimea, the Ukrainian side had to devote a significant amount of time and effort to restore at least a partial combat capability.
On the other hand, Russia relying on its resources soon transformed Crimea into a kind of “unsinkable aircraft carrier”, deploying several aviation regiments equipped with modern aeroplanes and helicopters.
History and Disposition of Russian Forces in Crimea, in Howard Colby, Pukhov Ruslan , Brothers Armed.
Reportazh s krymskogo aerodroma «Gvardeyskoye» [Wings of the Russian Black Sea Fleet.
The Military Operation for Crimea, in Howard Colby, Pukhov Ruslan , Brothers Armed.
