European leaders rebuffed calls from Ukraine for greater support against Russia on Thursday, after Kiev urged NATO to send ships into waters disputed with Moscow.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel asked Kiev to be ""sensible"" following the request from President Petro Poroshenko, just hours after the European Union failed to agree to threaten new sanctions against Moscow.
Kiev has called on Western allies to back expressions of support with concrete action after Russian forces on Sunday seized three Ukrainian ships off the coast of Crimea.
The incident was the most dangerous in years between the ex-Soviet neighbours -who are locked in conflict over Russian-backed separatist regions -and has raised fears of a wider escalation.
In an interview with Germany's Bild newspaper published Thursday, Poroshenko asked NATO members including Berlin to send naval vessels to the Sea of Azov to back his country.
But, while blaming Russia for tensions, Merkel showed no signs of being ready to back military support.
Ukraine has also urged Western governments to impose more sanctions on Russia over the incident, but there too it has seen little support.
In a statement on Wednesday, the EU strongly condemned Russia's actions but, after three days of debate among senior officials, could not agree on a tougher response.
NATO spokeswoman Oana Lungescu said the issue would be raised at next week's regular meeting of alliance foreign ministers in Brussels, where Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin is also expected.
Moscow and Kiev have traded angry accusations since Russian navy vessels fired on, boarded and captured the three Ukrainian ships.
After warning of the threat of ""full-scale war"", Poroshenko on Wednesday signed an act imposing martial law for 30 days in regions bordering Russia, the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
Russian President Vladimir Putin insisted Moscow's actions were ""lawful"" because the Ukrainian ships had crossed illegally into Russian territory.
He said the incident was a provocation orchestrated by Poroshenko to shore up public support ahead of a tough re-election battle in a presidential vote set for March.
The Kremlin on Thursday also denied claims from Kiev that it was blocking access for Ukrainian ships to the Kerch Strait, the only crossing point between the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
On the contrary, as far as we know the Kerch Strait is operating normally,"" Putin's spokesman Dmitry Peskov said during his daily briefing.
Ukrainian Infrastructure Minister Volodymyr Omelyan said on Wednesday that 18 Ukrainian vessels were awaiting permission to pass from the Black Sea to the Sea of Azov.
Another nine vessels were waiting in port on the Sea of Azov to pass in the other direction.
US President Donald Trump late on Thursday called off a planned meeting with Putin at the G20 in Argentina this week over Moscow's detention of the Ukrainian sailors.
The Ukrainian vessels -a tug and two gunboats -were trying to pass through the Kerch Strait from the Black Sea to the Sea of Azov, but were refused access and chased into international waters by Russian vessels.
Two of their lawyers said Thursday that the sailors had been transferred to Moscow for holding in the city's notorious Lefortovo prison.
While speaking at a press conference in the German capital on Wednesday, Seibert also added that ""a deployment of the German navy toward the Crimea coast is not being planned at the moment,"" in line with the government's position encouraging de-escalation.
Read alsoTurkey could play role of mediator in settling Ukraine-Russia row in Black-Azov seas region ""It is in the interest of Germany, it is in the interest of Europe, that Ukraine continue to play a role as a transit state for Russian gas,"" the spokesman also said amid Ukraine's concerns that the construction of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline bypassing Ukraine threatens Ukraine's position of a gas transit state and also threatens the entire European energy security.
As UNIAN reported earlier, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko called on the European Union to take real steps to stop the ""creeping annexation"" of the Sea of Azov by the Russian Federation.
Russia has now deployed nearly 24 combat aircraft, including 16 Su-27s and 8 MIG-29s to Belbek Airfield, #Crimea.
US Air Force/Samuel King Jr.An FIM-92 Stinger missile is fired from an Army Avenger vehicle.
The Pentagon has been focusing on preparations for a potential clash with a peer, or near-peer, adversary like Russia.
Amid heightened tensions with Russia, the United States Army in Europe has made a number of changes to how it operates.
The most recent change was the return of an air-defence unit stationed on the continent permanently.
The United States Army in Europe has made a number of changes in recent months as part of a broader effort by the Pentagon to prepare for a potential fight against an adversary with advanced military capabilities, like Russia or China.
The latest move came on November 28, when the Army activated the 5th Battalion, 4th Air Defence Artillery Regiment, in a ceremony at Shipton Barracks in Ansbach, near the city of Nuremberg in southern Germany.
The battalion has a long history, serving in artillery and antiaircraft artillery roles in the War of 1812, the Civil War, World War II, and the Vietnam War.
It was deactivated in the late 1990s, after the United States military withdrew from the Cold War.
Todd Daniels, commander of the 5th Battalion, 4th Air Defence Artillery Regiment, uncovers the battalion colours during the activation and assumption of command ceremony at Shipton Kaserne, Germany, on November 28, 2018.
Its return brings new and important short-range-air-defence, or SHORAD, capabilities, according to Col.
David Shank, the head of 10th Army Air and Missile Defence Command, of which the new unit is part.
It is a tremendous step forward for the Air Defence Enterprise,” Shank said at the ceremony.
The battalion will be composed of five battery-level units equipped with FIM-92 Stinger missiles, according to Stars and Stripes.
US Air Force/Samuel King Jr.Stinger missiles are fired from the Avenger Air Defence System.
Air Defence Artillery units were for a long time embedded in Army divisions, but the service started divesting itself of those units in the early 2000s, as military planners believed the Air Force could maintain air superiority and mitigate threats posed by enemy aircraft.
But in 2016, after finding a gap in its SHORAD capabilities, the Army started trying to address the shortfall.
In January, for the first time in 15 years, the United States Army in Europe began training with Stinger missiles, a light antiaircraft weapon that can be fired from shoulderand vehicle-mounted launchers.
Lightweight, short-range antiaircraft missiles are mainly meant to defend against ground-attack aircraft, especially helicopters, that target infantry and armoured vehicles.
Unmanned aerial vehicles – used by both sides in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine – are also a source concern.
Rachael JeffcoatA 35th Air Defence Artillery Brigade member loads a Stinger onto an Avenger Air Defence System.
US Army Europe has been relying on Avengers defence systems and Stinger missiles from Army National Guard units rotating through the continent as part of Operation Atlantic Resolve, which began in 2014 as a way to reassure allies in Europe of the United States commitment to their defence.
Guard units rotating through Europe have been training with the Stinger for months, but the 5th Battalion, 4th Air Defence Artillery Regiment, will be the only one stationed in Europe that fields the Avenger, a short-range-air-defence system that can be mounted on a Humvee and fires Stinger missiles.
The Army has also been pulling Avenger systems that had been mothballed in order to supply active units until a new weapon system is available, according to Defence News, which said earlier this year that Army Materiel Command was overhauling Avengers that had been sitting in a Pennsylvania field waiting to be scrapped.
Marion Jo Nederhoed/US ArmyA United States Army Avenger team during qualification in South Korea, October 24, 2018.
The Army has also fast-tracked its Interim Short Range Air Defence program to provide airand missile-defence for Stryker and Armoured Brigade Combat Teams in Europe.
The system includes Stinger and Hellfire missiles and an automatic 30 mm cannon, as well as the M230 chain gun and a 7.62 mm coaxial machine gun.
Final prototypes of that package are expected in the last quarter of 2019, according to Defence News, with the Army aiming to have the first battery by the fourth quarter of 2020.
The activation of the 5th Battalion, 4th Air Defence Artillery Regiment, is part of a broader troop increase the Army announced earlier this year, saying that the increase in forces stationed in Europe permanently would come from activating new units rather than relocating them from elsewhere.
In addition to the short-range-air-defence battalion and supporting units at Ansbach, the new units will include a field-artillery brigade headquarters and two multiple-launch-rocket-system battalions and supporting units in Grafenwoehr Training Area, and other supporting units at Hohenfels Training Area and the garrison in Baumholder.
The activations were scheduled to begin this year and should be finished by September 2020, the Army said in a statement.
Russia is building up its land forces and weapons along the border, Ukraine's president said Saturday as German Chancellor Angela Merkel warned Russia not to block Ukrainian ports in the Sea of Azov.
Tensions between Russia and Ukraine were still escalating a week after a naval clash in the Black Sea on November 25 in which Russia fired on three Ukrainian naval ships then seized them and their 24 crew members.
These numbers, which have not been verified, would account for the vast majority of men and hardware assigned to Russia's Western Military District.
The naval clash came as the Ukrainian ships sailed to the Kerch Strait, the only waterway leading into the Sea of Azov and the site of a new key Russian bridge linking occupied Crimea with the Russian mainland.
Russia accused the Ukrainian vessels of violating Russian territorial waters, a charge Ukraine has denied.
Ukrainian officials say Russia has now imposed a de facto blockade on its two main ports in the Sea of Azov by allowing only ships destined for Russian ports through the strait.
Merkel criticized that Russian move, speaking to reporters Saturday on the sidelines of the Group of 20 summit in Buenos Aires after holding a bilateral meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
A 2003 Russia-Ukraine agreement designates the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait as shared internal waters.
But following Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea, Moscow has asserted greater control over the passage.
In response to the seizure of the ships, Poroshenko convinced the Ukrainian parliament to implement martial law in ten border regions.
Many in Ukraine and abroad have criticized the martial law order, noting that playing up the Russian threat is politically beneficial to Poroshenko, who faces re-election in March.
The martial law order included a ban on entry to Ukraine of all Russian males aged 16 to 60, a move Poroshenko said is designed to prevent undercover Russian military units from infiltrating the country.
Poroshenko said this tactic was used after Russia seized Crimea and began to support separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine, sparking a conflict that has left more than 10,000 people dead.
On November 25, two Ukrainian gunboats, together with a tug, attempted to cross from the Black Sea through the Kerch Strait into the Sea of Azov, where Ukraine controls two major port cities—Mariupol and Berdyansk.
Nevertheless, Moscow accused Kyiv of ignoring protocol in applying for passage.
After a multi-hour standoff just outside the Kerch Strait, the Ukrainian convoy turned back to Odessa since the small shallow-water Gurza-M-class gunboats have a crew of only five and are limited to just five days of autonomous voyage.
Yet, the Russian forces did not allow them to withdraw peacefully and attacked, purposefully ramming the tugboat and using live munitions after a demand to stop engines was ignored.
The Berdyansk gunboat was hit multiple times by heavy machinegun fire and apparently by armor-piercing rockets fired from a Ka-52 helicopter gunship and an Su-30 jet.
The three Ukrainian ships surrendered and were boarded by Russian commandos.
Gurza-Ms are river gunboats with some coastal sea operational capabilities.
They have two gun turrets originally designed for a Ukrainian-made BM-3 armored vehicle.
Moreover, these vessels are equipped with a 30-millimeter automatic gun, a grenade launcher and laser-guided Ukrainian-made Baryer-VK anti-tank missiles.
Ukraine began building these gunships as a cheap alternative after 2014, when it lost almost its entire fleet during the annexation of Crimea.
The passage of two more gunboats may have annoyed the Russians; but on their own, those two small craft could not have possibly flipped the balance of military power in the Sea of Azov.
Still the Russian military went berserk, fired to kill, and captured ships that did not seem to pose any immediate threat.
The Russian defense ministry’s threat assessment apparently implies that a future Ukrainian naval base in the Sea of Azov could eventually become a deployment point for Western—that is North Atlantic Treaty Organization —ships and forces much better equipped than the small Gurza-M gunboats.
Although, those Ukrainian vessels could still play a vital role in guarding this base against Russian commando infiltration.
Russian submarines and warships of the Black Sea Fleet cannot operate there effectively, while the United States and its allies have some modern well-armed warships capable of operating in the coastal littoral.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has called on NATO to deploy forces to the Azov Sea to counter Russian aggression.
The fact that no NATO member is presently planning to send any ships to the Azov Sea—not even a short friendly visit—will hardly calm the Russian nightmare assessment of the West suddenly achieving naval superiority there.
Russia has been constantly using the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait to move corvettes armed with long-range Kalibr cruise missiles from the Caspian Sea through the Volga, the Volga-Don channel, the Sea of Azov, the Kerch Strait, the Black Sea, the Bosporus, into the Mediterranean and then back again.
These corvettes have been shooting Kalibr missiles at Syria from the Caspian and from the Mediterranean.
To attack any other targets in the larger Middle East, the Russian corvettes may use the rear position in the Caspian; to go after targets in the West, a deployment in the Black Sea or Mediterranean is essential.
A NATO-backed Ukrainian naval base in Berdyansk or Mariupol could thus seriously impede Russian naval operational plans, Moscow seems to believe.
The fear of a Western-led conspiracy against vital Russian interests in the Black and Azov seas may explain the extreme Russian reaction.
This cancelation will be seen in Moscow as a nasty snub, but also possibly as additional conformation of a Western-led conspiracy surrounding the Azov Sea.
After the naval skirmish, Poroshenko, supported by a majority in the parliament declared 30 days of martial law in regions bordering Russia.
By pushing back the Ukrainian forces and, say, handing the Azov shoreline to the Russian-backed Donbas separatists, Moscow solves the alleged Sea of Azov vulnerability problem while, at the same time, possibly securing a land corridor from Russia to Crimea.
The Russian military has announced a “division” of S-400 missiles has been urgently deployed at Dzhankoy, in northern Crimea—a strategically important crossroads, where the main rail and highway connecting Crimea with Moscow traverse the salty Sivash marshes that form the Western tip of the Sea of Azov.
This map here you can see #Russia clearly could stop #Ukraine from being able to call in it's Airforce or naval forces to stop any attack on #Mariupol or #Berdyanks.
This gives the Russians a major strategic advantage if they launch any attack in Eastern Ukraine.
KIEV, Ukraine — Russia is building up its land forces and weapons along the border, Ukraine's president said Saturday as German Chancellor Angela Merkel warned Russia not to block Ukrainian ports in the Sea of Azov.
Ukraine's president has called-up army reservists to strengthen its defences over fears of a Russian invasion.
Petro Poroshenko said reservists will be summoned for training as part of the martial law he declared at the end of November.
He said that some military units will be redeployed to strengthen the nation's defences in a ratcheting up of tensions between the neighbouring countries.
He also called on Germany and its allies to boost their naval presence in the Black Sea to deter futher Russian aggression.Martial law was declared in parts of Ukraine on 26 November, a day after the Russian coastguard fired at and seized three Ukrainian naval vessels and 24 crew members off the Crimean Peninsula that Russia annexed from Ukraine in 2014.
The Kremlin said Mr Poroshenko's latest announcement is an ""absurd"" attempt to inflame tensions.
As part of the 30-day martial law, all Russian males aged 16 to 60 have been barred from entering Ukraine, a move which Mr Poroshenko said was needed to prevent Russia further destabilising his country.Over the weekend Mr Poroshenko said that Russia deployed a large number of troops along its border, and claimed the Kremlin intends to push into Ukraine.
However, the Russian military said its forces in Crimea were conducting drills involving Bal and Bastion long-range anti-ship missile systems.The sailors taken from the Ukrainian ships in November by Russia have been placed in custody for two months as Russia investigates the clash in the Kerch Strait, which links the Black Sea and the Sea of Azoz.
Ukraine and Russia have blamed each other for the naval incident which ramped-up sour relations created in 2014 when Russia annexed Crimea and backed separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine.
Kiev says its ships were in international waters while Russia claims the boats were violating its borders.
Mr Poroshenko has said he tried to arrange a phone call with Mr Putin to discuss the standoff but was refused.
The UK does not currently have a presence in the Black Sea but Defence Secretary Gavin Williamson said Ukraine was a ""steadfast partner"" and that Britain would continue to carry out joint training programmes and military exercises.
NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg holds a news conference after a meeting with the ambassadors at the Alliance headquarters in Brussels, Belgium, Nov., 2018.
LONDON — Russia’s recent attack on Ukrainian naval vessels will likely top the agenda at a NATO meeting this week as the alliance searches for a robust response in the wake of the Kremlin’s latest act of aggression on Europe’s borders.
United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo is scheduled to join other foreign ministers for the two-day meeting in Brussels starting Tuesday, where American demands for more military spending from NATO allies will also be discussed.
This is an enormous threat and together, with our allies, we are searching for an appropriate response to it,” President Petro Poroshenko said.
The Ukrainian leader wants NATO to send warships to the Azov Sea, which is supposed to be shared between Moscow and Kyiv under a 2003 agreement.
Ukraine says Russian warships have blockaded the Kerch Strait off Crimea – the territory it forcibly annexed in 2014 – effectively cutting off Ukrainian Black Sea ports.
NATO is under pressure to offer a robust response at Tuesday’s foreign ministers’ summit.
We call on Russia to ensure unhindered access to Ukrainian ports and allow freedom of navigation for Ukraine in the sea of Azov and Kerch Strait,” Stoltenberg told reporters.
Following the incident in the Azov Sea, United States President Donald Trump cancelled a planned meeting with his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin at the G20 summit.
Along with military spending, NATO foreign ministers will also discuss Ukraine and Georgia’s ambitions to join the alliance.
Foreign ministers are also due to discuss Operation Resolute Support in Afghanistan, in which about 16,000 personnel from 39 NATO member states and partner countries are involved in training and assisting Afghan forces.
United States Navy regularly sails into the Black Sea to conduct exercises with NATO members Romania, Bulgaria and allies Georgia and Ukraine.
Today, I called both President Vučić and Mr Haradinaj to brief them on the outcome of Wednesday's meeting of NATO Foreign Ministers on the Western Balkans.
I underlined that both Belgrade and Pristina should show calm and restraint, and avoid any provocative statements or actions.
I also spoke with President Vučić on the need to de-escalate current tensions.
I reminded both that the EU-mediated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina remains the only way to bring durable peace and stability to the region.
NATO remains committed to the security and stability of Kosovo through our UN-mandated KFOR peacekeeping mission.
Ukrainian soldiers move to position in a APC during military drills in base Honcharivske, Chernihiv region, Ukraine, Monday, Dec., 2018.
MINSK, Belarus — The Ukrainian parliament on Thursday voted to withdraw from a wide-ranging treaty on friendship with Russia, the latest step in escalating tensions between the two neighbors.
The Supreme Rada overwhelmingly supported a motion by President Petro Poroshenko not to prolong the treaty when it comes up for renewal in April.
The camouflage-clad president on Thursday visited an air base to announce an upcoming dispatch of troops to the Russian border.
The long-simmering conflict between Russia and Ukraine that started with Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014 spilled into the open on Nov. when the Russian coast guard fired upon and seized three Ukrainian naval vessels and their crews.
Ukraine's foreign minister on Thursday reiterated his country's call for the release and safe return of the 24 Ukrainian sailors.
Pavlo Klimkin in a speech at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe warned that since the Crimean annexation Russia has not pulled back but, on the contrary, has extended operations into the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
Poroshenko responded to the standoff by introducing martial law for 30 days, something Ukraine hadn't done even after Crimea's annexation and amid large-scale fighting between Ukrainian forces and Russia-backed separatists in 2014-2015.
The Ukrainian parliament on Thursday voted not to prolong the friendship treaty with Russia, which is up for renewal next April, and adopted a bill that unilaterally doubles the extent of Ukraine's territorial waters to 24 nautical miles.
Ukrainian authorities say this will allow the coast guard and the navy to be more efficient in patrolling the area to prevent military threats and smuggling.
The bill also allows Ukrainian border guards to open fire without warning on potential attackers.
Large alert air defence exercise going on in Russian Western and Southern Military Districts.
Reports of units moving and conducting simulated launches from many areas.
Ukraine parliament gave authority for marine border guards to open fire without warning to protect sea areas.
Washington The United States has begun making the necessary preparations to sail a warship into the Black Sea, a move that comes amid heightened tensions in the region following Russia's seizure of Ukrainian ships and detention of Ukrainian sailors.
A State Department spokesman said, ""the United States carries out its activities consistent with the terms of the Montreux Convention.
On Wednesday, the United States Navy sailed the guided missile destroyer USS McCampbell near contested waters in the Sea of Japan Wednesday, an action that is bound to irk Russia.
The United States warship conducted what the Navy refers to as a ""Freedom of Navigation Operation"" to push back against Russian claims on the waters.
A spokesman told CNN Wednesday that Moscow lays claim to areas that far exceed the 12 miles from the Russian coastline that is guaranteed by international law.
Ukraine’s Ambassador to the United Nations Volodymyr Yelchenko revealed on Thursday that Russia has deployed nuclear weapon carriers in Crimea.
Speaking on a security briefing on the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov region, Yelchenko said that Moscow has tightened its military grip over the area, which it illegally annexed back in 2014 amid civil unrest against the Ukranian government.
The opening in the Black Sea that leads to the Sea of Azov, the Kerch Strait, is where Russian troops illegally rammed and seized three Ukrainian ships in late November, triggering an international outcry.
Yelchenko went on to explain how Russia may be preparing for the complete re-nuclearization of Crimea, an idea that would raise alarm among international peacekeepers.
Yelchenko’s claims follow a Fox News report this week showing the deployment additional S-400 surface-to-air missile batteries at a Crimean airbase, days after the confrontation between the Russian military and Ukrainian navy ships after they attempted to enter the Sea of Azov.
The incident, as well as the continued military build-up, has raised fears that Moscow may be intending to invade Ukraine, although Russian President Vladimir Putin has played down such speculation.
Putin warned this week of an arms race with the United States after Secretary of State Mike Pompeo issued a 60-day ultimatum for Russia to correct its “material breach” of the joint nuclear treaty signed during the Cold War.
Hungarian Foreign Minister Peter Szijjarto delivers a statement during the Geneva Conference on Afghanistan, at the European headquarters of the United Nations in Geneva, on Nov., 2018.
Normal exchange of fire, there is no escalation on the battlefield yet.
BRUSSELS NATO will supply Ukraine’s military with secure communication equipment this month, its head Jens Stoltenberg told President Petro Poroshenko at a meeting on Thursday called to discuss an escalation of Kiev’s conflict with Moscow.
Stoltenberg praised Ukraine’s “calm and restraint” after Russia seized of three its naval vessels and their crew off Crimea last month.
The NATO chief reiterated support for the former Soviet nations’ aspirations to join the alliance a plan which Moscow vehemently opposes.
Russia is resisting international calls to release the ships and men seized in the Kerch Strait, which controls access to the Sea of Azov near the Crimea region that Moscow annexed from Ukraine in 2014.
EU leaders will discuss Ukraine and Russia over a summit dinner later in the day.
The bloc’s leaders are expected to offer Ukraine help for regions affected by Russia’s actions in the Azov Sea but stop short of imposing further sanctions on Russia, something sought by more hawkish governments.
WASHINGTON There will be no meeting between United States President Donald Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin while Russia still holds Ukrainian ships and sailors seized near Crimea, United States national security adviser John Bolton said on Thursday.
Russia seized three Ukrainian navy vessels and their combined crew of 24 last month off the coast of Russian-annexed Crimea and accused them of illegally entering Russian waters.
Ukraine has said Russia captured the two small gunboats and one tugboat illegally and accused Moscow of military aggression. European Union leaders will reaffirm support for Ukraine in its standoff with Russia and their readiness to increase aid to the country at a summit on Thursday, the bloc’s foreign policy chief said.
The EU’s 28 heads of state will offer Ukraine help for its regions suffering after Russia seized three of its naval vessels and their crew off Crimea last month, a draft summit statement seen by Reuters showed.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation has once again threatened Ukrainian diplomats working in Russia, arguing that Kyiv is failing to ensure safety of Russian diplomats in Ukraine.
Two Russian diplomats working in Ukraine have been recently added to the database, which threatens their security,"" spokesperson for Russia's Foreign Ministry Maria Zakharova told a briefing in Moscow, according to an UNIAN correspondent in Russia.
She called on the Ukrainian authorities to strictly comply with the provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961 regarding the protection of employees of diplomatic and consular missions.
