Analyses of the damage done to Muscovy by Macedonia’s accession to NATO – including comments by Pres Poroshenko.
Salisbury update – it appears the third covert operator did not exfiltrate from the UK or did so covertly.
Election update and controversy over Rada banning Russian nationals from election monitoring teams.
On the ecclesiastical front, the ROC suffers a catastrophic loss in Kyiv with the defection of its “brains trust” of 12 leading clerics to the OCU, authors of church doctrine, policy, and key public relations figures.
In Russia persecution of the Witnesses escalates, while a coven of Witches casts spells on the Vozhd’s enemies, producing a media frenzy – Russia is truly descending into its medieval past.
Future historians may label this period the Second Oprichnina, as many Russian observers suggest it is.
Russia will have to develop new types of weapons in a limited time frame in response to the US’s withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, Russian Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu said in a conference call on Tuesday.
The defense industry has been given two years to create a ground-based variant of the Kalibr system with the long-range cruise missile that “proved itself” in Syria according to Shoygu.
In connection with this, the Russian President has instructed the Defense Ministry to take response measures,” Shoygu said.
According to the Russian general, there is no need for additional funds to be allocated from the federal budget, the new projects will simply be allocated funding from the existing resources of the state arms program.
The most recent version of the program was signed by President Putin at the start of 2018, and allocates 22 trillion rubles to arms production and procurement for the Defense Ministry, Interior Ministry, Russian National Guard and other departments.
Deputy Defense Minister Alexey Krivoruchko has been tasked with overseeing the budget for the new missiles.
He is expected to “initiate the relevant development activity in a short time as part of the allocations for the 2019 state defense order and the 2020-2021 planned period by reallocating funds to carry out the mentioned operations,” Shogyu said.
Before the treaty, the Soviet Union had missiles of this category aimed at NATO’s European member-states.
United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo warned that if Russia fails to return to compliance with the treaty within six months, the United States will completely break off the treaty.
Over the next 10 years, Washington intends to invest $494 billion in a completely updated “nuclear triad”, according to a report by the Congressional Budget Office.
The Pentagon will allocate $234 billion to maintaining and upgrading the nuclear weapons delivery systems; $15 billion will be used to finance tactical nuclear weapons, and $106 billion to develop new systems.
The new arms will include reduced capacity W76-2 warheads and new cruise missiles for submarines.
The United States also intends to add 12 new nuclear submarines to its fleet.
Russia successfully test-fired an enhanced version of RS-24 Yars intercontinental ballistic missile from the Plesetsk spaceport in the Arkhangelsk Region on 6 February.
Moscow time on February 6, a mobile Yars solid-propellant intercontinental ballistic missile armed with multiple warheads was test-fired from the Plesetsk state testing spaceport,” said in a statement of the Defense Ministry,” – said in a statement of the Defense Ministry.
Also noted that the warheads arrived at the designated area at the Kura practice range on the Kamchatka Peninsula, in the Russian Far East.
The purpose of the launch was to check tactical, technical and flight characteristics of the advanced intercontinental ballistic missile system.
The RS-24 Yars is a Russian strategic missile system comprising a mobile or silo-based solid-propellant intercontinental ballistic missile with MIRVed warheads.
The ICBM was developed by the Moscow Institute of Thermal Technology under the supervision of Academician of the Russian Academy of Sciences Yuri Solomonov.
Russia has conducted a new test of the RS-24 Yars while tensions increased among Russia and USA after Donald Trump pulled the United States out of a nuclear arms control treaty in place since the Cold War.
Last week, United States President Donald Trump announced the United States would leave the pact, which it has long accused the Russians of violating.
NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg commented on Washington and Moscow pulling out of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.
Another U.S.-Russian nuclear treaty could soon expire without renewal following Washington’s withdrawal from a Cold War-era arms-control pact, a senior Russian diplomat has said.
Political analysts said the accession of the country now known as North Macedonia to NATO, which could be complete by year’s end, was a setback for Russia.
Macedonia is on its way to join Nato next year – despite a Russian push-back in the Western Balkans and beyond.
The path of North Macedonia to NATO was very difficult but the country demonstrated unity, the head of state said.
The head of state added that on the same day, February 6, the European Commission decided on the membership of North Macedonia in the European Union.
As UNIAN reported earlier, on February 6, in Brussels, permanent representatives of all 29 countries of the Alliance signed a protocol on the accession of the Republic of Northern Macedonia to NATO in the future.
Henceforth, representatives of Northern Macedonia will take part in meetings of NATO and the North Atlantic Council as a guest country’s envoys.
On February 6, Macedonian Foreign Minister Nikola Dimitrov announced that the new name of the country would finally be approved as soon as the amendments to the Constitution came into force.
On January 8, head of the Mission of Ukraine to NATO Vadym Prystaiko said Ukraine could join the Alliance after Macedonia.
The Russian Federal Security Service proposed to transfer the fifth-generation mobile communications in Russia to domestic SIM cards, Russian cryptography and replace networks equipment, in particular, on base stations from foreign to locally manufactured, reportsfinanz.ru.
According to the newspaper Vedomosti, the initiatives were proposed by the FSB representatives at a meeting of the network infrastructure working group of the Digital Economy project on January 30.
Cryptographic algorithms are used to authorise subscribers, so SIM cards must support these algorithms, explained one of the interlocutors of Vedomosti.
In August 2018, the FSB military unit announced a closed tender for 3 million rubles with a proposal to develop requirements for the IT security of fifth-generation networks based on Russian crypto algorithms, SIM cards and equipment for both subscribers and providers.
The FSB has long believed that foreign cryptography and equipment pose risks to national security, and suggests switching to domestic cryptography, recalls Cisco security expert Alexey Lukatsky.
The FSB proposed improvements are very expensive, and it is necessary to assess the real need in order to decide whether to participate in this tender, said the Huawei representative.
In order to use Russian crypto algorithms, the equipment of each base station will probably have to be certified according to the requirements of the FSB for encryption tools, explains Lukatsky, it is easier and cheaper to protect only traffic between base stations with Russian cryptography.
If traffic is encrypted between the end devices, he believes that base stations can not be certified, but this option is unrealistic because operators will not be able to fulfill SORM requirements and they will have difficulties with foreign networks.
It is unlikely that Russian cryptography will be supported by international SIM standards.
Delfi.it reports that the Department of State Security and Military Intelligence of Lithuania has blocked the investments of a Russian corporation into a Lithuanian company because the company is suspected of of collecting cartographic data for the Russian army.
According to the Lithuanian special services, the Russian oligarch Vladimir Yevtushenkov’s company Sistema was planning on acquiring a Lithuanian company through the investment firm of his son, specializing in cartography and aerial photography.
In addition, the Sistema holding company owns the Russian company Kronstadt, which several years ago won the Russian government’s tender for equipping the center of electro-cartographic data in Russia.
According to the Annual Threat Assessment prepared by two Lithuanian special services, the Department of State Security and Military Intelligence of Lithuania, Russia consistently strengthens military facilities in the Kaliningrad region, however, the additional NATO forces deployed in the Baltic region and the growing national forces of Baltic countries reduce the likelihood of conflict, Interfax reported.
New military units are being formed, new armaments and military equipment are being supplied, and intensive military training is being conducted on land and sea landfills of the region,” the document said.
According to the Threat Assessment, Belarus, which is bordering on Lithuania, is given the role of a “buffer” state in the Russian military doctrine.
The Russian Federation uses Belarus to plan military operations and demonstrate military power, and the deepening military integration and economic dependence reduces the ability of Minsk to implement independent defense and security policies.
On the other hand, the authors of the document emphasize that in the event of a military conflict, the increase in the national armed forces of the Baltic countries and the NATO facilities deployed in the region will allow avoiding the wide involvement of NATO and reducing the likelihood of a conflict in the region.
Earlier, President of Belarus Alexander Lukashenko ordered to strengthen border security and demanded to take “exhaustive measures” to increase border guard units and form new ones.
In an article for Carnegie Moscow Center, political expert Tatyana Stanovaya says Vladimir Putin has left Russia’s elites to fend for themselves as he wanders off to worry almost exclusively about geopolitics.
Stanovaya argues that the current murder investigation against Senator Rauf Arashukov recalls the 2016 arrest of then Economic Development Minister Alexey Ulyukaev, but today’s case has more sweeping political repercussions and weakens multiple political institutions, structures, and key influence groups.
The plane belongs to an offshore company registered in Seychelles whose owners are unknown, and Prigozhin’s family regularly appears in photos taken in the cabin of a similar-looking jet.
Based on Navalny’s research, the newspaper Novaya Gazeta tracked M-VITO’s flights for the past couple of years for a new special report.
The military officer, who entered the UK under the name Sergey Fedotov, came to Britain on the same day the other two hit men travelled to the UK to assassinate Sergei Skripal.
The third Russian agent implicated in the Salisbury nerve agent attack aborted his planned exit from the UK, raising the prospect he remained in the country.
He was using a passport whose number differed by only a few digits from the fake passports used under the names of Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov.
Nearly 3 months after deeming Russia in violation of a chemical weapons law, the Trump administration has yet to impose new sanctions required by the law.
Det Sgt Nick Bailey was contaminated while investigating the Salisbury Novichok attack in March.
WASHINGTON – Leaks exposing the UK’s role in the notorious Skripal affair shine a light on London’s strategy to revive Cold War tensions and to justify increasing its intelligence budget, former Pentagon adviser Karen Kwiatkowski told Sputnik.
The Verkhovna Rada has adopted the law introducing amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine . — Ukrinform.
The Verkhovna Rada, Ukraine’s parliament, has backed amendments to the Constitution on Ukraine’s path to the European Union and NATO, according to an UNIAN correspondent.
EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Federica Mogherini has issued a declaration on the alignment of certain third countries with the European Council’s decision concerning restrictive measures in view of Russia’s actions destabilizing the situation in Ukraine. — Ukrinform.
United States National Security Advisor John Bolton has welcomed a meeting he held on Wednesday with Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin, reaffirming the common positions of Washington and Kyiv. — Ukrinform.
United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker has said the United States is working to strengthen Ukraine’s resilience and deter further Russian aggression.
We are working together to strengthen Ukraine’s resilience and deter further Russian aggression.
It’s time for peace for Ukraine,” Volker wrote on Twitter on February 7, 2019, following the meetings of Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin with top United States officials.
Resolutions are adopted to be implemented, and the UN monitors their implementation.
This also applies to the “Crimean” resolution, which demands the release of captured Ukrainian sailors. — Ukrinform.
The European Court for Human Rights has cancelled the planned February 27 public hearing on Ukraine’s suit against Russia involving Crimea and has decided to postpone it, the Kyiv-based Ukrainskaya Pravda ezine has said, citing the court’s press service.
The Moscow City Court has rejected appeals against the court ruling to extend the arrest of the first four Ukrainian sailors captured by Russian military in the Kerch Strait, the coordinator of the team of lawyers, Nikolai Polozov, has reported on Facebook. — Ukrinform.
The Ukrainian-based Prosecutor’s Office for the Autonomous Republic of Crimea jointly with the police have begun a pretrial investigation into the illegal pollution of the Black Sea with toxic waste in Russian-occupied Crimea.
The pretrial investigation is conducted by prosecutors jointly with the Ukrainian police.
The Embassy of Ukraine in France has called on the French news agency Agence France-Presse to fix the map where Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula is designated as Russian territory.
Russian-led forces mounted 11 attacks on Ukrainian troops in Donbas, eastern Ukraine, in the past 24 hours.
PHOTOS On Thursday, the “LPR” representatives transferred 33 convicts to Ukraine-controlled territory, so they could further serve their sentences here.
Ukraine’s State Border Guard’s naval forces in cooperation with Naval Forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and other units of the Joint Force Operation have conducted training exercises in the Sea of Azov.
The aim of the exercises was to repel a mock enemy attack from the sea.
According to the press service of Ukraine’s State Border Service on Wednesday, the drills involved an intruder vessel, which ignored the requests and legal requirements of Coast Guard ship and Naval Forces ships and carried out dangerous maneuvers at high speed, trying to approach the shore for a possible landing.
In the northern part of the Sea of ​​Azov there was a complex of training marine, aviation and artillery components, which provide control over the water area in the area of ​​operation of the combined forces.
This is reported by the Ukrainian Military Portal In the training complex the interaction of the naval group in the composition of the ships of the State Border Guard Service and the Naval Forces of Ukraine was worked out.
Their actions were covered with air by regular airplanes and helicopters of the Joint Forces, air defense and artillery.
The training took place in difficult meteorological conditions and with limited visibility.
Seven thermal imaging sights and eight night-vision devices, which doted by the United States government, were stolen from the Ukrainian Army’s warehouse located Lviv region.
Optics were donated to Ukraine by the United States government as part of an international technical assistance program,” the SBI report said.
According to investigators, the abduction of military property occurred due to the negligent attitude of the warehouse manager to the accounting and security of the entrusted property.
Washington has provided Ukraine with more than $1 billion in “security assistance” funds since February 2014.
Out of the total amount of assistance that has been provided to Ukraine’s Armed Forces, United States aid accounts for about 90 percent.
Ukrainian soldiers repelling Russian proxy forces in Donbas have spoken with EUobserver to tell about the simmering conflict in eastern Ukraine that has been ongoing for four and a half years already.
The grey zone between the warring sides is also a grey zone in terms of information.
The modernized rocket launchers system was developed by Shepetovsky repair factory in cooperation with other enterprises of the national defense industrial complex.
As a base, the KrAZ-5401Ne cross – country chassis with a carrying capacity of 9 tons was developed by PJSC AvtoKrAZ in 2016.
The Government of the Republic of Lithuania has passed a resolution to donate munitions worth EUR 255,000 to the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine.
The Baltic State has been supporting Ukraine since the beginning of the Russian aggression in 2014.
Lithuania previously provided material support to the Ukrainian Army and elements of military weapons, in particular rocket munitions.
Ukraine’s operating banks received a net profit of UAH 21. billion in 2018, which is the maximum historical indicator.
First Deputy Head of the National Police of Ukraine, Vyacheslav Abroskin, has said a suspect in organizing the murder of a Ukrainian activist Vitaly Oleshko aka “Sarmat” was detained in Lviv on February 7.
The man has been hiding from law enforcement across Ukraine for the past five months.
There were eight Ukrainian citizens among the sailors of the SEA SCAN 1 vessel seized off the coast of Portugal while carrying 2. tonnes of cocaine.
The Verkhovna Rada in the framework of de-communization directed to the Constitutional Court a bill on the changing the name of the Dnipropetrovsk region to Sichaslavsk region.
In the fall of 2018 the parliament did not have enough votes to send this bill to the Constitutional Court.
The Constitution of Ukraine and the Rules of Procedure of the Verkhovna Rada determine the procedure for amending the Basic Law of Ukraine.
Then the document is considered by the Verkhovna Rada Committees and recommends to the parliamentarians whether to consider legislative initiatives or not.
The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine prohibited observers from the Russian Federation to participate in the election process in Ukraine.
The law provides the amendments to the law on the elections of the president, lawmakers and local elections.
So, the department sees no legal obstacles for the adoption of this law.
The Verkhovna Rada, Ukraine’s parliament, has introduced amendments to the electoral legislation, which ban citizens of the aggressor state from being official observers in Ukraine’s elections. — Ukrinform.
United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker called on the Ukrainian authorities to allow Russian observers to monitor the presidential election in March 2019. — Ukrinform.
The mutual absence of citizens of the conflicting countries in OSCE has never prevented the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights from monitoring an electoral process, therefore its mission must be successful in Ukraine as well.
Ukraine’s Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Kateryna Zelenko said this in comments to Ukrinform in response to a request to comment on the statement by United States Special Representative for Ukraine Kurt Volker on the possibility of admission of Russian observers to the Ukrainian presidential election.
The mutual absence of citizens of the conflicting countries in the OSCE has never prevented ODIHR from successfully conducting the election observation process,” Zelenko said.
She recalled that official observers from Ukraine did not go to the presidential election of Russia in 2018.
As reported, United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker called on Ukrainian authorities to allow Russian observers to monitor the presidential election in March 2019.
Talks on members of the foreign observation mission are currently under way between the OSCE/ODIHR and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.
Polls suggest comedian Volodymyr Zelenskiy is a frontrunner in Ukraine’s presidential election.
Feb 7 – The fact-checking VoxCheck project “Liars and Manipulators Rating” has analyzed statements of Ukrainian politicians.
We did not check the regional media, because very often politicians just repeat what they said in the central media,” VoxUkraine media director and VoxCheck Project Coordinator Olena Shkarpova said.
In total, the sample included 1,962 claims on reforms and financing of the army, the state of the economy and the fight against corruption, medicine and education, pensions and subsidies.
President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko on his Twitter account on Thursday afternoon launched an opinion poll regarding the accession of the Ukrainian state to the North Atlantic Alliance.
Viktor Medvedchuk, the representative of the “Opposition Platform – For Life” told how Ukraine could reach an agreement with Donetsk in 2014.
Not with Shufrich, but Ukraine with these prodigal sons, prodigal people.
I told Turchynov we were ready to go, to catch up this list of questions and start a dialogue.
I called them and stated that our leader had a proposal to release the hostages.
Then, it was resumed in June, in a month after a new President was elected, when Trilateral Contact Group appeared,” Medvedchuk said.
This was not the former Ukrainian President’s first press conference since he fled to Russia after the bloodshed on Maidan and as on previous occasions, his message seemed closely coordinated with that coming out of the Kremlin – Former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych appeared at a press conference on 6 February in the Moscow offices of the state-controlled ‘Russia Today’ agency.
It was not the first such event since he fled to Russia after the bloodshed on Maidan and as on previous occasions, his message seemed closely coordinated with that coming out of the Kremlin.
This time the performance appeared aimed at trying to influence the Ukrainian presidential elections at the end of March.
The press conference came two weeks after Yanukovych was convicted, in absentia, by the Obolon District Court in Kyiv of state treason and sentenced to 13 years’ imprisonment.
There are several reasons for concern about that court trial due to flaws in the law enabling trial by absentia and some other details, however Yanukovych’s attempts to present himself as the victim of political persecution were less than convincing.
He could probably feel confident that he would not be asked what you should call appealing to Russian President Vladimir Putin to send troops into Ukraine if not treason.
Nonetheless, his account of the events five years ago was heavily edited and only likely to convince Russians who had been hearing the same narrative about a state coup, etc., from Russian state television.
His claim that the political pressure allegedly brought to bear on the court in Kyiv was “unprecedented” was a particularly memorable moment from an ex-President in hiding who had imprisoned his main rival and several of her associates.
Perhaps the only unexpected moment in the event came with Yanukovych’s assertion that Interpol has not issued a Red Notice on him and that he can, allegedly, travel where he wants.
Considering that Interpol has placed at least one young Ukrainian – the friend of abducted student Pavlo Hryb – on its list despite very strong grounds for believing the case to be politically motivated, it is rather baffling that it has refused in the case of Yanukovych, citing fears that his prosecution could be political.
Neither he, nor Putin’s press secretary, were willing to explain what his status is in Russia.
Russia is known to have given several Berkut special force officers wanted for crimes against Maidan Russian citizenship, as well, reported, as some of the high-ranking people close to Yanukovych, like Vitaly Zakharchenko, the former Interior Minister.
Yanukovych had not given one of these ‘press conferences’ for a year, and, like the previous ones, it had been hyped up in advance.
In fact, most of it repeated the themes that Yanukovych – and the Kremlin – have repeated before about Maidan, the supposed ‘coup d’état ‘ in Kyiv, Donbas, etc.
There was nothing new about Crimea either, with its “loss” attributed to the Ukrainian authorities having divided the country.
Looking heavily made up, Yanukovych came out with some pronouncements that bore absolutely no scrutiny.
One was the assertions that his “lawyers have passed documents to the investigative bodies to start an investigation, who was really to blame for the loss of Ukraine.
In short, almost exactly the refrain from the Kremlin, even to the cynical assertion that it was Maidan activists who gunned down Maidan activists.
The events around the creation of a united Ukrainian Orthodox Church cane well after Yanukovych’s previous press conference, but here too there were no surprises, with Yanukovych repeating Putin’s line about this supposedly being the Ukrainian state’s ‘interference’ in religious matters.
The key difference to previous press conferences was the constant reference to the coming presidential elections.
President Petro Poroshenko, Yanukovych claimed, cannot possibly win through fair elections, so if he does win, this will mean that the elections were rigged.
One might think that Yanukovych, more than anyone, should know about rigged elections, however UNIAN’s Moscow correspondent Roman Tsymbalyuk reports that even here Yanukovych was simply parroting the prevailing Russian narrative.
Yanukovych asserted that Ukraine should allow polling stations in occupied Crimea and Russia, claiming that it was fear of votes against those now in power in Ukraine that made them refuse to do so.
While there certainly are arguments on both sides, at least with respect to Crimea, the recent Russian ‘elections’ illegally held there, and the methods used to force people to take part make it difficult to understand how the Ukrainian Central Election Commission could prevent mass election fraud.
What active measures it may take to support another presidential candidate and to generally influence the outcome, first of the presidential, then the parliamentary elections in Ukraine should be the subject of very close scrutiny over the next months.
Putin effectively spelled out one extremely negative method soon after Russia’s attack on three Ukrainian naval boats near Crimea and the seizure of 24 Ukrainian POWs on 25 November 2018.
It seems likely that this is why there has been no movement for so long on exchanges of POWs and civilian hostages in occupied Donbas, or of political prisoners held in occupied Crimea and Russia.
Political consultant Viktor Ukolov has said the Kremlin is preparing a pretext for intervention against Ukraine with the help of Ukraine’s fugitive ex-officials.
Speaking at a press conference in Moscow, the disgraced president said the agreement had been signed together with the leaders of the then opposition, however Russian representative Vladimir Lukin, who was present at the talks, did not sign the document.
Yanukovych also said he had just returned to Russia after he received treatment for his injury abroad.
Disgraced ex-President Viktor Yanukovych would be better off if he availed himself of his right to defend himself, came to Kyiv and argued his position in the court of appeals, Ukraine’s Prosecutor General Yuriy Lutsenko has said.
Twelve Kyiv priests of the former Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate have joined the newly created Orthodox Church of Ukraine.
As is seen from the list of the priests’ names, the intellectual elite, who for a long time were involved in the formation of church policy and education, and also played a significant role in Ukraine in creating a positive public opinion about UOC-MP, left their former organization, the Religion in Ukraine portal said.
On the site of the Kyivan Metropolitanate of the UOC posted a list of clerics who went “into a split,” that is, to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine, which in January 2019 received autocephaly from the Constantinople Church.
From the list, it follows that the intellectual elite, which for a long time was involved in the formation of church politics and education , went from the UOC-MP , reports Religion in Ukraine.
These clerics of the Metropolitanate of the UOC have forbidden not only to serve, but even to partake in communion.
With the coming to power of Metropolitan Onuphri in 2014, Metropolitan Volodymyr’s previous course of openness to society and dialogue was curtailed, and the abovementioned ministers were pushed to the background.
Now they will continue their ministry in the Orthodox Church of Ukraine.
Primate of the newly created Orthodox Church of Ukraine , Metropolitan of Kyiv and All Ukraine Epifaniy says he sets three key tasks for himself.
Ukraine’s lavras may become subordinate to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine in the coming years, perhaps even a within year, Epifaniy said.
But without spiritual education, in general, and without the development of education, we won’t be able to do this,” he told the Novoye Vremya weekly on February 7.
I believe that the Lord will create such conditions where lavras will become part of the local church of Ukraine.
I think that this will happen in the coming years, perhaps even within a year.
I’d like Lavra monks to independently come to realize that there is no other way than the unification to create our modern history together,” he said.
That is, they have no will for dialogue, that’s because they have no arguments.
But I am ready to communicate with them and find time for dialogue about the unity of all Orthodox Christians in the united church.
Orthodox Christians hope Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras’s visit signals that Turkey, which closed the historic Halki seminary in 1971, might let it reopen.
Russian witches and seers performed on Tuesday one of their most powerful rituals, “the circle of power,” to pass on their mystical energy to President Vladimir Putin.
Dozens of people who claim to have supernatural powers stood side by side, reading spells in their effort to support the Russian head of state.
Self-proclaimed leader of the Russian witches Alyona Polyn said the main intention of the gathering is to enhance quality of life in Russia, the whole world in general and to support the president.
Russian President Vladimir Putin is getting some paranormal support from a coven of Moscow witches looking to cash in on his popularity.
Dozens of witches and seers gathered in the Russian capital Moscow on Tuesday, chanting spells and incantations to protect President Vladimir Putin.
Russian witches and seers performed one of their most powerful rituals, “the circle of power”, to pass on their mystical energy to President Vladimir Putin.
Turning to the Jehovah’s Witnesses: We must treat all religions equally — that’s a fact.
But we also need to consider the country and the society in which we live.
That doesn’t mean, however, that we should be counting the representatives of religious communities among the various destructive or even terrorist organizations.
Jehovah’s Witnesses are also Christians, and I don’t really understand why they’re persecuted.
Police in two Russian regions have detained more members of the Jehovah’s Witnesses, a day after a Russian court convicted a Danish adherent of the religious group to six years in prison.
I had to look up what was meant by “the Second Oprichnik”, it seems the first involved Ivan the Terrible persecuting noblemen not loyal to him using members of the middle and lower classes as loyal apparatchiks, finally murdering even those apparatchiks.
The name oprichnik refers to land Ivan “separated” from the rest of the administrative Russian state, to have direct and autocratic rule over.
This means that the separate property “oprichnik”, was seized from the former owners , and put under autocratic control of Ivan.
I wonder if Sorokin is an openly political figure, if he saw what was coming with the turn of the screws from Putin to total autocracy over seized assets.
