Not only that, but Russia isn’t going to stop in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.
If you have no personal knowledge of these facts, you can take it from President Barack Obama.
He admonished the world to “stay vigilant and stay focused on the importance of upholding the principles of territorial integrity” regarding Ukraine.
However, the president failed to disclose how he knows that Putin has territorial conquest on the agenda.
The rhetoric of Obama about Ukraine reminds me of the commonly-accepted version of the 2008 war between Russia and Georgia.
President Mikheil Saakashvili was out in front bemoaning the tragedy that was inflicted upon his country.
That’s what set me comparing the ongoing Ukrainian crisis with what happened in Georgia.
Despite the assertive headlines, Georgia was another case where reliable facts were hard to find.
There were a lot of confident allegations, but few hard facts on the Georgian side of the story.
The Russian counter-version of the story claimed the Georgians started the conflict and that Russia was merely being reactive.
Later, however, a multinational EU fact-finding mission issued a report that blamed Georgia for the war.
It is that maybe Kyiv invaded Donbass, the area in which thousands of Ukrainians have died in horrific battles.
It was territorially whole, constitutional, and not beset by bloody internal war.
Many observers, like Obama, automatically equate the borders of the new Ukraine with those of the former Ukraine.
The notion that the new Ukraine is entitled to all the territory of the former Ukraine is quite tenuous.
It chased the democratically-elected president Yanukovych out of the country under threats of death.
It ruled from February 27, 2014 until June 7, 2014 when President Petro Poroshenko assumed office following a democratic election.
In the meantime, however, two areas of former Ukraine, Donbass and Crimea, declined to become parts of the new Ukraine.
The new Ukraine never had controlled those territories, and the majority of the inhabitants wanted no part of the new Ukraine.
I find it is hard for many people to wrap their minds around the foregoing explanation.
The media drumbeat has constantly sounded out the Kyiv-centric version of things.
Just say that in Spain there is a revolution whereby people who feel antagonistically toward Catalonians take over by force in Madrid.
The junta immediately advances threats that diminish the cultural and linguistic heritage and practices of Catalonians.
Of course the situation in Ukraine is much more complicated due to the Soviet background, differing World War II related sentiments and legends, and a long-running and well-crafted demonization of Putin in the press.
All the flap about Russia sending troops and weapons into Eastern Ukraine has things backwards.
What’s being called Eastern Ukraine in the press is in reality Donbass.
Russia actively denies that it has supported Donbass with military personnel and equipment.
It was just made the villain by a skillful campaign based on fabrications.
Unfortunately, world attention has been diverted from Kyiv’s transgressions and the horror they have wreaked.
I’ve documented in my book Ukraine in the Crosshairs how those allegations are not fact based.
I think it is very important to question why the press, the US, NATO, and the EU have so contorted their depiction of the Ukrainian crisis.
Ostensibly, the Maidanists claimed from the start to be seeking greater democracy and closer ties to Europe.
And that divisive issue spawned the internal conflict that precipitated the great Ukrainian crisis. –Before the escalation of the Maidan protests, there was no threat of a Russian invasion, there were no fighting “separatists,” there was no war in Donbass.
Ukraine was whole. –Sanctions were not causing ruinous economic damage to many countries.
Relations between the United States and Russia were not in dangerous disarray. –There were no war-torn Donbass cities, towns, and villages.
Thousands of now deceased Ukrainians were still alive. –And the opportunity for replacing the unpopular leader Yanukovych through a democratic election was on the immediate horizon.
Take a good look at what’s transpired and tell me what tangible benefit has accrued to the Ukrainian people.
It is difficult to imagine why anyone would believe that association with the EU will undo all the damage that conflict has caused.
In the end, the horrors inflicted upon Ukrainians by the junta were totally unnecessary, ineffectual, and counterproductive.
