Ukrainian Conflict Is About To Escalate Once Again While United States Midterm Elections Draw Nearer 3. out of 5 based on 10 ratings. user reviews.
The United States midterm elections are drawing closer it appears that the Ukrainian conflict shows promise of escalating once again.
On October 11th, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko noted an increase in combat readiness of the Ukrainian Armed Forces to repel Russian aggression.
Groups of forces that are ready to repel aggression on potentially dangerous areas have been created, and not only from the east, but also from the Crimean direction.
The troops should be kept ready, including from Transdniester and from the north,” Poroshenko said.
Furthermore, according to him an increase in the aviation fleet and the fleet of anti-aircraft missiles has also strengthened the country’s air defense.
In response, the State Council of the Republic of Crimea claimed that it was the Ukrainian authorities who tried to carry out sabotage in the Crimea.
Anyone who is closely following the conflict on the territory associated with the Crimea, understands that all provocations come precisely from the Ukrainian side.
Poroshenko, during his announcement of the new brigades, said that he had just finished inspecting the Clear Sky 2018 multinational exercises.
It has 50 aircraft from all NATO member countries and our Ukrainian air force.
The purpose of the exercise is to increase the level of compatibility of our combat aviation with the air forces of the United States of America,” he claimed.
On September 27th, Ukraine also received two free old cutters from the United States Navy.
This happened during Ukrainian President Poroshenko’s visit to the United States Coast Guard Base in the city of Baltimore.
Despite receiving them free, Ukraine will have to pay $10 million for renovations of the vessels in Baltimore, where they will remain until fall of 2019.
The United States Navy also officially began construction of a maritime operations center at Ochakiv Naval Base in Ukraine, on July 25th.
The maritime operations center is one of three projects that are currently planned to be executed by the Seabees in Ochakiv and will serve as a major planning and operational hub during future military exercises hosted by Ukraine.
Other future Seabee projects in Ochakiv include a United States naval facility and entry control points with perimeter fencing.
Meaning that the CIA has a lot of influence on the country’s intelligence office.
Since 2014, the United States has provided total military aid of $1 billion to Ukraine.
This also included military trainers and the missiles came from United States army stock, so more than likely, Ukraine was provided with old hardware which the United States would not utilize.
With the United States mid-term elections upcoming, it is necessary for the Trump and his aides to present power and show that they can place the “escalation” between Ukraine and Russia under control.
It would not be surprising for there to be an incident similar to the assassination of Zakharchenko to cause tensions in Eastern Ukraine to grow despite the ceasefire.
The “Russian aggression” narrative is a valuable internal policy tool in the US, it provides justification for the United States to fuel its military industry complex and show force against a mostly speculative threat.
It is no secret that United States candidates use the conflicts around the world the country takes part in as a sort of “bargaining chip” to secure a larger portion of the vote.
New Global economy Crisis is looming and United States need scapegoat to blame.
Jews, many of who are Khazar have a long bloodlust for Slavic Russian Orthodox.
They are the ones behind United States policy vis a vis United States towards Russia.
And Israel is heavily involved training the Ukrainian army, and supplying the with arms.
They dream of their old ancient Kingdom of Khazaria, that was utterly defeated by the Muslim Mongol Golden Horde and the Mongols returned the lands to their proper owners, the Slavic Russian princes known as the Muskovites.
And Jews want Russia for her material resources which dwarf any other nations.
They descended on a weak Russia in the 1990’s, plundered much, but Putin came in and put a stop to that.
Indeed, IDF snipers were responsible for the massacre at Maidan in Kiev.
At least in Russia the military is resisting Jew plots as the downing of IL-20 in Syria showed.
Russia needs to respond forcefully in Ukraine and support the pro-Russian forces.
Ukraine army is a fake army….they are unable to retake Donbass vs farmers&miners army…so if Russia invade all Azov coast to Crimea…it would be the same scenario as Crimea.
The 2 things Ukraine and it’s overlord should consider is that Putin has stated that Russia will not allow Ukraine to use the people of the DPR & LPR for a shooting gallery and also, that Crimea is Russian land.
For those dimwitted proxy force Ukrainians, the translation is simple, if you expect a long life expectancy, don’t listen to your colonial master.
Once Nord stream 2 is done by late 2019 Russia will move in Ukraine, Syria and Afghanistan against the racist supremacist global Jewish confederate slave empire dictatorship.
It’s a smart strategy by Russia just be patient and win in every area possible.
The war winds down in Syria, so the United States moves to start another war.
The USA is war, and war is the USA, like vampires without blood they will die.
Syrian war will continue as United States and Zionists want to create a quasi state in Euphrates and Idlib.
Russia will have to support an inevitable Syrian and Iranian assault to liberate all of Syria.
True, America is like herpes, you can never get rid of them, but sometimes you can go into remission.
Ukraine is an eternal part of Russia and should come back in mother Russia’s lap.
Putin should have acted more decisively when the Don Bas nationalists were on the verge of liberating all of Ukraine.
Now the United States and NATO hyenas are trying to turn Ukraine into another launch pad against Russia like they have done in Kosovo with the Balkanization of ex-Yugoslavia.
If Ukraine attacks, their army and their statehood should be destroyed and Ukraine should be taken back to Russian federation under the name of Novorossia or Malorossia in order to prevent future nazification and possible use of Ukraine in an slavic killing slavic war organized by the west.
The peaceful & fair solution for Ukraine is to split the country along its natural border the Denieper river.
Those to the east can have an election and decide what they want to do.
