Ukraine would be able to make its own domestic and foreign policy choices.
Ukraine would be unable to govern itself effectively or orient itself towards the West.
In 2014 Russia launched a campaign of violent subversion to compel Ukraine to ‘federalize’ its political system.
Belying Russian expectations, Ukrainians fought back en masse, forcing Russia to resort to increasingly open military intervention.
Russia inflicted crushing defeats on Ukrainian forces, yet was unwilling to pay the price that further high-intensity war would have exacted.
One prevalent view is that implementation means finding a mid-point between the Russian and Ukrainian positions.
However, attempts to do so have failed – heaping pressure on Ukraine, risking political instability in Kyiv, and not leading to any discernible change in Russian policy.
Instead of trying to resolve an unresolvable contradiction, Western policymakers should acknowledge the starkness of the Minsk conundrum.
It would view the Minsk and Normandy processes mainly as conflict management tools.
In line with the priority attached to upholding Ukraine’s sovereignty, Western governments would meanwhile maintain support for long-term political and economic reform in Ukraine, using the EU/Ukraine Association Agreement as the anchor.
Yet it would proceed from the assumption that the region should not be legally reincorporated into Ukraine for the foreseeable future.
Finally, this approach would logically entail a lengthy stand-off with Russia over Ukraine – a prospect that many decision-makers in the West would find troubling and unnerving.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine Introduction: the ‘Minsk conundrum’ Russia’s undeclared war in eastern Ukraine – which sets the Kremlin-backed ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ and ‘Luhansk People’s Republic’ against Ukraine’s central authorities – has entered its seventh year, with no end in sight.
By mid-February 2020, the death toll had climbed to almost 14,000, with more than 30,000 people injured.
Ukraine is now home to almost 1. million registered internally displaced persons , the ninth-largest number in the world.
The economic impact, measured in lost output and trade, and destroyed or damaged assets, almost certainly runs into tens of billions of dollars.
Unsurprisingly, the war has driven political relations between Ukraine and Russia to an unprecedented low.
Relations between Russia and the leading Western powers have meanwhile sunk to their lowest point since the early 1980s.
Implementation of the Minsk agreements of September 2014 and February 2015, which sought to end the war, remains the professed goal of Western policy.
Indeed, ‘Minsk implementation’ is a mantra for policymakers, reiterated publicly by leaders and privately by officials.
Bursts of activity – most recently in December 2019, when the heads of state of the ‘Normandy Format’4 met after a three-year gap – have not broken the logjam.
Attempts at implementation have foundered because they are mistakenly predicated on compromise.
The background to the Minsk agreements This question drove the crisis that engulfed Ukraine in 2013–14.
At the core of the proposed pact was a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement , which would eliminate most tariffs on trade in goods.
Ukraine would transpose much of the EU acquis communautaire into its own legislation.
But by late 2011, with the negotiations at an advanced stage, the Kremlin had come around to the view that it was a realistic threat.
Three factors in particular informed the Russian leadership’s change of position.
First, the Kremlin had become concerned about the EU’s expanding profile in the non-Baltic post-Soviet space.
Although the EU did not conceive of the AA as a geopolitical instrument, 1 Peterson, N , ‘The War in Ukraine Was Supposed to End 5 Years Ago.
This figure includes IDPs displaced as a result of Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
The real number of displaced persons could well be much higher than the registered figure.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine Russia saw the agreement in this light: as a challenge to its view of the post-Soviet space as its selfproclaimed sphere of influence.
Second, the AA promised to establish a radically different model of governance on Russia’s doorstep – in the country that many Russians considered to be virtually indistinguishable, culturally and historically, from their own.
Merely raising that possibility implicitly challenged the authoritarian system which President Vladimir Putin had consolidated in Russia and which had, he believed, already been threatened by contagion from Ukraine after the 2004 Orange Revolution.
Third, Russia was by now championing its own integration project, the Eurasian Economic Union , which Putin described in October 2011 as one ‘pole’ in a ‘multipolar’ global order.
Russian policymakers considered Ukraine’s accession to the EAEU vital,9 the point being that Ukraine could not join it and have an AA with the EU.10 Stopping Ukraine from signing the AA had therefore become a priority for the Kremlin.
Successive Ukrainian leaders had rejected earlier Russia-led integration initiatives.
They were especially wary about joining a customs union – the first stage of integration into the EAEU – given the constraints that this would place on their ability to run an independent trade policy and pursue Ukraine’s EU integration, and given the much greater size of Russia’s economy.
So it proved with Viktor Yanukovych, who replaced Yushchenko as president in 2010.
Although more open to cooperation with Russia, Yanukovych sought a balance between Ukraine’s relations with the EU and those with Russia.
At the same time, he also flirted with engagement with the EAEU, floating various arrangements short of membership.
Russia was not fooled, however, and from 2012 stepped up economic pressure to force Yanukovych to drop the AA.12 Increasingly isolated internationally by his administration’s corruption, growing authoritarianism and economic incompetence, Yanukovych started to buckle.
He had planned to sign the AA at an EU/Ukraine summit in Vilnius in November 2013.
The Kremlin stepped in with a $15 billion loan and other inducements, confident that Ukraine’s economic problems would eventually force Yanukovych to give in.
Yanukovych’s about-face sparked demonstrations in Kyiv – the so-called ‘Euromaidan’ protests – which at their peak drew hundreds of thousands of people.
The authorities gradually (albeit ineptly and incoherently) intensified the use of force against the protesters in the early weeks of 2014, 6 Dragneva, R and Wolczuk, K , Ukraine Between the EU and Russia.
Russian Resistance to Democratization in the Former Soviet Union, Farnham: Ashgate Publishing Limited; and Horvath, R , Putin’s Preventive Counter-Revolution.
Weakened by elite defections and buffeted by international outrage at its brutality, Yanukovych’s administration imploded.
Yanukovych fled Kyiv on 21 February, arriving in Russia shortly afterwards.
Ukraine’s unicameral legislature, the Verkhovna Rada, removed him and installed Oleksandr Turchynov as acting president, pending a presidential election in May.
Yanukovych’s overthrow rocked the Kremlin, which ordered Russian troops and irregular forces to occupy Crimea.
The proximate trigger for the decision may have been concern that the new leadership in Kyiv would cancel the lease on Russia’s Black Sea Fleet base on the Crimean peninsula,14 but the smoothness of the operation indicated that a contingency plan had been drawn up earlier.
A referendum on 16 March 15 recorded an implausible 96. per cent vote for incorporation into Russia on an equally unlikely turnout of 83. per cent.
The ‘Novorossiya project’ Annexing Crimea was cathartic for Russia’s leaders and for many ordinary Russians.
But it did nothing to counteract Ukraine’s increasingly westward orientation.
The answer was the ‘Novorossiya project’, a campaign of violent subversion designed to turn the east and south of Ukraine, where many of the country’s ethnic Russians and Russian-speakers lived, against the authorities in Kyiv.
The initiative reflected a view of Ukraine that was and is widely held in Russia – summed up by the claim, which Putin often makes, that Russians and Ukrainians are ‘one people’ with a shared destiny.
In this account, Ukraine is not a ‘real’ country, as Putin told United States President George W Bush in 2008.17 Supposedly a mish-mash of disparate regions glued together under Tsarist and Soviet rule, Ukraine is thought to be inherently weak and unstable because of its regional, linguistic and confessional fault lines.
It is seen at the same time as an organic part of the ‘Russian world’, without which it becomes an unsustainable entity.
By extension, Ukraine’s integration into ‘alien’ Western-led structures would be perverse and dangerous.
Set against the paralysis that gripped Ukraine’s government machinery following the ouster of Yanukovych, this outlook encouraged Russian decision-makers to think that they could bring the authorities in Kyiv to their knees.
This also rendered unconstitutional the subsequent referendums held in Donbas in May.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine The general feeling inside the Kremlin was that Ukraine had ceased to exist as a state.
The central government was no more, and the eastern regions would follow Crimea into Russia’s embrace.
The locals would be in favour, and there would be no military resistance.
After the Revolution, for a number of reasons the Bolsheviks – let God judge them – added historical sections of the south of Russia to the Republic of Ukraine.
This was done with no consideration for the ethnic composition of the population, and these regions today form the south-east of Ukraine.
The Novorossiya project seems to have originated among an assortment of officials, political consultants, nationalist ideologues and business figures.
Sergei Glaziev, Putin’s adviser for the EAEU, played a prominent early role.
Compared with the invasion of Crimea, which was a disciplined military operation, the Novorossiya project was a loosely organized affair executed by networks of provocateurs and saboteurs , supported by Russian intelligence operatives.
The Presidential Administration in Moscow provided general oversight of this opaque constellation; Vladislav Surkov, another of Putin’s senior advisers, would emerge during 2014 as the key official dealing with Ukraine.
Although the overthrow of Yanukovych set off unrest in eastern and southern Ukraine, it was soon apparent that the Kremlin had misjudged the mood there.
Seeking to exploit discontent at events in Kyiv, local activists and Russian agents organized rallies and attacked official buildings in cities in the east and the south during March.
They attracted little support in Kharkiv, Dnipro and Odesa , where the authorities remained broadly loyal to the provisional leadership in Kyiv.
Many there feared his Euromaidan successors, whom they considered illegal usurpers.
Fragile from the start, the local standing of the new authorities in Kyiv evaporated as power was appropriated by regional forces – business oligarchs, organized crime figures, remnants of the Yanukovych ‘clan’ and socially excluded groups.
But alongside hostility towards the new leaders in Kyiv, there was ambivalence about growing Russian influence, which at least some of these actors saw as a threat to the positions that they were carving out for themselves.
The Kremlin would have to intervene more directly to take charge in Donbas.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine Putin referred to Novorossiya during his annual phone-in on 17 April: … what was called Novorossiya back in tsarist days – Kharkov, Lugansk, Donetsk, Kherson, Nikolayev and Odessa – were not part of Ukraine then.
These territories were given the Ukraine in the 1920s by the Soviet Government.
They were won by Potemkin and Catherine the Great in a series of well-known wars.
The centre of that territory was Novorossiisk, so the region is called Novorossiya.
Russia lost these territories for various reasons, but the people remained.
Putin’s remarks signalled support for the orchestrated violence that had exploded five days earlier.
On 12 April armed irregulars, some of whom had participated in the invasion of Crimea, seized the cities of Sloviansk and Kramatorsk in Donetsk oblast, which they then used as bases for raids against other urban centres.
Its leaders proclaimed the establishment of the Donetsk People’s Republic on 6 April, and of the Luhansk People’s Republic on 27 April.
Both regimes held referendums on 11 May, claiming large majorities for ‘self-dependence’ .27 Russia’s objectives Given its antecedents, the phrase ‘Novorossiya’ inferred absorption by Russia (or at least separation from Ukraine), as certain Russian nationalists and imperialists wanted.
These regions would then exert a stranglehold over the central authorities, stymieing Ukraine’s Western integration.
In short, the Novorossiya project aimed to promote ‘a secessionist revolt that the Kremlin could use to exert leverage over the geopolitical future of Ukraine’.30 Within this framework, the Kremlin had three objectives.
The first was to promote the ‘federalization’ of Ukraine, allegedly to reflect the latter’s divisions and to restore stability.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine Kremlin wanted to bring this about through constitutional reform.
As the diplomatic community swung into action to contain the crisis, Lavrov persuaded his counterparts to give their general endorsement to this demand.
Ukraine, Russia, the United States and the EU met in Geneva on 17 April and called for a ceasefire, disarmament and an amnesty.
Russia sought to confer a spurious legitimacy on its own activities by pretending that it was not a party to the conflict, which it portrayed as a civil war, and that constitutional reform would be a settlement between equal Ukrainian sides.
More irregulars, along with operatives from Transnistria, were therefore sent in to achieve this third goal by taking charge of the DNR/LNR during the spring and summer.
They set up embryonic state structures and imposed top-down order on chaotic local situations, subjugating or driving out local elites identified as obstacles to the extension of Russian influence, while assembling a new counterelite from marginalized parts of society.
Tighter control also enabled the Kremlin to rein in those Novorossiya operatives who had criticized what they saw as Russia’s failure to intervene sooner and more firmly.
Russia reiterated its demands throughout the summer at meetings of the Normandy Format group, set up on 6 June on the margins of events commemorating the 70th anniversary of the D-Day landings in France.
Comprising Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France, this became the main forum for attempts to manage the crisis.
The Normandy heads of state set up a Trilateral Contact Group on 8 June.
The TCG contained representatives from Russia, Ukraine and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe , and was charged with conflict management and resolution.
At Russia’s insistence, DNR/LNR representatives joined the TCG on 23 June.
According to the Kremlin, this put them on a par with the authorities in Kyiv.
War in Donbas The Novorossiya project was, however, already in trouble.
Besides failing in Kharkiv, Dnipro and southern Ukraine, it lacked broad support in Donbas.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine dire condition of Ukraine’s army, the ATO initially relied on reservists, militias funded by business oligarchs, volunteer battalions (later formally integrated into the Ministry of Interior and subordinated to a newly created National Guard) and, from May, ‘territorial defence battalions’ formed in each oblast of the country and trained by the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
After an uncertain beginning, the ATO pushed DNR/LNR forces on to the defensive in May.
Politically, it was reinforced by surging patriotism throughout Ukraine, exemplified by the crowdfunding of ATO units and Petro Poroshenko’s victory in the presidential election on 25 May, the first time that a Ukrainian president had been elected without a second round run-off.
Poroshenko was confident enough about developments to put forward a 15-point peace plan on 20 June.
Its political sections made concessions to the insurgents – a partial amnesty, joint police patrols in the post-ceasefire conflict zone, decentralization (‘by means of the election of executive committees, defence of the Russian language, draft changes to the Constitution’), pre-term local and parliamentary elections and joint appointment of governors – but Poroshenko envisaged a process controlled by his administration.
Crucially, he called for a 10-km buffer zone on the Ukraine/Russia border to stop Russia resupplying its proxies.
As diplomatic exchanges between Kyiv and Moscow continued during the summer of 2014, Russia responded to the ATO by sending into Ukraine more irregulars and heavier and more advanced equipment, including surface-to-air missiles,39 and by supporting DNR/LNR forces with long-range artillery firing from its own territory.
Even so, Ukrainian forces recaptured Sloviansk, the symbolic centre of the insurgency, on 5 July, and had pushed the DNR/LNR forces into a narrow strip running from Donetsk through Luhansk to the Russian border by early August.
With the Novorossiya project on the verge of defeat, Ukraine’s negotiators sent Surkov their latest peace proposals on 25 August.
These suggested that the border buffer zone be established by 5 September and that Russia secure the ‘self-disbandment’ of the DNR/LNR by 14 September.
Up to 6,500 Russian troops, organized into battalion tactical groups, invaded Donetsk oblast.
They decimated a large Ukrainian force at Ilovaisk, southeast of Donetsk; Ukraine lost several hundred soldiers and many of its armoured vehicles.
DNR and LNR units, again supported by regular Russian forces, regained much of the lost territory in subsequent days.
This document is from a haul hacked from Surkov’s email account and subsequently published.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine The Minsk-1 agreement This was the context in which the first Minsk agreement was signed in the capital of Belarus on 5 September 2014.
It proposed banning landmines and drones, except OSCE drones, and reiterated the call for foreign troops to be withdrawn.
In line with Minsk-1, the Verkhovna Rada passed a temporary law on special status on 16 September.
It scheduled pre-term local elections in occupied Donbas for 7 December.
The law also prohibited the central authorities from dismissing local councils .45 The announcement of a ceasefire had little effect.
As fighting continued, Russia bolstered the DNR/LNR regimes to make them invulnerable to renewed pressure from Ukraine, and thus avoid a repetition of the summer crisis.
To strengthen the legitimacy of the regimes, ‘presidential’ and ‘parliamentary’ elections were held on 2 November, before the date stipulated in the temporary law on special status.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine results enabled the installation of new Moscow-backed local leaders.
On 15 December, Russia created an inter-ministerial commission to manage the DNR/LNR economies.
Developments in Ukraine simultaneously showed that the DNR/LNR and the rest of the country were moving further apart.
Parliamentary elections on 26 October produced a majority coalition in the Rada committed to deeper Western integration.
Voting had confirmed that Ukraine’s east/west electoral divide was shifting eastwards, with ‘pro-Western’ parties doing better in the south and much of the east than their ‘pro-Russian’ rivals.
In November, the authorities in Kyiv began cutting economic and financial ties with the DNR/LNR (to reduce budgetary spending on state institutions on territory no longer under their control), establishing a limited number of crossing points across the line of contact and fortifying their military positions in the region.
Fighting intensified in parts of Donetsk oblast at the turn of the year.
Most notably, insurgents supported by Russian troops attacked Ukrainian positions at Debaltseve, a transport hub near the administrative line between Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.
Although not as destructive as the battle at Ilovaisk, this engagement was still a major setback for Ukraine’s forces, which withdrew from Debaltseve on 18 February 2015.
The Minsk-2 agreement As fighting raged at Debaltseve, emergency negotiations, brokered by Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President François Hollande of France, took place in Minsk.
This document, signed on 12 February 2015 by representatives from the OSCE, Russia, Ukraine, the DNR and LNR, has been the framework for subsequent attempts to end the war.
The product of hasty drafting, it tries valiantly to paper over yawning differences between the Ukrainian and Russian positions.
As a result, it contains contradictory provisions and sets out a convoluted sequence of actions.
The Minsk-2 agreement was endorsed by United Nations Security Council Resolution 2202 on 17 February.
The day after the pullback of heavy weaponry from the contact line, a dialogue on local elections will start in accordance with Ukrainian law and the temporary law on special status adopted in September 2014.
There is now no reference to Poroshenko’s buffer zone or an OSCEmonitored security zone.
Its ‘key element’ will be ‘decentralization’, which will take account of the ‘peculiarities’ of occupied Donbas, as agreed with the DNR/LNR representatives.
Ukraine will also adopt ‘permanent legislation’ on special status before the end of 2015.
The political sections of Minsk-2 are weighted heavily in Russia’s favour.
In particular, the provisions on special status go way beyond the brief reference in Minsk-1.
Exceptionally farreaching in scope, they would be enshrined in a permanent law and an amended constitution.
Furthermore, because Minsk-2 does not envisage a buffer zone, there would be nothing to prevent Russia from resupplying its DNR/LNR proxies before it did return the border to Ukraine’s control.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine Perhaps not everyone has yet noticed, but this is extremely important – the Ukrainian side, the authorities in Kyiv, in fact, have agreed to implement a deep constitutional reform so as to satisfy requests for the self-dependence – however it’s called: decentralization, autonomization, federalization – of certain regions of their country.
This is the essential, deeper meaning of the decision taken by the authorities.
Implementation of these measures would in effect destroy Ukraine as a sovereign country.
The DNR and LNR would be reincorporated into Ukraine but as distinct political, economic and legal entities tied to Russia – thus introducing a constitutional Trojan Horse that would give the Kremlin a lasting presence in Ukraine’s political system and prevent the authorities in Kyiv from running the country as an integrated whole.
Indeed, radical devolution to Donbas might well prompt other regions to press for similar powers, causing central authority to unravel and effectively balkanizing Ukraine.
Yet the DNR and LNR would be able to sign agreements with other countries , perhaps establishing Russian military bases on their territories.
The adoption of Russia’s demands might so weaken the central authorities in Kyiv that implementation of the AA would be rendered impossible.
The German and French leaders seem to have been so keen for a ceasefire that they assented to political provisions at odds with Ukraine’s existence as a sovereign entity and, probably, its EU integration.
Again, it is significant that Putin did not use the word ‘independence’ , which would contradict the formal reincorporation of occupied Donbas into Ukraine.
By way of precedent, Ukraine’s ‘non bloc’ status under Yanukovych was compatible with the continued presence of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet in Crimea.
Russia intended to retain its military presence in Transnistria following the reintegration of the region even though Moldova’s constitution contains a neutrality clause.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine Yet despite Russia’s efforts, Minsk-2 was not just the product of intense pressure on Ukraine.
Confounding predictions in Moscow in the spring of 2014,59 few Ukrainians threw in their lot with Russia.
On the contrary, Ukrainians fought back en masse, probably killing several hundred Russian troops and irregulars60 and nearly overrunning the DNR/LNR until they were stopped by Russia’s army at Ilovaisk and, to a lesser extent, at Debaltseve.
Russia could have had little doubt by early 2015 that even if it inflicted mass casualties on Ukraine, it would incur further heavy losses itself.
This was a price that its leaders were unwilling to pay for sensitive domestic reasons – indicated by the harassment of Russian journalists and activists investigating this subject, and by the classification of data attesting to Russian casualties in peacetime ‘special operations’.61 Ukraine could not destroy Russia’s proxies, yet Russia was unwilling to sustain further high-intensity war with Ukraine; Ukraine was unable to prevail, but its readiness to fight to defend its sovereignty gave Russia pause.
It is precisely because Minsk-2 reflects this stalemate on the battlefield that it is an inherently contradictory document.
As noted, the agreement makes the return of the border to Ukrainian control contingent on a political settlement agreeable to Russia and its proxies.
However, it also includes provisions favouring the re-establishment of Ukrainian control over Donbas before a settlement has been finalized.
Articles 1 and 2 envisage a lasting ceasefire and the pullback of heavy weaponry from the contact line before a dialogue on elections is held.
Article 4 is ambiguous about whether the dialogue begins the day after the pullback has started or the day after it has finished; Ukraine can credibly argue that the pullback of heavy weaponry must be completed before election preparations begin.
More important still, Russia has yet to withdraw its troops, equipment and irregulars from Ukraine, as article 10 in effect requires it to do without preconditions – thus relinquishing control over the border.
Russia has meanwhile strengthened the DNR/LNR’s armed formations and tightened its control over them, such that they are now effectively appendages of its own military.
Taken together, these circumstances make it impossible to hold elections in Donbas according to OSCE/ODIHR standards, as stipulated in article 12.
Furthermore, special status as set out in Minsk-2 – let alone the even more extreme demands made by Russia in May 2015 – is simply unworkable.
It far exceeds what most Ukrainians consider an acceptable price for peace, as polls repeatedly show.
Any Ukrainian leader who even appeared open to these ideas would probably commit political suicide.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine of four law enforcement officers; this despite the fact that the draft did not refer to special status.
Poroshenko’s successor, President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, who made ending the war central to his election campaign in 2019, has also had to tread carefully.
He proposes folding a reintegrated Donbas into the nationwide decentralization programme launched in 2014.67 Under the terms of a draft law on decentralization submitted to the Rada in December 2019, however, the DNR and LNR would not receive anything like the powers listed in Minsk-2; nor would they gain constitutional ‘special status’.68 This is unacceptable to Russia.
Ukraine’s version puts the re-establishment of control in the east before a political settlement.
Donbas would be reintegrated in line with the national decentralization programme and subordinated afresh to the authorities in Kyiv.
This would entrench Russian-controlled statelets, breaking the back of the Ukrainian state, preventing the central authorities from running the country as an integrated unit and torpedoing its westward integration.
Only then would Ukraine regain control over the border, although whether Russia would allow that is moot.
Minsk implementation Western imprecision and inconsistency ‘Minsk implementation’ has been the avowed goal of Western policy since 2015.
United States and EU policies have not been as clear and as consistent as they could and should have been or as policymakers like to think.
Some decision-makers focus on making Russia change its policy ; some would be 66 Shandra , Leaked Kremlin emails show Minsk protocol designed as path to Ukraine’s capitulation, 13.
The draft permanent law was adopted at first reading but did not get any further and was eventually withdrawn from the Rada agenda in 2019.
In the absence of permanent legislation, the temporary law on special status passed on 16 September 2014 has been rolled over each year since its expiry in 2017 as part of a ‘de-occupation’ law naming Russia as an aggressor and occupying power.
The de-occupation law also wound up the ATO and transferred responsibility for military operations to the armed forces.
The implication is that Russia might suspend the handover if dissatisfied over special status and constitutional reform – potentially, a pretext for indefinite delay.
In any case, Russian demands in May 2015 would make the DNR/LNR responsible for border management.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine content if Ukraine gave in to Russia’s agenda; some want a compromise ; some face two ways, voicing support for Ukraine’s sovereignty while hoping that an agreement acceptable to Russia is possible; and others seem prepared to accept anything that returns Europe to what they consider normalcy.
In so far as there is a prevalent view in Western capitals, particularly in Europe, it is that implementation means identifying a point between the Russian and Ukrainian positions as regards elections and special status.
In this connection, two diplomatic initiatives stand out:72 • The Morel Plan.
Ukraine would at the same time provisionally adopt a special-status law, which would become permanent once the OSCE/ODIHR had ruled the elections to be free and fair.
Articulated in 2015 and 2016 by Germany’s foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, this also called for the entry into force of a special-status law on the same day that elections were held in Donbas.
The Steinmeier Formula also got nowhere because of opposition in Ukraine.
But it was resuscitated in the autumn of 2019, when Zelenskyy signed the first written version.
Another sharp reaction in Ukraine forced him to back down, and to reassure domestic critics that he would not assent to elections in Donbas while Russian troops were there.
They suggested that free and fair elections could be held in Donbas before Russian troops had withdrawn and before the authorities in Kyiv had reclaimed control of the border – and that this would be acceptable to mainstream Ukrainian opinion.
Both proposals were also based on the 2015 draft permanent law on special status.
Yet the explosive reaction to the law in Ukraine at the time exposed the strength of domestic opposition to it.
Nor, given what we know about Russian thinking, would the law have been anywhere near enough for the Kremlin.
Russian precision and consistency While some Western policymakers have tried to find a way to implement Minsk-2 so that everyone gets something, their Russian counterparts have kept things simple.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine maintained that Ukraine must agree the Russian interpretation of the political sections of Minsk-2 with the DNR/LNR before it could even notionally get the border back.
Russian decision-makers did learn one lesson from the failure of the Novorossiya project.
They no longer think that Ukraine will collapse imminently; getting it to assent to their version of Minsk-2 will take longer than they thought.
By such logic, the support of Western countries, led by the US, is what has prevented Ukraine from capitulating.
This explains why Russia has kept up incessant pressure – periodic military escalation, economic sanctions, information war, cyberenabled attacks, covert meddling in Ukraine’s domestic politics.
By trying to divide and disorient Ukraine, Russia hopes to convince others that its neighbour is a failed state.
According to this reasoning, Western capitals will eventually prioritize the restoration of ties with Russia, withdrawing their support for Ukraine and/or pushing it to make concessions.
The replacement earlier this year of Surkov by Dmitriy Kozak as the senior Russian official responsible for Donbas should be seen in this context.
Born in Soviet Ukraine and one of Putin’s trusted fixers, Kozak has already sounded more constructive than the relentless Surkov.
Yet there is no evidence that Russia has altered its position on Minsk-2 implementation.
Moreover, it was Kozak who fronted the abortive attempt to resolve the Moldova/Transnistria dispute along lines almost identical to Russia’s preferred solution for Donbas.
His appointment may be a belated response to the emergence of President Zelenskyy, whose freshness has at times left Putin looking leaden-footed77 but whose election also appears to have given rise to the perverse judgment in Moscow ‘that Russia-friendly or even pro-Russian forces could return to power in Kyiv’.78 The move may also be an attempt to capitalize on renewed political infighting and fragmentation in Kyiv in recent months.
Although they express themselves less obnoxiously in public, other senior Russians share his scornful view of Ukrainian national identity.
Kozak also oversaw the inter-ministerial commission managing the DNR/LNR economies.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine eagerness of President Emmanuel Macron of France to mend fences with Moscow.
Whatever the reason for Kozak’s assignment, it arguably heralds new dangers for Ukraine.
Proposing an alternative approach In the view of this author, however, there is an alternative way to approach implementation of the Minsk agreements.
First, Western governments should define their objective, unequivocally, as the defence of Ukraine’s sovereignty.
This would be the bottom line that too often has been missing from policy debates in Western capitals.
It would mean being guided by what the authorities in Kyiv decided was feasible in terms of implementation, particularly as regards elections and special status, even if this proved unacceptable to Russia, as it almost certainly would.
Equally, Western leaders should support a Ukrainian leader who freely reached agreement with Russia on these questions, although the likelihood of that seems remote given where Ukrainian public opinion is.
What they should not do is push Ukraine to cede ground on the core issues.
That would contradict their commitment to uphold Ukraine’s sovereignty.
The likeliest effect would be to undermine the authorities in Kyiv, destabilizing the political situation there and encouraging Russia to press for more concessions.
Second, in the absence of a settlement acceptable to Ukraine, Western governments should view the Minsk agreements and the Normandy process primarily as mechanisms for ending the conflict in Donbas.
Decision-makers should welcome practical dialogue and confidence-building measures (e.g. withdrawal of weapons, prisoner exchanges, allowing the OSCE mission full access to the conflict zone, environmental/ ecological risk mitigation)82 to de-escalate the fighting, minimize casualties and build a sustainable ceasefire.
But they should not expect movement over political issues, which would continue to divide Ukraine and Russia.
The Minsk and Normandy processes would see many more ‘draws’, as Zelenskyy described the December 2019 Normandy summit.
The third element of this approach is not, strictly speaking, part of the Minsk agreements but flows from the commitment to uphold Ukraine’s sovereignty.
It would require Western capitals to maintain support for political and economic reform in Ukraine.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine structural reforms to unlock its economic potential.
Looking further ahead, the focus should be gradual implementation of the EU/Ukraine AA, which provides a long-term anchor that Ukraine otherwise lacks, and related fundamental reforms which are supported by international donors.
This would strengthen institutional resilience in the face of Russian pressure, which will continue without a political settlement to the Kremlin’s liking.
Implementing the AA would require rebuilding (or building from scratch) much of Ukraine’s state.
It is debatable whether Ukraine has the capacity to deliver the AA in its entirety, in which case the prioritization of certain chapters would be advisable.
Such an undertaking would also require a major commitment from Western countries and donors.
Sustaining that at a time of ‘Ukraine fatigue’, and with governments and electorates battered by the COVID-19 pandemic, will be testing to say the least.
It is imperative that donors apply firm conditionality to assistance, particularly as regards IMF programmes, which Ukraine has frequently failed to deliver since the mid-1990s.
In addition, Western assistance should include the supply of defensive military equipment to reinforce the capabilities of Ukraine’s armed forces, thus raising the cost to Russia should it again decide to dial up the violence in a major way.
Until there is a clearly positive change in the core Russian approach, the international community needs to build its policy toward Moscow over eastern Ukraine on the assumption that anything, including more serious fighting, is possible.
For now, this may seem highly unlikely… But large Russian units have already fought twice in Ukraine, once even during peace talks.
Moscow could resort to such means again should the lower-cost, lower-visibility approach of supporting the entities in a protracted conflict fail.
Fourth, Western governments should encourage the authorities in Kyiv to take a more inclusive approach towards those in occupied Donbas.
Unlike the de facto states in Abkhazia and Transnistria, the DNR and LNR are not fully consolidated.
Unlike with the conflicts in Georgia and Moldova, Russian actions were critical in fomenting war in 2014.
Crucially, people either side of the contact line retain similar identities.
Yet the longer the occupied region exists in a separate space dominated by Russia, the likelier it is that an identity overtly hostile towards Kyiv will crystallize, causing the current division to harden still further.
Successes and Failures of Economic Reform in Ukraine’, in Hale, H and Orttung, R , Beyond the Maidan.
A study of eastern Ukraine’s separatist-held areas’, in De Waal, T and Von Twickel, N. , Beyond Frozen Conflict.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine Certain actions by the authorities in Kyiv have added to this danger.
Supposedly intended to combat smuggling and corruption, it depressed trade across the contact line, thus hitting living standards and prompting the DNR and LNR authorities to retaliate by expropriating large companies on their territories.
Besides weakening the economic interaction that could help over time to rebuild political trust, such isolationist actions lend respectability to negative stereotyping of those in occupied Donbas, making reconciliation even more difficult.
This is about more than a pragmatic argument over how to make reintegration eventually happen; there is a principle at stake.
Ukraine’s justified claim to sovereignty over occupied Donbas should go hand in hand with a recognition that those there are entitled to be treated as Ukrainian citizens.
Commendably, Zelenskyy has adopted an inclusive tone, but more needs to be done to address humanitarian issues, rebuild trade links and facilitate people-to-people ties.
That said, fifth, Western governments should assume that the DNR and LNR will not be de facto parts of Ukraine any time soon.
For reasons of principle and consistency, Western capitals should continue to recognize Ukraine’s de jure sovereignty over occupied Donbas.
But an attempt at early reintegration would impose intolerable strains on Ukraine.
Reconciling communities traumatized by war will be an immense challenge.
The DNR and LNR are enmeshed in Russia’s military/security, economic and media spaces.
The political gap separating them and Kyivcontrolled territory is wide and will become wider if Ukraine continues to reform to EU standards.
Integration on terms agreeable to Ukraine would mean the effective dissolution of the DNR/LNR regimes.
There is no chance that the Kremlin would accept that in the foreseeable future.
A reformed and prosperous Ukraine might eventually act as a magnet, drawing people in occupied Donbas to reintegrate voluntarily.
And Russia’s attitude would still have to change before it could happen.
Until then, the priority for Western governments should be to help defend the sovereignty of unoccupied Ukraine against Russian pressure.
Finally, the approach sketched here would logically entail a lengthy stand-off with Russia.
This would last until Russia’s leaders acknowledged Ukraine to be a sovereign country.
That seems inconceivable as long as the current leadership holds power in Moscow, and is also unlikely to happen quickly in a post-Putin world.
By implication, those United States and EU sanctions on Russia that are tied to implementation of the Minsk agreements would remain in place for the foreseeable future.
The expropriation of assets by the DNR/LNR regimes on 2 March followed a decision by the authorities in Kyiv the day before to regulate trade across the line of contact for the first time, although the blockade at that point remained unofficial.
The expropriation added to political pressure on Poroshenko to make the blockade official, which he did on 15 March.
The deficiencies of the Minsk agreements, and the consequent failure to implement them, have prompted calls for them to be abandoned and replacements negotiated.
A variation on this is the suggestion that the authorities in Kyiv should simply cut ties with the DNR and LNR, which in this version cannot be reintegrated and are a costly burden on Ukraine.
The main effect of a unilateral Ukrainian decision to withdraw from the Minsk framework or to sever all links with occupied Donbas would be to remove any remaining diplomatic constraints on Russia, giving it a pretext to re-escalate the fighting.
In addition, such a move might well splinter Western support for Ukraine, which would be left even more isolated.
The Minsk Agreements have often been called into question by critics arguing that they disadvantage Ukraine and have failed to bring about an end to the conflict.
But all relevant actors should remember how unlikely it is that a new agreement could be reached – still less a better one – and how dangerous it would be if there were none at all.
Conclusions Russia’s undeclared war in Donbas is Moscow’s latest attempt to limit the sovereignty of Ukraine, which successive Russian leaders have seen as the heart of their country’s self-proclaimed sphere of influence.
Having annexed Crimea in March 2014, Russia launched a campaign of violent subversion in eastern and southern Ukraine.
Using teams of insurgents (local activists and provocateurs from Russia itself), Russia tried to force Ukraine to ‘federalize’ its political system.
The aim was to create pro-Moscow regimes in these regions that would, once reintegrated into Ukraine, enable Russia to control its neighbour from within.
The Novorossiya project quickly turned out to be a crass misjudgment – ‘a conceit of Russian geopolitical culture’ as one observer put it.
The readiness of many more to fight in self-defence compelled Russia to resort to increasingly open military intervention to save its proxies.
Russia inflicted crushing defeats on Ukrainian forces in September 2014 and February 2015, yet was unwilling to pay the price that further high-intensity war would have exacted.
By almost any standard, this was a stunning failure of Russian foreign policy.
Brookings Institution Press, 326: ‘… it is not clear that letting the Donbas go would solve the problem with Russia.
Russia’s goal of getting Ukraine to join a Russia-led bloc is further than ever from being realized.
The war has soured the Ukrainian public toward Russia, and the fact that much of the pre-2014 population that was most pro-Russian resided in Crimea or the occupied Donbas, and cannot now vote, makes it harder still that a pro-Russian government will come to power in Kyiv.
So the tension between Ukrainian democracy and Russia’s ambitions there is higher than ever.
This tension pulses through the Minsk agreements, which reflect two irreconcilable views of Ukraine’s sovereignty – the Minsk conundrum.
Ukraine sees the agreements as instruments with which to re-establish its sovereignty.
It demands a meaningful and lasting ceasefire, followed by the complete withdrawal of Russian troops and the return of the border to its control.
Free and fair elections in the DNR/LNR would be held according to OSCE/ODIHR standards.
Following reintegration of the DNR/LNR, Ukraine would make its own domestic and foreign policy choices.
By contrast, Russia views the Minsk agreements as tools with which to break Ukraine’s sovereignty.
It demands that elections be held in occupied Donbas before Ukraine has reclaimed control over the border, knowing that its proxies would win.
An extreme form of special status would be written into Ukraine’s constitution, crippling the central authorities and turning the DNR and LNR into Russian-controlled mini-states.
Ukraine would be unable to govern itself effectively or to orient its foreign policy to the West.
Only then would Russia return the border to Ukraine’s control, although it is doubtful that this would actually happen.
Western attempts to resolve the Minsk conundrum – notably, the Morel Plan and the Steinmeier Formula – have sought to bridge the Russian and Ukrainian stances.
Not only have they failed; they have heaped pressure on Ukraine and made a delicate situation there even more fragile.
On the contrary, Russia’s leaders have felt vindicated in their view, first, that Ukraine is inherently weak and unviable; and, second, that Western governments lack the spine for a drawn-out confrontation.
Well-intentioned attempts at conflict resolution may therefore have made a political settlement that protects Ukraine’s sovereignty even less likely.
Such episodes underline the need for extreme caution when talking about Minsk implementation, which easily merges with a presumption that the Ukrainian and Russian positions can be split down the middle.
Rather than searching for an optimal point acceptable to all, Western policymakers should acknowledge the starkness of the Minsk conundrum – that either Ukraine is sovereign, or it is not – and stop trying to square this circle.
There is, however, an alternative way to approach implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine • It would make the defence of Ukraine’s sovereignty the unambiguous premise of Western policy.
This would mean adhering to Ukraine’s interpretation of the Minsk agreements, particularly as regards elections and special status.
Some policymakers would recoil from this prospectus, which they would find troubling and unnerving.
The twin realities laid bare by Russia’s war in eastern Ukraine – Ukraine’s determination to defend its sovereignty and Russia’s determination to break Ukraine’s sovereignty – mean that the Minsk agreements are not susceptible to such logic.
A protracted stand-off over Ukraine need not preclude cooperation with Russia in other areas, to the extent that this is possible.
It would, however, mean a relationship with Russia that would be fractious, difficult and sometimes dangerous – and that would therefore require constant attention and management.
But those inclined to reject such an approach because they find it too uncomfortable ought to ponder the alternative.
Attempts to implement the Minsk agreements that do not start from an unequivocal commitment to support Ukraine’s sovereignty will continue to fail and will continue to risk destabilizing Ukraine itself – with potentially grave implications for long-term security in eastern Europe.
More than six years after Russia launched its calamitous and futile war against Ukraine, Western decision-makers need to decide which of these answers to the ‘Minsk conundrum’ best serves their countries’ interests and most closely accords with their professed principles.
Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine About the author Duncan Allan is an associate fellow with the Russia and Eurasia Programme at Chatham House, and the director of Octant Research & Analysis Ltd, an independent consultancy.
For more than 28 years he was a member of the UK Foreign & Commonwealth Office’s research analysts’ cadre, working on the countries of the former Soviet Union, particularly Russia and Ukraine.
Acknowledgments I am grateful to James Nixey, Orysia Lutsevych, Ľubica Polláková and Anna Morgan in the Chatham House Russia and Eurasia Programme for their encouragement and support.
Jake Statham and Anna Brown copy-edited the manuscript, and gave me invaluable advice and help.
Kirk Bennett, Laurence Broyd, Alexander Hug, Donald Jensen, Rebecca Loughna, James Sherr, Kataryna Wolczuk and two anonymous reviewers.
Our mission is to help governments and societies build a sustainably secure, prosperous and just world.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical including photocopying, recording or any information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the copyright holder.
The opinions expressed in this publication are the responsibility of the author.
Volodymyr Zelenskyy, Angela Merkel, Emmanuel Macron and Vladimir Putin attend a press conference after a summit on Ukraine at the Élysée Palace in Paris, 9 December 2019.
