Patriotic Heresy vs. the New Cold War Fallacies of United States policy may be leading to war with Russia.
Stephen F Cohen August 27, 2014 | This article appeared in the September 15, 2014 edition of The Nation.
Share Tweet Illustration by Doug Chayka I prepared the text below for remarks to the annual US-Russia Forum in Washington, DC, held in the Hart Senate Office Building on June 16.
Obliged to abridge my text to the time allocated to speakers, I have restored the deletions here and spelled out a number of my impromptu comments.
We meet today during the worst and potentially most dangerous American-Russian confrontation in many decades, probably since the Cuban missile crisis of 1962.
The Ukrainian civil war, precipitated by the unlawful change of government in Kiev in February, is already growing into a proxy US-Russian war.
Certainly, we are already in a new Cold War, which escalating sanctions will only deepen, institutionalize and prolong—one potentially more dangerous than its US-Soviet predecessor, which the world barely survived.
This means that the kinds of miscalculations, mishaps and provocations the world witnessed decades ago will be even more fraught with danger.
I have in mind the argument made by some Moscow military strategists that if directly threatened by NATO’s superior conventional forces, Russia may resort to its much larger arsenal of tactical nuclear weapons.
Indeed, highly charged suspicions, resentments, misconceptions and misinformation both in Washington and Moscow today may make such mutual restraints even more difficult.
The same is true of the surreal demonization of Russia’s leader, Vladimir Putin—a kind of personal vilification without any real precedent in the past, at least after Stalin’s death.
We—opponents of the United States policies that have contributed so woefully to the current crisis—are few in number, without influential supporters and unorganized.
I am old enough to know our position was very different in the 1970s and ’80s, when we struggled for what was then called détente.
We were a minority, but a substantial minority with allies in high places, even in Congress and the State Department.
Our views were solicited by mainstream newspapers, television and radio.
In addition to grassroots support, we even had our own lobbying organization in Washington, the American Committee on East-West Accord, whose board included corporate CEOs, political figures, prominent academics and statesmen of the stature of George Kennan.
We have no access to the Obama administration, virtually none to Congress, which is a bipartisan bastion of Cold War politics, and very little to the mainstream media.
We do have access to important alternative media, but they are not considered authoritative, or even essential, inside the Beltway.
In my long lifetime, I do not recall such a failure of American democratic discourse in any comparable time of crisis.
About my episodic participation in the very limited mainstream media discussion, I will speak in a more personal way than I usually do.
Recalling the American adage “There are two sides to every story,” I sought to explain Moscow’s view of the Ukrainian crisis, which is almost entirely missing in mainstream coverage.
Second, having argued since the 1990s, in my books and Nation articles, that Washington’s bipartisan Russia policies could lead to a new Cold War and to just such a crisis, I wanted to bring my longstanding analysis to bear on today’s confrontation over Ukraine.
I expected to be criticized, as I was during nearly twenty years as a CBS News commentator, but not in such personal and scurrilous ways.
Until now, I have not bothered to reply to any of these defamatory attacks.
I do so today because I now think they are directed at several of us in this room, indeed at anyone critical of Washington’s Russia policies, not just me.
They indulge only in ad hominem slurs based on distortions and on the general premise that any American who seeks to understand Moscow’s perspectives is a “Putin apologist” and thus unpatriotic.
By defaming us, they seek to obscure their complicity in the unfolding disaster and their unwillingness to rethink it.
Share Tweet Print | Web Letter | Write a Letter | Single Page Suggested for you From Around the Web Advertisement How I learned 9 languages and am learning even more, and how you… Learn languages online Beyonce & Jay Z’s Sexy Romance Afun4u The Top 5 Largest Aircraft in the World Afun4u Top 10 Motorcycles of the Future Afun4u Top 7 Women Who Earn More Than Their Husbands eagerbrain The best TV couples of the world eagerbrain Before commenting, please read our Community Guidelines.
It's ""my country right or wrong"" still rules and that explains Bush telling Vietnam we should have stayed there fighting.
Our HUAC computer databases are much more organized and available than ever before hence fear in all quarters to speaking out.
Globalization with fall of the Soviet Union mean an world western European corporate and christian orthodoxy now believing the world can be converted to a one dominating culture and is willing to risk stealth nuclear war to get it.
This is a hot war and it is only a matter of how far and how quickly it is allowed to escalate.
It is so very endearing to see the United States sit back and let others fight a war that they provoked and successfully framed ( with the full cooperation of the Western media) Russia as the villian of the peace.
NATO and the EU have to be the stupidest bastards on earth to so blindly be sucked into this ruse that has the potential to do great harm to themselves.
As with the invasion of Iraq this war is also starting with the big lie and the question remains how many lives will be lost before the truth catches up.
American foreign policy is without a doubt guided by psychopathic imbeciles as Russia is not a third world country.
Nuclear war is absolute suicide for the human race, yet no one in Washington seems even capable of addressing the existential danger posed by a US-Russian war.
They're too stupid to understand what they're actually dealing with, except in the most abstract manner.
They think Russia will endlessly back off from confronting the Mighty Mighty USA, and are only concerned with advancing the PNAC and Neocon agendas.
Samantha Power, playing Condi Rice's ghost at the UN yesterday, is just the latest example.
They are all bought by the Military Industrial Complex that must have war to give a reason for their existance and budgets...much the same as NATO, which lost its reason for being at the collapse of the USSR, is reshaping itself as the US's world-wide army.
I also believe that many have emergency contingency flights booked for New Zealand.
Earlier the idoitic masses are fooled by the patriotism or nationalism because majority are basically illiterate.
But at this present condition when homelessness and joblessness are nearer to hell then starting another new war may be a self-inficted wound.
The food prices would be soaring to the sky and there would be more homeless and jobless ctizens created in humongous numbers.
In addition, the number of limbless veterans would cover the streets of any city of this country.
But inspite of those facts, I do believe there is a larger chance that a war would break out because before going down to the pages of history this superpower will have a last bite.
Other matters will attract attention quite soon there's just too many pressing matters happening world-wide.
Yes, I have heard Cohen from the very outset of the Orange Revolution 2. on Amy Goodman's Pacifica broadcast.
Cohen was the originator of the story that Ukraine's uprising was primarily by fascists and neoNazi groups.
Well, we should all recall that the Kremlin was saying the opposite at the time of the see more 14 & % • Share › observer # novictim • 5 months ago Any time yet another gathering in Maidan is shown, there's a high percentage off the Right Sector flags.
I don't think you can seriously argue the motives and ideology of the Right Sector.
Your arguments are weak, not related to anything and you start with ad hominem attack, implying Cohen's monetary motives and disingenuous representation.
The talks between Ukraine and Russia about Crimea going back to Russia have been going on for a long time.
Most Russians will tell you that they don't like how it was done but glad it was done after all.
And you have no idea whether the people in Crimea were happy to be invaded.
Guns are in their faces and a armed force of drunken thuggish Russians prowl their streets.
I am not a Russian nationalist but I don't like geopolitical games that are hidden under the blanket of moral superiority and fighting for freedom and democracy.
You appear to try to take this high ground but disregarding quite a bit of the preceding events.
Vote or note, the better organized and trained forces are ultra nationalists.
Without the support from US, it's also unlikely that the coup would have taken place.
You can direct your own eyeballs to the NATO bases and the involvement of British and American special services in to the present situation.
Cohen stresses out the point that a lot of responses of Russia are retaliatory.
While it doesn't make annexation of Crimea totally correct, it's up to international lawyers to decide the matter.
Your latest comment shows that you really have no idea how things went down in Crimea.
While I don't claim to know everything and everybody, certainly what you are describing is rather from another propaganda piece or Hollywood movie.
They don't exist, they shouldn't exist, oh they do exist but they're all Nazis.
In his warped and twisted analysis, the people of Ukraine are incapable and undeserving of having a say in their own fate.
They can't be demonstrating because they're tired of the saturation of corruption they lived with under Yanukovych.
No, that can't be why the people are mad, it must be because Vicky Nuland divided 5 billion dollars in cash among all of them.
The world would be a better place if we started considering people as human beings and not pawns who happen to inhabit some ""sphere of influence"" drawn up to pander to the insecurities of some paranoid sociopath.
It's funny that Cohen whines about access and the stifling of debate, when Putin has done the exact same thing in Russia:, eliminated the free exchange of ideas, eliminated all vestiges of a free press, severely curtailed the civil rights of the populace, while catering to their ultra-nationalistic fantasies hoping they don't notice the other parts.
It's funny Cohen comes across with his self-pitying persecution complex to defend the actions of a man who has murdered journalists and those with whom he doesn't agree.
As so well illustrated in ""House of Cards"" , the successful political ploy provides a win in every circumstance.
Here's a situation with a robust Plan B The allied powers Plan A is as illustrated in the article.
Plan B, in the case of Russian resistance to Plan A, is to destabilize the region and slow or even stop Russian integration into the European economic arena thereby assuring continued American dominance in European affairs.
You have also employed innuendo in slurring the author of this article.
A few have sought my guidance, and I always advise, “Even petty penalties for dissent in regard to Russia could adversely affect your career.
At this stage of life, your first obligation is to your family and thus to your future prospects.
The lives of these youth and ALL of us are and will be effected by the actions now being take world wide vis-a-vis Russia.
I've been to USA a few times , what you think of politics really, really matters in USA for your relations with customers, suppliers, professors, etc.
It's not like in Europe, or Russia or elsewhere where there's job and there's political views, and if you're doing a good job nobody gives a damn about you being a Buddhist/Communist/Hippy/-lover/etc.
Mr novictim don't quite understand the meaning of the word but is trying to attack me.
He's implying that, me liking the article is related to my nationality and there for is either incorrect or fallacy.
He does not care that Russia is rapidly becoming a Soviet-style dictatorship, with state-controlled courts, statecontrolled media, political prisoners, and glorification of Putin.
He does not care that Putin's actions are, even in the tiniest details, replicating what Hitler did in 1930's.
One can only marvel at how a man who knows Russia (but blissfully lives in outside it) can be so ignorant.
It is also possible that his views are driven by the fear that Russia may become less than prominent in the world order, and then his unique qualifications, knowledge of the Russian language and of all the things Russian, may become obsolete and uninteresting to everyone around him.
But I know that people like him provide intellectual comfort to the disgusting man ruling Russia with iron fist, and provide ammunition for the Soviet state brainwashing propaganda.
But even if I mentioned the fact that 8% of seats in the Ukrainian parliament are given to ultranationalists, it would not invalidate my point.
Cohen is hypocritical when he presents the Ukranians as fascists while whitewashing Russia, ""overlooking"" that the same can be said about it.
In addition, Ukraine did want to move in the direction of the democratization and respect for human rights by joining EU --but was brutally stopped by its jingoist neighbor led by their venerated fuerer.
It's just economics, with our world military and secret police pushing it on the world.
Nuclear and Fracking, that is the Obama agenda, even if it takes the CIA and military.
The clearly hate solar, with the 50% bs German company conjecture based tariff.
Or giving a few billion dollars to thermo-nuclear research so that we can start making electricity from Deiteriy, Tritiy and potentially from anything in the dustbin.
Realistically, any new nuclear is 20 years away from generating commercial power.
We need to put the big money into research on streamlining and automating the solar roof and parking lot installation phases.
Change the bog bias from nuclear, fracking and tar sands to citizens, rooftop parking lot solar, big company offshore wind, and local municipalities waste toe heat, electricity fuels and raw materials, close the loop.
Waste energy and resource use needs a lot of research, mostly to measure and test the system outs there and report on who well they work.
Sadly, the gov is a see more 3& % • Share › ZvonceZG . • 5 months ago Putin control rebels,he send them arms and his army.Cohen disappointened me long time.
Ukraine is in Russia's part of the world, so its strictly a matter for Russia to decide.
Based on and other evidence, it looks like Putin is not just ""helping"" one side, but is creating the civil war in the first place.
The government of Ukraine has been swinging back and forth between East-oriented and West-oriented factions for decades and I suspect could accommodate many of the East's demands without a war.
Therefore I wonder if Putin is militarizing the situation not to help Russian Ukrainians but so that he can openly use force, intimidate other neighboring countries, and perhaps even invade beyond Ukraine.
When Kiev troops in armoured vehicles opened fire on the Mariupol police headquarters on May 9, Interior Minister Arsen Avakov at once came out with a detailed and plausible explanation, which was disseminated by media throughout the world.
Avakov said ""terrorists"" had attempted to storm the building, and the armoured vehicles were sent to help the police.
You're facts and fallacies omit a helluva lot but they raise some interesting points.
