His research interests include international relations, foreign policy analysis, security studies, and geopolitics.
No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical or other means, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Turkuvaz Haberleşme ve Yayıncılık A.Ş., İstanbul SETA | FOUNDATION FOR POLITICAL, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL RESEARCH Nenehatun Caddesi No: 66 GOP Çankaya 06700 Ankara TURKEY Tel: +90 312.551 21 00 | Fax :+90 312.551 21 90 www.setav.org | info@setav.org | @setavakfi SETA | İstanbul Defterdar Mh.
It has a strategic position in the Black Sea region and has vast mineral resources.
The country has a rich history and its territory, especially the eastern part, was the battlefield between the Russian Empire and its enemies for many centuries.
For the tsars and the Soviet leaders, the size of Russia represented the countries geopolitical security against an invader.
Shortly after the February 2014 Ukrainian revolution a pro-Western government came to power in Kiev.
Moscow understood that it has to intervene to avoid such a scenario and launched a hybrid war against Ukraine.
This report aims to identify the main reasons behind Russia’s hybrid war against Ukraine.
The report presents the main components of the hybrid war that is being waged to destabilize Ukraine.
Russia has used economic, psychological, and cyber warfare against Ukraine and has organized espionage activities on its territory in order to destabilize the country.
The same tactics can be used to destabilize another country after they are adapted by the aggressor to the targeted country’s profile.
The report presents the main threats to Ukraine’s national security since 2014.
It also underlines the efforts made by Ukraine to counter the hybrid threats.
It discusses a selective range of issues like proxy war, trade war, propaganda, cyberattacks, infiltration, sabotage, and clandestine operations.
This report aims to highlight hybrid war characteristics and the ways in which the Russian Federation implemented the hybrid war concept in Ukraine between 2014 and 2018.
The report tries to promote an understanding and awareness among the decisionmaking leaders about the hybrid war threats.
Professor Burhanettin Duran SETA General Coordinator 8 INTRODUCTION In the last years, a number of articles have been written about Russia’s hybrid war against Ukraine but none of them have presented specific information and examples of all the hybrid activities, available in open sources, organized against Ukraine.
This report presents these events and underlines the complexity of this kind of war in order to promote a better understanding of the issue at hand.
In the following days, thousands of people took to the streets of Kiev and other cities in the Western Ukraine to protest.
Despite protests, President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych postponed the signing of the European Union Association Agreement at the Vilnius summit following Moscow’s pressures.
The decision generated a great wave of dissatisfaction among Ukrainian citizens and triggered the following events.
The Azarov government and President Yanukovych`s fate along with the future of Ukraine under Russia’s influence was decided at the summit in Vilnius.
After the decision, thousands of pro-European protesters took to the streets to show their dissatisfaction about the postponement of the signing 1.
These protests led to a violent fight with the police forces in February that resulted in the death of dozens of people.
It all ended on February 22 when the parliament decided with an overwhelming vote to dismiss President Yanukovych, who had already fled to Russia.
At the same time, it was decided to appoint an interim president and to set the date of May 25, 2014, for holding presidential elections.
On February 23, the Ukrainian Parliament repealed the law on the policy of the state language that allowed the use of minority languages in public institutions in the regions where minorities exceeded 10% of the population.
Given the fact that in the southeastern part of Ukraine the ethnically Russian minority accounted for more than 10% of the region's population, the Russian language became a regional one.
The abrogation of the law raised a great deal of dissatisfaction among the Russian-speaking population which represents a majority in the southeastern region of Ukraine.
Unsatisfied with parliament's decision and encouraged by pro-Russian propaganda, the Russian-speaking population took to the streets to protest.
The latest political changes in Kiev and the decisions taken by the new leadership made it clear to the Russian Federation that it must act to protect its strategic interests.
On February 27, 2014, while the Ukrainian Parliament was voting for the new pro-Western government, the occupation of Crimea was in full swing.
Russia's special forces managed to occupy the peninsula without firing a single shot and on March 18, 2014, the Russian Parliament voted for the annexation of Crimea.
The following points are important when speaking about Crimea in geopolitical terms.
Due to its position it assures the dominance over the Black Sea from Crimea you can easily reach any shore of the Black Sea.
The loss of Crimea would have severely limited Russia’s maneuvering freedom and Russia would had lost its influence in the Black Sea region.
Also, Russia could not allow Crimea to become a port for NATO’s warships.
Macdonald Alastair and Pavel Polityuk, “Ukraine Government Pledges Russian Language Rights”, Reuters, 18 April 2014.
Crimea also facilitates access of the Russian Federation to warm waters and the access to the World Ocean which was drastically limited after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
Due to the fact that its ports in the Arctic Ocean are frozen six months a year and its ports in the Baltic Sea are far away from warmwaters, the access of the Russian fleet to the World Ocean was severely limited.
The main objective of the Russian Federation after 1991 was to project its naval power and influence to the Mediterranean Sea, the Middle East, and the Atlantic Ocean.
This objective was also mentioned in Russia’s naval doctrine published on July 26, 2015.
After the annexation of Crimea, Russia tried to destabilize Ukraine by supporting protests in the eastern part of the country.
On March 1, in the regions of Donetsk, Luhansk, Kharkiv, Mariupol, and Odessa,10 thousands of pro-Russian protesters expressed their dissatisfaction regarding the repeal of the law on the policy of the state language.
The main core of the protesters was coordinated by Russia’s secret services.
In the same month, on April 27, the rebels declared Luhansk's independence under the “Luhansk People's Republic,” all with Russia’s help and its coordination.
Isabel GORST, “In Northeast Ukraine, Pro-Maidan Occupiers Are Routed by Counter-demonstrators”, The Washington Post, March 1, 2014.
Ukraine was not able to immediately start an operation for retaking control of its occupied territories for the following reasons:15 • The critical internal situation after the revolution.
Despite the fact that a ceasefire was reached on September 5, after the Minsk Agreement, it would not be respected by the two sides.
On February 12, 2015, the Minsk II Agreement was signed by Ukraine, Russia, Germany, and France which established a package of measures to end the conflict.
The region continues to remain a hot spot on the map of Europwe, where fighting between the Ukrainian army and pro-Russian separatists backed by Moscow is still underway.
The Russian Federation’s interest in the short term is to continue the conflict in order to put continuous pressure on Ukraine and on its leadership in order to destabilize the country and to make it difficult to be governed.
In the long term, Russia wants to transform the war in Eastern Ukraine into a frozen conflict, like those in Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Transnistria.
Thus, Moscow can block Ukraine’s accession to the European Union and to NATO.17 Besides the proxy war component, the Russian Federation used its gas energy resources as a political weapon to force the new government to act in its interest.
Its purpose is to undermine the state order and to discredit Ukraine, the pro-Western leadership and its allies, the United States, and the European Union.
In addition, as part of the hybrid war, Moscow triggered a complex cy14.
Kiev Launches 'Anti-terror Operation' in East – Live Updates”, The Guardian, April 15, 2014.
Michael Kofman and Katya Migacheva, Lessons from Russia’s Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, , 45.
All these tactics used by the Russian Federation aim to weaken, destabilize, and disintegrate Ukraine and are known in the specialty literature as elements of a hybrid war.
In other words, the conflict is part of the hybrid war waged by the Russia Federation in Ukraine; the complexity of this war will be analyzed in the following chapters.
This report covers the period from February 2014 to December 2018 and defines the peculiarities of the hybrid war in Ukraine and its complexity.
It can be encountered in the 5th century BC during the Peloponnesian War and targets all levels of war, from the tactical and operational to the strategic.
A New Paradigm for Stability Operations in Failing States, (U.S Army War College, Pennsylvania: 2007), 4.
Therefore, it is more profitable for a state, in terms of costs and risks, to start a hybrid war against an opponent in order to achieve its political goals.
Thus, the aggressor state acts on as many levels as possible to undermine the state concerned.
The purpose is to make it fall apart from the inside or to influence its internal and/or foreign policy according to its own interests.
The third parties can fund one of the state or non-state actors involved in the conflict by offering weapons, fighting techniques, money, military training,26 intelligence, and soldiers or mercenaries.
The Russian Federation offers all the necessary support to the separatists in order to preserve their occupied territories and to keep the Ukrainian army in check.
Yemen and Syria are other examples of conflicts where we can see the involvement of other state actors in the war through proxies.
Regarding the conflict in Ukraine, the Russian Federation was actively involved in the protests in late February in Crimea and in March 2014, in the southeastern part of Ukraine in the regions of Odessa, Kharkov, Mariupol, Donetsk, and Luhansk.
The case of the illegal occupation of Crimea by the Russian Federation is a particular one in which the operation was carried out by the regular troops of the Russian army involving all armed forces .27 Although mercenaries were present, their role in the operation was minimal compared to that of the Russian Armed Forces.
Strategically speaking, the Donbass region is very important for Ukraine since it holds the largest reserves of coal and steel in the country, and it is where the chemicals and turbines needed for nuclear power plants are produced.
The protests that broke out in eastern Ukraine in March 2014 were used by the Russian Federation to exploit the dissatisfaction of the pro-Russian population in its own interest.
Since early March 2014, hundreds of people have crossed the border from the Russian Federation to join the pro-Russian demonstrators.
This was coordinated by Russian intelligence services, which recruited volunteers through social media platforms and especially men between the ages of 18 and 45 who they sent to the cities of Eastern Ukraine.
Among them were members of intelligence services, especially GRU agents the secret service of the Russian army known as the Main Intelligence Directorate.
In the beginning, they had the role of agitators and they later sabotaged and recruited fighters from among the Ukrainians.
A significant number of rebels also came from officers and non-commissioned officers in the army, police, and Ukrainian intelligence services who have decided to betray their country.
Among them, many were long before recruited by the Russian intelligence services.
The maintenance of violent protests was intended to create a state of chaos, to create tensions in society, to show the illegitimacy and inability of the government, and to hinder or even block its activity.
At the same time, through these protests Russia put pressure for a breakup of Ukraine and tried to trigger a federalization process.
In the meantime, Kiev accused Moscow of encouraging and supporting the protests through the GRU, but Kremlin denied any involvement.
Since April, paramilitary groups paid and trained by the Russian Federation joined the protesters.
Also the presence of mercenaries from Serbia,34 the Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation, and Ukraine,35 under contract with Moscow were also no28.
Sam Judah, “Russian Site Recruits 'Volunteers' for Ukraine”, BBC, March 5, 2014.
Roman Goncharenko, “Russians Hold Key Posts with Ukraine Separatists”, Deutsche Welle, July 31, 2014.
Nemanja Rujevic, “Serbian Mercenaries fFighting in Eastern Ukraine”, Deutsche Welle, August 14, 2014.
Investigation Reveals Ukrainians Fighting in Russian PMC Wagner”, Euromaidan Press, June 7, 2018.
Besides them, up to August 2014, American, French, Italian, German, and two Romanian volunteers36 were fighting next to the separatists.
In May 2014, the Security Service of Ukraine, SBU identified a mercenary group named ""Wagner"", that was fighting in Donbass and had links with the Russian Federation.
This is mainly due to the precarious state of the Ukrainian army and the lack of funds.
The Ukrainian army's offensive in early July made it possible to regain control of the part of the its territory that was occupied by the separatists.
The latter now controlled only the large cities of Donetsk and Luhansk.
The Russian Federation provided the separatists with fighters, tanks, rocket launchers, sniper rifles, anti-tank and automatic anti-personnel weapons, and armored personnel carriers equipped with guns.
Although Moscow continued to deny the presence of its troops on Ukraine’s territory, the photos of Russian soldiers from the battlefield posted in 2014 on the social network Vkontakte testify to the contrary.
At the end of July, a series of photographs showing several Russian soldiers near military trucks, arms, and Russian military equipment were posted.
By the end of August, according to NATO, there were 1,000 Russian soldiers in Eastern Ukraine.
According to the Soldiers' Mothers Committee, the number of Russian soldiers was between 7,000 and 8,000.42 As a result, the separatists, helped by the Russian army, managed to increase the front line up to the Azov Sea near the port of Mariupol.
In August, the Ukrainian army for the first time entered in a direct conflict with the Russian 36.
These Satellite Photos Prove That Russian Troops Are Shelling Ukraine”, Business Insider, July 28, 2014.
On August 25, ten Russian paratroopers were captured in Eastern Ukraine.
The identity tags worn around their necks and their testimonies recorded by Ukrainian troops were undisputed evidence of the Russian army in Ukraine.
Following the incident, the Russian Ministry of Defence said that the soldiers crossed the border in Ukraine accidentally while they were executing patrol missions at the Russian-Ukrainian border.
Recognizing the ""accidental"" presence of Russian paratroopers in Ukraine, at 60 km from the Russian-Ukrainian border, Moscow confirmed what the government of Ukraine had been sustaining for several months.
Despite the signing of the second Minsk treaty in February 2015, the terms of the agreement were not respected and the conflict is ongoing.
Oksana Grytsenko, “Thousands of Russian Soldiers Fought at Ilovaisk, Around a Hundred Were Killed”, Kyiv Post, April 6, 2018.
Roland Oliphant and Tom Parfitt, “Capture of Russian Paratroopers in Ukraine Overshadows Talks with Russia”, The Telegraph, August 26, 2014.
Most intelligence officers enrolled after the establishment of the SBU were recruited from the Fifth Directorate of the KGB, which acted in the Soviet Socialist Republic of Ukraine and reported directly to Moscow.
Although the Soviet Republics declared their independence in 1991, between the Russian and Ukrainian intelligence services a secret line of communication and collaboration was maintained.
Since 2010, when Viktor Yanukovych won the presidential election in Ukraine, Russian intelligence services gained a growing influence over their Ukrainian counterparts.
Yanukovych was a Kremlin loyalist whose election campaign was supported and paid by Moscow.
He appointed Russian citizens or persons who had links with the Russian intelligence services as the Minister of Defence and as heads of the intelligence services.
Democratization, Corruption, and the New Russian Imperialism, (Praeger, Santa Barbara: 2015), 470.
Philip Shishkin, “How Russian Spy Games Are Sabotaging Ukraine’s Intelligence Agency”, The Wall Street Journal, March 11, 2015.
Thus, Russian agents sabotaged the security institutions of Ukraine by ensuring that they are weak and unable to face a crisis or an external threat.
The SBU counterintelligence department knowingly allowed Russian intelligence agents and officers to carry out espionage and subversion activities on Ukraine’s territory.
Furthermore, the SBU counterintelligence allowed Russian intelligence services to recruit intelligence officers from all the Ukrainian security structures.
Kalinin was a Russian citizen, a former KGB agent, and was born and educated in Moscow.
In March 2015, the President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko declared that 80% of the SBU officers were FSB agents, a fact that showed the seriousness of the situation.
After the Ukrainian revolution in February 2014, not only did the president flee to the Russian Federation but also Oleksandr Yakymenko, the SBU director, and Hryhoriy Illyashov, the SZRU director, and other high-level intelligence officers.
The head of the SBU from Crimea along with 90% of the intelligence officers from the agency betrayed the country and joined the Russian Federation.
When the new director of the SBU entered the agency headquarters in Kiev, he found an empty building.
In addition, the computers and hard drives containing the data of 22,000 SBU officers and informants were destroyed and all relevant information regarding the cooperation between the SBU and the FSB had disappeared.
In Ukraine’s eastern regions, one-third of the SBU intelligence officers from Donetsk joined the separatists.
Among them was Alexander Khodakovsky, the head of the counterintelligence department who was supposed to identify traitors and foreign agents.
In addition, a large number of SBU officers from Luhansk joined the separatists.
The operations, however, did not have the expected results due to the information leak to the Russian intelligence.
During the same period, because of the information leak, several SBU officers were captured by separatists while they were carrying an undercover mission.
After the February 2014 revolution, the new directors of the SBU65 and the SZRU66 fired hundreds of intelligence officers and many of them were accused of treason.
Shortly after, the SBU and the SZRU hired hundreds of intelligence officers, following much more severe tests, including a lie detector, to ensure they are not Russian agents.
In addition, the directors of all the departments within the two services together with their deputies and heads of units from all regions were changed.
However, the leakage of information has not been definitively resolved.
Even after this process there were still Russian agents in the Ukrainian intelligence agencies.
This offered a great advantage to the Russian Federation which in some cases knew in advance the military plans of Ukraine’s special operations and not only.
It had broad access to Ukraine’s top secret information, vulnerabilities, names of intelligence officers, details about their covers, locations, and operations, information about their battle plans, military positions and supplies, etc.
On April 26, 2014, three SBU officers from the Alpha Unit were captured by the separatists while they were conducting a secret operation in the city of Horlivka in the Donetsk region.
They were realizing a surveillance mission in the occupied territories evaluating the possibility of arresting a valuable target.
They were captured because of a leak inside the SBU.70 In order to avoid such developments, Ukraine had to clean all its security agencies of Russian agents.
Taras Kuzio, “Who Committed Treason in Ukraine?”, Ukrainian Policy, March 1, 2016.
Oksana Grytsenko, “Separatists Acted on a Tip to Capture SBU Officers, Ukraine’s sSecurity Service Says ”, Kyiv Post, 28 April 2014.
UKRAINE’S SUCCESSFUL COUNTERINTELLIGENCE OPERATIONS SBU officers arrested a Russian citizen working for GRU in Chernivtsi.
He 21.03.2014 wanted to obtain classified information about the sketches of the new missile systems developed by Ukraine.
The Ukrainian authorities arrested an officer of the Anti-Terrorism Operations 27.07.2014 Zone Coordination Center for providing classified information to Russian intelligence services about the army's operations in the Donbas region.
The Ukrainian army detained a person in the Donetsk region that illegally crossed the Russian-Ukrainian border.
He was collecting information for the Russian Federation about the positions and vigilance of the Ukrainian army.
The SBU detained an officer of the gendarmerie, an agent of the Russian Federation, 31.07.2014 who was preparing the assassination of the Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine.
The SBU detained a high-ranking officer who worked in the Ukrainian army staff and sent information regarding the operations of the army to the Russian 04.02.2015 Federation.
Furthermore, in order to undermine the soldiers' morale, he was disseminating false information about alleged battles lost by the Ukrainian army and about the unbearable conditions on the front.
A senior officer of the Ukrainian gendarmerie was detained by the SBU for high 18.05.2015 treason.
He provided classified information to the Russian intelligence services about the positions of the Ukrainian army and its infrastructure.
Anna Mostovych, “SBU Arrests Traitors Who Informed on Ukrainian Troops for Russian Intelligence”, Euromaidan Press, February 4, 2015.
The SBU press service announced that the Deputy Chief of the Anti-terrorist 16.06.2016 Operations Zone was arrested for providing classified information to Russian intelligence services.
The head of a department within the Ukrainian army was arrested and charged with high treason.
He was recruited by the GRU in 2015 and managed 22.12.2016 to provide 60 classified documents.
According to a SBU press release, in 2016 alone there were 83 cases of espionage and high treason.
An intelligence officer from the SBU was arrested in the Kerson region for col16.08.2017 laboration with the FSB.83 An official of the Ukrainian gendarmerie was caught providing intelligence to 11.10.2017 the Russian intelligence services.
Ukraine's counterintelligence service announced that they arrested a Russian 15.12.2017 citizen that was working for the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service in the Cherkasy region.
The Deputy Head of Protocol Department of the Prime Minister of Ukraine was detained by the SBU and was accused of providing classified information to the Russian intelligence services.
Due to his position he had access to highly important information from inside the Cabinet of Ministers.
At the same time, he was also the Prime Minister's personal translator during meetings with high-level representatives of other states.
He had access to almost everything that was 21.12.2017 discussed behind closed doors with high-ranking officials from other states.
Just months before being arrested, he accompanied Ukrainian Prime Minister Volodymyr Groysman to the United Kingdom during an official visit.
There he interpreted for Groysman during a meeting with the UK Prime Minister.
He had also interpreted the dialogue between Groysman and United States Vice-President Joe Biden in July 2016 during an official visit to the White House.
In less than 24 hours another Ukrainian citizen was arrested for spying for 21.12.2017 Russia.
A high-ranking SBU officer from the Kiev Central Unit was arrested for providing classified information to the Russian intelligence services.
Luke Harding, “Ukrainian Interpreter Who Visited May Arrested on Russian Spying Charges”, The Guardian, December 21, 2017.
The SBU detained a person working in a state-owned company under the 21.04.2018 Ministry of Defence.
She was accused of providing strategic intelligence to the Russian intelligence services.
The SBU detained two men that were working for the local government in the Zaporizhzhya region accusing them of spying for the Russian Federation.
Between July 2015 and October 2018, they offered information to the Russian intelligence services about the sociopolitical and socioeconomic situation of 12.10.2018 the region.
They also tried to organize subversive activities like riots and mass protests in Zaporizhzhya.
This region is one of the most important industrial centers in Ukraine producing steel, aluminium, aircraft engines, automobiles, and other heavy industry goods.
This gives the region a strategic importance for Ukraine’s army and industry sector.
According to the SBU, he was working for the GRU, Russia’s military intelligence service, for three 10.12.2018 years.
The GRU wanted to obtain Ukraine’s most successful UAV models operating on the Donbas front line and other information about its air force capabilities.
Although in December 2014, the SBU director claimed that he had cleared the intelligence services of Russian agents,95 some of them remained and continued to transmit classified information.
Russian secret services have managed to penetrate deeply into key Ukrainian institutions, government agencies, intelligence services, and branches of the armed forces.
The FSB and GRU mainly targeted the recruitment of SBU senior officers, using bribes, pressures, blackmail, threats, and even physical violence to reach their goals.
During the period of 2014-2018, the SBU dismantled numerous networks formed by Ukrainian citizens and controlled by Russian secret services.
These groups collected information on the positions and activity of the army, military, and strategic facilities and about the situation in Ukraine's border areas.
Denys Krasnikov, “Ukraine’s Security Service Uncovers Russian Spies, Corrupt Judge”, Kyiv Post, October 13, 2018.
Between 2014 and 2018, both the GRU and the FSB carried out numerous clandestine operations on the territory of Ukraine.
Given that their number is high, a selection based on open sources is offered below.
SABOTAGE AND CLANDESTINE ACTIVITIES Unidentified individuals fired a grenade at an army depot in the city of Kharkiv.
Unidentified individuals used a grenade launcher to hit the liquefied gas tanks of the Kharkivregiongaz company in the city of Kharkiv in order to trigger an 11.01.2015 explosion.
The grenades did not hit their target but hit the company's technical room.
A railway bridge linking the Zaporizhzhya region to the Donetsk region was blown up just as it was being crossed by a train loaded with coal.
The railway 20.01.2015 line was frequently used by the Ukrainian army to transport military equipment and supplies near the conflict zone.0 A railway bridge was blown up in the region of Luhansk.
It linked the area oc18.03.2015 cupied by the Ukrainian army and the area held by separatists.1 A portion of the railway linking the Dnipropetrovsk region to the Donetsk 25.03.2015 region was blown up as a train loaded with coal was crossing it.2 In the city of Kharkiv, a tank wagon containing fuel and lubricants for the 30.03.2015 Ukrainian army was blown up at Osnova railway station.3 In the city of Kharkiv, a portion of the railroad was blown up when a train was crossing it.
The saboteurs’ special interest in this railroad is due to the fact that the route is used by the 31.03.2015 Ukrainian army to arm its troops in Eastern Ukraine.
Therefore, their purpose was to interrupt or at least delay the delivery of weapons and supplies to the Ukrainian army.
The roof of the 26.12.2015 building caught fire but it was quickly extinguished without causing great damage.
A Russian grenade was found at the scene, indicating a sabotage attempt.
This is the largest armament depot in the territory of Ukraine.2 A former FSB intelligence officer who betrayed his country and fled to Ukraine 18.11.2016 was kidnapped in Kiev.
The SBU managed to capture the kidnappers at the border with the Russian Federation.3 The Balaklia armament deposit was attacked once again and 138,000 tons of weapons exploded.
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko accused the Russian Federation of sabotage activities.
Ukraine lacks adequate facilities 23.03.2017 for storing weapons in maximum safety.
At the same time, the level of security level around these warehouses is also weak, which makes it easy to organize sabotage activities.
Denis Voronenkov, a former deputy of the Russian Parliament and a critic of 23.03.2017 Vladimir Putin, was assassinated in the center of Kiev.
He obtained Ukrainian citizenship in 2016 after he fled Russia.6 A SBU officer was assassinated after a car bomb attack in the city port of 31.03.2017 Mariupol.
The officer, a former deputy of the counterintelligence director of Donetsk, helped capture dozens of Russian agents.
Tony Wesolowsky, “Ukraine's Exploding Munition Depots Give Ammunition to Security Concerns”, RFE/ RL, October 6, 2017.
SBU Says Russia’s FSB Fails to Kidnap Its Renegade Officer Who Fought for Ukraine”, Kyiv Post, November 18, 2016.
Ex-Russian MP Who fled to Ukraine Killed in Kiev”, The Guardian, March 23, 2017.
This poses serious 27.09.2017 problems to the Ukrainian army in terms of arms supply.
The interruption of the continuous flow of arms required in the struggle in Eastern Ukraine with the pro-Russian separatists could lead to the inability to maintain the front line or to organize an offensive operation.
As a result of sabotage, Ukraine has lost more weapons than it has used since the beginning of the war in the east of the country.3 A Chechen woman who fought as a volunteer in the Ukrainian army was assas30.10.2017 sinated in the Kiev region.4 The research and production headquarters of the Photoprylad complex in Cherkasy was attacked by grenades.
The Photoprylad Company is part of the stateowned military industrial concern Ukroboronprom, a key component of Ukraine's 05.04.2018 defense industry.
Among others, it produced guiding and firing systems for armored vehicles, anti-tank missiles, applications for artillery and helicopters, and night vision devices.5 The SBU prevented the assassination of Arkady Babchenko, a Russian journalist 30.05.2018 and a critic of Vladimir Putin.
The assassination attempt was ordered by the Russian intelligence services.6 Around 3m., three depots with ammunition exploded simultaneously and following this, another exploded at the 6th Arsenal of the Ministry of Defence ammunition depot in the Ichnya district of the Chernihiv region.
The incident was catalogued as an act of sabotage organized by the Russian Federation.
At this military facility approximately 09.10.2018. “69,500 tonnes of munitions, including 43,000 tonnes ready for use” were stored.8 Ukraine has three remaining main strategic arsenals, the 1322nd Artillery Ammunition Base ; 47th Arsenal of the Ground Forces Command ; and the 222nd Central Artillery Ammunition Base (Cherkasy region).129 The aim of the Russian Federation is to weaken Ukraine’s capability to supply its army which fights in Donbass.
Alec Luhn, “Ukrainian Military Intelligence Officer Killed by Car Bomb in Kiev”, The Guardian, June 27, 2017.
Christopher Miller, “Kyiv Car Bomb Kills Man in Suspected Targeted Attack”, RFE/RL, August 8, 2017.
Andrew Roth, “Ukraine Reveals It Staged 'Murder' of Russian Journalist Arkady Babchenko”, The Guardian, May 30, 2018.
No Coincidence Sabotage Is the Main Version Given Proximity to Russia Border”, UNIAN, October 9, 2018.
Ukrainian Spec-op Troops Penetrated Country's Biggest Ammo Depots – Journalist”, UNIAN, October 21, 2018.
The railways in these regions are strategic in terms of their importance for the Ukrainian army which is fighting in Donbass.
It receives fuel, lubricants, arms, troops, ammunition, and other important supplies via this railway system.
Also, between 2014 and 2018, dozens of explosions and bomb attacks took place and several dozens were foiled by the SBU130 in Kiev, Odessa, Nikolaev, Kherson, Zaporizhzhya, Kharkiv, Lviv, and Mariupol.
In addition to these incidents, hundreds of false alarms132 were recorded over the last four years in which different people announced that bombs had been placed in railway stations, subway stations, airports, and public institutions.
The purpose of the bomb attacks and false alarms is to create chaos and to spread panic among the population in order to destabilize Ukraine.
On August 17, 2017, SBU Director Pavlo Hrytsak announced that Russian intelligence services are planning the assassination of Ukrainian political and public figures to destabilize the country.4 Another method used by the Russian services to try to destabilize Ukraine according to the SBU is to fund and organize protests.
In November 2016, the SBU and the SZRU mentioned in a joint press release that the Russian Federation is also using NGOs to organize and to fund protests in Ukraine.6 130.
The population and the international public must also believe that the war is over and nothing can be done.
Otherwise, the will of the population can change the situation on the field.
The second element is represented by direct threats, which intimidate, mislead, demoralize, and put pressure on the enemy’s leadership and population.
Actions like the continuous threat of war or invasion, massing troops at a state’s borders,139 blocking access to international waters,140 cutting the gas supply, organizing assassinations, bomb threats and acts of sabotage etc., put pressure on the enemy and affect its morale.
PROPAGANDA It is especially important for the aggressor state to have a good propaganda machine that can influence and manipulate public opinion and the attitude of the targeted population.
At the same time, propaganda can intimidate and demoralize a part of the population making it unable to act against a threat.
Andrew Rorth, “Ukraine President Warns Russia Tensions Could Lead to 'Full-Scale War'”, The Guardian, November 28, 2018.
Since then, propaganda has been increasingly used by state and non-state actors to achieve their goals.
In our days, propaganda is often associated with fake news but this is only one outcome of propaganda.
Propaganda can also present true information in order to promote a doctrine, ideology or ideas, and to make them known to the public to gain followers.
Also, propaganda can target the disinformation of a specific group, whether ethnic, racial, religious, or an entire population in order to make it act in the way the sponsor of the propaganda wants.
The state which disseminates propaganda must know the targeted audience very well only in this way will propaganda be efficient and yield results.
Disinformation seeks to convince the public of the superiority or inferiority of a subject, be it a candidate of a political party, a president, a government, a state, or a cause.
It is, therefore, desirable to obtain a certain attitude from the public in order to make it act in a certain way:146 to vote for a certain party/candidate,147 to organize protests, to remain passive in the face of a threat to national security, to support or to disagree with government policies or local/national decisions, etc.
In most cases, the disinformation sponsor aims to manipulate public opinion for political purposes.8 141.
Vladimir Volkoff, Tratat de dezinformare, trad. de Mihnea Columbeanu, Antet, București, 18.
Also, media, books, brochures, and agents of influence help promote propaganda.
The A Department, also known as the Disinformation Department of the First Directorate of the KGB, is responsible for espionage and subversion,150and has the ability to organize subversive actions in different states.
Protests, uprisings, massive defamation campaigns of foreign personalities and leaders, and campaigns to disseminate false and sometimes true information to confuse the population, are all the areas of expertise of the A Department.
The source of propaganda is known, it can easily be identified (e.g.: Russia Today, Sputnik, TASS, CNN, The Washington Post, AFP, Le Monde, BBC, Deutsche Welle, Sky News, UNIAN, etc.), and the information may be true or partially true.
Thus, it is very important to double-check the information from every newspaper or news agencies before drawing a conclusion.
In some cases, pieces of information can be omitted on purpose or accidentally.
Sometimes false information and exaggeration can be used as we see in articles in Russia Today, Sputnik, or Sky News.3 We encounter this kind of propaganda when a state or a non-state actor wants to promote a certain ideology, doctrine, idea, event, leader, etc., and to convince the public that what they are promoting represents the truth.
During the Cold War, the Radio Free Europe station that broadcasted in Eastern European communist countries promoted democratic values.
The Radio Station presented itself as a source of information that did not represent the voice of the United States, but the voice of the dissidents and the oppressed people of the communist countries.
In fact, the RFE was secretly funded by the United States Congress through the CIA154 and its purpose was to spread information about democratic values, life in Western countries, and the horrific dictatorships of Eastern Eu149.
Jasper Jackson and Sorin Cristian Semeniuc, “Sky News Defends Report on Gun Running Amid Claims of Faked Meeting”, The Guardian, August 10, 2016.
Through the RFE, people from communist countries like Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Poland, were able to access information banned by their regimes.
The aim was to influence the population in order to change the communist regimes from the bottom up through revolutions.
White propaganda is also used to promote religions, the glorious past of a state, the performances of a national team,156 the necessity to start a war,157 etc.
White propaganda can target the misinformation of a population and of a group based on political orientation, ethnicity, race, religion, for political purposes through the propagation of true, partially true, false, or exaggerated information.
A good example is Russia Today’s broadcast station bureau from the United States, which frequently tries to spark tensions between the white and the black population in the country.
The actor behind this campaign, namely the Russian Federation, wants to increase the racial tensions in U.S. society.
The source that releases the information may or may not be correctly identified and the accuracy of the information is not certain.
Some information can be published on different sites, blogs, or groups on social media platforms without knowing who is behind it.
A good example is the 1980s KGB operation to disseminate the theory that the HIV virus was created by the United States as a biological weapon.
First, the information appeared in India and was later taken up by other sources of information.
The goal was to spread an antiAmerican sentiment in the Third World.3 155.
Ewen Macaskill, “Former Bush Press Secretary Claims Iraq War Fuelled by Propaganda”, The Guardian, May 28, 2008.
The source cannot be identified or is attributed to a source that is not responsible for disseminating the false information.
Its purpose is to spread false information, to misinform, manipulate, and to lower the morale of a group or population without being able to identify who is behind it.
During the Second World War, the Nazi intelligence services set up an undercover radio station that broadcasted English news about the war and presented itself as a British station.
The station broadcasted false information to listeners, especially to the British public, about the situation on the front with the aim of lowering the population’s morale.
They used tens of thousands of fake accounts on social networks like Facebook and Twitter to influence voters' opinions.
The users of these networks did not know that there were not Americans behind those accounts or groups, but Russians paid to share false information, modified photos, and to add negative comments.
Beginning on February 23, 2014, simultaneously with the coming to power of a pro-Western government in Kiev, the media in the Russian Federation began an extensive campaign of discrediting the new government, describing it as a fascist junta that took over power.
The Kremlin's propaganda was particularly effective among the Russian minority concentrated in Eastern Ukraine and Crimea because they were watching especially Russian TV channels.
Also, pro-Russian elites in the region played an important role in instigating protests against the new leadership.
After the Ukrainian revolution in February 2014, Russian propaganda presented Ukraine as a bankrupt state led by fascists170 164.
Kofman and Migacheva, Lessons from Russia’s Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, 11.
Eric Draitser, “Solving the Crisis in Ukraine”, Russia Today, March 19, 2014.
Also, Rusisan propaganda presented Ukraine as a state from which Russian ethnics flee because of ultra-nationalists.1 During the protests in Kiev, the Kremlin's Russian media, such as Russia-24,172 Russia Today, Komsomolskaya Pravda,173 and NTV,174 characterized the protesters as ""radical militants""175 that supported the overthrowing of the rule of law.
The same TV channels highlighted that the protesters were the first who opened fire against the law enforcement forces.
An article in Russia Today dated March 3, 2014, presented the scenario that snipers who killed dozens of demonstrators during the protests were hired by the protesters' leaders.
In fact, the snipers were brought to Ukraine by the Russian Federation to help Yanukovych deal with the protests.
In July 2015, the chief military prosecutor of Ukraine investigating the role of the SBU before and during the February 2014 revolution, declared that the intelligence service of Ukraine, at the request of the FSB, waged an information war against its own citizens.
The aim was to discredit the pro-European protesters and the idea that ​​Ukraine should join the European Union.0 Between 2014 and 2018, Russian propaganda aimed to repeatedly promote, over a long period of time and by all means, messages to discredit Ukraine, weaken the civilians’ and army’s morale, and encourage interethnic tensions.
Propaganda focused on repeating the same false themes that it packaged in simple and clear messages so that it can be understood by everyone.
Russian propaganda pays special attention to this subject in order to influence the thinking and the behavior of the Ukrainian soldiers.
Russia wants to affect and break Ukrainian soldiers morale, to make them desert their army, and to discourage other people from joining the army.2 181.
Bryan Macdonald, “Four Years After ‘Euromaidan,’ Corruption Is Still King in Ukraine”, Russia Today, February 22, 2018.
Robert Longley, “An Introduction to Psychological Warfare”, ThoughtCo, March 1, 2019.
SUBVERSION The purpose of the propaganda has in the same time a subversive role.
From the perspective of Hans J Morgenthau, a representative of classical realism, national morale is one of the nine elements of a state's power.
National morale represents the determination wherewith a nation supports its foreign and domestic policy in time of peace or war.
At the same time, national morale influences the agricultural and industrial production, the efficiency of the armed forces, the actions of its diplomatic body,206 and the reaction of the population in the cases of internal and external crises.
On July 15, 2016, when a coup attempt took place in Turkey, people showed a powerful spirit of unity and were able to react to a situation of internal crisis.
People prevented the coup by going out on the streets and standing in front of the soldiers and the tanks.
The loyalty of the people to the constitution and their belief in the legitimacy of the political system were the main forces behind their actions.
Also, the effect of propaganda is stronger on national morale when the internal situation is affected by poor governance.
The incompetence and corruption in state structures, lack of reforms, low living standards, and a large gap between the rich and the poor, decrease the morale of a population.
Due to the delicate domestic situation, a large proportion of the population tends to believe 200.
Blackstock, The Strategy of Subversion; Manipulating the Politics of Other Nations, 24.
Nilay Kar Onum and Kubra Kara, “Survivors Recall 2016 Defeated Coup Night in Turkey”, Anadolu Agency, July 13, 2019.
At the same time, the level of education and information among a certain population is very important in order to counter propaganda.
The population should be informed daily by the government about fake news in mass media, and it should offer examples and present true information.
In the long run, poor governance can make people lose their respect, attachment, and loyalty to national symbols.
In this context, power can easily be taken over by different political, social,208 or paramilitary groups209 funded and controlled by other state actors.
The takeover of power can be accomplished through early elections, the initiation of a censure motion by the opposition parties, a coup d’état, or a revolution.
Sometimes, behind the last two events intelligence services of other states can be present as gray eminences.
Their interests vary greatly, ranging from dissatisfaction with the internal213 or external policy direction214 of the state concerned, to controlling its natural resources.
Before the coup they were publicly against the domestic and foreign policy of Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi and the relations between countries were not optimal.
Then, the first democratically elected president was ousted by the Egyptian army.
Shortly after the coup, the UAE sent $3 billion and Saudi Arabia sent $5 billion in aid to Egypt.
Egypt’s Chief of General Staff Abdul Fattah al-Sisi organized the coup and took over power.
Bethany Allen-Ebahimian, “64 Years Later, CIA Finally Releases Details of Iranian Coup”, Foreign Policy, 20 July 2017.
Julian Borger, “Russian-Trained Mercenaries Back Bosnia's Serb Separatists”, The Guardian, January 12, 2018.
David Hearts, “Why Saudi Arabia Is Taking a Risk by Backing the Egyptian Coup”, The Guardian, August 20, 2013.
Patrick Werr, “UAE Offers Egypt $3 Billion Support, Saudis $5 Billion”, Reuters, July 9, 2013.
Four years later, in 2017, he ratified a document through which Egypt ceded sovereignty of two of its islands in the Red Sea to Saudi Arabia.
Tiran and Sanafir Islands are strategically placed at the mouth of the Gulf of Aqaba.
This decision angered the population and the opposition accused him of handing over the islands in return for economic aid.
In the years after the Egyptian coup, Cairo received billions of dollars from Saudi Arabia in economic aid.
These are good examples of how certain states try to influence other states’ domestic and foreign affairs.
In April 2019, the Sudanese military organized a coup and took over control of the country.
To demoralize the population of the state concerned and disintegrate its constituent groups.
To discredit the authority, the activity, and the image of the state (the government, the presidency, and the institutions that ensure the security and defence of the country), civil servants, and elites.
To induce the population of a state into passivity, to block its reaction if a group takes power by force or if the state is invaded.5 219.
Ian Blakc, “Egypt's President under Fire over Red Sea Islands Transfer to Saudi Arabia”, The Guardian, April 11, 2016.
Amina Ismail, “Opposition Grows to Egypt's Plan to Cede Islands to Saudi Arabia”, Reuters, June 15, 2017.
Justin Lynch and Robbie Gramer, “Arab States Foment Sudan Chaos While United States Stands By”, Foreign Policy, May 5, 2019.
Khalid Abdellazi, “Saudi Arabia, UAE to Send $3 billion in Aid to Sudan”, Reuters, April 21, 2019.
Alican Tekingündüz, “The Saudis, Emiratis, and the Future of Turkish Projects in Sudan”, TRT World, April 23, 2019.
On August 28, 2018, President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko declared that the Russian Federation is preparing a massive manipulation campaign in order to influence the parliamentary and presidential elections in 2019.234 He stated, “The tentacles of Moscow have penetrated social networks heavily, they hold a grip on certain media, they are present in cyberspace.
Their purpose is to pass false information to undermine the state order and to influence and manipulate the Ukrainian electorate.
Between March 2014 and August 2018, the Security Service of Ukraine destroyed dozens of networks that were working for the Russian Federation and were disseminating propaganda 226.
Andrei Soshnikov, “Inside a Pro-Russia Propaganda Machine in Ukraine”, BBC Russia, November 13, 2017.
Russian propaganda is not only spread by the Russian Federation through the means mentioned above, but also in Ukraine through television channels, Kremlin-controlled press agencies, bloggers, and members of social networks.
Regarding Ukrainian TV channels and press agencies, the most popular ones do not promote Russian propaganda so as not to lose their transmission licenses.
In order to limit the impact of Russian propaganda on the population, on March 12, 2014, the Ukrainian National Television and Radio Broadcasting Council decided to block several proKremlin Russian television stations.
On April 15, 2017, Ukraine decided to add other Russian channels to the list of those forbidden.
The National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine also banned several sites with Russian content, social platforms and search engines like Yandex, all of them from the Russian Federation.
The last two closely monitor Russian propaganda and point out false information to read237.
Stephen Ennis, “Ukraine Hits Back at Russian TV Onslaught”, BBC, March 12, 2014.
Among the channels that are most read and watched by Ukrainians and that are controlled by Ukrainian oligarchs are 1+1, 2+2, TET, UNIAN TV, STB, Novyi Kanal, ICTV Inter TV, K1, K2, MEGA, NTV, and Chanel 5 TV; and in terms of news agencies, Segodnya.ua, Komsomolskaya Pravda, Arguments and Facts Ukraine , TSN.ua, and UNIAN.info.
On occasion, some are used by oligarchs in domestic political struggles to discredit their opponents and to promote the activities of the parties they support.
DIRECT THREATS As we mentioned before, direct threats are the second element of psychological war.
Such actions are represented by threats of war or invasion, massing troops at a state’s borders245 or blocking its access to international waters.
Other states can use energetic blackmail, assassinations, bomb threats and acts of sabotage etc.
These are realized by a state actor in order to put pressure on its enemies’ governments, security structures and population, to affect their morale, and to maintain a state of permanent tension and fear of war.
Between 2014 and 2018, Russia threatened Ukraine with war numerous times.
In March 2014, at the request of Vladimir Putin the Russian Parliament authorized the use of military force into neighboring states to protect Russian citizens.
This created a weighing fear among Ukrainian populations and leaders that an imminent invasion will take place.
In August 2016, Vladimir Putin threatened Kiev with serious consequences for Ukraine if it attacks the separatists in Donbass.
Also, between 2014 and 2018, the Russian Federation continuously massed troops at Ukraine’s borders.9 In the same period, Russia’s president numerous times ordered his country’s military to be in a state of combat readiness inducing the idea that he is preparing an invasion.
These actions were realized in order to maintain a permanent state 244.
Shaun Walker and Harriet Salem, “Russian Parliament Approves Troop Deployment in Ukraine”, The Guardian, March 2, 2014.
Kim Sengupta, “What Lies Behind the New Russian Threat to Ukraine”, The Independent, August 12, 2016.
This put a permanent pressure on Ukraine’s leadership, on its security institutions, and disseminated fear among the population.
On November 25, 2018, Russia blocked the entrance of three Ukrainian ships into the Azov Sea by blocking the Kerch Strait and then captured the ships and their crew.
Limiting or denying Ukraine access to its ports from the Azov Sea through the Kerch Strait violated Article 37 and Article 38 of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Moscow had been warning Kiev since September 2013 with economic repression if it were to sign the Association Agreement.6 The table below shows how Russia triggered an economic war.
Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said his country does not recognize the price rise and that Russia's actions represent an act of economic aggression.9 256.
Shaun Walker, “Ukraine's EU Trade Deal Will Be Catastrophic, Says Russia”, The Guardian, September 22, 2014.
Vladislav Vorotnikov, “Ukraine Crisis May Have Serious Implications for the Meat Industry”, GlobalMeat, March 3, 2014.
Agata Wierzbowska-Miazga, “Russian Economic Pressure on Ukraine”, The Center of Western Studies, March 26, 2014.
Andrey Ostroukh and Alexander Kolyandr, “Gazprom Bill Puts Ukraine under Pressure”, The Wall Street Journal, April 24, 2014.
The delivery resumed in 2014 but by 2018 Russia continued to 16.06.2014 threaten Ukraine to shut off the gas and actually did this for short periods of time between 2014-2018.261 The Russian Federal Service for the Oversight of Consumer Protection and Welfare forbade the import of pork and beef from Ukraine.
Ukrainian products no longer had a sales outlet and exports could not be rerouted to EU countries because they did not meet the sanitary-veterinary standards imposed by the EU.262 The Russian Federation prohibited the import of dairy products from Ukraine 28.07.2014 on the grounds that they are dangerous and do not comply with consumer protection laws.3 Imports of alcoholic drinks from Ukraine were forbidden on the grounds that they violated consumer protection laws.
Ukraine represented a big exporter 14.08.2014 of beer and vodka for Russia, which brought it earnings of millions of dollars.
At the same time, Russia imposed 01.11.2018 sanctions on 68 Ukrainian companies.
Moscow wanted to show to the new leadership in Kiev the price they have to pay for choosing a pro-European path and to force it to pursue a pro-Russian policy.
Shaun Walker, “Russia Cuts off Gas Supply to Ukraine After Talks Collapse”, The Guardian, June 14, 2014.
Vladimir Soldatkin, Natalia Zinets, “Gazprom Seeks to Halt Ukraine Gas Contracts as Dispute Escalates”, Reuters, March 2, 2018.
Carmen Paun, “Ukraine Losses US4$m, Due to Russian Meat Trade Restrictions”, GlobalMeat, December 8, 2014.
Maxim Stulov, “Russia Bans Dairy Imports from Ukraine”, The Moscow Times, July 27, 2014.
Alexander Kolyandr, “Russia to Ban All Fruit and Vegetable Imports from Ukraine”, The Wall Street Journal, October 2, 2014.
However, due to the involvement of the European Union, the United States, the IMF, and the World Bank, which massively financed Ukraine, its economy has stabilized.
The signing of the European Union Association Agreement in June 2014 significantly helped the country's economy.9 Between 2014 and 2018,270 the European Union provided Ukraine €3. billion in economic aid.
Also, over the same period, the United States provided approximately $1. billion in military assistance,272 loans of about $3. billion,273 and $1.3 billion in USAID funds.
In addition to the EU and the United States, both the IMF and the World Bank have provided loans to Ukraine.
From February 2014 until January 2018, the IMF provided $8. billion and the World Bank provided $5 billion.5 Without the economic aid received from these actors, Ukraine could not have coped with the economic war by Russia.
Also, Kiev would not have been able to continue the war in Donbass and to deal with its economic problems.
Ryan Browne, “US Releases $200 Million in Defensive Aid to Ukraine as Moscow Seeks Better Ties”, CNN, July 20, 2018.
Between February 2014 and September 2018, the information systems of strategic state institutions and private companies were targeted by Russian hackers under the coordination of the intelligence services.
Moreover, Ukraine has become a Russian test bed for computer viruses and a training ground for breaking into servers and computer networks.
The table below shows the main operations performed by the Russian secret services in the cybernetic field in order to destabilize Ukraine.
Russia knows very well the vulnerabilities of Ukraine’s communication system because Ukrtelecom uses Russian-made telecommunications, and internet equipment and systems .278 276.
The right-wing candidate actually did not obtain more than 1% of the votes.
The attempt was 24.05.2014 thwarted by the Ukrainian company that deals with the cyber-security of the server.
The purpose of the Russian hackers was to help the Russian propaganda machine publish fake news that would have presented an Ukrainian presidential election won by a representative of the extreme right wing.1 Hackers, helped by a virus, caused a power strike affecting three regions in the western part of Ukraine, including the Kiev region.
The incident interrupted the supply of energy to approximately 225,000 users.
This was also 23.12.2015 confirmed by the United States Department of Homeland Security a few days later.
This was the first time that the United States government officially recognized that a power blackout was caused by a virus and according to cyber-security experts, it was considered the first attack that was able to stop a power grid.3 The SBU blocked the provision of programs that helped Russian intelligence services steal information from the computers of strategic institutions and private companies in Ukraine.
Russian intelligence services were using Ukrainian commercial entities to plant spy programs in the networks of military 25.11.2016 and industrial enterprises, critical infrastructures, executive bodies, airports, banks, factories, and state and private companies in Ukraine.
Kiev's electricity grid was targeted by a cyberattack that left the northern part 12.2016 of the capital without electricity.6 According to a CrowdStrike cyber-security report, a group of hackers used a malware program installed on Android devices in 2014-2016 to monitor Ukrainian soldiers in artillery units.
Thus, information was obtained regarding the 22.12.2016 location of the infected devices and the communications stored on them.
The information was used in support of pro-Russian separatists in Eastern Ukraine.
Mark Clayton, “Russia Hammers Ukraine with Massive Cyber-Attack”, Bussiness Insider, March 15, 2014.
Ten Years of Russian Cyber Attacks on Other Nations”, NBC News, December 18, 2016.
Pavel Polityuk, “Ukraine Investigates Suspected Cyber Attack on Kiev Power Grid”, Reuters, December 20, 2016.
He expressed his belief that this was strong evidence that the Russian services are leading a cyber war against Ukraine.9 Certain Ukrainian banks and the Ukrenergo energy distributor company were 27.06.2017 targeted by cyberattacks.
The action did not affect the sources of supply, but in the case of the banks it caused difficulties in terms of banking operations.0 In November 2017, Dmytro Shymkiv, deputy head of the Ukrainian presidential administration, in an interview to the Kiev Post news agency stated that 99% 13.11.2017 of the cyberattacks on Ukraine come from Russia.
He also highlighted the lack of experts and funds needed by Ukraine to defend itself in this cyber war.1 The operating system of Odessa Airport was infected with a virus.
After the attack, workers were unable to process customers’ data on computers, and 24.10.2017 they had to do it manually which caused several flight delays.
The Kiev metro payment system was also affected by the cyberattack.2 The inauguration of the Cyber Security Situation Center took place.
If the attack would have succeeded, the supply of chlorine used to purify the water in the Ukrainian 11.07.2018 water pumping units would have been interrupted.
A similar cyberattack occurred at a petrochemical refinery in Saudi Arabia in August 2017.
The hackers in this case aimed to sabotage the company by triggering an explosion.7 288.
Natalia Zinets, “Ukraine Hit by 6,500 Hack Attacks, Sees Russian 'Cyberwar'”, Reuters, December 29, 2016.
Pavel Polityuk and Alessandra Prentice, “Ukrainian Banks, Electricity Firm Hit by Fresh Cyber Attack”, Reuters, June 27, 2017.
Ukrainians Not Prepared for Cyber Attacks”, Kyiv Post, November 17, 2017.
Pavel Polityuk and Jack Stubbs, “New Wave of Cyber Attacks Hits Russia, Other Nations”, Reuters, October 24, 2017.
Pavel Polityuk, Angela Moon, Margarita Popov, “Russia Hackers 'Preparing Huge Malware Attack' on Ukraine Businesses, Claims Cyber Police Chief ”, The Independent, July 27.
Nicole Perloth and Clifford Krauss, “A Cyberattack in Saudi Arabia Had a Deadly Goal.
He said that the purpose of the attacks is to destroy Ukraine's strategic infrastructure.8 On October 8 and 9, Ukraine's state fiscal service was targeted by more cyberattacks which disrupted the programs used by taxpayers for filing taxes.
According to the SBU, Russia’s aim was to destabilize 04.12.2018 Ukraine’s judicial information system.
What Are Ukrainian Virtual Cops Doing?”, 112.international, Feburary 5, 2018.
Moreover, Ukraine suffered even further because of the war and economic sanctions imposed by the Russian Federation.
Ukraine’s strong dependency on Russian markets and natural resources caused serious problems after Moscow imposed economic sanctions and stopped gas supplies to the country.
The hybrid war triggered by the Russian Federation generated serious problems for Ukraine which was unprepared for this kind of situation but succeded to adapt and fight against the hybrid threats.
The conflict made Ukraine a stronger state with more powerful institutions for fighting a hybrid war.
This paper presented the main characteristics of a hybrid war and the ways it is fought with specific examples in order to facilitate a better understanding of the topic.
To combat hybrid threats to national security a state needs political will, good leadership, and strong institutions which are effective and capable of coping with crisis situations.
At the same time, it has to identify its vulnerabilities in 55 RUSSIA’S HYBRID WAR IN UKR AINE different sectors (security, transport, industrial, economic, military, education, natural resources, etc.) and try to eliminate them.
Following this, a state, as much as possible, has to reduce its external dependency on any other single state for different products or resources.
It has to make sure that it has multiple sources of supply from other states.
Another step in fighting hybrid threats is to create a body responsible for identifying fake news and subversive news.
This institution must present true information and showcase the main promoters of the fake news for the population to be aware of their content.
Also, it should create public registries for unreliable/suspect sources.
Another option is to block the content.7 To counter the military component of a hybrid war, a state needs a welltrained army equipped with modern fighting technology and capable of performing counterterrorism and counter-insurgency missions.
The army and security forces should realize applied national exercises, war games, and have international training.
Also, good cooperation between state institutions, decision-makers, and military, police, and intelligence services is needed.
The latter must be able to penetrate terrorist and insurgent groups and provide relevant information about their activities and plans.
State security institutions must have efficient counterintelligence departments to block their intelligence officers from being recruited by foreign intelligence services.
In addition, foreign intelligence services must be specialized in offensive counterintelligence actions to allow false information to be transmitted to agents and to prevent their intelligence officers from turning into double agents.
High-Tech, Information and Cyber Conflicts”, in Connections: The Quarterly Journal, Volume: 16, No: 2 , 16.
Hayley Tsuyakama, “Anonymous Strikes Again, Takes over Syrian Defense Ministry Web Site”, The Washington Post, August 8, 2011.
Cyberattacks should be treated very seriously and the state should invest in scientific research and the development of specialized software and hardware able to fight in the field of cyber-security.
The existence of teams to engage in counter-revolutionary, counter-insurgency activities can make a decisive contribution to fighting hybrid threats.
Last but not least, the existence of an anti-propaganda agency to raise awareness of false news is imperative for countering a hybrid war.
Tom Finn, “Qatar National Bank Investigating Alleged Data Hack”, Reuters, April 27, 2016, 313.
Yet Another Group Hacking for China's Bottom Line”, Wired, June 14, 2014.
Alex Hern, “Hacked Satellite Systems Could Launch Microwave-Like Attacks, Expert Warns”, The Guardian, August 9, 2018.
Chris Graham, “Cyber Attack Hits German Train Stations as Hackers Target Deutsche Bahn”, The Telegraph, May 13, 2017.
Jeanne Meserve, “Hackers Reportedly Have Embedded Code in Power Grid”, CNN, April 9, 2009, 321.
Jordan Robertson and Michael Riley, “Mysterious ’08 Turkey Pipeline Blast Opened New Cyberwar”, Bloomberg, December 10, 2014.
How the West Fought against It, LSE Institute of Global Affairs, London, 2017.
DAUGHERTY, William E, JANOWITZ Morris, A Psychological Warfare Casebook, Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1958.
JOWETT, Garth S., Victoria O’DONNELL, Propaganda and Persuasion, Fifth Edition, SAGE, Washington D.C, 2012.
JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF, Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, KOFMAN, Michael, MIGACHEVA Katya, Lessons from Russia’s Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, 2017.
Lupta pentru putere si lupta pentru pace, trad. de Oana Bosoi, Alina Dragolea, Mihai Zodian, Polirom, Iași, 2007.
PIASECKI, Boleslaw, “Offensive Counterintelligence and the Challenges Facing Polish Intelligence Services”, National Centre for Strategic Studies, NCSS, Warsaw, 2014.
British Clandestine Psychological Warfare against the Third Reich, East Sussex, www.psywar.org, 2010.
VOLKOFF, Vladimir, Tratat de dezinformare, trad. de Mihnea Columbeanu, Antet, București.
Ukraine”, European Commission, 16.04.2018, available at ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/countries-and-regions/countries/ukraine/, accessed 06.09.2018.
Investigation Reveals Ukrainians Fighting in Russian PMC Wagner”, Euromaidan Press, 07.06.2018, available at euromaidanpress.com/2018/06/07/ karpaty-donbas-syria-the-ukrainian-mercenaries-russia-recruited-to-pmc-wagner/, accessed 01.09.2018.
KUZIO, Taras, “Who Committed Treason in Ukraine?”, Ukrainian Policy, 01.03.2016, available at ukrainianpolicy.com/tag/yanukovych/, accessed 10.09.2018.
MESERVE, Jeanne, “Hackers Reportedly Have Embedded Code in Power Grid”, CNN, 09.04.2009, available at edition.cnn.com/2009/TECH/04/08/grid.threat/index.html, accessed 01.09.2018.
PERLROTH, Nicole, KRAUSS Clifford, “A Cyberattack in Saudi Arabia Had a Deadly Goal.
For the Russian Federation it was clear that its influence in Ukraine and its fleet presence in the Crimean Peninsula were threatened.
In this context, Moscow understood that Ukraine would continue its accession steps to the EU and NATO and that it had to intervene to avoid such a scenario.
This report aims to identify the main reasons behind Moscow’s hybrid war against Ukraine.
On February 27 2014, unidentified armed men linked to the GRU, Russia’s military intelligence apparatus, seized the buildings of the main public institutions in Crimea and raised the Russian flag over them.
In less than a week, Russia took control over the peninsula and on March 18, 2014, the Russian Federation annexed Crimea.
Starting in March 2014, Moscow encouraged protests among the pro-Russian population in the eastern part of Ukraine in cities like Donetsk, Luhansk, and Harkov.
Since May 2014, Russia has used non-state actors in eastern Ukraine to act as its proxies in the war.
It has supplied them with money and combat equipment and, thus, they have been able to take control of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions; shortly there after, they declared their independence.
At the same time, Moscow started economic, psychological, and cyber warfare on Ukraine and has organized espionage activities on its territory.
This report aims to highlight the characteristics of hybrid war and the way in which the Russian Federation implemented them in Ukraine between 2014 and 2018.
