Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid 0MB control number.
The Ukrainian parliament approved a new pro-Westem government in February.
Russia responded to the change of government in Kyiv by seizing Ukraine’s Crimea region and annexing it on March 18.
In April and May, armed pro-Russian separatists seized areas of the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine, which was made possible by men, weaponry and leadership from Russia.
Ukrainian forces regrouped and made substantial gains against the separatists in July and August, but in late August and early September, United States and NATO officials say Russia stepped up its support to the separatists, including by deploying several thousand Russian troops to fight in Ukraine.
Both the Russian troops and the separatists have been supplied with hundreds of tanks, armored personnel carriers, artillery, surface-to-air missiles, and other military equipment from Russia.
As a result, Ukrainian forces have lost ground and may lose more if Russia continues to press its offensive.
The war has added to these problems, including the destruction of infrastructure in the Donbas and a steep drop in the value of Ukraine’s currency.
The Ukrainian government has received the first two installments of a $17 billion IMF loan designed to stabilize its finances.
However, the IMF has warned that if the war continues, Ukraine could need another $19 billion in financing.
The European Union unveiled an 11. billion Euro aid package for Ukraine.
The EU has imposed sanctions on over 70 persons from Ukraine and Russia held responsible for undermining Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as key state-owned firms in Russia.
The Administration requested and received funding from Congress for $ 1 billion in loan guarantees for Ukraine.
The Administration says that the United States is providing over $184 million in aid to Ukraine this year to help Ukraine carry out political and economic reforms.
The Administration strongly condemned Russian’s annexation of Crimea and its incursion into eastern Ukraine.
The United States has imposed sanctions against 64 Russian individuals and firms for destabilizing Ukraine.
On April 3, President Obama signed H.R. 4152 into law, as well as S 2183, a related bill requiring Radio Free Europe-Radio Eiberty and Voice of America to increase broadcasting in eastern Ukraine, Crimea, and Moldova.
Russia’s Seizure of Crimea and Support for Insurgents in Eastern Ukraine.
It occupies the sensitive position between Russia and NATO member states Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania.
Since Ukraine achieved independence in 1991, Ukraine’s political scene has been dominated by “oligarchs” (powerful, politically well-connected businessmen, mainly based in eastern and southern Ukraine), which have divided up the country’s economic assets among themselves and raided the government budget for their own profit.
His government was criticized for massive high-level corruption, in part committed by Yanukovych’s own family and close associates.
United States and EU officials expressed strong concern over the government’s human rights record, especially the targeting of opposition leaders for selective prosecution.
The EuroMaidan and the Collapse of the Yanukovych Regime Many observers have believed that, despite growing dissatisfaction with the government, there was little likelihood of public unrest in Ukraine, given widespread disillusionment with the political class as a whole.
However, in November 2013, the government made a last-minute decision to not sign an Association Agreement with the European Union that would have aligned Ukraine more toward Europe, at least in the areas of economics and trade, due to Russian pressure.
On November 30, Ukrainian special police attacked peaceful protestors in Kyiv’s central Maidan Nezalezhnosti, or Independence Square.
Through the next three months, the Yanukovych government alternated between attempted crackdowns and conciliatory gestures.
Elite “Berkuf riot police attempted to clear protestors from the Maidan and other areas of Kyiv, with the support of roving gangs of street thugs hired by the government.
The death toll may have caused support in the Ukrainian parliament, which was controlled by pro-government Parliamentarians, for the crackdown and the regime to collapse.
Yanukoyvch and many of his supporters in the government and parliament fled the capital by February 21.
Ex-President Yanukovych and dozens of other top officials of the former regime are being sought by police for their part in killing and injuring Maidan protestors and other regime opponents, even though he and some of his closest supporters are currently in Russia.
After Yanukovych and his supporters fled Ukraine, the Ukrainian parliament, now composed mainly of opposition deputies, rapidly passed sweeping measures.
Oleksandr Turchynov, a long-time top aide of Tymoshenko, was elected as speaker of the parliament and made acting president until new presidential elections were held on May 25.
The government includes members of Fatherland, as well as Freedom, a far-right nationalist party, and Maidan activists, but no key figures from the former ruling regime.
Nevertheless, many Maidan protestors view the new governing parties very skeptically, suspecting that they are nearly as opportunistic and corrupt as the Yanukovych regime.
Russia's Seizure of Crimea and Support for Insurgents in Eastern Ukraine Russia responded to the change of government in Kyiv by seizing Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula.
In March 2014, thousands of pro-Russian protestors demonstrated in the region, especially in the cities of Donetsk and Euhansk in the Donbas region and in Kharkiv.
Unrest in eastern Ukraine soon took an even more ominous turn in April 2014.
Armed men stormed and occupied key government buildings and broadcast facilities in the key cities of Donetsk and Euhansk, as well in Slovyansk and more than a dozen other towns in the Donbas region.
One striking factor early in the conflict noted by Ukrainian leaders was the repeated failure of Ukrainian police and security forces to maintain or restore order in eastern and southern Ukraine.
They admitted that local police in Donetsk and Luhansk regions were “helpless” against separatist forces and have to be rebuilt from scratch.
Explanations given for this phenomenon include low morale, corruption, and a lack of professionalism; alleged covert political games played by oligarchs affiliated with the previous regime; and sympathy for the separatists.
Efforts by supposedly elite security forces to restore order were often met with humiliating failure and substantial casualties.
Ukrainian leaders have used armed volunteers to supplement the regular security forces.
The leaders of the “Donetsk People’s Republic” and the “Euhansk People’s Republic” declared their entities to be sovereign states after the vote.
Acting President Turchynov said the real turnout for the vote was 32% in Donetsk region and 24% in Euhansk.
In doing so, however, Turchynov may have tacitly conceded that the “republics” and/or independence may be supported by a significant minority of people in these regions, which is in fact consistent with public opinion polls.
Such public opinion polls have repeatedly shown that the overwhelming majority of people in eastern Ukraine do not support separation from Ukraine or annexation by Russia.
However, polls also show great distrust in eastern Ukraine for the current government in Kyiv, in part, some analysts say, due to a massive propaganda effort in Russian media.
The destruction of parts of the Donbas in the fighting may also harden feelings against Kyiv among some inhabitants.
Current Political Situation On May 25, 2014, Ukraine held a presidential election.
Poroshenko is a pro-Westem billionaire whose holdings include Roshen, a leading chocolate brand in the region.
The lowest turnout was in Donetsk region and Euhansk region , where Russian-backed separatist gunmen seized polling places and used threats, kidnappings, and other forms of intimidation to stop the vote.
An International Election Monitoring Mission, which included several Members of Congress, observed the elections.
A preliminary statement from the mission said that the vote was “largely in line with international commitments and with a respect for fundamental freedoms in the vast majority of the country” despite the “hostile security environment” in Donetsk and Euhansk.
After taking office, President Poroshenko announced a peace plan to end the conflict, which included a cease-fire, the laying down of arms by the separatists, and the opening of “humanitarian corridors” so that civilians may leave the conflict areas.
Poroshe nk o initially supported amnesty for the separatists, except those involved in serious crimes, and the repatriation of fighters who came from Russia.
Poroshenko said he favors decentralizing Ukraine’s currently highly centralized governing system and guaranteeing free use of the Russian language in Ukraine.
On June 20, President Poroshenko declared a ceasefire to give time for the implementation of his plan.
Reportedly under pressure from France and Germany, Ukraine reversed its former vow not to negotiate with “terrorists” and held talks with separatist leaders on June 23, some of whom agreed to abide by the ceasefire.
Separatist forces did not respect the ceasefire throughout its 10-day duration, and repeatedly attacked Ukrainian troops.
They also continued to receive armed personnel and weapons from Russia.
In July and August, Ukraine scored the most significant successes of its campaign so far by routing some of the most professional of the separatist forces from strongholds in Slovyansk, Kramatorsk, and other towns, as well as besieging separatist forces in the key cities of Donetsk and Luhansk.
However, in late August and early September, United States and NATO officials said that Russia stepped up its support to the separatists, including by deploying several thousand Russian troops to fight in Ukraine.
Perhaps in recognition of that fact, on September 4, President Poroshe nk o said that he was ordering his military to prepare for a cease-fire on the 5* if a bilateral cease-fire between the two sides is agreed to at a meeting in Minsk, Belarus on that day.
Poroshe nk o said the cease-fire would be followed by the “gradual” introduction of a peace plan.
Such a cease-fire, if it occurs, could lead to a “frozen conflict” in which pro-Russian separatists have de facto independence and receive formal or informal support and recognition from their Russian patrons, such has occurred in Transnistria in Moldova, and Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia.
On August 25, President Poroshe nk o dissolved Ukraine’s parliament, and set new parliamentary elections for October 26.
However, foreign companies often cite such issues as rampant corruption and serious shortcomings in the rule of law (including a weak judiciary) as key stumbling blocks to foreign investment.
In addition, the war in the Donbas has stopped production and damaged infrastructure in this vital industrial region.
It is unclear what economic link s will exist between this region and the rest of Ukraine when the fighting ends.
Ukraine’s Gross Domestic Product dropped by 4.7% in the second quarter of 2014, according to the country’s statistical office.
Given the deterioration in the economy caused by the war, the IMF has agreed to combine the third and fourth loan tranches, which Ukraine hopes to receive by the end of the year.
Moreover, the IMF has warned that if the war continues, Ukraine could need another $ 19 billion in financing from the international community.
The reform plan will involve significant expenditure cuts, including cancelling wage and pension increases, cutting government employment and social spending, and cutting corruption through a new government procurement law.
Revenue increases are also envisioned, including ending tax evasion schemes and other frauds.
Ukraine’s government has already announced sharp increases in utility prices for domestic consumers.
Ukraine's Foreign Policy The Ukrainian government’s main foreign policy priorities are to secure international support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, including non-recognition of Russia’s annexation of Crimea, as well as international assistance to ameliorate the country’s dire economic situation.
The government is reevaluating the former government’s renunciation of NATO membership aspirations, but has not done so yet.
Some political forces in Ukraine are calling for Ukraine to seek NATO membership, given Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, while others are more cautious, perhaps out of concern about further Russian aggression or the belief that NATO is unlikely to accept Ukraine as a member anytime soon in any case.
At the September 2014 NATO summit in Wales, the Allianee agreed to set up four trust funds to help Ukraine’s military in sueh areas as logistics, command and control, military personnel issues , and cyberdefense.
Russians often point out that their ancestors spilled a great deal of blood to incorporate Crimea and most of the rest of Ukraine into the Russian empire, and a great deal more to keep it within the empire through many wars.
Russia reacted with hostility to the emergence of a new, more pro-Westem leadership in Ukraine in February 2014.
Russian forces invaded Ukraine’s Crimea region in late February and annexed it in March.
Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov has called for making Russia the second official language in Ukraine; and constitutional reform s that would confirm Ukraine’s neutral status.
Moscow has also insisted on “federalization” of Ukraine under which the various regions would have wide autonomy in the areas of the economy, finances, culture, language, education, and external economic and cultural ties with neighboring countries or regions.
Russia’s federalization proposal appears to many analysts to be an effort to permanently cripple the central government in Kyiv, giving forces in eastern Ukraine under Moscow’s sway a veto power over important decisions, including on Ukraine’s current pro-Westem orientation.
Moscow has so far declined to recognize the Donetsk and Luhansk “people’s republics” as independent countries or annex them to Russia.
Flowever, Russian official statements maintain that Moscow is asserting that the “people’s republics” are a legitimate expression of the public will in the Donbas and that their “leaders” are legitimate interlocutors for Kyiv in determining the future of Ukraine.
Some observers have explained the apparent variance between Russia’s words and deeds as Putin’s attempt to test how far he can go in destabilizing Ukraine while avoiding the imposition of additional sanctions by the EU and United States.
If Moscow cannot pressure Kyiv to agree to its federalization plans, once some form of negotiations to end the crisis begin, some analysts believe Russia may use the same tactics it has used in other former Soviet territories, including Transnistria in Moldova, and South Ossetia and Abkhazia in Georgia, to support and protect these self-declared independent states, leaving open the option of recognizing it later or even incorporating it into Russia.
Even if Russia does not recognize the separatist entities or send in “peacekeeping” troops to protect them, the chaos created by the Moscow-backed groups could still serve Russian goals.
The disorder could also cripple Ukraine’s efforts toward European integration, a key Russian goal.
Moscow’s efforts have been unsuccessful, even with friendly governments in Kyiv, due to Kyiv’s refusal to cede control of one of its key economic assets.
In June 2014, Bulgaria stopped work on South Stream, at least temporarily, due to objections from the European Commission about the project’s compliance with EU energy regulations.
Indeed, in March 2014, Oettinger indicated that the EU’s overall natural gas consumption attributed transit from Russia via Ukraine, had in fact, declined and that fact, along with increased gas storage facilities and pipeline interconnections in EU countries, has diminished Russia’s leverage over the EU in any possible future gas crisis.
If relations between the EU and Russia continue to deteriorate, European countries could take more serious steps to find alternatives to Russian gas, although they would not be able to replace all of that gas with currently available alternative sources.
Ukraine has thus far refused to pay the increased amount and is demanding a new gas contract with a lower price.
On June 16, Gazprom cut off gas supplies to Ukraine, due to its nonpayment of outstanding debts.
Russian gas continues to flow to European countries despite the cutoff against Ukraine, but Russian officials have warned the Europeans that Ukraine may siphon off Russian gas supplies meant for Europe.
Ukraine claims to have enough gas in storage to last until late this year.
However, Ukrainian leaders concede that Ukraine will have to purchase additional gas supplies in the next few months in order to maintain enough pressure in the pipeline system to supply gas to Europe this winter.
If it cannot, Europe may undergo its third gas crisis in less than a decade.
Ukraine has begun to import small amounts of gas from Poland, Hungary, and Slovakia this way.
However, Ukrainian officials admit that “reverse flow” supplies alone will not suffice to meet demand in Ukraine this winter.
In the long term, Ukraine could develop its own shale gas deposits and improve exploitation of its conventional gas reserves; import liquefied natural gas; or import gas from Azerbaijan, Central Asia, and elsewhere via pipelines through the EU’s planned Southern Energy Corridor.
Ukraine will also to have to make much greater strides in energy conservation.
European Union The European Union’s main instrument to promote European values and deepen economic ties with Ukraine is the Association Agreement.
Although the DCFTA further opens potentially lucrative EU markets to Ukraine, it also requires it to adopt EU legislation and standards and to gradually expose its own firms to tough competition from EU imports.
Under intense pressure from Russia, which strongly opposed Ukraine’s intention to sign the AA, the Ukrainian government armounced on November 21 that it would not sign the agreement, the first in a series of events that led to the regime’s demise three months later.
The EU and Ukraine signed the parts of Ukraine’s Association Agreement dealing with political issues in March 2014, and the parts dealing with economic issues (including the DCFTA) were signed on June 27.
However, the EU has already lifted tariffs from almost all Ukrainian imports at least through November 2014, when it is hoped the economic parts of the DCFTA will have come into force.
On May 12, 2014, the EU added 13 additional names of Russian officials, and two companies based in Crimea.
On July 29, the EU agreed to impose sanctions on Russia's financial, defense, and energy sectors.
The measures barred buying or selling debt, equity, or other financial instruments issued by five Russian state-owned ha nks with a maturity of over 90 days; banned future EU arms sales and imports from Russia; prohibited the sale of “dual-use” goods and technology to Russian military end-users; barred the sale of some oil exploration equipment and technology, for uses such as arctic, deep water or shale oil exploration.
However, observers have noted that the sanctions were crafted to reduce the economic harm to EU countries, for example by not targeting the sensitive natural gas sector; the sale of dual use technologies to civilian firms; or France’s planned delivery of two Mistral amphibious assault ships.
Press reports indicate that the EU is considering new sanctions in response to Russia’ increasingly brazen intervention in Ukraine.
United States Policy During Ukraine’s political upheaval in late 2013 and early 2014, Obama Administration officials urged Ukrainian leaders and the protestors to find a peaceful, democratic solution to the crisis.
President Obama and Administration officials tried unsuccessfully to reassure Russia that the United States was not in a geopolitical competition with Moscow over Ukraine.
The United States has suspended most bilateral cooperation with Russia.
Bank Rossiya, was also sanctioned due to its role as the personal bank of senior Russian officials.
The Administration also sanctioned 17 entities, including ha nks and other businesses.
Russia has not yet chosen to move forward, and these sanctions represent the next stage in a calibrated effort to change Russia’s behavior.
The sanctions imposed so far appear to have had little effect on Russian behavior.
Administration officials condemned the May 11 “referendums” held by the separatists in eastern Ukraine as illegal and invalid.
President Obama and Administration officials warned that the United States will impose additional sanctions on Russia if it disrupts Ukraine’s May 25 presidential election.
On May 25, President Obama congratulated the people of Ukraine on holding the presidential election despite threats from Russian-backed separatists, and on May 26, Obama congratulated Poroshenko on his victory.
President Obama met with President-elect Poroshenko in Warsaw on June 4.
The two leaders discussed Poroshenko’s plans for reforms, including in economic reform, improving the investment climate, fighting corruption, and reducing energy dependence on Russia.
They also discussed a package of additional U.S assistance to Ukraine to support reforms in these areas, as well as training and equipment for Ukraine’s law enforcement bodies and armed forces to help them deal with the crisis in eastern Ukraine.
Vice President Biden attended President Poroshenko’s inauguration on June 7.
For more on the sanctions on Russia, see CRS Report IN10048, United States Sanctions on Russia in Response to Events in Ukraine, coordinated by Dianne E Rennack.
Press reports claim that United States business groups with interests in Russia have lobbied heavily against unilateral sanctions, warning that European competitors could take advantage of them to squeeze out United States firms.
However, on July 16, 2014, the United States imposed sanctions unilaterally on key firms in Russia’s financial, energy, and military technology sectors—including Gazprombank, Vnesheconombank , Novatek, and Rosneft.
After the Malaysian airlines tragedy on the 17*, the EU largely matched and even in some cases went beyond these sanctions.
On July 27, the Administration responded by adding Rank of Moscow, VTB Bank, and Russian Agricultural Ra nk to the list of companies with restricted access to United States capital markets.
According to other State Department figures, the United States allocated $92,391 million in aid for Ukraine in FY2013 and $86,125 million in FY2014.
In its FY20I5 Congressional Budget Justification, likely drafted before the crisis in Ukraine, the Administration requested $57 million in Economic Support Fund assistance for Ukraine.
Ukraine is also expected to receive $6. million in USAID Global Health funding, $22 million in State Global Health Funding, $2. million in INGLE law enforcement aid, $1. in IMET military training assistance, and $2 million in Foreign Military Financing.
A reduction in energy subsidies is one of the most politically sensitive conditions the IMF put on its loan to Ukraine.
The United States also provided help so that Ukraine can hold free and fair presidential elections in May 2014.
In addition to three banking advisors already in Kyiv, the Administration said it would send additional advisors in such areas as public debt management, macroeconomic policy, and budget and tax administration.
A full list of what Ukraine is seeking has not been disclosed, but press reports claim that Ukraine has asked for arms and ammunition, communications gear, intelligence support, aviation fuel, night-vision goggles, mine-clearing equipment, vehicles, medical gear, and other items.
The amount included 300,000 Meals Ready to Eat to Ukraine in March, at a cost of about $3 million.
An additional $8 million in non-lethal ineludes explosive ordinanee disposal equipment and handheld radios for Ukraine’s military and engineering equipment, eommunications equipment, vehieles, and non-lethal individual taetieal gear for Ukraine’s border guards.
The funding will pay for body armor, night vision goggles, and communications equipment.
The package will support economic reforms; assist constitutional reform, decentralization, and confidence-building in eastern Ukraine; strengthen Ukraine’s border guards; support the fight against corruption; help diversity Ukraine’s trade and increase its energy security.
The Administration has notified Congress of its intent to use $ 19 million in Global Security Contingency Fund authority to train and equip four companies and one tactical headquarters of the Ukrainian National Guard, as part of their efforts to build their capacity for internal defense.
The training would take place in 2015 at a Ukrainian training site in Yavoriv, in western Ukraine.
As of August 2014, the United States has obligated or notified $52 million in security assistance to Ukraine since the start of the crisis in March.
The FY2015 foreign operations appropriations bill , approved by the Flouse Appropriations Committee on June 24, contains $215 million above the President’s pre-crisis request in aid for Ukraine and other former Soviet countries facing Russian aggression.
The Senate committee version of the bill, approved by the Senate Appropriations Committee on June 19, contains $100 million in additional funds for this purpose.
Other Legislation The 113* Congress has passed legislation in response to the current political crisis in Ukraine.
On April 1, the House also passed S 2183, which requires Radio Free Europe-Radio Eiberty and Voice of American to start a programming “surge” to provide accurate information to eastern Ukraine, Crimea, and Moldova in order to counteract inflammatory Russian propaganda.
On May 14, 2014, the House Armed Services Committee reported the FY2015 National Defense Authorization Act , which would prohibit United States funding for military-to-military cooperation, information sharing, and cooperative threat reduction and other nonproliferation activities with Russia.
