At the autumn session of the PACE, the Ukrainian delegation will try to prevent the elimination of sanctions on Russia's demand.
The Russians disagree with our version of the placement of peacekeepers in the Donbass, but have not yet offered any alternatives themselves.
Lieutenant of the Armed Forces of Ukraine found hanged in the territory of the military unit in Brovary.
Information from the SBU helped the United States strike on Russian mercenaries in Syria on February 7.
The EU expects the immediate release of Sentsov and all Ukrainians illegally detained in Russia and the occupied Crimea.
The Ukrainian diplomat, who was expelled from Hungary, returned to Ukraine.
End of Sentsov's hunger strike means he is in critical condition, Ukraines' ombudsperson says.
Latvian special services announced that Russian GRU repeatedly attacked the cyberspace of the country.
According to the Ministry of Finance, the federal authorities are also negotiating with him to abandon some of his operations conducted in Europe so that these operations do not found themselves under sanctions,""the newspaper writes, reports Censor.NET with reference to Interfax-Ukraine.
At the autumn session of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, which will be held in Strasbourg on October 8-12, the Ukrainian delegation will try to prevent the elimination of the possibility of imposing sanctions on the demand of the Russian Federation.
The Ukrainian delegation is convinced that Moscow wants to destroy an organization called for the defense of democracy, the rule of law and human rights.
The Russian Federation plans to employ mercenaries of the private military company Wagner to destabilize the Balkans.
They have already"" illuminated ""not only in Syria and Ukraine, but also in Africa and Asia.
I emphasize, in our opinion, perhaps it will be their next application in the Balkans.
Otherwise, it is difficult to explain the presence of a dozen citizens of the Balkan countries in Wagner, ""he said.
Guskov said that foreigners PMC mercenaries will be used by Russia to destabilize the situation in their countries.
He also said that many foreign fighters ""Wagner"", mostly Serbs, have already received Russian citizenship and still do not leave the territory of the Russian Federation.
Special Representative of the United States Department of State Kurt Volker is counting on a new meeting with the assistant to the President of the Russian Federation, Vladislav Surkov.
We have proposed the deployment of a UN peacekeeping mission that would guarantee security in the occupied territory and create conditions for the Minsk agreements to be implemented, namely local elections, amnesty, etc,"" Volker said.
The Special Representative of the State Department noted that the Russian side did not agree to the proposal, so he asked for their proposals.
Russians do not agree with the proposals we have made, but have not yet offered any options themselves, ""Volker added.
Recall that on September 5, Russian President Vladimir Putin expressed the opinion that the presence of UN peacekeepers in the Donbas would be in favor of resolving the conflict in eastern Ukraine, and instructed the RF Ministry of Foreign Affairs to make a corresponding draft resolution for consideration by the UN Security Council.
On September 20, Poroshenko, speaking at a UN Security Council meeting, said that Ukraine ""needed a UN peacekeeping arm"" and urged the Secretary General to send an evaluation mission to Ukraine.
In numerous statements of the Russian authorities, it was stressed that peacekeepers should be placed only on the line of separation of the warring parties, but not on the entire occupied territory of the Donbas and especially not on the Russian-Ukrainian border.
On January 29, 2018, United States Special Envoy to Ukraine Kurt Volker stated that Russia was ready to ensure that the United Nations peacekeeping mission in the Donbas was deployed not only on the line of collision, but throughout the Donbas.
April 13, I President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko said that more than forty countries are ready to take part in a peacekeeping operation in the occupied territory of Donbas.
As informs Censor.NET, this was written by a spokesman of the GPU Andriy Lysenko on his Facebook page.
It was previously established that according to the order of the military commander, the deceased from 06 to 10/7/2018 was assigned to a daily recruiting assistant to another military unit.
According to Lysenko, a group of the military prosecutor's office of the Darnytsia garrison of the Central region of Ukraine headed by the Deputy Prosecutor of the garrison immediately went to the scene of the event.
On the spot, in addition to the employees of the military prosecutor's office of the Darnytsky garrison, an investigating and operational group of the Desnian Police Department of the National Police in Kyiv and an operative response unit of the Central Directorate of the Military Service of the Law Enforcement Administration.
The body of the deceased was delivered to the Bureau of Forensic Medicine Kyiv, ""he said.
Information from the Security Service of Ukraine helped the United States of America strike at Russian mercenaries near the city of Deir-ez-Zor in the province of Hisham in Syria in early February 2018.
According to Igor Guskov, the head of the SBU apparatus, Censor.NET reports, in an interview with Ukrainian News.
Because we eat them have shown who these people are, as they are secretly killing.
Therefore, I think that our American colleagues, having received such information, properly arranged their armed forces.
Plus, psychologically, it was even easier for them, because they realized that they were not colleagues from the Russian army and even not mercenaries, but secret killers"", said Guskov.
He noted that as a result of the United States military strike near Deir Ez-Zor, 82 Russian mercenaries were killed.
The Obolonsky District Court of Kiev issued a text of a letter from former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, in which he requested the Russian President Vladimir Putin to enter troops into the territory of Ukraine.
In his text Yanukovych accused Western countries of terrorism and violence.
Chaos and anarchy, life, health and human rights prevail in the country, especially in the south-east and in the Crimea under threat,""wrote Yanukovych to Putin.
Former President Alexander Goroshinsky's lawyer said that Yanukovych sent a similar letter to leaders of European countries, but they allegedly ignored him.
As reported by the ""Apostrophe"", the prosecutors of the Chief Military Prosecutor's Office ask the court to sentence 15 years in prison to ex-president Viktor Yanukovych in the case of state security.
The European Union expresses its solidarity with Oleg Sentsov and, besides his prompt and appropriate treatment, expects an immediate release along with all illegally detained Ukrainian citizens in Russia and the Crimean peninsula.
By refusing to provide him with proper medical treatment at a hospital, the authorities of the Russian Federation violated his human rights as well as his obligations in the field. human rights under international law, in particular the measure of the European Court of Human Rights of July 25 this year, ""says Kosyanchych.
Recall that on May 16, 2018, lawyer Oleg Sentsov said that his client May 14 declared an endless hunger strike.
Thus, Sentsov demands the release of all Ukrainian political prisoners who are in Russian prisons.
October 5, lawyer Dmitry Dinze, representing Sentsov's interests, washed away that his client would stop the hunger strike on October 6.
Attorney Dmitry Dinze and sister Sentsova Natalia Kaplan reported that the convicted director began to decompose the liver and can refuse the kidneys.
According to Russian doctors, Sentsov may not survive the hunger strike.
As part of the Russian private military company Wagner, 10% are citizens of Ukraine.
The number of citizens of Ukraine, including the inhabitants of Crimea, who have adopted Russian citizenship, does not exceed 10%,"" he said.
Guskov noted that the Wagner PVC has no permanent staff, it is a contractual basis and rotation takes place from 3 months or more.
He noted that in this unit many Ukrainian citizens who fought in the Donbass, then 3-4 times were in Syria and participated in hostilities.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov announced this during a joint press conference with Italian Foreign Minister Geno Moovero-Milanese, reports Meduza.
Lavrov stressed that the indicated citizens of Russia did not hide during their trip to The Hague.
The Russian Foreign Minister also emphasized that the Netherlands did not provide ""facts or materials"" regarding the involvement of these Russians in cyber attacks.
Also, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation accused the Netherlands of implementing a ""reformed propaganda action"" against Russia.
On October 4, the Netherlands announced the deportation of 4 Russians who were preparing a cyberattack for the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and named their names.
British investigation believes that Russia is involved in the poisoning of the Violinist.
And the Ministry of Defense of said that missiles, which destroyed MN17, are not in their arms.
The head of state noted the need for preparation and adoption of appropriate changes to the legislation.
Today, regarding This technology, which is also one of the forms of interference in elections through money coming from the east, from Russia, I hope as the decisive actions of the Central Election Commission, so and the need for amendments to the legislation that substantially complicate this process and increase responsibility, ""Poroshenko said.
The President said that draft legislative proposals were ready for consideration by the National Council for Reforms and invited the newly elected members of the CEC to join this process.
All 14 candidates for the updated CEC have undergone a special examination. -The council has decided to increase the number of members of the Central Election Commission to 17 people.
On October 5, new members of the CEC took an oath in the session hall of the Verkhovna Rada. -The CEC elected a chairman , deputies and secretary at a closed meeting. -On October 8, Poroshenko announced that he was ready to discuss the candidacy for the last vacant post of a member of the Central Election Commission.
The Ukrainian diplomat, who was expelled from the consulate in Budapest, returned to Ukraine.
October 4, Hungary decided to send a Ukrainian consul from the country in response to a declaration by a non-Hungarian Hungarian consul in Berehove via a passport scandal in Transcarpathia.
The conflict broke out after a video distribution at the consulate in Hungarian passports in the Berezhny inhabitants of Zakarpattya appeared on the network.
The consul then advised these people not to talk about dual citizenship to the Ukrainian authorities.
The EU accused Russian President Vladimir Putin of illegally depriving Ukraine of the director Oleg Sentsov.
At the same time, the European Union expresses its support for Sentsovo and expects its prompt and adequate treatment and immediate release as well as the release of all Ukrainian citizens illegally detained in Russia and the Crimea.
Ukraine's Human Rights Commissioner, Liudmyla Denisova says Oleh Sentsov has stopped his nearly five-month hunger strike.
Russia, only verbally, without any medical certificates, assured us that his physical condition was satisfactory.
They would not have 'persuaded' him into stopping his hunger strike and would not have exerted psychological pressure on him.
A person with such goals, with such will, devotion and a sincere Ukrainian position, could not give up,"" Denisova wrote on social media, Censor.NET reports citing Ukrinform.
She noted that the process of ending the hunger strike is even more complicated and worse than the hunger strike itself.
I have demanded earlier that he be provided with highly qualified specialists, but the Kremlin has never done it,"" she said.
Only professional nutritionists have to work out a scheme for bringing him out of the hunger strike.
I demand that Russia speed up the process of granting me access to Oleh Sentsov.
If necessary, I will come to the Labytnangi colony even today, ""she said.
Sentsov’s cousin-sister Natalia Kaplan said March 16, 2018 that her Oleh reported on his failing health in a letter.
He in particular said that he is losing his hair and has his teeth crumbling into small pieces.
On May 14, 2018, the fillmmaker went on an indefinite hunger strike demanding to release all Ukrainian political prisoners held in Russia.
The Bureau for the Defense of Satrsme of Latvia reported that the Russian Intelligence Agency of the GRU repeatedly attacked the cyberspace of the country.
This is reported by DELFI with reference to the statement of the Latvian special services.
According to the Bureau of Defense of Self-Defense , Russian hackers attacked for intelligence purposes, in particular for receiving private correspondence and documents.
It is noted that for the most part, the purpose of hackers was the Latvian state authorities, in particular the defense sector, but sometimes the GRU also attacked private companies and media.
According to the bios, hackers used a phishing method the spy sent an email to the victim.
The Stsluzhba expressed confidence that behind these attacks is a group of hackers of the GRU, which is responsible for cyber attacks against the World Anti-Doping Agency , the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons , etc.
At the same time, the department emphasized that no foreign special services were trying to influence the elections in Latvia.
Let's remind, on October, 5th in large-scale hacker attacks of the Russian Federation accused Germany.
They reported that they were caught by Russians back in April when they tried to break the network of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in The Hague, which studied the poisoning of the former intelligence officer Sergei Skrypal.
It was also reported that Germany and Britain could impose new sanctions against Russia through cyber attacks.
According to the Sunday Times, Britain sees the possibility of a cyberattack against Russia in the event of a series of aggressive actions by the Kremlin.
Poland hopes the United States will impose sanctions against North Stream-2.
This was announced by Prime Minister Mateusz Moravetsky, reports RMF24, reports Censor.NET with a link to zn.ua.
I think that by the end of the year everything will become clear on this issue,"" he said.
North Stream 2 has to transport about 55 billion cubic meters of Russian gas annually from Russia to Germany via the Baltic Sea.
The transit of Russian gas through the Ukrainian GTS is one of the largest items of export of Ukrainian services.
In 2018, revenues from Russian gas transit surpassed Ukrainian gas imports by $0. billion.
Loss of transit by Ukraine will mean a loss of a significant part of currency earnings.
In addition, opponents of the project, including Ukraine, Poland, Moldova, the Baltic States, the United States and Denmark, argue that North Stream 2 will increase EU dependence on Gazprom.
Now the Russian monopolist supplies about a third of the total volume of gas used in Europe.
In ""Natskorpus"" so do not trust their potential partners from ""Svoboda"", headed by Oleg Tyagnybok, who last year even tried to negotiate separately with the public movement ""DIA"", headed by Dmitry Yarosh.
In addition, the ""DIA"" movement was also dealt with by the ""Right sector"", where Yarosh had previously been a leader, since, according to representatives of the ""PS"", they are referred to as ""younger partners"" at the talks, but they are not happy with them.
To win I need to choose the right tactics and follow it during the fight.
In addition, I have to be in great shape to adjust to the rival rhythm.
