The plan included a proposal how to reconcile Ukraine and Russia and lift anti-Russian sanctions.
In particular, it suggested to hold all-Ukrainian referendum on leasing Crimea to Russia, withdrawal of troops from Ukraine and lifting sanctions from Russia.
Kremlin called the plan 'an absurd' and denied connections to formation of it.
A week later Flynn resigned because of his leaked conversations with Russian diplomats on lifting American sanctions.
In an interview with “Strana.ua” Artemenko claimed, that he turned over material compromising Poroshenko to the American government with the help of Valentin Nalivaychenko – Head of Ukrainian Security Service.
He was the president of СSKA Kiev football club, later he went to prison for stealing $4 million through it.
Artemenko was imprisoned together with Mykola Karpyuk – a frontman of far-right Ukrainian organization UNA-UNSO till March 2014.
In 2000-2001 he and Artemenko were activists in protests ""Ukraine without Kuchma"" and were jailed for 4,5 years.
During Maidan at 2013-2014 Karpyuk’s organization became a part of Right Sector a union of far-right movements, which was set off during Maidan.
In March 2014 after ""referendum"" in Crimea he went to Russia to negotiate with Putin's aides about destiny of Crimea.
He was arrested by FSB officers on Russian-Ukrainian border and later condemned to 22. years in prison.
Its odious leader was a member of Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc before taking the leadership of a new political movement.
But after NYT article brought to the lights the delivery of a ‘peace plan’, MP was excluded from the party.
According to former „Right Sector“ leader Dmytro Yarosh, he was responsible for the finances there.
Two years after Interpol deleted the information about international search of Dmytro Yarosh.
Now he is non-affiliated member of parliament and an advisor to the Chief of the General Staff.
Artemenko told in Hromadske’s interview that couple days before the referendum on the status of Crimea was held on March, 2014, a meeting with Dmytro Yarosh, Mykola Karpiuk and other right movements took place.
During the meeting it was decided that Karpiuk with the head of Kyiv Right Sector department will go to Russia to negotiate on the top-level.
Then the question of the annexation of Crimea was arrised, and some propositions from a person, close to Karpiuk, appeared.
The next day after the referendum Mykola Karpiuk and his collegue frim Right Sector were arrested on the Russian-Ukrainian border.
Russian court sentenced him to 22,5 years of detention for allegedly participation in the Chechen war on separatists side.
Artemenko claims that he worked seven years in the United States and before returning to Ukraine, owned a logistics company in Qatar and that his work was connected to supplying military bases.
In his interview with “Strana.ua”, Artemenko said that his “peace-plan” with Russia had been developed by a group of Ukrainian MPs and two key figures of this story – the personal lawyer and special advisor of Trump, Michael Cohen and the American businessman of Russian origin Felix Sater.
According to “Strana.ua”, he got acquainted with Sater through mutual friends and Cohen he knows since the time the lawyer founded a family “business on ethanol” in Ukraine.
He claims that before that he actively cooperated with American intelligence agencies and allegedly helped to find Osama bin Laden.
Michael Cohen – Trump’s lawyer – is said to be the United States President’s connecting link to the Kremlin.
In January 2017 “BuzzFeed” published an article on Trump’s ties to the Russian government, claiming that Trump has being cooperating with it for many years through Cohen.
Among other things the articles says that Cohen met secretly Russian emissaries in Prague on 29 August 2016.
Now he is denying that he transmitted the Ukranian MP’s “peace-plan” to the White House.
But he confirmed meeting with Artemenko and receiving this plan from him.
In March 2016 the Obama Administration imposed sanctions on Russia for annexing Crimea and what followed in Crimea and Donbas.
One of Obama’s last actions as President was the extension of those sanctions.
Unless Trump changes something, they will last another year – until March 2018.
Meanwhile Trump has the right to undo the decision of his predecessor by decree.
However a number of American experts believe that right now the majority of American politicians – including some of his own team – don’t support lifting the sanctions.
On 11 January 2017 the Senators Ben Cardin and John McCain – representing two different parties – proposed a new law, by which the President has to give the Congress good reasons in order to lift sanctions.
The Senate told “Hromadske” that it may happen any moment, as soon as there is a need.
