Lawrence Enigmatic mystery 76 Love songs My funny Valentine 76 Race in the theatre Grey area 84 Economic and financial indicators Statistics on 42 economies, plus a closer look at defence spending Obituary 86 Richard von Weizsacker Germany's liberator The Arctic Ocean Earth's northernmost sea is stirring.
Printed by Quad/Graphics, Saratoga Springs, NY 12866 The cloud that is helping cure cancer.
Using Microsoft Azure and HDInsight, scientists and engineers at Virginia Tech harness supercomputing power to analyze vast amounts of DNA sequencing information and help deliver lifesaving treatments.
Now the next big breakthrough might not be found in a test tube, but in big data.
This is the Microsoft Cloud Microsoft Cloud learn more at microsoftcloud.com 6 The world this week The Economist February 14th 2015 Politics A summit on Ukraine in Minsk, the capital of Belarus, between the leaders of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine concluded with Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, announcing a ceasefire.
Meanwhile it was confirmed that Kayla Mueller, an American aid worker held by is, had been killed.
After a two-year takeover battle, Fosun, the largest privately owned conglomerate in mainland China, won its bid for Club Mediterranee, a holiday-resort firm that was wildly popular in the 1970s but has struggled over the past decade.
So you know the slightest imprecision can keep you from getting what you want.
State Street Global Advisors offers over 140* SPDR ETFs.They cover a broad range of asset classes, so investors have the tools they need to build a precise and diversified portfolio.
If you have a craving for precision, then visit us at spdrs.com/highlights.
Anvisfj'iis Precise in a world that isn’t State Street Global Advisors Before investing, consider the funds' investment objectives, risks, charges and expenses.
To obtain a prospectus or summary prospectus, which contains this and other information, caii 1.866.787.2257 or visit www.spdrs.com.
ETFs trade like stocks, fluctuate in market value and may trade at prices above or below tbe ETFs net asset value.
So do many Russians, including shameless Putinists who denounce the West’s decadence but exploit its schools and stockmarkets.
It should let them know that Russia, a great nation dragged down a terrible path, will be embraced when it has rulers who treat the world, and their own people, with respect not contempt, however long that takes.
The imf reckons that American growth will hit 3.6% in 2015, faster than the world economy as a whole.
America’s trade deficit, which was about 6% of GDP in 2006, had more than halved by 2009.
The countries of the single currency are running a current-account surplus of about 2.6% of GDP, thanks largely to exports to America.
At 7.4% of gdp, Germany’s trade surplus is as large as it has ever been.
And over the past year the renminbi, which rose by more than 10% against the dollar in 2010-13, has begun slipping again, to the annoyance of American politicians.
The maturity and interest cost of the debt, two-thirds of which is owed to official European creditors, are so generous that Greece pays a smaller share of gdp in debt service than Portugal and Italy.
The government is now required to run a primary budget surplus of 3% of gdp this year, rising to 4.5% from 2016 onwards.
If an athlete insists on running backwards, even the most patient trainer cannot help him.
Your pay is low for your qualifications-but at least the holidays are long, and the pension is gold-plated.
Teaching ought to be a profession for hard-working altruists who want to improve children’s life prospects.
Many Mexican teachers have inherited their j obs; Brazilian ones earn less than other public servants, and retire much earlier.
Yet it is possible to persuade the hardworking and ambi►► 12 Leaders The Economist February 14th 2015 ► tious to teach.
Teach for America, which sends star graduates from elite universities for two-year stints in rough schools, is being copied around the globe Private employers snap up its alumni-but many stay in teaching.
Such schemes are small, but show that when teaching is recast as tough and rewarding, the right sort clamour to join.
That may well mean higher pay-hut also less generous pensions and holidays.
Now he must make it behave responsibly S O SECRETIVE is China’s army that it began admitting foreign journalists to its monthly— and highly uninformativebriefings only last year.
And it would be a timely reminder to Chinese generals-some of whom speak dismissively of American strength-that America still wields a very big stick.
Their alumni do not stand out in the same way they often do in Britain.
Eurthermore, cognitive behavioural therapy is better at treating depression and reducing suicidal urges than drugs.
Yes, it is paid out of the tax pot rather than a discrete pension fund.
Eree bus passes, winter heating allowances and the like are indefensible if they are paid out regardless of wealth.
Ear from remaining “stuck with nearzero growth” those countries of the southern euro zone that have followed Angela Merkel’s prescription of labour-market reform and fiscal repair started to recover nicely some four to six quarters ago.
Eor Spain and Portugal, leading indicators project stronger gains ahead while, sadly, Greek indicators have started to nosedive with the rise of the Syriza threat.
If Greece now reverses its own labour reforms it will probably sink back into recession.
HOLGERSCHMIEDING Chief economist Berenberg London Greece’s debt looks unpayable only if one looks at the wrong statistics, such as the debt stock as a share of gdp, which you regrettably do.
Greece’s debt is at extremely concessional terms, resulting in an effective interest rate on public debt that is lower than Germany’s, and a public debt-service burden that, as a share of gdp, is about the same as America’s.
HENRY KASPAR Washington, DC Scent by post One of the hyenas depicted on the Eebruary 7th cover is cocking a leg while urinating.
Some of their experiments might work Hungary's angry media baron The invective that Hungary's most powerful businessman has unleashed overthe past few days towards his country's prime ministeris exceptional.
None of the popular hagiographies of St Va lenti n e give a ny hi nt of hi m li ki n g chocolate.
Standing room Yet again a story has surfaced of an airline trying to getapprovalfora standing section on a plane.
America's jobs report » I America'sjobs report, released on February 6th, showsthatthe economy is in rude health.
What's more, wages have increased 2 Schumpeter The network effect 3 Materials science Wings of steel ""'A woman's evolutionary reasons to play fast and Loose are Less obvious, for having many Lovers will not bring her more children.
Private lives People who work for religious organisations should think about the consequences for their personal lives.
Qobal Chief iMecutive XLIjroup trie Andmen, Chief iftecutivt Officer, Aon BenfieLd Qmip Chief finandaf ^ AHiCurifioni GtiterjH MdrgtretA WshLs trom.
Spedot RepmentottYe of the Secrirtary-Geneml for DiiOiter Riyk Auction.
HIGH TECH HUMAN TOUCH ^ ^ Advisor Dompstenc/ Based Training and Taaohing & Learning Material Pakistan, Islamabad GIZ dedicated to development TN Eontaxt 'The pft>^r4miiie the relorm olMix'dikiiul tniiitiij^ in Pdkiiiun jiitis id iftiprdve td, et^iuJ o|>|f 0 n unities in, Jiul ihe idevantie of vocatioiLiJ irdining in ilte OMiniry.
V('Tihiri ihe scope of the pm^jnmie, urgeied fiiejijiim wifi MTcnj^iKen die im^dcfnefitJtion pjnncr^ cjpjcity to ilevelt>p i,t]ni|)ete«Ky Iwcd tnUiir^ 4s well -b tcjchlti^ jtid IcJitiiti^ iiuictiih.
Your Profili You liavr a Master deg^, pceieralil^' in wcaiioiuJ iraining, eitgineeriiig or business science.
Y'bu also have at least 10 iivani of pfolesskuial ex|vrience mih designing, devrloping, itiiplementiiig and evaluatiiig qrt3T progratnmes and teaching and Irarning niaieriiU, ideally in an ijiientattdtLd ens'iidnniefu, preferable in Amtralia or New ZeabiKi. lirachlng ex^Terieirce j^itned ai vocaikutat colleges would lie a fnitlieT advantage.
You have ex|Jeiicnceof coofieraiing with jm{dej»enting Olga nUatio ns and WdikingW'ith nmltinaiianal teams, pteictahly in ctiumries undergoing conHici and cruik Further inforniaikui on the position can be found ai www«gie^dc/jobs« JoblD20B2S, OtBitflHt SmitHhan lur InlirivitilimtB Zi.ifl4iiiRMn«r|i*1 E$ll] www.gii.de/jobs InterEjccc is the glob;]] leader to getting top executives to the pinnjcic of their orcers.
STATT OF THE WORLD The World Economic Forum is the international institution committed to improving the state of the world through public-private cooperation.
The Tropical Forest Alliance 2020 is a global public-private partnership where partners take voluntary actions, individually and in combination, to reduce the tropical deforestation associated with the sourcing of commodities such as palm oil, soy, beef, and paper & pulp.
You are particularly competent at delivering international forestry or agricultural partnerships, publicprivate engagement, project and team management, public speaking, problem solving and synthesizing.
As the director of TEA 2020, you will be its recognized leader to all external constituents, partners and within the World Economic Eorum and our various networks.
Specifically, as guided by the TEA 2020 steering committee, you will lead and manage the TEA 2020 secretariat, ensuring its objectives and expected deliverables are met on time, with the right impact and within budget.
Your key responsibilitiesi * Provide intellectual, strategic and operational leadership in developing the Department's work program; * Lead and manage the REPRO Department ensuring it fulfils its mission; * Develop and deploy a culture of service in interfacing with various stakeholders; * Act as a catalyser and generator of innovation and changes; * Contribute to enhance the reputation of the Authority in the provision of excellence in scientific output.
Your skills; * Expe fierce in strategic leadership, in particular in scientific areas related to EFSA's remit; * Experience in facilitating and/or promoting scientific cooperation with a wide range of stakeholders; Experience in budgetary, hnarvcial and human resources management; * Experience in scientific working processes, including the processing of regulated products applications and dossiers; * Good knowledge of Risk Assessment and EU food and feed safety principles.
The Economist February 14th 2015 18 Executive Focus GREEN CLIMATE FUND RARE Opportunities in Seoui / Songdo Korea The Green Climate Fund is a newly established multilateral finance institution.
Economist London-based covering Eyrope As the research and ana^is division of the Economist Groups The Econon^ist Intelligence Unit helps leaders prepare for opportunity, empowering them to act with confidence when making strategic dedsions.
The OU is the global star>dard in providing quality, actionable intelligence to the public and private sector, assessing issues that impact the marketplace for over two hundred countries, Respor^sible for production a nd quality, you wi ll contri bute to all a reas of the region's editorial output undertaking economic and political forecasting and analysis; demonstrating outstanding editorial standards, intellectual leadership and analytical capabibtyt and repfesenting the EIU externally.
This will involve focusing on specified countries to produce several reports per month; leading Ely thinking on those countries; preparing daily research notes which interpret political and economic events; and commissioning contributors.
To succeed you must have experience of analysing a r>d forecasting political and economic trends; strong writing and editing skills in Ingbsh; the ability to organise, prioritise and remain calm under pressure; and a collaborative, quabty-consdous approach.
This is an opportunity for inotvkJua^s, companies. tn»nktanks, acaoemic and rese.rrinsttutions to undeftake short ‘tenn assignments for the Commonwealth Secret ar at on financing for OevelOpment poicy issues.
G20 workings and policy: debt sustainability: innovative finance for development: global partnership for development Internatlcmal and national pdDik, and private finance, development co-operaijon; and iFi financing policy We are seeking to estab*sh a poo* of spec^st expertise which we can qyicWy access Con&tXtants w# be ^^proached to undertake specific asslgrmerns such as research and analyses lat times to publication starxiaroh preparing policy papers and briefs, and presentlng/faciMtatinq C&scussions at Commonweafth.
But on February 12th, after all-night talks, they were put away “No good news,” said Retro Poroshenko, Ukraine’s president.
Mr Putin’s purpose is not to rebuild the Soviet empire-he knows this is impossiblehut to protect Russia’s sovereignty.
Also in this section 21 Russia's European supporters Behind Russia’s confrontation with the West lies a clash of ideas.
Russia feels threatened not by any individual European state, but by the European Union and nato, which it regards as ex►► 20 Briefing What Russia wants The Economist February 14th 2015 ► pansionist.
International Institute for Strategic Studies *26 countries it hard for multinational bodies such as NATO and the eu to craft a response.
Nearly all its large-scale military exercises in the past decade have featured simulations of limited nuclear strikes, in►► Briefing What Russia wants 21 The Economist February 14th 2015 ► eluding one on Warsaw.
And it would end Ukraine’s hopes of ever regaining sovereignty over its territory other than on Russian terms, which would undoubtedly include staying out of the Eu and nato.
Such behaviour is in►► Russia's European supporters In the Kremlin’s pocket Who backs Putin, and why P opulist parties of both right and left, many pro-Russian, did well in last May’s European elections, taking between them a quarter of the seats.
Syriza is cool on sanctions against Russia, and opposed to expanding them.
Its leader has accused the West of double standards in dealing with Russia.
France’s National Front, the foremost right-nationalist party, openly admires Mr Putin.
Hungary’s far-right Jobbik party, which won 20% of the vote in parliamentary elections last April, is avowedly pro-Russian.
And UKip’s leader, Nigel Farage, has called Mr Putin the world leader he most admires-at least as a political operator.
Russian media falsely portrayed these lackeys as official, independent election observers.
Political Capital; Gallup Analytics; The Economist *2014, % of respondents 22 Briefing What Russia wants The Economist February 14th 2015 ► tended to test Western air defences, and was last seen in the cold war.
What troubles Mr Stoltenberg greatly ah out Mr Putin’s new, angry Russia is that it is harder to deal with than the old Soviet Union.
David Axelrod meets reality For daily analysis and debate on America, visit Economist.com/unitedstates Economist.com/blogs/democracyinamerica Private schools Pro choice MILWAUKEE With Republicans resurgent, school vouchers are back O N THE desk of Zeus Rodriguez, the president of St Anthony School in Milwaukee, a mini Republican primary is underway A signed photograph of Scott Walker, the governor of Wisconsin, competes for space with snaps of Rand Paul and Jeb Bush-all three of them presidential hopefuls.
Private Schools occupation and possessions most of the change is taking place lower down, thanks to vouchers aimed at poor kids in awful public schools.
Only now are they being ex►► 24 United States The Economist February 14th 2015 ► tended to families wealthy enough that they might have sent their children to lowcost private schools anyway Some states use tax credits to reimburse parents for private tuition.
Under the dc scheme, each voucher is worth $8,500 a year, compared with $17,500 to educate a child in the public school system.
There are sound public-health reasons for taxing tobacco but as the map shows, the higher the taxes, the biggerthe black market.
Firms added more than im net new jobs in the three months to January, the best showing since 1997.
Among 16 -19-yearold men, hit hard by the recession, unemployment is now 11 percentage points lower than its 2009 peak.
Things are also looking better for those T he father of Maj or Maj or, a character in Catch 22, a novel by Joseph Heller, makes a good living not growing alfalfa.
Between 2008 and 2012, $io.m was paid to farmers who had been dead for over a year.
Most of the money goes to big, rich farmers producing staalready in work.
Average weekly earnings in January were 2.8% higher than they were a year earlier, the biggest increase since mid-2011.
That would lead to big problems in an economy where inflation will remain close to zero in 2015 and gdp growth is not wild.
Ms Yellen should enjoy the recovery while it lasts. ■ pie commodities such as corn and soyabeans in states such as Iowa.
This new system was meant to save around $23 billion over a decade-partly through cuts to food stamps for hard-up families, a welfare programme which, ►► Farm subsidies Milking taxpayers WASHINGTON, DC As crop prices fall, farmers grow subsidies instead Move forward.
No matter how complex your business questions, we have the capabilities and experience to deliver the answers you need to move forward.
As the world's largest consulting firm, we can help you take decisive action and achieve sustainable results. www.deloitte.com/confidence Deloitte.
Ominously, on February loth the usda predicted that net farm income would decline by 32% between 2014 and 2015.
Falling prices reduce the cost of subsidised crop insurance to the taxA POLITICAL eternity ago, back in May ,2013, President Barack Obama felt able to boast that the core of al-Oaeda in Pakistan and Afghanistan was on a path to defeat, allowing America to declare an end to the global war on terror that began after the September uth 2001 attacks.
Alfalfa non-growers still have bumper times ahead. ■ lamic State and its allies.
Though reactions do not divide perfectly along party lines, some Democrats grumbled that the new aumf, which would need renewing after three years, is too vague, lacks geographic limits and sets no timetable for repealing the 2001 aumf.
Mr Obama already claims legal authority for today’s strikes under a broad reading of the 2001 AUMF, which permits attacks on al-Oaeda and “associated” groups, as well as under his presidential powers of national self-defence.
This new authorisation invites the Republican-controlled Congress to give explicit backing for a long-lasting campaign to “degrade and defeat” is.
Some Democrats, including members of Congress who drew up their own draft AUMFs last year, fret that the current language could allow Mr Obama or his successor to launch a fresh ground war in the Middle East.
But rather than supersede that old authorisation or place time limits on its validity, this new 2015 aumf “builds on and adds to it”, he says.
Eor inside this courthouse Alabama’s first same-sex marriages were solemnised on Eebruary 9th.
On Eebruary 8th, shortly before the first gay marriages were due to take place, Roy Moore, the chief justice of the state Supreme Court, ordered probate judges in Alabama not to allow them.
In Arkansas as a whole, tickets have sold 2. times as fast as Eandango, an online ticket seller, expected.
However, “they won’t say anything because they [will bel in the same situation,” she predicts.
Gay couples in Mobile were not allowed to wed on Eebruary 9th, but many gathered to celebrate anyway before one of the city’s Mardi Gras parades.
In memoirs published on February 10th Mr Axelrod recalls fretting, soon after the inauguration in 2009, that White House insiders were already talking about breaking Mr Obama’s campaign commitments.
Even if the country is more resigned to partisanship than in 2008, that is still true.
As well as rewarding supporters with state] obs (the public payroll has more than doubled in 16 years), Chavez expropriated or nationalised 1,200 companies, from steelworks to a maker of cleaning products.
Some $20-25 billion was ►► 32 The Americas ► swindled in this way in 2012 alone, according to Jorge Giordani, who as Chavez’s economic guru was the architect of the system.
Even before the oil price collapsed, “21st-century socialism” had become unaffordable.
Between them, the government and pdvsa, the state oil company, issued more debt than any other emerging economy in 2007-11.
The fiscal deficit is heading for 20% of gdp this year, according to independent economists.
This includes debt payments by the government and pdvsa adding up to $10. billion in 2015.
On Eebruary 10th it announced changes to the foreign-exchange regime that would charge some importers closer to the market rate for dollars.
Sintesis Financiera unemployment rate % 18 Estimate t Forecast ^Excludes price-controlled goods and seasonal fluctuations tough measures required to stabilise the economy it is doubtless because he fears the anger of his own political base if subsidies are withdrawn.
Outflows: Oil revenue ► Non-oil exports ► Borrowing : Imports ^ Services Debt balance payments Other 90 Source: Moody's *Estimate tporecast The Economist February 14th 2015 studied more than 45,000 rulings issued in 2004-13 by the constitutional, administrative and electoral chambers of the supreme court and found that in no case did they rule against the government.
Mr Capriles’s strategy is to win a parliamentary election due by the end of this year, and then perhaps trigger a referendum to recall Mr Maduro, which the constitution allows in 2016.
Prosecutors have identified at least 2. billion reais in “suspicious payments” on Petrobras contracts; in a plea bargain, the company’s former purchasing chief has revealed that 3% of the value of all his division’s contracts was diverted to the PT and its allies for personal gain or campaign finance.
Petrobras itself has scrapped two of the unbuilt refineries, after spending $1 billion on them; it has abandoned work on doubling output at another and on revamping a petrochemonboth sides.
Mr Lopez, the propaganda holds, is a fascist who would strip the poor of everything they have gained.
Eixing the level of national content so high was a recipe for delay and extra cost.
Malaysia's dark side For daily analysis and debate on Asia, visit Economist.com/asia Indian politics Mufflerman triumphs As voters grow more demanding, an opposition party sweeps Delhi P OLITICAL cycles in India are speeding up.
Assembly polls in Delhi on February 7th gave Mr Kejriwal one of the biggest wins for any party, anywhere in India, since independence, aap won 67 of 70 seats.
If the election had been held in July the earliest plausible date, enthusiasm for Mr Modi might have swept in the bjp, which has recently won four other state polls.
Many voters, even some bjp mps privately, welcomed a check on what is widely seen as his arrogance; he is known as highhanded and aloof in government.
One bjp minister, in Delhi in December, called non-Hindus “bastards” and earned only a light reprimand from Mr Modi.
The aap’s main strategist, Yogendra Yadav, talks of his party filling a vacuum in the national opposition.
A test looms in assembly elections in poor but populous Bihar, where the bjp hopes to expand.
Instead he got into a scrape of his own on January 26th when he awarded a knighthood to Prince Philip, the husband of Australia’s head of state.
Naha / , a area OF ENLARGEMENT m election victory last November with a pledge to stop the project.
Hiroshi Ashitomi, a protest leader, says that according to ancient Okinawan lore a paradise known as nirai kanai lies out to sea.
One member of his review panel worries that the governor may have appointed too many conserva►► Asia 37 The Economist February 14th 2015 ► tive lawyers to it who are not especially worried about the Henoko project.
Vietnam’s youthful population of 9om adds up to 1.5m each year to the growing work pool.
Once, Vietnamese sought to work in the Soviet Union and its satellites.
Down the road, terrified puppy-eyes stare out from a metal cage beside a dog restaurant’s kitchen.
Permits were later issued again on a trial basis, but Vietnam’s labour ministry said in January that South Korea would close the gates again unless the share of illegal workers among tons of them as they were being smuggled from China to fill soup pots in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital.
Ms Hang says she has already saved the $3,200 needed for the renovation of the family home.
An important factor in keeping these elements together has been Mr Anwar himself A former deputy prime minister, he fell out with his mentor, Mahathir Mohamad, during the Asian financial crisis in 1998, and emerged as the leading advocate of re/ormasi-fundamental reform of an ossified, corrupt political system.
So, unfairly or not, the case has harmed the image of Malaysia’s judiciary, and, to the extent that he is seen as implicated in its decisions, of Mr Najib himself Already his reputation as a liberal and moderate has been dented by his government’s use of another archaic and draconian law, on sedition, to hound its critics.
They have been handed a weapon in the troubles surrounding imdb, a sovereign-wealth fund, whose board of advisers Mr Najib chairs.
Politicians from both the opposition and umno have called for investigations into imbd.
Even economic reforms-where he has a respectable record of, for example, widening the tax base and cutting fuel subsidies-may stall The most difficult ones require the ending of Malaysia’s rules mandating commercial discrimination in favour of the Malay majority, a system to which many in umno are wedded.
The pla is the party’s armed wing-its soldiers swear allegiance to it rather than the people or the country.
Eighting military graft is intended to enhance both of these qualities.
In the 1990s the pla, at first with the party’s blessing, dived into commerce.
In 1998 President Jiang Zemin called a halt to most pla commerce, but the armed forces never rid themselves of graft.
Mr Xi’s military clout gives him a greater chance of success than his predecessors in curbing graft in the pla.
The Chinese New Year holiday, and with it a peak in consumption and prices, scuttles back and forth between January and Eebruary (in the Gregorian calendar), complicating the annual comparisons.
The Erench director, Jean-Jacques Annaud, had been banned from China for making “Seven Years in Tibet”, a film released in 1997 that depicts the Chinese army invading Tibet and portrays the Dalai Lama sympathetically.
But China Eilm Group, a state-owned giant, and others made Mr Annaud a rare foreign director of a Chinese feature film, with a budget of more than $4om.
Mr Annaud says he was surprised when, in 2007, representatives of the Beijing Eorbidden City Eilm Corporation visited him in Paris to ask him to make the film.
There were some domestic critics online who did not care for the novel or its author, and who would have liked to derail the film project.
Because of the perennial calendar headache, China’s statisticians wait until March to publish the full range of data for the economy, lumping January and Eebruary together to assess the true state of retail sales and industrial output.
Audience figures rocketed to tens of millions as it won scoops that included airing video and audio tapes of Osama bin Laden, the late head of al-Oaeda.
World Bank; Arab *Annong population Social Media Report aged 13 and up Also In this section 42 Israel's partisan newspapers 42 Palestine's culinary delights 43 South African tourism 43 Justice In Chad and Senegal 44 Nigeria's delayed vote For daily analysis and debate on the Middle East and Africa, visit Economist.com/world/middle-east-africa rain’s mainly Shia uprising.
Private media is often little better since it is owned by big businessmen whose interests usually lie in buttering up regimes, cbc, a private Egyptian channel founded in 2011 by Muhammad al-Amin, offered airtime in November 2012 to a hugely popular sketch show by Bassam Youssef, akin to America’s Jon Stewart.
Yediofs attacks on his family, he bridled, were no longer taking place daily in print, but hourly on the internet.
Eor years he and his Israeli wife have brought tens of thousands of Americans, including congressmen, on partisan tours of Israel.
The Economist February 14th 2015 dude social media and small independent outfits.
Networks in rebel-held Syria broadcast local news via YouTube channels or Eacebook pages; a few including Aleppo Today broadcast on satellite.
The genie of feisty and critical media may be stuffed back into the lamp, but not the thirst for information.
Eorget the white vegetable that, when boiled, resembles a brain and releases a gassy aroma redolent of cheap cafeterias.
Translated literally, zahara baladi means wild flower, and it usually makes its appearance some time in February, just as the terraced hills erupt in a riot of colourful blooms.
It is a bright spot in an otherwise dismal economy; GDP growth has limped, at about 2% for the past two years and unemployment is at 35% and rising.
World Travel and Tourism Council that the rules will come into effect come what may.
A leaked report by Grant Thornton, a consultancy, for the Tourism Business Council of South Africa said the policy could cost more than ioo,ooojobs.
Mr Habre, now aged 72, has been living in Senegal since fleeing from Chad at the end of his reign.
A new Senegalese president, Macky Sail, gave the case a fresh lease of life, with the eager backing of Aminata Toure, an anticorruption campaigner who served as his prime minister until last summer.
With the endorsement of the African Union . they oversaw the innovative creation of the Extraordinary African Chambers.
Mr Habre could not, in any case, be tried before it, since his alleged crimes were committed before the icc was set up.
Last year the AU said it would promote its own continental human-rights court-hut incumbent leaders and their senior officials, it added, must be exempt.
Private polls conducted for both parties suggested that, had the vote gone ahead as planned.
Electoral delays are not unusual in Nigeria-the 20u presidential poll was postponed too-but this hold-up is particularly controversial because it was forced by the army.
Jibrin Ibrahim of the Centre for Democracy and Development a WANT Better late than never think-tank in Abuja, went so far as to call the army’s action “direct blackmail” of the electoral commission.
The question many Nigerians are asking, however, is whether the enforced pause will swing the outcome of the vote.
Frans Timmermans For daily analysis and debate on Europe, visit Economist.com/europe The German economy No new deal BERLIN Germany is investing too little-hurting Europe, the world and itself F rom Washington to Athens, politicians and economists who often have little in common all agree that Germany under Chancellor Angela Merkel is largely wrong about economic policy.
Public investment in Germany-shared by the federal, state and local governments-has fallen from 6% of gdp in 1970 to 2% now.
The main reason for low domestic investment, says Michael Hiither, the Cologne institute’s director, is uncertainty and nervousness over the future.
Half the firms polled by Mr Hiither’s institute claim that this makes any new investment unattractive.
The Justice and Development party has made unprecedented overtures to the Kurds, easing bans on the language and talking to the imprisoned pick leader, Abdullah Ocalan.
It escalated into street battles between pick supporters and Huda-Par, an Islamist Kurdish party, whose precursor, Hizbullah (unrelated to the eponymous Lebanese militia), was used by the Turkish state to fight the pick in the 1990s.
The PICK insists that Huda-Par has links to IS and that Turkey backs both.
She insists the hdp will win the minimum 10% of the national vote needed to win parliamentary seats in June’s election.
It is a fitting image, given that Mr Putin is due in Budapest on February lyth, two weeks after Mrs Merkel.
Hungary has taken a €io billion ($ii billion) loan from Russia to upgrade its ageing nuclear power plant.
The spectacle of a handcuffed imf head doing the “perp walk” aroused special outrage.
As details of orgies with prostitutes in Washington, Paris and Lille have emerged, the French are being torn between an instinctive respect for privacy over sexual behaviour and a creeping moral disquiet.
The presiding judge in the trial, which opened on February 2nd, made it clear that this was a criminal, not a moral.
But Mr Orban has since come back into line, supporting Ukraine’s sovereignty and stressing Hungary’s commitment to nato.
The case against Mr StraussKahn hinges on whether he knew that the women who attended soirees libertines, or group-sex parties, often organised in his honour, were paid.
Jean Ouatremer, a journalist who raised questions about Mr StraussKahn’s sexual behaviour in 2007, said it was time for the media to examine their own silence.
Ukraine, which borders Hungary, casts a long and ever darkening shadow.
Mr Timmermans insists his job is about getting Europe to work better, not acting as deregulator-in-chief But his approach has riled Eurocrats and members of the European Parliament.
In 1991, during a diplomatic stint in Moscow, he holed up in a government building during an attempted coup, talking to focal mps and diligently dispatching reports back to The Hague.
The soothsayer of subsidiarity Eor years the eu has been in firefighting mode, battling to hold the euro together or reacting to unrest in its neighbourhood.
Eluent and more-or-less accentless in six European languages, fiercely ambitious and the proud owner of a formidable intellect, Mr Timmermans is well placed to take on Brussels’s bureaucratic machine.
Dr No, who had grand plans of his own, saw them thwarted when he was buried alive under a heap of bird guano.
Europe’s bureaucrats and lawmakers may not be too fond of him, but Mr Timmermans should at least escape that fate.
Britain has slipped from fourth to sixth in the global defence spending league since 2012, according to sipri, a thinktank-putting it behind France, Saudi Arabia, Russia, China and America.
The hangover from what are perceived to have been costly and unsuccessful campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan and a sour, introspective national mood, reflected in a Commons defeat for the government in August 2013 over action in Syria, has made the political establishment fearful of making the case for what the chief of the defence staff.
The Milibandwagon Fo r dai Ly a n a Lysis a n d d ebate 0 n B ri tai n , vi sit Economist.com/britain wanted their country to aspire to be a great power and not accept decline-the highest level since the first survey in 2010.
The Conservative-led coalition can also claim success in dealing with the Ministry of Defence’s overheated equipment budget, closing a £45. billion hole left by the previous.
That requires departments that are not protected (as health is, for example) to cut day-to-day spending from ►► 50 Britain The Economist February 14th 2015 ► £147 billion this year to £86 billion by 2020.
That would mean Britain fails to meet its NATO commitment to spend at least 2% of GDP on defence, despite Mr Cameron again pledging to do so at the alliance summit he hosted in Wales only in September.
The owner of the Ivy restaurant in London withdrew sprsm in cash in a single day; his lawyer has said this involved no impropriety.
Despite saying in 2011 that all 6,000 British-held accounts in the files were “ripe for investigation”, the authorities have collected just £i35m in tax, interest and penalties-less than 1% of the estimated total in the accounts.
Conservative mps have gleefully pointed out that the misdeeds revealed by the leak took place during the previous.
Appealing 2,000+ LGT LGT Bank 2008 Heinrich Kieber In witness protection Unknown HSBC Geneva HSBC 2009 Herve Falciani Under French protection.
The Economist ^And second, unidentified ex PwC employee ^Corporate tax deals ^ Great f Courses’ The Art of Storytelling: From Parents to Professionals Taught by Professor Hannah B Harvey PROFESSIONAL STORYTELLER LECTURE TITLES 1.
Remember Your Stories— The Power of Orality Master the Timeless Art of Storytelling The gift of storytelling may be one of life’s most powerful — and envied — skills.
From Parents to Professionals Course no.13 I 24 lectures I SAVE UP TO $185 DVDj$254;95 NOW $69.95 CD NOW $49.95 +$10 Shipping, Processing, and Lifetime Satisfaction Guarantee Priority Code: 108280 For 25 years, The Great Courses has brought the world’s foremost educators to millions who want to go deeper into the subjects that matter most.
Labour’s early showing in the campaign has been more divisive than unifying, even as its appeal appears less national, due to the party’s shrinking support in Scotland and tin ear to the more afQuent south, by the day.
His objection is to the fact that, instead of trying to fix Labour’s big weaknesses-its weak polling on the economy and on Mr Miliband’s fitness for command-the Labour leader has mainly been promising to spend oodles on the nhs, while launching blistering attacks on business.
Boots, dared squeal, the Labour leader denounced him as a Monaco-based tax avoider.
Compared with the Conservatives, whose Australian campaign chief, Lynton Crosby, rules with an iron bar.
Out canvassing with an otherwise impressive Labour candidate, Sarah Sackman, in the north London suburb of East Einchley Bagehot was depressed to witness how quickly, when challenged to explain how a Labour government would be different from the Tories, she resorted to the lie that her party would stop the “Tory privatisation” of the nhs.
Yet she was following orders, Mr Miliband having instructed his lackeys to “weaponise” the nhs, on the basis that Britons love it.
Labour invented it and it is creaking under the pressures of an ageing population.
Pupils of xfA recruits do just as well in reading as those of other teachers; in maths, their test scores are better.
Also in this section 54 English-language teachers' woes But Teach First’s training has been rated “outstanding” in all 44 categories reviewed by Britain’s schools inspectorate.
The early retention rate is similar for xfA itself Some countries add weekend gatherings and seminars for participants to swap ideas and commiserate.
Recruits may even be “overloaded with support”, says Dzameer Dzulkifli, who runs Malaysia’s scheme-which could be a waste of more than their time, since such support is expensive in the rural areas where many are based.
Indeed, the cost of the xfA model is what may prevent it going mainstream.
Several schemes, including those in Bulgaria, India, Malaysia and Mexico, are doing better than the state at tracking teaching quality and student out►► 54 International ► comes.
A fifth of school principals in Washington, dc, are xfA alumni, as are its schools chancellor, Kaya Henderson, and several of her senior staff.
Many of those who leave teaching move to social programmes or start-up ventures.
Back in Baltimore, Ms Sarmiento says her main task is to ensure her pupils believe that, too.
Just over im English-language staff teach over 200m Chinese pupils, a heroic, if mind-boggling, teacher-pupil ratio.
English spoken here The Economist February 14th 2015 Many speak a scripted English in class and prefer to focus on the pen-and-ink grammatical work on which their pupils are examined.
In Japan, for instance, the government has said it will bolster the mandatory English requirement for children in primary school-hut only from 2020 when the country hosts the Olympic games.
Agustm’s colleague, Armando Velazquez, a mid-career English teacher, refuses to speak a word of Spanish in the classroom and makes the whole of his lessons conversational.
Even if the most promising innovations are widely copied, fluency will come only gradually; today’s pupils must first learn enough English to become tomorrow’s competent teachers.
But that is how Mr Wang-who favours private jets and flashy yachts (he owns Sunseeker, the British maker of the sleek craft seen in James Bond films)-celebrated his latest deal on February 10th.
The previous month he took a 20% stake in Atletico Madrid football club.
Why authors need to be entrepreneurs For daity coverage of business, visit Economist.com/business-finance erect bearing.
In August it launched a 5 billion yuan venture with Baidu and Tencent, two leading internet firms, to devise “online to offiine” ►► 56 Business The Economist February 14th 2015 ► services, in which consumers use their smartphones to choose products but are then led to a physical shop, where they buy them.
Citigroup *Estimate forecast Though sceptics may exaggerate Dalian Wanda’s dependence on links to officialdom, the firm’s recent move into cultural industries has clearly been made with government support.
Public documents show that it received at least 7. billion yuan in subsidies between the start of 2011 and mid-2014.
In December his firm held a celebration in the interior city of Wuhan to mark the opening of a culturally-themed development.
So smarter cars and roads equipped with sensors will use our highly secure cloud to keep traffic moving.
All nghts reserved 58 Business Fashion designers Strutting their stuff MILAN The purpose of fashion shows is changing.
With a loto 15-minute catwalk display costing up to a few million dollars, some industry commentators wonder if there are better ways for fashion brands to spend their marketing budgets than parading their wares at more and more shows.
A recent survey of the luxury industry by the Boston Consulting Group concluded that word of mouth overThe Economist February 14th 2015 took magazines last year as the biggest influence on consumers’ purchase decisions.
For $180 you Lean buy a Constellation Taurus, a 59metre, 8o-tonne freighter that is perfect for anyone looking to break into interstellar trading.
Its nearest competition is Ethereum, a Bitcoin-inspired publishing platform, which raised $i8m.
However, there is a chunk of the audience that “doesn’t want those compromises,” says gig’s owner, Chris Roberts.
GIG has already sent some of them a module that lets them take a tour of their new spacecraft, and another that lets them stage dogfights with other craft.
The Office of Eoreign Assets Control , the arm of the us Treasury that oversees sanctions, closed the loophole in August.
It said the transaction had taken place on August 6th and had been registered on August nth, just before the sanctions were expanded on August 13th.
You belong to yourself In another curious development, Rossiya later seems to have given away its remaining stake in Sogaz, by transferring ownership of Abros to Abros itself The terms of the transaction are unknown.
According to corporate records, a stake of 0.004% is held by a firm called Bolshoi Dom 9 , whose six shareholders (including its largest investor, Yuri Kovalchuk) all own stakes in Rossiya or are ►► 60 Business The Economist February 14th 2015 ► affiliated with the bank.
Until March 2014, 43.6% of Gunvor was owned by Fentex Properties, of which Mr Timchenko is the sole beneficial owner.
In several cases, says one, the European subsidiaries of Russian companies thought to be controlled by parties on sanctions lists suddenly appear to be only indirectly owned by them, thanks to the creation of a new corporate layer (ownership of which is hard or impossible to ascertain) to hold a maj ority stake in them.
Western governments design them with a degree of ambiguity, so as to encourage Western firms to play safe and shun any company that might conceivably be connected with targeted people.
By letting Russian-linked firms sidestep them through well-timed share transfers, the West may be weakening one of the most powerful tools it has in its dealings with Russia.
The Economist *Restrictions on financing in Western capital markets tLater transferred to Abros Business 61 The Economist February 14th 2015 Schumpeter | Authorpreneurship To succeed these days, authors must be more businesslike than ever T he mystery is worth a book in itself.
A LEXIS TSIPRAS and his radical left Syr/^iza party worked for more than a year while in opposition to prepare their policy platform.
Over 8o committees were charged with producing specific proposals for overhauling different sectors of the Greek economy.
At the end of 2009 Greece owed €301 billion, then around 127% of gdp, mainly to the private sector.
Today it owes around €315 billion , all but €70 billion of which comes from public lenders.
Panayotis Nikoloudis, a former anti-money-laundering tsar who heads a new anti-corruption ministry, says there are 3,500 cases of large-scale tax evasion amounting to €7 billion; they could yield €2. billion in 2015.
Second, it would reduce its primary The Economist February 14th 2015 budget surplus to 1.5% of gdp, from a target of 3% this year and 4.5% in 2016.
Cut►► Buttonwood The sky’s the limit Commercial property has been delivering excellent returns K eep interest rates low for long enough and the property market will eventually boom.
Sabina Kalyan of cere Global Investors says that prime offices (those in the best locations) in Madrid are now changing hands at 4.5%, compared with around 8% at the bottom of the market.
The world economy is not exactly racing, but forecasts predict gdp growth of more thani% in the euro area and Japan and more than 3% in America.
In any case, prime properties, I Safe as offices CommerdaL property, average annuaLtotaL returns to September 2014, % 3 year 5 year 10 year 0 4 8 12 16 which investors are most enthusiastic about, managed to weather the 2008-09 recession and so should be resilient to another downturn.
Deals involving development land fell by 29% globally last year, including a 3% decline in Europe.
Investors have even been willing to accept a negative yield on bonds issued by Nestle, a Swiss foods group, in effect paying for the privilege of lending it money.
And if inflation returns, property will be a better hedge than conventional government bonds.
Economist.com/blogs/buttonwood The Economist February 14th 2015 Finance and economics 65 ► ting them to a profit-neutral level and further extending the duration of Greece’s debts could generate savings worth 17% of GDP, according to Mr Darvas.
China’s Cosco, which already runs a profitable container terminal O IL’S fall may be good for consumers, but it has hurt big private-equity firms.
More money was raised for energy buy-outs in America in 2014, and more deals were made, than at the port, and Denmark’s Maersk were frontrunners among the shortlisted bidders.
But the buy-out firms had also begun to invest in oil companies themselves-a more straightforward bet on the oil price.
And Samson, an American producer partly owned by kkr, has also fallen in value.
Eigures released on Eebruary 9th showed that India’s gdp rose by 7.5% year on year in the fourth quarter of 2014, a shade faster than China’s.
GDP is typically measured by reference to the prices and structure of the economy in a base year.
Over time this snapshot becomes less relevant, and the GDP figures less accurate, so the base year is updated every few years.
Eirms’ top-line growth has slowed in part because prices are not rising as quickly.
IMF; *Fiscalyears ending March, 2011-12 national statistics base year from 2012 onwards tion falls.
The cso reckons gdp will grow by 74% in 2014-15 in real terms, half a percentage point faster than in the previous year.
The prospects for further rate cuts, and for the economy more generally, depend on what emerges when Mr Modi’s finance minister, Arun Jaitley presents his first full-year budget on Eebruary 28th.
The Eederal Reserve’s talk of higher rates is the opposite of what its economy needs.
The award is designed to provide work experience for a promising journalist or would-be journalist, who will spend three to six months at The Economist mitmq about economics and finance.
Inequality in Japan The secure v the poor TOKYO The problem is not the super-rich I N THOMAS PIKETTY’S bestseller, “Capital in the Twenty-Eirst Century”, Japan appears as another rich country in which wealth is becoming ever more concentrated.
It is certainly another rich country in which the book is selling well.
Now Schwab and others like it, including Vanguard and Eidelity are trying to become more like precarious] obs, who account for a rising share of the workforce.
The average annual salary for permanent employees is around Ysm , compared with ¥2m for less secure workers.
If people were paid for what they accomplish, argues Robert Eeldman of Morgan Stanley, the economy would grow faster.
None of that has stopped “Capital” selling overi30,ooo copies so far in Japan.
Earlier this month, for example, in an effort to broaden its offerings, Eidelity announced the acquisition of eMoney which provides wealth-planning products to a large number of small advisory firms who use them to bring in and retain clients.
Anyone who has recently visited a British supermarket will be familiar with such seemingly generous deals, typically extended to shoppers after they pay The four biggest British supermarket chains all offer some form of price-match guarantee, promising that their customers could not save any money by shopping elsewhere.
Net of the resulting £2 rebate, the upstart’s steak would cost just £3.
Eor instance, if some customers are too busy to shop around, a firm can sell to them at a high price while using a guarantee to attract more price-sensitive, hassle-tolerating customers.
Einally, a price-guarantee may be an attempt to signal genuinely lower prices and thus stand out from the crowd.
On close examination, that sounds like an effort to abate a price war, not start one.
The consequences are both good and bad I N NOVEMBER 20u an American icebreaker, USCGC Healy, set off from Seward, Alaska, to sail north through the Arctic Circle into the Chukchi Sea.
AiX rise in temperatures at the equator-from, say, 25X to 26X-will have effects, but does not change much.
Between 1996 and 2014, the rate rose to i48,oookm^ even though the past two seasons have seen an increase in summer ice compared with the low point in 2012.
The Economist February 14th 2015 ^ Also in this section 70 Replacing orbiting infrastructure 71 Measuring the sea's acidity 71 How violins evolved 72 Making holographic movies For daily analysis and debate on science and technology, visit Economist.com/science The two have different properties.
According to Mar Eernandez-Mendez of the Alfred Wegener Institute in Bremerhaven, in the summer of 1982 a column of Arctic seawater with a cross-sectional area of a square metre fixed 26 milligrams of carbon a day.
There has, for example, been a substantial increase in the number of cod-especially of sexually ac►► 70 Science and technology The Economist February 14th 2015 ► tive cod, more than seven years old.
A study by Bjarte Bogstad of Norway’s Institute of Marine Research found that the blubber of both species had declined from being more than 40mm thick in the early 1990s to less than 35mm now.
The whales may be suffering because the Arctic zooplankton on which they feed are being replaced by more temperate species that are harder to catch or less nutritious.
They also suffer indirectly, through the loss of their main prey, a fish called the capelin, which has begun to swim northward in search of cooler waters.
Dr FernandezMendez thinks a shortage of these may limit the Arctic Ocean’s productivity even if most of the ice melts and exposes the water beneath to light.
NASA; NOAA; USAF *FaiLed before repLacement On Earth it is a fact of public Life that politicians Love to trumpet new infrastructure but take much Less interest in maintaining what already exists.
Many satellites Launched forimportant purposes such as monitoring solar weather , tracking the climate and just helping people navigate are Limping along in need of repLacement.
One that is about to be substituted \stUe Advanced Composition Explorer, a solar-weather satellite Launched in 1997 with an intended Lifetime of five years.
That still Leaves a Lot of other elderly satellites in similar need of retirement.
Such marine measurements are important, however, in order to track the acidification of the ocean that is being brought Technological evolution Making sweet music Artefacts, as well as organisms, can evolve by natural selection B iological evolution happens by random mutation and selection.
As is also the case with living organisms, mutation and selection seem to have arrived at an optimal result. about by rising carbon-dioxide levels in the air.
At the industrial era’s dawn in the mid-i8th century, the ocean’s surface waters had a pH of 8.2.
Since then, they are reckoned to have absorbed about a third of the carbon dioxide emitted by the burning of fossil fuels.
Preliminary studies suggest that some ►► 72 Science and technology The Economist February 14th 2015 ► of these animals are already finding it harder to survive than they used to.
Dr Chen thinks his device might be commercialised for as little as $1,000. anb’s is similarly frugal.
To cut costs as much as possible it employs standard D-cell batteries and cheap memory cards to record the data.
But, although commercial lcds are cheap, the bespoke screens required for holography are costly because they need far smaller picture elements.
Dr Smalley was able, by employing red, green and blue light simultaneously, to create a coloured, holographic image.
The next task, therefore, is to scale the design up by linking many crystals together, to create an image both bigger than a single crystal’s display and capable of being seen from lots of directions.
But if the system does scale up in the way Dr Smalley hopes it will, then living-room holography may be yet another hoary prediction of the future that actually does arrive in the present.
Eliot 75 Lawrence before Arabia 76 Love songs, a history 76 Racism and the theatre For daily analysis and debate on books, arts and culture, visit Economist.com/culture MOSCOW The domestic response to Andrei Zvyagintsev’s award-winning film, “Leviathan”, says a lot about today’s Russia, and especially about the church Russian cinema Portrait of a country T O THOSE in the know, there are two Russian trailers for “Leviathan”, Andrei Zvyagintsev’s new film, which opened in Moscow earlier this month.
Had “Leviathan” been made then, the mayor would have been a local party boss, the new church a Palace of Culture and the priest a kgb general.
Like the icGB-the Committee for State Security-the church has adopted the role of guardian of the state.
In today’s Russia it is not the people, but the church itself, the film concludes, that has fallen.
To some on the Republican right in America, this evolution is a rake’s progress, in which oe is a debasement of the currency leading to hyperinflation and economic ruin.
At other times redenomination also helped to boost activity; an early version of oe.
The Economist February 14th 2015 prices were remarkably stable during this period; over the short run, however, the discipline required by this standard required some short, sharp slumps which imposed considerable pain on the working classes.
The advent of universal suffrage after the first world war made it impossible for democratically elected governments to impose such costs on their voters; commodity money disappeared and “fiat” money (ie, money that is what the government declares it to be) became the norm.
Jonathan Cape; £25 W ’HEN Thomas Stearns Eliot died in 1965 few other poets could claim to match his achievement.
Eew previous biographies have been able to delve into the early years of Eliot’s life.
During his time at Harvard-where he also spent time writing bawdy ballads with his drinking companions, alcohol masking his shyness-he was introduced to modern Erench poetry which would profoundly change the way he wrote.
John Murray; £25 F rom earliest childhood, Ned Lawrence knew that his family was different, in some unspoken way, from other families, and that he was not at all like his four brothers.
As a middle-class boy growing up in Oxford at the turn of the 20th century, young Lawrence was certainly idiosyncratic.
His letters from teenage cycling trips round Prance contained lots of information about castles, but only intermittent signs of real feelings.
But these bits never quite constitute a whole, comprehensible human being; much about Lawrence remains an enigma because he wanted it that way.
Parents, Mr Gioia Theatre Grey area NEWYORK A new play considers race in the office J ACLYN has an attitude problem.
Like many critics today, he is gripped by a regrettable need to say The Economist February 14th 2015 Tonya Pinkins, is black.
The two had been friendly, but the doctor’s machinations inject something toxic into their chemistry.
Anyone seeking a prescription for racial harmony will not find it in this play.
The answers, awkwardly, are hardly black and white. something about the internet.
But, as he notes, the love song has outlasted religious, social and political objections for centuries; it will survive Miley Cyrus and Justin Bieber-and grumpy intellectuals.
Th« C«mbrldg# Advanced Laadanhip P^ogramma brings together the v^ry ba&t International leaders for ibrea we«ks of inspiration, insight and iilumma [ton.
Enabling you to step back from your organ isatk»n, we giva you the c^nce to refresh your perspective and rejuvenate your thinking, ready to bring bnghtef i^as and more powerful (fiitiatives to your leadership.
Tbs School is also ranked independently in the top of UK bufmess sebOOtS for Its Business and Manaffemenr researcK {Times Higher iducation.
Wharton’s top-ranked faculty will empower you to inspire others through the innovative thinking and strategic vision required to create a culture of excellence.
Global Executive MBA High achievement takes place in the hamewoHt of high ecpcfctation.
TheXBAbrGfobof Lecrdem Ifa The Global MBA Combining the strengths of three vfodd-class graduate schooU end the disciplines of Internationa] relations and pubhe policy in modules spanning 14 months.
ECONOMICS AND FINANCE SSlPDET international Program for Development Evaluation Training JUNE 8 JULY 3, 2015 | Ottawa, Canada “Ww/ly 90% of tPD€T ponkipom wwtd retommend thk propram to a €alteapue.’' —Ajuiuat ivofuation Report, 2014 This program targets indIvkJuali who manage, conduct or furKl evaluations in a development context.
AMRO is in the transition period of becoming an international organization.
SPECIALIST Specialists will, conduct sectorial based economic surveillance and research on ASEAN-i-3 members and advanced economies, and work on CMIM related issues.
SPECIALIST Specialists will, conduct sectorial based economic surveillance and research on ASEAN-I-3 members and advanced economies, including works related to providing technical assistance to ASEAN-i-3 members in the area of macroeconomic and financial statistics, and work on CMIM related issues.
S MIGDi which will be located ecroea two The tWPa^irg'. to be developed &» private sector prqjecta by appropriately qualified deveUipc^ OFWP is announcing tire launch cf the QuaUncaoon ptoceaa for developera throUi^ the launch of the Kequeat Ear Qualification PRFQT document.
Experience emphasising integrative approaches to natural resource management will be favoured over engineering approaches or the provision of water for other services.
We welcome applications from everyone irrespective of gender and nationality but, as women are currently under-represented, we would particularly encourage applications from women, and applicants from Asia and Latin America at this time.
Applications, including a covering letter stating interest in, and suitability for, one of the positions, a fullv. with publication list , the names and current contacts of three referees, should be sent by e-mail to ISPC-Membership@fao.org by March, 10th 2015.
Nominations of candidates by third parties will be considered if contact with nominees and submission of all relevant documents can be completed in the same time frame.
The last dale for Sale of RTQ Bidding DcKtimsnte la hereby eidended upto 05 095015.
RFP bidding documents shall be issued subaequenUy id the Qualified Bidders, ahortiisted through Stage-l bidding prooees.
Ter^ino-Comrnercial Bid A Envei^ It: Price Bid) wttti Reveri* Auction from eligiC>la bidders on 'FOR Destination' basis for the following Packages: s.
Date and Tima of Opening of TechnoCommerelal Bids : 1630 Hm. on 17.03.2015 Bidding documents for aH ihe above mentioned Packages shai be on sale from 99.015015 to 02.035015 The dale A time of recekM of bids (both lechno-commercial and price bid) for above mentfoned padiages is up lo 1490 Hra. tST on 17.03.2015.
The date and time csf opening of Price Bids for the respectivB Packages shall be Intimated aeperalsly after opening of TedYKJ-Cornmefcial Bids.
NTPC Bhawan, SCOPE Complax., instHubonal Area, Lodhi Road, New Delhi11 0003 CIN: L401 01 DL 1975001007966. of frttffo Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries and take appropriate advice before sending money, incurring any expense or entering into a binding commitment in relation to an advertisement.
I Global defence spending Global defence spending increased by 1.7% in 2014, following three years of decreases.
Russia's own defence spending increased by 8.3% in 2014; it continues to spend more as a percentage of GDPthan America.
Other markets % change on Dec 31st 2013 Index Feb 11th one week in local currency in $ terms United States 2,068.
Listen in cars, planes and trains with no interruptions using the full offline listening mode.
The Economist Radio 86 Obituary Richard von Weizsacker The Economist February 14th 2015 Germany’s liberator Richard von Weizsacker, first president of his reunited country, died on January 31st, aged 94 F orty years, as the Old Testament shows, marks a psychological threshold.
The cdu boss revelled in political combat; the head of state stood apart, a figure of decency, dignity and goodness.
BE MORE HAN AVERAGE When you learn e language the Rosetta Stone way, you don't Just leam something new.
The Economist Espresso Our new daily app for smartphones With clarity, brevity and wit, our new daily app delivers a stimulating shot of analysis and insight every weekday morning.
