In explaining why he launched this invasion, President Putin falsely claimed that Ukraine was always a part of Russia.
And, just as he did the first time he invaded Ukraine, Putin made bogus assertions about pro-Russian Ukrainians being under threat.
To help sort fact from fiction and gain a better understanding of how we got to this point, the \""NewsHour\""'s Ali Rogin looks at the history of Ukraine and of its people's political independence.
In 1991, at the beginning of the end of the Soviet Union, Ukraine declared independence after nearly 70 years under Moscow's control.
And when Russian President Vladimir Putin took power a decade later, he began trying to get it back.
We will believe that Ukraine is not only our closest neighbor, but is indeed our brotherly republic.
At a NATO summit in 2008, he reportedly told then-President George W Bush that Ukraine was not even a country.
That claim ignores the centuries of history through which modern Ukraine took shape.
It was first home to the Kyivan Rus people, who were Scandinavians traders and Russia's namesake.
Over time, it was absorbed by Poland and Lithuania, and then the Russian Empire and Austria-Hungary.
A post-World War I treaty briefly recognized its independence, long enough to spark Ukrainian nationalist movements.
In 1932, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin deliberately imposed famine there, killing at least three million Ukrainians in a single year.
Indeed, by World War II, some Ukrainians welcomed Nazi occupation as a way to challenge Soviet control.
Millions more non-Jewish Ukrainians were also killed or put to hard labor.
The final piece was Crimea, a peninsula on the Black Sea, which Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev transferred from Russia to Ukraine.
But even after Ukraine declared independence in 1991, pro-Russian political elements remained, which Putin exploited.
In Ukraine's 2004 presidential elections, he supported the pro-Russian Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych.
Yanukovych ran against Viktor Yushchenko, a pro-Western opposition politician.
It would be a great mistake if Ukraine misses a train bound for Europe.
Yanukovych won, but international monitors said the election fell short of its standard.
They sparked the Orange Revolution, so-called for the campaign's colors, holding protests and storming Parliament.
The Ukrainian Supreme Court deemed the results invalid, and Yushchenko won the next election.
During the election, Yushchenko became ill and his face became disfigured.
The Ukrainian authorities are, who have been doing everything not to let Yushchenko win.
The main question is not in the direction of movement, but in the speed of it.
My task is to make sure that Russia-Ukraine relations take a radical turn in the right direction.
Yanukovych stopped trade talks with the E.U., instead pursuing a similar agreement with Russia.
That night, crowds gathered in Kyiv's Maidan, or Independence, Square, which continued to grow into a sprawling camp.
The government should be afraid of the people, not the people afraid of the government.
In my view, this is an attempt by the opposition to shake the current and, I want to emphasize, legitimate authorities in the country.
Then, the opposition and government reached a truce, and Yanukovych fled, reappearing a few days later in Russia.
I intend to keep fighting for the future of Ukraine against those who are using fear and terror to seize the country.
He sent unidentified armed men to occupy airports in Crimea, which Putin has long said was stolen from Russia.
Putin denied sending in troops, but said he would if asked, setting up a pretext, just as he did for this invasion.
If we see that lawlessness starting in eastern regions too, if people ask us for help, we reserve the right to use all options at our disposal to protect those citizens.
On March 6, the Crimean Parliament voted to secede from Ukraine and join Russia.
Days later, a public referendum rife with alleged fraud passed with 95. percent of the vote.
That July, the U.S., E.U., Canada, and other allies imposed sanctions on Russia.
More unidentified vehicles arrived in Crimea escorted by Russian police cars, and Russian troops took over more buildings.
As it is today, the Putin regime said it was helping Crimeans defend themselves, with little evidence they needed defending.
No, Russia cannot remain indifferent, and it will not remain indifferent.
Two months later, Ukraine elected its next president, pro-European businessman Petro Poroshenko.
But the events in Crimea had inspired pro-Russian separatists in two other regions, Donetsk and Luhansk, collectively known as the Donbass.
Russian-backed separatists began an insurgency against the Ukrainian military.
There were diplomatic attempts to reach a cease-fire, but those never held.
The fighting continued into 2019, when Poroshenko lost reelection to TV star and neophyte politician Volodymyr Zelenskyy, who'd once played an accidentally elected president of Ukraine.
He campaigned on domestic issues, but also wanted to restore peace to the Donbass.
Most likely, if I meet Mr Vladimir Putin, I will tell him the following: Well, you finally gave us back our territories.
Three years later, Putin is forcing the Ukrainian people further down that cruel path, while Zelenskyy fights to lead them out.
To help sort fact from fiction, and gain a better understanding of how we got to this point, the NewsHour's Ali Rogin looks at the history of Ukraine and its people's political independence.
In explaining why he launched this invasion, President Putin falsely claimed that Ukraine was always a part of Russia.And, just as he did the first time he invaded Ukraine, Putin made bogus assertions about pro-Russian Ukrainians being under threat.To help sort fact from fiction and gain a better understanding of how we got to this point, the ""NewsHour""'s Ali Rogin looks at the history of Ukraine and of its people's political independence.
In 1991, at the beginning of the end of the Soviet Union, Ukraine declared independence after nearly 70 years under Moscow's control.And when Russian President Vladimir Putin took power a decade later, he began trying to get it back.
That claim ignores the centuries of history through which modern Ukraine took shape.It was first home to the Kyivan Rus people, who were Scandinavians traders and Russia's namesake.
A post-World War I treaty briefly recognized its independence, long enough to spark Ukrainian nationalist movements.The Ukrainian Socialist Soviet Republic was born in 1922.
In 1932, Soviet leader Joseph Stalin deliberately imposed famine there, killing at least three million Ukrainians in a single year.Indeed, by World War II, some Ukrainians welcomed Nazi occupation as a way to challenge Soviet control.
But even after Ukraine declared independence in 1991, pro-Russian political elements remained, which Putin exploited.In Ukraine's 2004 presidential elections, he supported the pro-Russian Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych.
They sparked the Orange Revolution, so-called for the campaign's colors, holding protests and storming Parliament.The Ukrainian Supreme Court deemed the results invalid, and Yushchenko won the next election.
Yanukovych stopped trade talks with the E.U., instead pursuing a similar agreement with Russia.That night, crowds gathered in Kyiv's Maidan, or Independence, Square, which continued to grow into a sprawling camp.
He sent unidentified armed men to occupy airports in Crimea, which Putin has long said was stolen from Russia.Putin denied sending in troops, but said he would if asked, setting up a pretext, just as he did for this invasion.
On March 6, the Crimean Parliament voted to secede from Ukraine and join Russia.Days later, a public referendum rife with alleged fraud passed with 95. percent of the vote.
The political protests took on a military dimension.Russian-backed separatists began an insurgency against the Ukrainian military.
The fighting continued into 2019, when Poroshenko lost reelection to TV star and neophyte politician Volodymyr Zelenskyy, who'd once played an accidentally elected president of Ukraine.He campaigned on domestic issues, but also wanted to restore peace to the Donbass.
Three years later, Putin is forcing the Ukrainian people further down that cruel path, while Zelenskyy fights to lead them out.For the ""PBS NewsHour,"" I'm Ali Rogin.
Listen to this Segment Watch Watch the Full Episode PBS NewsHour from Mar 08, 2022 Related Mar 03 How to help people in Ukraine and refugees fleeing the conflict with Russia By Emily Sumlin Go Deeper russia russian invasion of ukraine ukraine By — Ali Rogin Ali Rogin Ali Rogin is a foreign affairs producer at the PBS NewsHour.
By — Morgan Till Morgan Till Morgan Till is the Senior Producer for Foreign Affairs and Defense at the PBS NewsHour, a position he has held since late 2015.
He was for many years the lead foreign affairs producer for the program, traveling frequently to report on war, revolution, natural disasters and overseas politics.
During his seven years in that position he reported from – among other places Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Syria, Lebanon, Turkey, Egypt, Israel, Palestine, Ukraine, Russia, Georgia, Haiti, South Korea, Brazil, Mexico, Canada and widely throughout Europe.
Learn more Support PBS NewsHour: More Ways to Watch PBS Video NewsHour iPhone App PBS iPhone App PBS iPad App YouTube Facebook Educate your inbox Subscribe to Here’s the Deal, our politics newsletter for analysis you won’t find anywhere else.
