The interview in the above matter was held in Room HVC-304, Capitol Visitor Center, commencing at 10:08m.
I am -next to declaring war, 5 this is the most important thing that the Congress can do 6 under Article I To hide behind that, to have it in a SCIF, 7 to defy historical precedent that we conducted under both 8 Nixon and Clinton, which guarantees the participation of 9 counsel, White House counsel in the room in an adversarial 10 way.
And then if we could start behind here 17 1 officer for more than 27 years, under five Presidents, three 2 Republican and two Democrats.
At the same time, I have been instructed by my 6 employer, the United States Department of State, not to appear.
I am grateful for all of you on the key congressional committees who have traveled to Ukraine in the past 5 years -and I had occasion to speak to many in the 3 years I was in Kyiv -and appropriating billions of dollars in assistance in support of our primary strategic goals, in particular, increasing Ukraine's resiliency in the face of Russian aggression in the defense, energy, cyber, and information spheres, and empowering institutions in civil society to tackle corruption and undertake systemic reforms.
I believe that all of us in the legislative and the executive branches in the interagency community working out of our embassy in Kyiv, with Ukrainians in government in the Armed Services in civil society, and with our transatlantic allies and partners, can be proud of our efforts and our resolve in Ukraine over the past 5 years, even though much more remains to be done.
United States officials who have spoken publicly in Ukraine to push back on Russian aggression and corrupt influences have been subject to defamatory and disinformation campaigns, and even online threats for years.
You don't step in to the public arena of 4 international diplomacy in active pursuit of United States principled 5 interests against venal vested interests without expecting 6 vigorous pushback.
A I approached the director general late in the afternoon -mid-afternoon on October 1st, because I had not had any contact from any member on the leadership of the Department.
A Well, there was a line in there that the committees had been attempting to bully, intimidate, and threaten career foreign service officers.
And my read of the 16 request would include that. 17 wmmm took issue with my raising the additional 18 information, and the conversation rapidly, I would say, 19 either escalated or degenerated into a tense exchange.
I said, welt, you say that the career Foreign Services are being intimidated.
Q And I assume you did not have any further conversations with 37 1 A No, and I think as counsel can confirm, once our 2 relationship was established, he, was taken off 3 of my account, and while I did not participate in further 4 conversations, my understanding is that the tone and further 5 back and forth between L and my counsel was fully 6 professional and respectful.
A He said he had not yet succeeded in securing an agreement to issue such a statement.
Q Had he heard about your interaction with A So that came later, because our first conversation was on September 28th, Saturday, when I was picking apples.
He then subsequently came to my office, and he was the only Foreign Service officer outside the European Bureau who initiated contact and came to my office.
So he checked in with me several times over the last 2 weeks to see how I was doing.
And so I very much appreciated him reaching out on a personal level and showing, as someone who's been an ambassador in four missions, including Afghanistan, understanding it's important to be responsive and engage the people who work for you.
A Well, as I mentioned before, that's why I reached out to the director general, Carol Perez, on October 1st because I had concerns that outside of the European Bureau, the leadership in the Department was not actually signaling its support for the career Foreign Service officers.
A Based on my normal procedures I would guess that I shared it with people who followed Ukraine in the European Bureau, as well as with the leadership of or embassy in Kyiv.
Q You haven't seen memoranda that -A I've seen the letter that I signed in April 2016.
Q You mentioned the documents that the State IG had provided to Congress.
So I -what I have been told, I first learned about it from | reporter who emailed me, a person I'd never had contact with, and to whom I did not respond, who claimed that she had seen the documents and asked me a question, and with the many dozens of emails from media over the last several weeks, since this story started, I didn't answer a single one, I forwarded them all to our press officer.
A This was after -it was probably a day or 2 after the IG came up and passed documents.
A My guess is, to the best of my recollection, I conveyed the information.
A I believe it may have been that conversation that she shared that she had had a similar conversation with him.
I had better insights into the mind of Yuriy Lutsenko than I did of Rudy Giuliani.
And so, that was the initial, if you will, 17 renewal of a relationship.
A To the best of my recollection, the President may have retweeted something affiliated with the Hannity Show the second day.
A I honestly, again, I have started following Twitter more than I did before March, but I was not an active follower at that point.
The deputy 12 director was a former Georgian national named Gizo Uglava.
A So immediately since our Ambassador and embassy was being attacked with allegations that we felt were completing baseless, we prepared press guidance, and I believe the record -the public record would show that the media outlets quoted that press guidance.
A The narrative continued to be pushed until the narrative was still out there.
A The request from the embassy endorsed by the European Bureau, there should be a high-level endorsement of Ambassador Yovanovitch.
And so as I said, this is an issue of believabi1ity about someone who routinely lies.
Do you know if the name 5 Vi tali -I apologize for these pronunciations.
A I think, you know, if we're going back -I don't know specifically about that particular incident or charge, but as a matter of conversation that U.5. officials had with Ukrainian officials in sharing our concern about the direction of governance and the approach, harassment of civil society activists, including Mr Shabunin, was one of the issues we raised, yes.
A To the best of my recollection he was one of the individuals who helped popularize the information that came out of the black book.
But at some point Andy shared with me where he had heard the first information.
Because Mr Manafort had spent a decade in 2 Ukraine, Ukrainians followed his reemergence as a U.5. figure 3 very closely.
He did, however, say, welt, I've 4 been friends with Zlochevsky for 21 years, and he's in Dubai 5 right now.
A The company, which is actually a major player, thanks to all the licenses he granted to himself, when he was a minister, is a serious gas producer, but its reputation in the industry is a company that throws elbows and uses political strings.
A Because it has a history of not just competing on quality of service.
You know, he made some statements that have been videotaped about how he played a role in removing Shokin, and as a result, you know, SI billion in aid was freed up.
Several 4 months after he became prosecutor general in the spring of 5 2016, for instance, former President Poroshenko in one of his 6 calls with then-Vice President Biden asked for a former, I 7 believe, New Jersey State prosecutor | mmm by 9 had served for 2 years as an anti corrupti on 10 adviser under contract to the Department of Justice in 11 Ukraine and spoke Ukrainian fluently.
And by time I got there, that case had been dismissed by the team against Zlochevsky, the person, by the team of prosecutors that were there prior to Mr Shokin going into office.
A It is fair to say that when she was Ambassador and I was Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, we were in regular communication about everything that went on in the U.S.-Ukraine relationship.
A My understanding is -what I recall him saying is I heard what I need to know to protect the interest of the President.
And we made clear 25 that we were willing to resume assistance with their political will to actually take the steps that were necessary to reform the prosecutor's office.
A Well, I mean, it's -I would say that we're now talking about late 2017, and we were beyond having the potential leverage of sovereign loan guarantees.
A Nazar Kholodnytsky was selected by Viktor Shokin as, in our view, the weakest of the three final candidates to become the special anti corruption prosecutor.
And in 13 the course of the first 2 weeks, he was caught trying to 14 suborn a witness, coach him to lie, as well as obstruct 15 justice in a case that involved his hometown, in an effort to 16 bribe the minister of health, Ulyana Suprun, | a § ree d 18 for NABU and caught the effort on trying to give her a bribe.
And this was the issue in the letter that I 8 think is part of the packet that you may have received that I 9 signed in Apri1 2016.
Immediately after President Zelenskyy 23 raises this desire to purchase more javelins, the President 24 says, I would like you to do us a favor, though, because our 25 country has been through a lot and Ukraine knows a lot about it, I would like you to find out what happened with this whole situation with Ukraine, they said CrowdStrike.
I believe that was the rationale for Yuriy 10 Lutsenko doing what he did.
I can't recall if Mr Bakanov mentioned Giuliani when we first talked, the one name that I wrote down in my notes was that he mentioned Fruman, he said he didn't remember the other name, and later he sent me the business card of Fruman and Parnas.
A My conversation with Mr Bakanov, as I recounted part of it before when he gave the names of the associates, one of whom he knew, the other he couldn't remember, when he asked for my counsel, I had suggested, as I said, someone like you who's an associate could meet and hear somebody out without making commitments.
A Mr Giuliani was not consulting with the State Department about what he was doing in the first half of 2019.
And to the best of my knowledge, he’s never suggested that he was promoting United States policy.
It involved promoting the rule of law, energy independence, defense sector reform, and the ability to stand up to Russia.
President Trump suggested that he would talk to Vice President Pence, and schedules willing, that he hoped it could work out, but in any case, the United States would have representation at the inaugural.
A To the best of my recollection, we had no direct conversation and were not in each other's presence until the United Nations General Assembly week, the last week in September.
A So there were several readouts provided secondhand from representatives who had been in that meeting and presumably those will be part of the documents that were collected as part of your requested documents and -Q So you're -sorry.
She gave a 2 readout to my office director who was probably acting for me 3 that week, normally office director of Eastern 4 Europe.
A You're now talking about a period leading up to his visit in December 2015.
Q And the Vice President's involvement with Ukraine is pretty significant at that point in time and it remained until he, you know, through 2016.
A When I was -the first time I was in Ukraine as acting deputy chief of mission in the period of mid-January to mid-February 2015, subsequent to me going into the deputy prosecutor general on February 3rd and demanding who took the bribe and how much was it to shut the case against Zlochevsky I became aware that Hunter Biden was on the board.
A The whole range of U.S.-Ukraine relations, because of special representative for Ukraine negotiation Volker's focus on the Donbas conflict.
When we got to more general bilateral relations, that was the first time, I mentioned earlier, that I heard directly from Kurt his assertion that Perry, Sondland, and Volker were now in charge of Ukraine policy.
Coming out of the meeting with the President, he explained how the meeting had gone on May 23 in the Oval Office, that the three officers were the ones leading the charge, and that -he said that we're working on a phone call with the President.
He said, We'll aim for that perhaps next week, and hopefully that will lead into a meeting by the end of the month, July 29 and 30, which was roughly, I think, the dates that were discussed in the June 18 meeting that Secretary Perry chaired.
This is what I'm going to 11 do, and this is my message and this is why.
A I asked him what his purpose was, and that's when he said, as I relayed earlier, that because, clearly, former Mayor Giuliani was an influence on the President's thinking of Ukraine that he, Kurt Volker, felt it was worthwhile engaging -Q Right.
A What I understood was Kurt was thinking tactically and I was concerned strategically.
And both leaders, both Putin and 22 Orban, extensively talked Ukraine down, said it was corrupt, 23 said Zelenskyy was in the thrall of oligarchs, specifically 24 mentioning this one oligarch Kolomoisky, negatively shaping a picture of Ukraine, and even President Zelenskyy personally.
Again, I had a 25 conversation with Fiona, I remember that, a sort of farewell call or a meeting, discussion.
A I honestly can't remember the content of that conversation apart from I know that she had some concerns about nonstandard actors.
A To the best of my recollection, she had concerns possibly based on having been in conversations in the Oval Office that he made assertions about conversations that did not match with what had actually been said in the Oval Office.
A I was not in those conversations, so -Q I'm just asking what she told you.
A I think she may have been as direct as saying that Gordon Sondland lies about conversations that occur in the Oval Office.
Q And the part that was about Ukraine, was there anything more that -A That's as much as I recall.
A I believe I was informed by Lieutenant Colonel Vindman on July 24, the day prior.
Q When you described that readout in addition to emphasizing how Mr Vindman was uncomfortable and the sensitive nature of the call, so he wasn't comfortable talking about it, you did say, I wrote down here, that he mentioned that there was a -that President Trump had discussed the extreme narratives that had been discussed publicly.
But given everything that you knew, 2 and you certainly have indicated today that you were aware of 3 the public narratives -4 A Yeah.
A Again, at this time, which we're talking about the period of the election, which is November 16, and this article coming out the month of the inaugural in 2017.
Honestly, again, I was in Ukraine focused on that end of the relationship.
I know that he was an investigative journalist, and there were, as I recall, hundreds of names, almost all of which were Ukrainian, in the black book.
I was in Ukraine, and so I was not privy to whatever activities may have been happening here in the United States. | when I would go to the NSC, the person I would normally talk to directly was the State Department detailee, the woman I mentioned previously, Catherine Croft, who has been working with Kurt Volker, she was a director at the NSC for Ukraine.
And prior to Catherine doing her 1-year stint, she had worked at the Ukraine desk at the State Department.
So my principal interlocutor when I would go to the NSC to have conversations generally was the State Department director, I M Generally, directors at the NSC do not travel on their own, but they often accompany principals.
I can say that Victoria Nuland was Assistant Secretary, sometimes Celeste Wallander and Charlie Kupchan would travel with her to countries, whether that would be Russia or Ukraine. support of others, and so it hurts me to say this, but generally people remember who the principal on the trip was and not all the staff who actually do most of the work.
A That sounds like an appropriate centralized way of gathering documents from many people.
A Well, my role as an identified record collector was to go through all of my records and identify information and provide that information.
A This is the first time I've done this type of process where I've had to go through all my handwritten notes and other forms of communication to find evidence that might be responsive to the subjects that were listed in the subpoena.
And so it was a matter of concern that those in office were using that office not to prosecute criminals but to put pressure on civil society, the media, and political opponents.
So, if you were to ask a 23 Ukrainian over the last year, if they had to cite one case 24 that encapsulated the failures of President Poroshenko and 25 his team, which included Prosecutor General Yuriy Lutsenko, the case of Katia Handziuk became a clarion example of the failure for the country to move forward in the same way that the murder of Georgiu Gongadze in 2000 encapsulated the failure of then President Kuchma to move the country forward.
You have a reputation of loving and 2 cherishing this U.S.-Ukraine relationship and dedicating your 3 life toward strengthening the relationship between the United 4 States and Ukraine.
Mr Kent, thank for your patience and 21 di1igence i today, we are nearing the end.
So, for 10 instance, this past year, S250 million, there was a 11 conditionality on the second $125 million.
A That is what the representative of the Office of Management and Budget stated in the sub-PCC on July 18th, yes.
A There was great confusion among the rest of us because we didn't understand why that had happened.
Q Then you mentioned that there was planning to have a meeting on July 31st.
So it's 25 part of the records that were collected by the State Department.
A It was -it would have been sequential because those are three different individuals.
And that involved the National Anti corruption Prevention Council, the National Anti-Corruption Bureau, as well as the prosecutor general's office.
And you've worked in and around a lot of dictatorships in your life, Uzbekistan, Thailand now, you know, not Ukraine, but certainly a country struggling to build democracy.
To the best of my knowledge, these were the only two calls between President Trump and a head of government of the six countries for which I have responsibility.
