How Ukraine's Referendums Broke The Rules May 12, 2014 14:22 GMT By Daisy Sindelar A woman casts her ballot in the eastern Ukrainian city of Donetsk in the May 11 referendum called by pro-Russian separatists.
How Ukraine's Referendums Broke The Rules share Print Separatists in the eastern Ukrainian regions of Luhansk and Donetsk are claiming success following dual referendums on self-rule held May 11.
Together, Donetsk and Luhansk constitute 15 percent of Ukraine's population, or approximately 6. million people.
But no precise voter figures have been offered, nor has there been any explanation for how the polling stations' understaffed election commissions were able to tabulate hundreds of thousands of paper ballots so quickly.
Ukraine's acting president, Oleksandr Turchynov, says turnout was 24 percent in Luhansk, 32 in Donetsk.
While separatist and pro-Russian correspondents were reporting crowds and long lines outside polling stations, other journalists in Luhansk and Donetsk documented evidence of low turnout, with some polling stations remaining almost completely empty throughout the day.
Nearly all major polling stations were guarded by men wearing black balaclavas and carrying automatic weapons.
Some polling stations failed to provide individual booths, forcing voters to mark their ballots in plain view of bystanders.
In at least one instance, a man voted ""no"" but told a reporter he voted ""yes,"" apparently concerned for his personal safety. -Voter violations.
By Ukrainian law, election commissions in individual polling stations must be staffed by at least nine people.
Numerous voter points had as few as three staffers, who openly acknowledged they had no previous experience on election committee work.
Some electoral districts had no voting lists, creating the potential for multiple votes and other forms of fraud.
In the run-up to the referendum, Ukrainian forces seized a vehicle outside the city of Donetsk carrying armed men transporting weapons and an estimated 100,000 preemptively marked ""yes"" ballots.
Some journalists reported seeing separatists destroying ballots marked with ""no"" votes.
According to a May 8 survey released by the Pew Research Center, 70 percent of eastern Ukrainians want the country to remain united, while just 18 support the idea of secession.
Ukraine's SBU security service last week released an audio recording of what it said was a phone conversation between a Russian ultranationalist, Aleksandr Barkashov, and the head of a separatist Donbass group, Dmytro Boitsov.
Boitsov purportedly expressed concern that the regions couldn't pull off a successful referendum without military backup; Barkashov responded by saying, ""Just write whatever you want.
No international election observers, not even Russian ones, were present during the referendums.
A number of journalists reported being harassed and even beaten outside polling stations; in some instances, photographers were forbidden to enter voter stations.
However, voters interviewed by RFE/RL appeared to have different interpretations of what that entailed.
Others said it meant remaining part of Ukraine, but with greater autonomy, a la Crimea, pre-annexation.
Still others believed they were voting for independence from both Ukraine and Russia. -What happens next.
Possible long-term scenarios include the regions becoming frozen conflict regions with parallel Ukrainian and separatist structures, or Moscow stirring violence as a pretext to finally cross the border with peacekeeping troops.
