It auxiliary force; Ukraine; does so by assessing the extent of Russian troop involvement and sovereign defection; civil war that of external sponsorship to non-state actors.
Second, it puts forward a tentative theoretical framework that allows distinguishing between the different outcomes the two patterns of intervention generate.
Here, the focus is on the role of non-state actors in the two interventionist scenarios.
The core argument is that the use of nonstate actors is aimed at sovereign defection.
The article introduces the concept of sovereign defection and defines it as a break-away from an existing state.
Outward sovereign defection is equated to the territorial seizure of the Crimean Peninsula by Russian Special Forces, aided by existing criminal gangs acting in an auxiliary capacity.
Inward sovereign defection refers to the external sponsorship of the secessionist rebels in South-East Ukraine and their use as proxy forces with the purpose of creating a political buffer-zone in the shape of a frozen conflict.
To demonstrate these claims, the article analyses the configuration of the dynamics of violence in both regions.
It effectively argues that, in pursuing sovereign defection, the auxiliary and proxy forces operate under two competing dynamics of violence, delegative and non-delegative, with distinct implications to the course and future of the conflict.
I came to the office of the Crimean union of Afghan war veterans, where we decided to stand as a shield between the Russian and Ukrainian troops, and half an hour later the building was blocked and Aksyonov’s1 bands led by the ‘green men’ began to storm it.
What started as protests in late November 2013 , and escalated into violent demonstrations over the course of the following months (Kramer and Higgins 2014), effectively turned into an internationalized civil war2 with the annexation of Crimea and the eruption of armed hostilities in the South-Eastern regions of Donetsk and Lugansk.
The national and international media paid great attention to the issue.
Yet, the main interest was in the so-called ‘little green men’ and less in the self-defence forces accompanying them, on the rebel groups in the South-East or on the armed volunteers helping the Ukrainian army.
Moreover, in their investigative pursuits, accounts of the developments collapsed under the same label different types of armed groups, or employed labels in an interchangeable fashion.
With President Vladimir Putin’s admitting the ‘little green men’ in Crimea were Russian Special Forces , academic research swiftly moved to correcting the existing incongruities surrounding the military operations in Crimea.
Despite the literature covering significant ground at a fast pace, key questions on the origins and role of the local self-defence forces, the volunteer groups and, most importantly, the state-sponsored insurgents in the South-East remain unanswered.
The puzzle concerning this article links these entities to their function in the armed conflict and to the external support they receive.
As the ‘little green men’ also became involved in the armed hostilities in Donetsk and Lugansk , and as groups of armed volunteers, such as the ‘men in black’ or Semen Semenchenko’s Donbas battalion, reinforced the response of the Ukrainian army, paying closer attention to the morphology of actors involved in Ukraine’s conflict setting is imperative for both policy-making and academic considerations.
To this end, after assessing the intervention patterns, the article develops a tentative theoretical framework that might help with ordering the variation in empirical observations on the violence in Crimea versus that in South-East Ukraine, and with providing a more integrated account of concurring explanations of the situation.
At the centre of the article is the claim that the use of non-state armed actors for the projection of political violence in Ukraine is aimed at sovereign defection.
The article introduces the concept of sovereign defection as a novel analytical tool for assessing the outcomes of using non-state armed actors in both interventionist scenarios.
The latter refers to a physical, territorial breakaway, the former to a political, ideological one.
Outward sovereign defection equates to the territorial seizure and annexation of the Crimean Peninsula by Russian Special Forces, aided by existing criminal gangs.
Inward sovereign defection refers to the external sponsorship of the secessionist rebels in South-East Ukraine with the purpose of creating a political buffer-zone in the shape of a frozen conflict.
To demonstrate these claims, the article analyses the dynamics of violence in both regions.
It effectively argues that in pursuing sovereign defection, the use of non-state armed actors frames two competing dynamics of violence, which the article labels delegative and non-delegative.
At the core of these concepts is the idea of delegation of the practice of violence to third parties.
It originates in the Principal-Agent theory which has approached delegation as a transactional enterprise focused on maximizing utility and shifting responsibility on the basis of a contractual agreement.
As such, the article explains the variation in the outcomes of the situations in Crimea and the South-East by differentiating between delegative and non-delegative dynamics of violence.
Specifically, it argues that delegating violence to non-state 94 V Rauta actors is observed in the South-East and is linked to promoting inward sovereign defection, while operating covertly with Special Forces, aided by local criminal gangs, accounts for pursuing outward sovereign defection by following a non-delegative dynamic of violence.
Second, it compares the types of intervention patterns in Crimea and South-East Ukraine.
Against this background, the article introduces the notion of sovereign defection as a more powerful explanatory tool capable of capturing the differences between the intervention strategies.
Then, it interrogates the validity of the concepts of outward and inward sovereign defection by analysing the chosen dynamics of violence, delegative and non-delegative.
It concludes that the Russian Federation shifted from opting for a non-delegative dynamic of violence in Crimea to a delegative one in the South-East on the basis of significant differences in the salience of each outcome.
Every stone, every square meter of this land is soaked with Russian blood.
Former President of Ukraine, Oleksandr Turchinov spoke of the events as a clear ‘political aggression’ and international leaders followed suit.
The strong rhetoric accompanied a striking course of events that unfolded against a more complex background.
The beginning is linked to Ukrainian President Victor Yanukovich’s decision, in November 2013, to abandon closer economic ties with the European Union in favour of those with Russia.
Against this background, the transition from the soft, non-military influence saw as a first step the annexation of Crimea to the Russian Federation.
In the spring of 2014, ‘little green men’ – which President Vladimir Putin would later admit to be Russian soldiers (MacFarquahar 2015) – entered and took hold of the peninsula with the help of local militias.
With the Russian Parliament approving Putin's request to use force as to protect Russian interests, and with overwhelming results in favour of joining Russia in a highly contested local referendum, Crimea officially became part of Russia.
Southeast European and Black Sea Studies 95 The events were quickly followed by unrest breaking out in Eastern and Southern Ukraine.
As Crimea was being institutionalized into the Russian Federation, rebel separatists occupied administrative buildings, airports and radio stations in cities such as Donetsk, Luhansk and Kharkiv.
Led by Aleksandr Zakharchenko and Igor Plotnitsky, the rebel groups initially voiced claims for varying degrees of autonomy and independence.
To further emphasize the rebels’ determination, their militias fused under the new United Armed Forces of Novorossiya.
Over the course of 2014, and into the first months of 2015, the fighting intensified with significant battleand non-battle-related casualties.
Currently, attempts at regulating the violence have seen several European brokered truces and cease-fire agreements being signed, with varying degrees of success.
In December 2015, the clashes continued despite the Minsk Agreement having been in place since February, effectively showing an overall predisposition on both sides for coercive measures at the expense of diplomatic efforts.
Assessing patterns of intervention There are significant differences in the type of military operations carried out in Crimea and in the South-East, and it is the purpose of this section to comparatively qualify the patters of intervention in both regions.
As the following paragraphs will discuss, if Crimea is a clear case of covert direct military intervention, the armed struggle waged by the separatist rebels requires several clarifications since current explanations shift between treating it as either direct or indirect.
The existing literature has already determined the covert direct character of the events in Crimea with Karagiannis making the case for understanding Crimea’s annexation as a result of ‘a covert operation with Special Forces and a local Pro-Russian militia in Crimea’ and Cimbala and Galeotti , among others, stressing similar points.
First, classifying the situation in the South-East as a direct Russian military intervention requires caution and increased specificity of arguments.
Journalistic accounts, academic research and official statements have repeatedly claimed that Russian citizens are involved in the fighting.
This, however, erroneously adds to the argument and complicates matters significantly.
Formulated under the label ‘citizen’, accusations of direct military intervention fail to build a strong case because, rather than being an issue of intervention, this is a question of presence of foreign fighters in conflicts.
Recently, David Malet argued that foreign fighters should be defined as ‘noncitizens of conflict states who join insurgencies during civil conflict’ , and that they are part of the wider issues of rebel groups recruitment and organization strategies.
What does build a convincing argument, however, is the documented evidence of the presence of Russian troops and Special Forces as servicemen on active duty, as opposed to just Russian citizens.
This underlines the fundamental citizen–soldier distinction that has allowed the Kremlin to dismiss claims of military intervention on the basis of the voluntary character of the fighting implied by the concept of ‘citizen’4.
Significant evidence, however, has substantiated claims of direct covert intervention, similar to the military operations in Crimea.
As Ukraine’s Foreign Ministry began tweeting the hashtags #UkraineUnderAttack and #RussiaInvadedUkraine , proof of troop involvement amounted considerably.
Satellite imagery and digital detective work accompanied academic research in building a strong case for understanding the reality of the battlefields as a Russian military intervention.
The core of the argument was the rising numbers of fatalities on the rebel side, many of whom proved to be Russian soldiers.
As evidence amounted, battle-related casualties accompanied personal testimonies , the capture of Russian soldiers as war prisoners and official statements documenting the situation.
Independent journalism seconded the claims across all types of evidence, and the diverse nature of the reporting was proportional to the striking character of the facts.
One such Southeast European and Black Sea Studies 97 account produced a geographic mapping of the place of origins of the soldiers.
And, while these findings may be fraught with bias in the light of the controversial relationship between Khodorkovsky and the Russian administration, other reports soon surfaced.
It emphasized the multifaceted involvement, ranging from provision of troops, training, cross-border sanctuary, and arms and munitions.
This strengthens the relevance of previous investigations such as the one by the Open Russia organization or that issued by independent think tank, Bellingcat.
Addressing the concerns of Russian relatives of those serving and dying, the independent think-tank dedicated to the use of open-source information, analysed the origins of artillery attacks on Ukrainian military positions.
The analysis used Google Earth satellite images, as well as videos from social media and local media reports.
While experts cautioned on the accuracy of such reports on grounds of replication issues and methodological validity , such evidence is significant because, firstly, it responds to emerging trends in research in favour of using social media data , and, secondly, because it corroborates with data and conclusions from academic research.
For example, a RUSI study by Igor Sutyagin documented the presence of Russian troops as well as reconnaissance and special operations units.
The discussion on troop involvement reviewed the direct component of the interventionist strategy, but it left unanswered the question of the indirect intervention.
More specifically, what needs to be determined is the provision of external support to pro-Russian rebels by Russia and its impact to the projection of rebel violence.
If the core concept for determining Russian direct military intervention was the soldier, in the case of indirect intervention, the role is taken by external sponsorship in the form of arms transfers, hosting and military training.
This is of significant importance as determining the extent of support to the separatist rebel organization allows acknowledging the operations in the South-East as being a proxy war.
Moreover, it should be noted that it sits alongside other methods such as theft, smuggling, weapons capturing or development of war economies.
Bourne proposes a classification of these arming patterns into ‘bottom-up’ and ‘top-down’ categories and reinforces the relevance of the ‘conflict-complex’, namely the political and economic background.
The overall preponderance of domestic weapons in Ukraine is explained, in fact, as an endogenous process to the conflict.
Since the Ukrainian Army ‘has been increasingly left by the state to reform itself and to survive on its own’ , lack of control challenged its ability to defend stockpiles.
Second, stockpile leakages are linked to successive army defections that saw armed personnel switch loyalties.
The role of transfers should not, however, be misrepresented in comparison to in-country procurement methods, for its implications are politically and militarily significant.
In the case of the latter, arms transfers can enhance the tactical performance of the armed groups because of the potentially high quality of provided arms.
Thus, as previously mentioned, external sponsorship is understood as strategically relevant because it adds the indirect component to the characterization of the intervention in South-East Ukraine.
Specifically, by providing assistance, the supporting-state opens the front lines of a proxy war that complements the traditional, covert mode of direct intervention.
In this way, the chosen proxy becomes ‘conduit for weapons, training and funding’ from a benefactor wishing to influence the strategic outcome of the conflict.
In the Ukrainian scenario, the benefactor is Russia and its use of the rebels as proxies targets the Government in Kiev.
While the issue remains contentious in the light of Russian denials, support in the form of arms transfers has been extensively documented.
First, specialist studies concluded that the rebels are in possession of arms previously known to have been exclusively in the use of the Russian army.
Second, NATO released satellite imagery reinforced claims of arms transfers.
Such statements became an integrative part of Ukrainian Southeast European and Black Sea Studies 99 official discourse statements on the conflict, and have been a source of confirmation of Russian involvement.
Drawing a demarcation line between the patterns of intervention observed in Ukraine – direct military intervention in Crimea and joint direct–indirect in the South-East –, solves, however, only part of the puzzle.
To address this issue, the second half of the article argues that the variance in patterns of performance can be assessed by integrating the role and use of non-state armed groups – auxiliaries in Crimea and proxy forces in the South East – into the Russian Federation’s pursued outcomes.
Sovereign defection and non-state armed groups This section puts forward a tentative theoretical framework that locates the situation in Ukraine within the Russian aim of externally promoting sovereign defection.
This is defined as the deliberate pursuit of a break-away from an existing state – in this case, the state of Ukraine.
The latter refers to a physical, territorial breakaway, while the former to a political, ideological one.
Inward sovereign defection, on the other hand, refers to the external sponsorship of the secessionist rebels in South-East Ukraine with the purpose of creating a political buffer-zone in the shape of a frozen conflict.
Thinking theory thoroughly requires developing and applying a cumulative approach to the enterprise of inquiry.
Cumulation refers to the growth of knowledge in a certain research area.
The aim of the concept of sovereign defection is to rebalance the existing discussion towards a more integrative answer.
Currently, the debate on the rationale behind the Russian interventions has been generated by generic ‘identity-interest-ideology’ explanations.
Occasionally, these have distilled into considerations of nationalism, historical irredentism or geo-strategy.
More importantly, and with severe consequences to the overall conceptualization of the military interventions, this recently emerging commentary has run the error of treating Russian interference and involvement as mono-causal.
Notably, it has sought to harness the individual ability of a proposed explanation to frame the event.
In doing so, it portrayed explanations as mutually exclusive and as running in opposite causal directions.
For example, Barbashin and Thoburn championed the nationalist dogma as a cause.
Similarly, Shlapentokh called for a closer inspection of geopolitical Duginism, an emerging foreign policy discourse carved by anti-Western philosopher Alexander Dugin.
Very few analyses, thus, proceeded with a correlative mind-frame in which the ‘intensity’ of a factor did not outweigh another.
Notably, Karagiannis observed that ‘geopolitics alone cannot explain the new Russian foreign policy in region’ , and proposed linking it to Russia’s ‘humiliation ’ in the aftermath of the Cold War and its portrayal as the ‘loser’ of the Cold War contest.
Similarly, Allison framed explanations in a three layer model including geopolitical competition and structural power, identity and ideational factors, as well as the search for domestic political consolidation in Russia.
Sovereign defection breaks away from the general tendency of providing only a fractured analysis that performs suboptimally in the face of causal heterogeneity.
It does so because of its ability to be a predicator of the logic behind the events from the stage of input to that of output, while keeping separate the category of desired outcome.
Basically, it walks the narratives of intervention from beginning to end through the causal maze much like an analytic Ariadne’s thread.
First, sovereign defection allows framing both interventions as processes aimed at a ‘lock-in’ of preferred outcomes.
Adopting the general concept of preferred outcomes moves the discussion beyond the previously mentioned generic answers as what is channelled is the flexibility of the response and not a specific category of responses.
For example, the situation is no longer viewed just as a function of interests defined per power, but rather the result of weighing the salience of each interest in relation to context-dependent and context-developing aims.
Second, a focus on outcomes within the sovereign defection framework addresses inconsistencies in the debate.
Specifically, it locates macro and micro problems of current explanations.
Macro failings are essentially issues of contextualizing the interventions.
This refers to the tendency to approach the topic with a pronounced Cold War mentality in which power and interest remind of the decades of long superpower competition.
Thus, what is observed is not a preoccupation with the west, but rather a prioritizing of the east.
Here, the article refers to the error of falling into the legitimation-goal trap, namely confusing narratives of legitimation with causal motivations.
This happened against a background in which Russian foreign policy remained essentially undefined and lacking clear direction for years.
Causal explanations, thus, morphed from carefully crafted legitimation narratives that referenced identity, history and nationalism.
Crimea’s symbolic significance was fundamental and its relevance was built through both positive and negative reinforcement.
On the other, deliberate attempts were made to vilify Ukrainian-ism in a search of discrediting other-ness and promoting Russian values and traditions.
However, these symbolic strings were aimed at accommodating Russian behaviour into the international legal order, and should not be automatically derived into causal determinism.
Third, and most importantly, sovereign defection provides an overall more refined analysis.
Here, the discussion departs from the meta-theoretical considerations of cumulation and macro–micro problems, and enters into a discussion on sovereign defection’s substantive advantages.
In practice, this ability has been coined under the concept of sovereignty.
For the purposes of this analysis, the focus is on the latter acceptations.
Against this background, sovereign defection becomes a tool for understanding the pursued outcomes of the Russian Federation in Ukraine.
Recently, Clem addressed the fundamental question of Ukraine’s ability to legitimize its sovereignty in the present geopolitical circumstances of the Crimean annexation and of the East being engulfed by a separatist civil war.
At the centre was the relationship between territory and nationality, and Clem concluded that the Ukrainian claims for sovereign legitimacy are based on the historical association of territory with an ethno-linguistic distinctive cultural group.
Sovereign defection explains the Russian interventions by conceptualizing them into an attack on the territorial integrity and a challenge to national unity which generate a collapse of the control over the exercise of authority.
Crimea sees a total replacement of Ukrainian authority by integration within Russian authority, and the SouthEast observes the emergence of a competing authority infrastructure through the backing of separatist claims.
Second, the international legal sovereignty is eroded as the annexation of Crimea removes Ukraine’s ability to exert exclusive representation over the region as a political entity of the international system.
In this way, sovereign defection formalizes official statements accusing Russia of sovereign interference.
But, sovereign defection pushes for further specificity in understanding the issue.
As mentioned, the latter refers to the territorial breakaway of Crimea and the former to a political breakaway of the South-East into an autonomous region acting as political buffer-zone.
To interrogate the validity of the outward and inward types in the sovereign defection framework, the article proposes an assessment of the role of the non-state armed groups in both Crimea and the South East.
The last section of the article assesses the performance of the local self-defence forces in Crimea and that of the pro-Russian rebels in the SouthEast as part of Russia’s application of delegative and non-delegative dynamics of violence.
The purpose of this section is to observe the construction of inward and outward sovereign defection as strategic outputs, or goals of the Russian interventions.
Acknowledging the differences in types of military interventions – covert, direct in Crimea, and covert, joint in the South-East – the premise of the argument is the development of two competing dynamics of violence for each type of intervention, effectively corresponding to the inward–outward categories of sovereign defections.
The dynamics are defined as delegative and non-delegative and the difference rests in the use of non-state armed groups.
Specifically, as mentioned above, delegative implies transferring authority over violence to a non-state actor, and non-delegative implies a concentration of the authority and an aversion towards authority transfers.
The South-East, on the other hand, makes a case for a delegative dynamic of violence where the Russian-backed separatists take charge of the violence in a proxy capacity.
The essence of the argument is, thus, in the distinction between auxiliary and proxy forces and how they are used in the process of pursuing the specific outcomes.
Recently, the literature moved toward drawing a clear demarcation between acting on behalf and acting in conjunction.
Basically, in a proxy relationship the proxy agent wages war against a target in the name of the benefactor.
This effectively renders the proxy agent a third party in a conflict between the benefactor and the target where they intervene indirectly.
Here, the distinctiveness of the proxy agent rests, thus, on its ability to carry out violence through delegation from the benefactor.
This is in stark contradiction with the type of relationship implied by acting in conjunction, in which case proxy forces are replaced with auxiliary ones.
In underlining their differences to proxy agents it should be noted that while functionally similar, auxiliaries are relationally different because their contribution is collaborative in nature and associative in type.
Specifically, auxiliaries have followed a path of working ‘under and with’ the military and, thus, their contribution to fighting should be seen as complementary and as a direct part of the military effort.
Collaboration with auxiliaries is underpinned by outward sovereign defection.
As an outcome, it refers to the territorial breakaway of a region and its annexation to the territory of another state.
Secession and annexation were pursued by applying a non-delegative dynamic of violence.
In this case, the action was carried out by Russian Special Forces in a covert military intervention.
The exact steps of the process were already discussed at length when comparing between types of interventions.
The focus here, however, is on the local self-defence forces and their role.
Auxiliaries in Crimea played the political role of justifying and legitimizing the intervention with their actions being portrayed as supportive to the covert military intervention.
In support of this claim is, first, the nature of the auxiliary forces and, more precisely, their loose organizational structure.
As documented, the self-defence forces were a patchwork of organized gangs descending from Crimea’s embroiled network of criminality, which despite having a long-standing collaboration with Russia , lacked the stability to efficiently make use of violence in a political dimension and not just criminal.
Inward sovereign defection is qualitatively different from outward sovereign defection because it promotes only a political breakaway.
As noted previously, the haphazard development of events in the South-East confused the aims of the rebels, which found themselves claiming various degrees of independence from administrative autonomy to secession and annexation to Russia.
What constitutes the core of inward sovereign defection as an outcome is, however, the desire for the establishment of a buffer-zone in the shape of a frozen conflict.
More importantly, the de facto state becomes a channel for blocking the activity of the ‘host’ state and, thus, limiting its domestic and international manoeuvre space.
The development of such a buffer-zone and establishment of frozen conflicts requires empowerment of local rebel forces which, in receiving support, become proxy forces.
The strength of inward sovereign defection to capture the attempts at fostering a zone of frozen instability is reinforced when looking at the long-standing practice in Russian foreign policy to bolster frozen conflicts.
Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia, Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan and Transnistria in Moldova.
Conclusion The article argued that understanding the situation in Ukraine should take into consideration the generally complex causal setting leading to the events.
It contended that causality should not strive for complete specification of singular explanations and that such treatment in isolation produces an artificial answer to the key questions surrounding the ongoing armed conflict.
To counterbalance the logical fallacies of the current research enterprise, the article advanced the idea of ‘sovereign defection’ as an alternative explanation.
Defining it a breakaway from an existing state, sovereign defection re-framed the issue of causality of the events by using the concept of outcome as an analytical tool.
Similarly, by employing the pro-Russian separatist as proxy forces, Russia pushed for the creation of a de factor state, a significant control mechanism already in practice in regions such as Transnitria or South Ossetia.
The article’s pursuits are only tentative and, the ongoing character of the conflict diminishes any predictive attempts.
However, by comparing the pattern of military intervention and by drawing a clear distinction between the uses of non-state actors, the article has pushed the debate towards new questions.
Taken seriatim, the most important question the article addressed was that on the sought outcomes of the Russian incursions into Ukrainian territory.
Essentially, this was a twofold discussion about the construction and directionality of military intervention as a foreign policy tool.
While retaining the obvious Clausewitzian undertone linking war to politics, it departed from mainstream conceptualizations of cause and refined the debate by shifting focus on purpose.
The article’s attempt at grasping finer nuances of Russian foreign policy added to the dominant narrative of interest and power a sense of regional historicity, one capable of explaining events in a more comprehensive manner by effectively detaching the analysis from a slowly crushing Cold War geopolitical burden.
Specifically, the argument stresses that the ongoing situation is not an internal conflict and that Ukraine is engaging Russian regular troops.
The article admits that ‘civil war’ carries a stigma of chaos and loss of ability to effectively control.
However, in the light of the article putting forward an objective, non-biased argument, as well as for the sake of academic consistency, the concept of ‘civil war’ will be used.
Despite vehement denials on behalf of Russia, conclusive evidence has been presented by the Ukrainian authorities, NATO and independent sources.
He specializes in indirect third party military interventions, respectively, proxy wars and proxy warfare.
How Ukraine’s arsenal matches up against the Russian-backed separatists.
Origin of artillery attacks on Ukrainian military positions in Eastern Ukraine between 14 July 2014 and 8 August 2014 – A Bellingcat investigation.
Byman, Daniel, Peter Chalk, Bruce Hoffman, William Rosenau, and David Brannan.05.
Vladimir Putin and military persuasion in Ukraine, 21 February–18 March 2014.
Non-state armed actors, new imagined communities, and shifting patterns of sovereignty and insecurity in the modern world.
Putin denies Russian troops are in Ukraine, decrees certain deaths secret.
Putin admits invading Ukrainian Crimea, denies similar invasion of Southeast Ukraine.
Embassy of Ukraine to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.15.
Statement by EU high representative Catherine Ashton on the developments in Ukraine's Crimea.
Ukrainians call for Yanukovych to resign in protests sparked by EU u-turn.
Explaining variation in Western Jihadists’ choice between domestic and foreign fighting.
Rebel groups’ arms acquisition and the importance of leakages from state stockpiles.
Russia’s approach to conflict – Implications for NATO’s deterrence and defence.
Russia denies that its soldiers are in Ukraine, but we tracked one there using his selfies.
The European Union, Russia, and the future of the transnistrian frozen conflict.
Urgent calls for calm as West faces biggest confrontation with Russia since Cold War.
