From 2006 to 2007 he was the prime minister of Ukraine; he also served in this post from November 2002 to January 2005, with a short interruption in December 2004.
After rejecting the Ukrainian-European Association Agreement, Yanukovych was ousted from office in the Revolution of Dignity.
Yanukovych served as the governor of Donetsk Oblast, a province in eastern Ukraine, from 1997 to 2002.
He was Prime Minister of Ukraine from 21 November 2002 to 7 December 2004 and from 28 December 2004 to 5 January 2005, under President Leonid Kuchma.
However, the election was fraught with allegations of electoral fraud and voter intimidation.
This caused widespread citizen protests and Kyiv's Independence Square was occupied in what became known as the Orange Revolution.
The Ukrainian Supreme Court nullified the runoff election and ordered a second runoff.
He served as Prime Minister for a second time from 4 August 2006 to 18 December 2007, under President Yushchenko.
Yanukovych was elected president in 2010, defeating Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko.
November 2013 saw the beginning of a series of events that led to his ousting as president.
Yanukovych rejected a pending EU association agreement, choosing instead to pursue a Russian loan bailout and closer ties with Russia.
This led to protests and the occupation of Kyiv's Independence Square, a series of events dubbed the ""Euromaidan"" by proponents of aligning Ukraine toward the European Union.
In January 2014, this developed into deadly clashes in Independence Square and in other areas across Ukraine, as Ukrainian citizens confronted the Berkut and other special police units.
In February 2014, Ukraine appeared to be on the brink of civil war, as violent clashes between protesters and special police forces led to many deaths and injuries.
On 21 February 2014, Yanukovych claimed that, after lengthy discussions, he had reached an agreement with the opposition.
On 18 June 2015, Yanukovych was officially deprived of the title of president by the parliament.
On 24 January 2019, he was sentenced in absentia to thirteen years' imprisonment for high treason by a Ukrainian court.
After the Orange Revolution 2. 2006–2007 elections and second premiership 3 Presidential campaign and election 4 Presidency 4.
Crimean naval base 4. 2012 parliamentary elections 5 Background to removal 5.
Accusations of police abuse and vote rigging 6 Removal from presidency 6.
Treason trial 9 Academic degrees 10 Awards and honors 11 Personal life 12 Cultural and political image 12.
Manafort consultant 13 See also 14 Notes 15 References 16 Further reading 17 External links Early life and career Viktor Yanukovych was born in the village of Zhukovka near Yenakiieve in Donetsk Oblast, Ukrainian SSR, Soviet Union.
He endured a very hard childhood about which he has stated, ""My childhood was difficult and hungry.
His mother was a Russian nurse and his father was a Polish-Belarusian locomotive-driver, originally from Yanuki in the Dokshytsy Raion of the Vitsebsk Voblast in present-day Belarus.By the time he was a teenager, Yanukovych had lost both his parents and was brought up by his Polish paternal grandmother, originally from Warsaw.
Yanukovych has half-sisters from his father's remarriage, but has no contact with them.On 15 December 1967, at the age of 17, Yanukovych was sentenced to three years imprisonment for participating in a robbery and assault.
On 8 June 1970 he was convicted for a second time on charges of assault.
He was sentenced to two years of imprisonment and did not appeal the verdict.
In 1971, Yanukovych married Lyudmyla Nastenko, a niece of Yenakiyeve city judge Oleksandr Sazhyn.In July 1974, Yanukovych enrolled at the Donetsk Polytechnic Institute.
In 1976, as a second-year student, he was promoted to director of a small trucking division within the Ordzhonikidzeugol coal-mining company.
His appointment as the chief manager marked the start of his managerial career as a regional transport executive.
He held various positions in transport companies in Yenakiieve and Donetsk until 1996.
Prime Minister President Leonid Kuchma appointed Yanukovych to the post of Prime Minister following Anatoliy Kinakh's resignation.
Yanukovych's main base of support emerged from the southern and eastern regions of Ukraine, which favor close ties with neighbouring Russia.
In the first round of voting held on 31 October 2004, Yanukovych took second place with 39. percent of the votes to opposition leader Viktor Yuschenko with 39. percent.
Because no candidate passed the 50 percent threshold, a second round of voting was scheduled.In the second round of the election, Yanukovych was initially declared the winner.
However, the legitimacy of the election was questioned by many Ukrainians, international organizations, and foreign governments following allegations of electoral fraud.
The resulting widespread protests became known as the Orange Revolution.
The second round of the election was subsequently annulled by the Supreme Court of Ukraine, and in the repeated run-off, Yanukovych lost to Yushchenko with 44. percent to Yushchenko's 51. percent.After the election, the Ukrainian parliament passed a non-binding motion of no confidence in Yanukovych's government, urging outgoing President Leonid Kuchma to dismiss Yanukovych and appoint a caretaker government.
Five days after his electoral defeat, Yanukovych declared his resignation from the post of Prime Minister.
In November 2009 Yanukovych stated that he conceded defeat only to avoid violence.
This government was marred by growing conflict between Yushchenko and Tymoshenko.
In January 2006, the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Ukraine started an official investigation of the allegedly false acquittal of the criminal convictions which Yanukovych received in his youth.
In 2006, a criminal charge was made for the falsification of documents regarding the retraction of Yanukovych's prior conviction.
According to Rossiyskaya Gazeta two documents had been forged regarding Yanukovych's robbery in association with rape and assault and battery.
The signature of the judge for these documents in Yanukovych's retraction was also forged.On 25 May 2007, Viktor Yanukovych was assigned the post of appointed chairman of the Government Chiefs Council of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Yanukovych's campaign was expected to have cost $100 to $150 million.On 11 December 2009, Yanukovych called for his supporters to go to Maidan Nezalezhnosti, Kyiv's Independence Square, in case of election fraud.Early vote returns from the first round of the election held on 17 January showed Yanukovych in first place with 35.8% of the vote.
After all ballots were counted, the Ukrainian Central Election Commission declared that Yanukovych won the runoff election with 48.95% of the vote compared with 45.47% for Tymoshenko.
Election observers from the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe said there were no indications of serious fraud and described the vote as an ""impressive display"" of democracy.
Tymoshenko withdrew her subsequent legal challenge of the result.Tad Devine, an associate of Rick Gates and Paul Manafort, wrote Yanukovych's victory speech.
Presidency Inauguration Ukraine's parliament had fixed 25 February 2010 for the inauguration of Yanukovych as president.Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko signed a decree endorsing a plan of events related to Yanukovych's inauguration on 20 February 2010.
Yanukovych stated during the 2010 presidential election-campaign that the current level of Ukraine's cooperation with NATO was sufficient and that the question of the country's accession to the alliance was therefore not urgent.
Yanukovich announced $2 billion worth of pension and other welfare increases on 7 March 2012.
Constitutional assemblyIn May 2012, Yanukovych set up the Constitutional Assembly of Ukraine, a special auxiliary agency under the President for drawing up bills of amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine; the President then can table them in parliament.
Because a small handful of people, who have been plundering the country for 20 years is only a handful, from which the whole society, the whole state and our image in the world have been suffering.
In late 2009, a law that raised the minimum wage and pensions was passed in the Ukrainian Parliament.
As a result of this, the International Monetary Fund suspended its 2008–2009 Ukrainian financial crisis emergency lending programme.
He saw the gas agreement signed in 2009 after the 2009 Russia-Ukraine gas dispute as very unprofitable for Ukraine and wanted to ""initiate the discussion of the most urgent gas issues"" after the 2010 presidential election.
This led to the April 2010 Ukrainian–Russian Naval Base for Natural Gas treaty.
Yanukovych also promised to create a consortium that would allow Russia to jointly operate Ukraine's gas transportation network and he has pledged to help Russia build the South Stream natural gas pipeline.
As of June 2010, both did not happen.Yanukovych rejected accusations that improvement of Ukrainian-Russian relations harmed relations with the European Union.
Downgrading uranium stock Yanukovych, Nicolas Sarkozy and Dmitry Medvedev before the beginning of the Nuclear Security Summit, 2010 During the 2010 Nuclear Security Summit, Yanukovych announced that Ukraine would give up its 90-kilogram stock of highly enriched uranium and convert its research reactors from highly enriched to low-enriched uranium.
Yanukovych said he wanted to create a free trade zone and visa regime with the EU as soon as possible.
He noted the importance of finding ways of reconciliation between Ukrainians fighting on opposite sides in World War II in his speech at the ceremony to mark Victory Day 2013.
In this speech he also expressed confidence that Nazi and Soviet totalitarianism of the past would never return.
Holodomor Yanukovych and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev on 17 May 2010 near Memorial to the Holodomor Victims in Kyiv.
Language policy in Ukraine Yanukovych stated in the past that he wanted Russian to become the second state language in Ukraine.
Effective in August 2012, a new law on regional languages entitles any local language spoken by at least a 10% minority be declared official within that area.
On 23 February 2014, following the Revolution of Dignity, a bill was passed by the parliament which would have abolished the law on regional languages, making Ukrainian the sole state language at all levels.
This bill was blocked by acting President Turchynov, until a replacement bill is ready.
The 2012 law was ruled unconstitutional and was struck down by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine in 2018, 4 years after the Euromaidan.
We respect the choice of our citizens and guarantee everyone's Constitutional right to freedom of religion.
We will not allow the use of churches and religious organizations by some political forces for their narrow interests.
This also refers to foreign centres through which religious organizations sometimes seek to affect the internal political situation in Ukraine.
Social policy Social benefit cuts for Chernobyl rescue workers, small business owners and veterans of the Soviet–Afghan War caused fierce protests in Kyiv in October/November 2011 by several thousand protesters.
Foreign policy United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is greeted by Yanukovych in Kyiv, Ukraine, 2 July 2010 Barack Obama talks with President Viktor Yanukovych during a pull aside at the 2012 Nuclear Security Summit at the Coex Center in Seoul Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff greets Yanukovych upon his arrival to the Planalto Palace in Brasília, Brazil, 25 October 2011.
Yanukovych's first foreign visit was to Brussels to visit the President of the European Council, Herman Van Rompuy, and the EU Foreign Affairs chief, Catherine Ashton.
He indicated that he was open to compromise with Russia on the Black Sea Fleet's future , and reiterated that Ukraine would remain a ""European, non-aligned state"", referring to NATO membership.
Both Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin soon stated they noticed a big improvement in relations with Ukraine since Yanukovych's presidency.
A day later Yanukovych stated that the recognition of the independence of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Kosovo violates international law, ""I have never recognized Abkhazia, South Ossetia or Kosovo's independence.
Yanukovych's stance towards integration with the EU, according to The Economist, led him to be ""seen in Moscow as a traitor"", a reversal of the 2004 presidential election where Moscow openly supported Yanukovych.
Anonymous journalists stated early May 2010 that they were voluntarily tailoring their coverage so as not to offend the Yanukovych administration and the Azarov Government.
The Azarov Government, the Presidential Administration and Yanukovych himself denied being involved with censorship.
In a press conference 12 May 2010 President Yanukovych's representative in the Verkhovna Rada Yury Miroshnychenko stated that Yanukovych was against political repression for criticism of the regime.
Crimean naval base Signing documents with President Dmitry Medvedev, 2010 On 21 April 2010, in Kharkiv, Yanukovych and Dmitry Medvedev, the Russian President, signed the 2010 Ukrainian–Russian Naval Base for Natural Gas treaty, whereby the Russian lease on naval facilities in Crimea would be extended beyond 2017 by 25 years with an additional 5-year renewal option in exchange for a multi-year discounted contract to provide Ukraine with Russian natural gas.
This treaty was approved by both the Russian and Ukrainian parliaments on 27 April 2010.
On 22 April 2010, Yanukovych stated he did not rule out the possibility of holding a referendum on the stationing of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Ukraine after the necessary legislative framework is adopted for this in future.
According to Yanukovych the main priority of his foreign policy was to integrate Ukraine ""into the European mainstream"", while improving relations with Russia.
In 2012, during the Ukrainian parliamentary elections of that year, Yanukovych's party of Regions won the poll with 30% against 25.5% for imprisoned Yulia Tymoshenko's Fatherland party.
Euromaidan and Ukraine–European Union Association Agreement See also: Timeline of the Euromaidan, February 2014 Euromaidan riots, 2014 Hrushevskoho Street riots, and 2014 Ukrainian Regional State Administration occupations The Euromaidan protests started in November 2013 when Ukrainian citizens demanded stronger integration with the European Union.
The origins of Euromaidan began as a smaller protest that had started in Independence Square in the center of Kyiv on 21 November, the day Yanukovych abruptly changed his mind on an Association Agreement with the European Union, deciding to strengthen economic ties with Russia instead.
Mass protests in Kyiv, December 2013 Anti-riot police forces consisting of Internal Troops holding protective position and Berkut special policemen shooting in Kyiv riots, January 2014 Yanukovych signing the Agreement on settlement of political crisis in Ukraine with representatives of the parliament opposition, February 2014 The protesters refused to leave the square until their demands were met.
These included items that the government should release jailed protesters, sign the EU agreement, and change the Constitution of Ukraine, and that Yanukovych should resign.
The protestors were attacked by police, resulting in civil unrest across Western Ukraine.
Yanukovych dismissed this as the work of his political opponents; instead, protesters called all the more for his resignation, saying he was ""aloof"" and unresponsive.
Violence escalated after 16 January 2014 when Yanukovych signed the Bondarenko-Oliynyk laws, also known as Anti-Protest Laws.
Demonstrators occupied provincial administration buildings in at least 10 regions, sending the police fleeing through rear exits in some instances.
Verkhovna Rada lawmakers repealed nine of the 12 restrictive laws that had been passed on 16 January by a show of hands, without debate.
Outrage ensued at the limits the laws imposed on free speech and assembly in the country.
In a striking concession aimed at defusing Ukraine's civil uprising and preserving his own grip on power, President Yanukovych offered to install opposition leaders in top posts in a reshaped government, but they swiftly rebuffed the offer to the delight of thousands of protesters on the streets craving a fuller victory in the days ahead.Mykola Azarov, the prime minister of Ukraine, resigned on 28 January.
He claimed ""the members of the security forces fulfilled their duties according to existing laws.
Over 46% of the budget subventions for social and economic development was allotted to the Donbas region's Donetsk Oblast and Luhansk Oblast administrations – 0.62 billion UAH versus 0.71 billion UAH for the rest of the country.Anders Åslund, a Swedish economist and Ukraine analyst, described the consolidation of Ukrainian economic power in the hands of a few ""elite industrial tycoons"", one of the richest and most influential of whom has become President Yanukovych's own son Oleksandr Yanukovych.
According to Åslund, one notable exception to the Yanukovych family's influence was Petro Poroshenko, who is described as ""uncommonly courageous"", although his confectionery empire is less susceptible to ruin by the substantial power the Yanukovych family wielded in the heavy industry sectors located in Yanukovych's geographic power base of Donetsk.Yanukovych had an estimated net worth of $12 billion, and has been accused by Ukrainian officials of misappropriating funds from Ukraine's treasury.
Arseniy Yatsenyuk has claimed that treasury funds of up to $70 billion were transferred to foreign accounts during Yanukovych's presidency.
Authorities in Switzerland, Austria and Liechtenstein froze the assets of Yanukovych and his son Oleksander on 28 February 2014 pending a money laundering investigation.
Yanukovych has denied that he embezzled funds and has said that his alleged foreign accounts do not exist.
This number includes both cases of the so-called Family entering the corporate rights of the firms they like by illegal methods, and ""assaults"" in order to obtain ""tribute"" – that is, commercial gain.
This is evidenced by the data of the Anti-Raider Union of Entrepreneurs of Ukraine.
Personal excesses Yanukovych abandoned his large estate, Mezhyhirya when he fled the capital.
The estate is located in a former forest preserve on the outskirts of Kyiv.
He had acquired the property in 2007, according to critics, through a convoluted series of companies and transactions.
Mezhyhirya is estimated to have been sold for more than 75 million United States dollars.
Protesters walked unchallenged into the former president's office and residential compounds after police and security left their posts in Kyiv.
Protesters had free access to government buildings, and to the presidential mansion and estate.
After describing the mansion's complicated ownership scheme, the article author noted, ""The story of Viktor Yanukovych and his residence highlights a paradox.
The cost of monitoring the mass media was reportedly $5. million just for the month of December 2010.
When the former president departed, 35 cars and seven motorbikes were left behind.
Kyiv's District Court seized 27 vintage cars in 2016 from the fleet stationed at Mezhyhirya, some worth more than $US 1 million.
Accusations of police abuse and vote rigging Yanukovych's refusal to sign a Trade Association Agreement with Western Europe originated massive protests that culminated in the murder of 88 demonstrators between the 20 and 22 February 2014.
Yanukovych has been accused, by Amnesty International among others, of using the Berkut to threaten, attack, and torture Ukrainian protesters.
Individual cases have been reported of citizens grouping together and fighting back against the Berkut in order to preserve election integrity and results.
Revolution of Dignity Parliamentary vote On Friday 21 February 2014, an agreement between president Yanukovych and the leaders of the parliamentary opposition was signed that called for early elections and the formation of an interim unity government.
The following day, Yanukovych fled from the capital ahead of an impeachment vote.
The vote came an hour after Yanukovych said in a televised address that he would not resign.
The constitutionality of Yanukovych's removal from office has been questioned by constitutional experts.
The vote, as analyzed by Sindelar, had ten votes less than those required by the constitutional guidelines.
She had been imprisoned since 2011, in what many saw as political payback by Yanukovych.
Her release had been an unmet condition for Ukraine's signing of a European Union trade pact.
Leaving Kyiv Yanukovych left Kyiv during the night of 21 February 2014 and initially moved to Kharkiv.
According to Dobkin at that time Yanukovych ""thought this was a temporary difficulty"" since he believed that the 21 February deal he had signed with opposition leaders could still provide for a graceful departure of his power later in the year.
In his press conference in Rostov-on-Don on 28 February, Yanukovych claimed that at the time he did not ""flee anywhere"", but that his car was shot at ""by automatic rifles"" as he left Kyiv for Kharkiv ""to meet the representatives of local parties"" and he was then forced to move around Ukraine amid fears for the safety of himself and his family.
According to an April 2014 poll conducted by the Razumkov Centre, only 4.9% of respondents would have liked to see Yanukovych return to the presidency.
Arriving in Russia According to the Ukrainian State Border Service, Yanukovych tried to flee via a charter flight from Donetsk, but was stopped by border guards.
Both Putin and Yanukovitch later stated that Russian forces helped Yanukovitch to fly to Russia on 24 February 2014.
On 26 February 2014, Russian media company RBC reported Yanukovych's presence in Moscow.
According to RBC sources, Yanukovych arrived at the Radisson Royal Hotel, Moscow on the night of 25 February 2014.
Then he moved to the Barvikha Sanatorium, the health resort of the President of Russia in Moscow Oblast.
RosBusinessConsulting also reported sightings of Viktor Pshonka, a former Prosecutor General of Ukraine in the hall of Radisson Royal Hotel.
The Press Secretary of the department that manages Barvikha Sanatorium denied the report, stating that he had no information of Yanukovych settled in Barvikha Sanatorium.
Exile in Russia According to Russian politician Oleg Mitvol, Yanukovych bought a house in Barvikha for $52 million on 26 February 2014.
On 27 February, a report stated that Yanukovych had asked the authorities of the Russian Federation to guarantee his personal security in the territory of Russia, a request that they accepted.
He accused the opposition of violation of the 21 February agreements and asked the armed forces of Ukraine not to intervene in the crisis.
The exact whereabouts of Yanukovych when he made this statement was unclear.
In an April 2014 poll by Kyiv International Institute of Sociology those polled in southern and eastern Ukraine were generally split on the legitimacy of the then Yatsenyuk government and parliament, but a majority in all regions agreed that Yanukovych was not the legal president of the country.On 3 October 2014, several news agencies reported that according to a Facebook post made by the aide to the Ukrainian Interior Minister, Anton Gerashchenko, Viktor Yanukovych had been granted Russian citizenship by a ""secret decree"" of Vladimir Putin.
On the same day, Russian presidential spokesman Dmitry Peskov said that he didn't know anything about this.On 26 November 2015, Yanukovych received a temporary asylum certificate in Russia for one year; later extended until November 2017.
In 2017, Russian media suggested that Yanukovych is apparently living in Bakovka near Moscow, in a residence owned by Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs.
Position of Yanukovych on his removal In a press conference in Rostov-on-Don on 28 February 2014, Yanukovych stated that all his possessions had been legally declared and accounted for.
The same day Swiss and Austrian authorities blocked Yanukovych's and his associates' assets, and launched a corruption investigation.Yanukovych said that an ""armed coup"" had taken place in Ukraine, and that he was still the legitimate president because there had been no impeachment, resignation, or death.
In the press conference he stated that he was still President of Ukraine and ""I can't find words to characterise this new authority.
He said he was surprised by the silence of Russia's president, Vladimir Putin, on the events in Ukraine.
On 28 February 2014 the BBC reported him as insisting that military action was ""unacceptable"" and as stating that he would not request Russian military intervention.On 4 March 2014, Russia's Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Vitaly Churkin, displayed a photocopy of a letter allegedly signed by Victor Yanukovych on 1 March 2014.
In an interview with the Associated Press and Russian channel NTV of 2 April 2014 Yanukovych called Russia's annexation of Crimea ""a tragedy"", the 2014 Crimean referendum ""a form of protest"" and he stated he hopes it will become part of Ukraine again.
Yanukovych said he would try to persuade Russian President Vladimir Putin to return Crimea to Ukraine.
He squarely blamed the Yatsenyuk Government and acting Ukrainian President Oleksandr Turchynov for Ukraine's loss of Crimea.
On 30 December 2021 Yanukovych filed lawsuits against the Ukrainian parliament at the Kyiv District Administrative Court in a bid to overturn his removal of the constitutional powers as President of Ukraine.
On 2 March, Ukrayinska Pravda reported that Ukrainian intelligence sources believed that Yanukovych was currently in Minsk, Belarus and that it was Russia's intention to declare Yanukovych as President of Ukraine in the event of Russian forces gaining control of Kyiv.Russian forces never gained control over Kyiv since the Russian army abandoned its Kyiv offensive on 2 April 2022.
Fraud case On 11 July 2005, the office of the Donetsk Oblast Prosecutor charged Yanukovych with fraud, stemming from alleged irregularities in the way his convictions were expunged twenty years earlier.
In 2006, the General Prosecutor closed the case due to lack of evidence.
In 2006, a criminal charge was filed for official falsifying of documents concerning the quashing of Yanukovych's prior convictions after it was discovered that two documents had been tampered with, including the forgery of a judge's signature in connection with one charge of battery.On 29 January 2010, the Prosecutor General of Ukraine Oleksandr Medvedko claimed that Yanukovych had been unlawfully jailed in his youth.A warrant for Yanukovych's arrest was issued on 24 February 2014 by the interim government, accusing him of the mass murder of protesters.
Acting Ukrainian Interior Minister Arsen Avakov declared that Yanukovych had been placed on Ukraine's most wanted list and that a criminal case for the mass killings of civilians had been opened against him.On 28 February 2014, the General Prosecutor of Ukraine, Oleh Makhnitsky formally asked Russia to extradite Yanukovych.
Russian prosecutors stated that they had not received such a request from Ukraine.
Due to the Crimean crisis he was put on the United States sanction list on 17 March 2014, an action which had been already previously been considered.After the Euromaidan events the General Prosecutor opened at least four new criminal cases against the former president of Ukraine.
This included multiple cash payments to a number of Ukraine's top officials which were investigated as suspected bribes.
Ukrtelekom case On 30 September 2014, the General Prosecutor of Ukraine opened a new case against Yanukovych for using ₴220 million of state money to establish his own private communication company based on Ukrtelekom.
Kharkiv Pact Beginning in the summer of 2014, the prosecutor's office investigated Yanukovych's signing of the Kharkiv treaty, which allowed the Black Sea Fleet to stay in Ukraine for an additional 25 years.
Yanukovych is being charged with abuse of power and state treason that are being investigated since April 2014 as well as the new procedure on creation of criminal organization that is being investigated since the summer.
Mass murder at Maidan This section may be confusing or unclear to readers.
Property theft through conspiracy Yanukovych is also charged with property theft in a conspiracy with the chairman of the Nadra Ukrainy state company , which has been under investigation since March 2014.
On 16 July 2015, some Russian media reported that Interpol had suspended its Red Notice for Yanukovych.
According to the Ukrainian Interpol office, this was a temporary measure due to Yanukovych's complaints that the charges were politically motivated.Interpol later confirmed that Yanukovych and Oleksandr Yanukovych were no longer subject to an Interpol red notice or diffusion, and that they are unknown on Interpol's databases.
Treason trial In November 2016, Prosecutor General Yuriy Lutsenko questioned Yanukovych via video link in connection with the former Berkut.
During the questioning, Lutsenko told Yanukovych that he was being accused of treason.On 14 March 2017, the Prosecutor General submitted to court documents of the Yanukovych's case on state treason.
One was Denis Voronenkov, who was shot dead in downtown Kyiv at the end of March 2017.
On 4 May 2017 the first preliminary session commenced in Kyiv's Obolonskyi District Court under Judge Vladyslav Devyatko.
He testified via video link from Russia.In closing arguments on 16 August, prosecutors Ruslan Kravchenko and Maksym Krym asked the court in Kyiv to sentence the former leader to 15 years in prison.
The judge then adjourned the trial until 13 September.However the former leader was hospitalized in Moscow days before he was scheduled to give the final statement.
Yanukovych was taken to Moscow's Sklifosovsky Institute of Emergency Medicine by ambulance on 16 November in an immobilized condition.
On 24 January 2019 a panel of three judges of the Obolonskyi District Court found Yanukovych guilty of high treason and complicity in Russian military intervention in Ukraine.
He was acquitted of the other charge relating to Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The verdict was that Yanukovych was sentenced to 13 years of jail in absentia.
Website Pravda.com.ua reported that Yanukovych received the honorary title of docent of the Faculty of Automobile Transport at the Donetsk State Academy of Administration, a tertiary education establishment that specialised in Economics and Management Oleksandr Zakharov, who studied international law at the Academy of Foreign Trade at the same time as Yanukovych, contended that ""individual study programs"" such as Yanukovych's were commonly viewed as a diploma mill for state officials.
List of awards and honours received by Viktor Yanukovych Personal life Yanukovych was married to Lyudmyla Oleksandrivna Nastenko.
With his wife Yanukovych had two sons, Oleksandr and Viktor, and three grandsons Viktor, Oleksandr and Iliya.
From 2006 to 2014, the younger Viktor was a member of the Parliament of Ukraine; he died by drowning at Lake Baikal in 2015.
In February 2017, Yanukovych admitted that after 45 years of marriage he had divorced Lyudmyla.Ukrayinska Pravda claims that during the Yanukovych presidency, his wife Lyudmyla lived separately in Donetsk.
Cultural and political image Yanukovych was seen by opponents as representing the interests of Ukrainian big business; they pointed out that his campaigns benefited from backing by Ukrainian billionaire Rinat Akhmetov.
Supporters of Yanukovych pointed out that the Donetsk Oblast secured unprecedented levels of investment during his time in office.Yanukovych drew strong support from Russian-speaking Ukrainians in the east of the country.
They blamed the Orange Revolution for creating broken promises, a dysfunctional economy and political chaos.
Kuchma, however, in conversation with United States Ambassador to Ukraine John F Tefft, in a document dated 2 February 2010 uncovered during the United States diplomatic cables leak, called the voters' choice between Yanukovych and Yulia Tymoshenko during the second round of the 2010 presidential election a choice between ""bad and very bad"" and praised Arseniy Yatsenyuk, the candidate eliminated in the first round of the election, instead.
In another January 2009 cable then-Ambassador of Ukraine to Russia Kostyantyn Gryshchenko stated that Putin had a low personal regard for Yanukovych.
Yanukovych and Putin during moleben celebrated by metropolitan Lazarus of Crimea in memory of 1025th anniversary of Christianization of Kyivan Rus.
His native language is Russian, similar to a majority of the population of his power-base and native Eastern Ukraine.
He admitted in March 2012 that it was a problem for him in 2002 to speak Ukrainian.
For the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election, Yanukovych wrote an autobiography for the Central Election Commission, in which he misspelled his academic degree.
Thereafter, he came to be widely referred to with this nickname in opposition media and opponents' speeches.
His autobiographic resume of 90 words contains 12 major spelling and grammatical errors.
Yanukovych stated in November 2009 that he respects all Ukrainian politicians.
In spite of this claim, on 22 September 2007, during the 2007 Ukrainian parliamentary election campaign, while delivering a speech in Vinnytsia, he compared Yulia Tymoshenko's performance as Prime Minister to ""a cow on ice"", most likely referring to her skills and professionalism as a prime minister.
Later, during TV debates with Yushchenko he explained, ""I called the traitors goats.
In an overview piece in March 2013, The Ukrainian Week claimed that Yanukovych had ""failed to meet"" his 2010 election promises.
He continued to serve in that role through the February 2010 Ukrainian presidential election, even as the United States government opposed Yanukovych.
Manafort's task was to rehabilitate Yanukovych's political career in the aftermath of the Orange Revolution.
Manafort hired the public relations firm Edelman to lift Yanukovych's public image.
However, Manafort's friends have said that Yanukovych ""stopped listening"" to him after he became president in 2010; Manafort warned him of the consequences of ""extreme"" political measures.Manafort would later go on to serve as campaign chairman for Donald Trump in 2016.
The American FBI began a criminal investigation into Manafort's business dealings while he was lobbying for Yanukovych.
American Federal prosecutors alleged that between 2010 and 2014 Manafort was paid more than $60 million by Ukrainian sponsors, including Rinat Akhmetov, believed to be the richest man in Ukraine.In January 2019, Manafort resigned from the Connecticut bar.
Russian is however widely spoken, especially in eastern and southern Ukraine.
After Medvedchuk escaped his house arrest on 27 February 2022 his whereabouts became unknown.
Retrieved 17 March 2014. ^ a b ""Офіційний портал Верховної Ради України"". w1.c1.rada.gov.ua.
Telegraph online ^ Wojciechowski, M Janukowycz zmienia konstytucję Ukrainy, przedłuża sobie kadencję i podkreśla polskie korzenie.
Retrieved 12 April 2015. ^ a b ""First ladies of Ukraine"", Information Telegraph Agency of Russia ^ Kazmirenko, Y From where started Yanukovych.
Retrieved 19 February 2018. ^ a b c ""Rada removes Yanukovych from office, schedules new elections for May 25"", Interfax-Ukraine ^ ""Yanukovych's removal was unconstitutional"". wordpress.com.
Retrieved 31 May 2016. ^ a b General Prosecutor opened another case against Yanukovych.
September 2014 ^ a b c d GPU opened a case on Yanukovych for the Kharkiv treaty.
Yanukovych sentenced to 13 years in prison for high treason, complicity in war"". unian.info.
Tigipko, Yatseniuk will take top posts after presidential elections"", Kyiv Post Archived 12 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ ""5.ua :: Янукович назвав Тимошенко ""коровою на льду"" on YouTube ^ Orange Revolution Democracy Emerging in Ukraine Archived 21 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine.
