Nation-states have become the most important form of political organisation within the international system.
Typically dominated by one particular ethnos– a people drawn together by cultural, ethnolinguistic or civic ties – states and their administration are critical to any study of world politics.
On the super-national level, governments form the basis for international relations and represent the constituent members of strategic alliances, International Organisations, and an international legal system.
The imbalance between states’ assets and capabilities begets global inequalities; their disagreements and skirmishes prompt international conflict.
As such, the nation-state remains the principal unit of analysis in much of the academic study of international relations.
However, despite their centrality to the discipline’s classical traditions – both realist and liberal scholars hold states to be the sole significant actors of world politics – there has been comparatively little analysis of what nation-states comprise, how they come into being, and the consequences of their rare fragmentation.
This perhaps results from the relative stability of the nation-state system.
The majority of the states most referenced in traditional international relations literature predate the organised study of international relations.
By the time the first International Politics Department was established in Aberystwyth in 1919, the European Westphalian system had been in place for nearly three centuries.
This overall stability has seen the nation-state increase its predominance as a form of polity through wars, border disputes, and population shifts.
Such constancy complicates the interrogation of how new states come into being as others fall apart.
In February 2008, following decades of severe violence and repression in the aftermath of the Yugoslav Republic’s disintegration, Kosovo declared its independence from Serbia.
In Spring 2014, following a pro-European revolution in Kyiv, Crimea unilaterally broke from Ukraine, acceding to – or being annexed by – the Russian Federation.
The transfer of Crimea to Russia has been supported by a far smaller number.
Both cases fall uncertainly within the canon of international law – an uncertainty unlikely to be resolved in the near future.
The instances of self-determination in Kosovo and Crimea share certain attributes.
Both can be seen as long-term results of the imperfect disintegration of large socialist states in the 1990s.
The Kosovan population was subject to sustained discrimination and ethnic cleansing, incomparably more concrete and severe than the perceived hardships undergone by the citizens of Crimea.
The NATO engagement in Kosovo was transparent, targeted, and supported by the international community represented by the UN Security Council.
The Russian military involvement in Crimea was covert, unsanctioned, and widely internationally condemned.
Furthermore, whereas Kosovo set out to implement its own independent state system, based on the region’s de facto government of decades – Crimea moved to accede to the Russian Federation.
In spite of these differences, Russian politicians have repeatedly invoked the example of Kosovo as precedent for the “accession” of Crimea.
In this essay, I will argue – contrary to the case laid out by Putin and others – that the two cases are insufficiently similar for the secession of Kosovo to offer a meaningful precedent to the annexation of Crimea.
Despite their outwardly similar backgrounds as minority regions of post-socialist states, the regions’ varying degrees of autonomy and structure clearly divide the Kosovan and Crimean examples.
Furthermore, the two are distinguished by the level of conflict and threat endured by the regions, as well as the broad international acceptance of Kosovo’s secession as compared to that of the Russian engagement in Ukraine.
In my conclusion, I will return to the persistent Russian claims of the two cases’ similarity, and highlight potential political benefits derived from this line of discourse.
Few areas of international law are clearly defined, universally accepted, and manifestly enforceable.
Instead, they are often expressed in nebulous jargon, detached from the practice of statecraft, and unable to apolitically constrain or direct states’ behaviour.
This extends to legislation concerning self-determination and secession.
Both texts seem to point towards the right to self-determination of “peoples’” – the national component of the nation-state.
None, however, clearly lay out criteria in which secessionism can and should take place, especially in cases, as in Kosovo and Crimea, characterised by the seceding territories failure to secure the consent of their respective metropoles.
They lack, moreover, precise definitions of to which “peoples” the concept should be applied.
This unclarity is compounded when weighed against states’ sovereignty and territorial integrity – also guaranteed by, inter alia, the UN Charter.
More transparent, however, are the conditions in which states are held to be legitimate polities.
While also vague, these conditions can be seen as baseline criteria for the legitimacy of any secessionist region.
Kosovo, in contrast to other disputed territories, met at least the first three of these conditions before its 2008 Declaration of Independence.
One of only two such regions in Yugoslavia , this status clearly demarked the Kosovan borders and population – a population approximately 68% ethnically Albanian in 1948, 92% by 2006.
It further granted significant levels of self-government and relative independence from the Belgrade regime.
A 1974 amendment to the constitution further allowed Kosovo to develop ‘its own central bank, education and health-care systems, police, courts and independent cultural institutions’ – competencies which could not be overturned without the region’s provincial assembly’s consent.
A ‘Serbization’ programme was instituted, whereby ‘tens of thousands of Kosovo Albanian doctors, municipal officials, teachers and industrial workers were sacked from their jobs’, replaced by ethnic Serbs.
Excluded from official Serbian political structures, the Albanian population moved to establish a ‘parallel state’, providing services in education, health, social support, justice, and human rights, as well as a market, banking and tax system.
The state building process was further accelerated by the 1998-1999 Kosovan War, triggered by the brutal Serbian attacks on, inter alia, the villages of Drenica and Račak.
It had demonstrated its legitimacy as a polity prior to its Declaration of Independence.
Kosovo’s clear and long-standing path to state-building and independence stands in contrast to that of Crimea.
While it would be unfair to judge Crimea solely against the same Montevidean standards for functional independence from the Ukrainian metropole – Crimea’s self-determination took the path of ‘accession’ to another state, not the foundation of a new independent state – indications of the region’s readiness and desire for ‘accession’ to Russian could have otherwise been made manifestly clear.
In 1954, the region was transferred as an Oblast to the Ukrainian SSR – a move of little consequence under the Soviet federal system – by Nikita Khrushchev after an alleged mere 15 minutes of deliberation.
Crimea was pronounced an Autonomous Republic of Ukraine during the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
While its territory has remained constant throughout its political development, Crimea’s population has not.
The Russian Empire and Soviet Union were complicit in the ethnic cleansing and mass-deportation of Crimea’s indigenous Tatar population between the 18th and early 20th centuries.
Although higher than other regions, the proportion of Russians is far from overwhelming.
Its diversity certainly does not indicate the presence of a homogenous ethnos, justifying – at least when considered in isolation – either independence or union with Russia.
It contrasts unfavourably with the 92% Albanian ethnic composition of Kosovo.
In this regard, the case of Kosovo is too singular to offer a precedent for the annexation of Crimea.
The political cause of Crimean independence or ‘accession’ to the Russian Federation also lacks the depth of historical support of the Kosovan campaign for independence.
The only referendum held in Crimea after 1991 was in support of maintained federal rights, pursuant to the 1992 Ukrainian constitution.
In Kosovo, by contrast, a ballot was staged in September 1991 indicating 99% support for independence – albeit with the Serb minority excluded.
Limited polling conducted by the UN Development Programme suggests that as recently as late 2011, only 65.6% of the Crimean population favoured ‘accession’ to the Russian Federation.
This figure is dwarfed by that in favour on Kosovan independence in 1991.
This is not to say that there was no support for the transfer of Crimea to Russia.
The 65.6% represents substantial backing, especially when combined with a limited pro-accession protest movement led by the politician Sergei Tsekov.
The Kosovan precedent of clearly documented and long-standing popular desire for self-determination did not apply in Crimea.
It is likely that this contrast of support for the self-determination projects in Kosovo and Crimea was directly related to the level of violence and threat endured by each territory.
The first such ad hoc court since the end of the Second World War, ICTY only had a mandate to prosecute crimes against humanity, genocide, grave breaches of the 1949 Geneva Conventions and violations of the laws or customs of war – the most severe infringements of international law.
In nearby Srbica, Serb forces allegedly shelled several villages, confining women and children in a barn before sexually abusing and killing them, disposing of their bodies in wells.
In Priština, hundreds of Kosovo Albanian residents were forced onto overcrowded buses and trains bound for the Macedonian border.
The organised violence suffered by the Kosovar Albanian population during the war represented a brutal layer of criminality after years of state-sponsored racism and subjugation.
It would be inaccurate to claim that the Crimean population escaped political misfortune entirely.
The 1998 Crimean constitution, for instance, reduced its legal status and the autonomy of the Crimean parliament.
Against this relatively friendly medium-term political background, Crimea’s 2014 ‘accession’ to Russia emerged catalysed by the Euromaidan Revolution.
By February 2014, the fervency of the protests – particularly concentrated on the central Maidan Nezalezhnosti– had risen to fever-pitch, spurred on by an attempted police crackdown.
Government offices were raided, and pressure brought to bear on the regime.
Yanukovych was forced from office into exile in Russia on 22nd February, replaced in time by the pro-Western chocolate magnate Petro Poroshenko.
The Euromaidan Revolution was reviled in Crimea, as elsewhere in Eastern and Southern Ukraine and in the Kremlin.
There is undoubtedly some truth to this allegation, even if claims the protests were led by ‘nationalists, neo-Nazis Russophobes and anti-Semites’ are largely unfounded.
A legally contested referendum, called by the newly installed pro-Russian government under Sergei Aksyonov, was held in Crimea and Sevastopol on 16th March.
Approximately 96.8% of voters are alleged to have backed union with Russia.
The peninsula’s ‘accession’ was confirmed by an 18th March Agreement signed by Crimean and Russian representatives.
While meaningful, the political consequences of the Revolution 600km from Crimea are of a different magnitude to the suffering endured by the Kosovar Albanian population during the 1998-1999 War.
The violence experienced during the collapse of Yugoslavia resulted in the 1999 UN Security Council Resolution 1244, which called for the rapid Yugoslav withdrawal from Kosovo, the demilitarization of the region, the establishment of UNMIK and sanctioned NATO-led peacekeeping.
It also pointed towards a future resolution of the Kosovan situation based on self-government and stabilisation.
The Yugoslav war crimes likely also contributed to the broad international recognition of Kosovo’s independence.
The legality of its Declaration was also approved by an – albeit somewhat nebulous – 2010 International Court of Justice ruling.
In the case of Crimea, no such international acceptance has been achieved.
The alleged presence of unmarked Russian special forces in the region before and during the ballot, as well as the Russian support for the unfolding conflict in the Donbas region in the East of Ukraine, further stoked international condemnation.
A further point of difference which invalidates the relevance of the Kosovan precedent is the alternative goals of self-determination in Kosovo and Crimea.
The Crimean referendum went a step further, calling not only for secession but also for the immediate transfer to a third-party state.
Its legality – as a singularity in the modern history of statecraft – would have been uncertain even before the 2014 General Assembly Resolution.
It is also deeply unpalatable, both to other states in Russia’s near abroad which fear similar territorial infringement, and to those in the West whose relations with the Putin regime were already tense.
Although not legally relevant, these states’ opinions and policies are significant.
In response to the ‘annexation’ of Crimea, a group of Western states levied sanctions on Russia, including three of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council.
Any future diplomatic resolution of the Crimean situation – through this most important forum at least – seems unlikely.
The Kosovan and Crimean situations are intractably multifaceted, yet of fundamental importance to Europe’s stability.
They challenge the permanence of the state-based political order and have erected barriers between the West and Serbia and Russia respectively.
Both cases are indeed superficially similar, but commentators – particularly in Russia – are wrong to claim that a Kosovan precedent can be applied to Crimea.
Its history of self-governance, the violence and repression it endured, and the manifest popularity of a break from Belgrade made an exceptionally strong case for remedial secession.
Even considering these circumstances, due to the centrality of state sovereignty to the international system, the International Court of Justice was still unwilling to pass a clear verdict showing its support.
Unlike Kosovo, the Crimean population had failed to demonstrate long-standing support for self-determination, and any repression experienced was incomparable.
Kosovo’s desire for statehood was far more agreeable to the international community than a Crimean ‘accession’ to a potentially hostile third-party.
Nonetheless, Russian politicians continue to emphasise the salience of the Kosovan precedent, casting the West as hypocritical for its failure to acknowledge its relevance.
This seems baseless until wider geopolitical and discursive considerations are taken into account.
Russia benefits from maintaining control of – and access to – Crimea without protracted negotiations with an increasingly pro-Western Kyiv.
The seizure of the peninsula and the “annexation” of Sevastopol as a Federal City represents a stand against NATO expansion in Eastern Europe, a perennial Russian preoccupation.
Sevastopol is also the home port to the vast Russian Black Sea Fleet, particularly important for its continued engagement in the War in Syria.
Putin especially has highlighted the interwoven history and shared identity of Crimean and Russians citizens since the imperial era.
Its ‘reunification’ with Russia presented an opportunity for a ‘national rebirth’ of a more assertive post-Soviet Russia.
The desire to couch the “accession” in terms of precedent and legalistic norms are perhaps also not surprising.
It corresponds with, inter alia, Ted Hopf’s assertion that a ‘Liberal Essentialist’ regime is seeking legitimacy through engagement with just such international institutions.
Considering this political backdrop, any attempt to draw parallels between the Kosovan and Russian case would have been problematic.
The differences between the two territories make the comparison impossible.
