Last week, as the ruble collapsed in value against the United States dollar and a full-blown financial crisis threatened to explode in Russia, news broke that President Barack Obama planned to sign a piece of legislation that essentially amounts to a declaration of war on Russia.
The evocatively titled Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014, which was unanimously approved by the House and Senate, is short on common sense and long belligerent ultimatums and misstatements of recent history.
It demands that Russia cease destabilizing Ukraine, abandon the Crimean Peninsula , withdraw its forces from Georgia , and even stop aiding Bashar al-Assad’s government in Syria.
It designates Ukraine, Moldova, and Georgia “major non-NATO allies,” and urges Obama to adopt more sanctions and visa bans against Russia.
Sanctions or no, Russia’s unprecedented $375 billion military build-up proceeds apace.
Moscow continues sending its air force on provocative missions to probe NATO borders, with the Baltic countries scrambling their jets to intercept Russian planes a record 21 times — just in the week of December 8-14.
For the second time this year, a near miss took place between a Russian military plane and a European civilian airliner.
Russia has twice conducted military exercises practicing a nuclear attack on Warsaw.
And Russian warships and submarines have patrolled as far afield as Australia and the United States.
The sanctions and the increasingly charged military stand-off between Russia and NATO member countries have done little to dent Putin’s popularity, which the respected Levada Center rates at 85 percent.
A majority of Russians — 59 percent according to the center’s last poll, in November — believe their country is on the right track.
Russians do not blame this turbulent state of affairs on their president, but on the United States and its “puppets” in the European Union — a view they have had relentlessly pounded into them by state-controlled airwaves.
In any case, after four rounds of NATO expansion into formerly Warsaw-Pact and Soviet domains, the wellspring of Russian goodwill toward the West long ago ran dry.
A Russian bomber could collide with a European civilian airliner in or near NATO airspace.
Russian and NATO submarines could accidentally crash in international waters.
A technological glitch could prompt either Russia or the United States to conclude the other has launched its nuclear missiles, which would necessitate “using them or losing them” — a frightening dilemma the Soviet Union faced when it almost mistook the 1983 NATO exercise Able Archer for an actual attack.
Such a catastrophic, improbable eventuality would be considerably reduced if the two countries had retained even basic relations of trust.
Or, as has been credibly suggested, Putin could decide he has nothing to gain by even minimally cooperating with the West.
But no one predicted that Russia would re-acquire Crimea last March through a stealth occupation.
Short of a palace coup or popular uprising , the probability of his relinquishing his grip on power ahead of schedule is minuscule.
If we accept that Putin is not going anywhere soon, we find ourselves in need of a political solution, a way of crafting a relationship with Russia that allows for “peaceful coexistence” with the West.
Carter administration National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski in addressing the Center for Strategic and International Studies, former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger in the Washington Post, Samuel Charap in an essay for this magazine, and I twice in The Atlantic.
Given the separatist conflict in eastern Ukraine, odds are infinitesimal that NATO would seek to induct Ukraine, and yet the alliance’s 2008 Budapest declaration promised that one day it would.
Moreover, Ukraine’s Verkhovna Rada has just passed legislation abolishing the country’s “non-bloc” status, established by law in 2010.
The legislature also made entering the Western military alliance a national goal.
In November, the Kremlin requested a “100 percent guarantee” that Ukraine not join NATO, presumably in exchange for helping foster peace in the Donbass — an overture towards ending the crisis that no one explored.
In his March address on the unification of Russia and Crimea, Putin justified Russia’s actions in light of eventual NATO expansion.
Indeed, NATO and European Union membership have mostly gone hand in hand — it is hardly unreasonable that the Russian leadership considers this possibility of Ukraine joining the alliance credible.
The author of the containment policy, George Kennan, warned in the 1990s that the then-planned expansion of NATO up to Russia’s borders would result in a “new cold war, probably ending in a hot one,” and kill chances for democracy in the country.
In any case, opposition to Ukraine’s membership is strong in Berlin and Paris.
To forestall the “Ukraine scenario” from befalling other former Soviet states, NATO would also need to foreswear — in writing — further expansion to the east.
Putin recently compared the peninsula’s relationship to Russia with that of the Temple Mount in Jerusalem for Jews and Muslims — a puzzling assertion to say the least, given that the territory only belonged to Russia from when Catherine the Great conquered it from the Ottoman Empire in 1783 until 1954, when Soviet premier Khrushchev “gave” it to Ukraine.
The United Nations needs to oversee a new, totally transparent referendum on the peninsula’s status.
Both Russia and the West would have to agree to be bound by its results.
In return for a guarantee of neutrality for Ukraine and carrying out a transparent, binding new referendum on Crimea, Moscow would have to cease supporting separatist insurgents in the Donbass, verifiably withdrawing whatever personnel and materiel it has in the region.
Russia would also have to re-commit to the provisions of the September Minsk Protocol that established a cease-fire between the rebels and the government in Kiev and to respecting Ukraine’s sovereignty.
And if Ukraine opts to join the European Union, Russia must let it do so.
To give Russia incentive to agree to halt support for Donbass separatists and allow a second referendum in Crimea, the United States and the European Union can offer a prompt end to economic sanctions and visa bans.
Previous iterations of such a proposed accord have received no serious consideration.
Let’s recall, as well, that when Russia helped insurgents seize part of Ukraine’s east, perhaps a million of that region’s population fled not to Kiev-controlled territory, but into Russia itself.
Now is the time for the United States and the European Union — specifically, Obama, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and French President Francois Hollande — to launch a new diplomatic overture to Russia.
This may provide Putin with ample objective grounds for reaching an agreement.
As unpalatable as it will be to Western leaders, they will have to deal with him to get it.
It’s unfortunate that instead policymakers and legislators in Washington seem to be pushing relations with Russia in the opposite direction.
The latest in the West’s assault on Russia, the belligerent Ukraine Freedom Support Act that Obama himself signed, only makes the inevitable and necessary reconciliation with Russia all the more difficult.
And that’s the last thing Russia, or the United States, or Ukraine need right now.
