Scholar Publishing House and Centre for Polish-Russian Dialogue and Understanding, 2017.
Abstract In this review essay, two recent books, one analysing the question of the Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014 directly and the other in the context of changing geopolitics and world order, are discussed.
Parallels with war pamphlets in the 18th century, authored by Olaus Hermelin and Petr Shafirov in the context of the Great Nordic War, are drawn.
Rein Müllerson’s suggestion that the world should return to balance-of-power politics in the context of international law is rejected.
Research for and writing of this review essay was supported by Grant no.
IUT20-50 of the Estonian Research Council and fellowship of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.
While resolutions of the UNGA are legally non-binding, this majority expressed the predominant opinion of the international community.
Nevertheless, while only 11 states voted against the resolution, 58 abstained and 24 remained absent when the voting took place.
Thus, a considerable number of UN member states – including China, a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council – avoided a direct answer regarding the question of illegality.
Therefore, the UNGA vote also demonstrates a certain fragmentation of the international community along geopolitical lines and alliances.
In any event, declaring a territorial situation illegal does not in itself offer detailed guidance for how to practically deal with it, beyond formal non-recognition, especially when there appears to be no end in sight.
While formal non-recognition of the illegal situation in the narrower sense has not been controversial, additional sanctions against Russia adopted by Western states have sometimes been just that.
The typical pattern has been that sanctions against Russia once adopted by United States Congress would then be undermined by presidential statements that were broadly understood as supportive of Russian claims regarding Crimea.
A similar contradictory approach can also be observed in the practices of some European Union countries, wherein the biannual ritual of prolonging sanctions against Russia is also invariably accompanied by the sceptical voices of influential politicians.
In his Kremlin speech of March 2014, President Vladimir Putin made Russia’s legal-political case to justify the incorporation of Crimea into Russian territory.
Based on the subsequent Western reactions and sanctions, Moscow’s justifications have not been successful internationally, at least not in the short term.
Among international lawyers in the West, Thomas D Grant expressed the representative view well when emphasizing the illegality of the annexation.
In contrast, in Russia, lawyers have offered legal-political justifications of the annexation that were primarily made to reassure domestic audiences.
Nevertheless, a constitutional law professor from the Higher School of Economics in Moscow, Elena A Lukyanova, also raised a dissenting voice in Russia and publicly expressed doubts about the legality of the annexation of Crimea.
Her analysis triggered a rapid and equally spirited rebuttal by Valery Zorkin, 1 UNGA Res.
Lukyanova, ‘O prave nalevo’ , Novaya Gazeta , available at www.novayagazeta.ru/articles/2015/03/19/63473-o-prave-nalevo.
The popular approval, in Russia, of Crimea’s annexation has apparently been so overwhelming that even pro-Western opposition politicians have been confused about how to proceed.
For example, Ksenia Sobchak, a presidential candidate in the March 2018 elections, admitted that the 2014 annexation was illegal but that, in order to now solve the conundrum, one would need a new and proper referendum on the issue – in Crimea, Ukraine, as well as in Russia itself.
We can assume that, in 2001, the drafters of the ILC’s draft Articles on State Responsibility did not think of this possibility when discussing consequences of illegal annexations.
For international lawyers, probably the most interesting question is whether Moscow has any serious legal-political arguments for the annexation that would at least deserve our attention from an intellectual or moral standpoint.
As is well known, the main argument supporting the illegality thesis in the context of Crimea is that the deployment of Russian special forces during the takeover of power in Crimea violated Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter.
In addition, Russia’s annexation also violated the border treaty concluded by Russia and Ukraine in 2003, in which Russia had recognized Crimea as part of Ukraine.
Yet, beyond the immediate normative arguments, the current debate about the legality of Russia’s actions in Crimea can also be seen from a historical perspective.
Quite symbolically, Russia’s accession to the jus publicum europaeum in the early 18th century coincided with the publication of such war manifestos and pamphlets.
In 1700, Muscovy’s Tsar Peter the Great attacked the Kingdom of Sweden in the province of Estonia at the town of Narva, and the Great Nordic War broke out.
A Conversation with Russian Presidential Candidate Ksenia Sobchak’, Center for Strategic and International Studies, 6 February 2018, available at www.csis.org/ events/russias-post-authoritarian-future-conversation-russian-presidential-candidate-ksenia-sobchak.
Legitimations of War and the Formation of European Identity in the Early Modern Period’, 11 Journal of Early Modern History 63.
It then became a task of the Russian diplomat Petr Shafirov (1670– 1739) to respond with Russian arguments, mostly offering quite a different perspective on what had happened historically and on what had been agreed in the earlier treaties.
Shafirov’s pamphlet became Russia’s first publication related to the tradition of international law.
In the absence of international courts, the debate on the justness of the Great Nordic War was ultimately decided on the battlefield – to the triumph of Russia.
Nevertheless, the Swedish and Russian war pamphlets were meant to influence the European public opinion, at least before the peace treaty of Nystad finally recognized the territorial changes in 1721.
In their recent account of plans to outlaw war, Oona Hathaway and Scott Shapiro write that, since at that time starting a war was not prohibited in international law, war manifestos were first of all a means of propaganda.
Interestingly, about onethird of the historical war manifestos that those authors collected and examined charged their enemies for the disruption of the balance of power.
This demonstrates that, at least historically in Europe, balance-of-power arguments have played a certain role in legal-moral-political justifications of war.
Balance-of-power considerations have been typically considered irrelevant for post-1945 discussions of jus ad bellum in international law.
At the same time, the idea of balance of power has lived on in post-1945 international relations literature, especially among historically oriented realists, perhaps most notably among them the former United States chief diplomat and foreign policy theorist Henry Kissinger.
For a detailed engagement, see Peevers, ‘Liberal Internationalism, Radical Transformation and the Making of World Orders’, 29 European Journal of International Law 303.
The Traditional View Emphasizing Illegality The first book reviewed here, entitled The Case of Crimea’s Annexation under International Law, is the outcome of an international conference that the Polish Academy of Sciences and the Centre for Polish-Russian Dialogue and Understanding organized in Warsaw in March 2015, one year after the annexation.
This came after the initial lively encounter of some leading Russian and Ukrainian international law scholars at the meeting of the European Society of International Law’s international legal theory interest group in Tallinn in June 2014.18 The Warsaw conference became one of the two prominent European conferences that at the time focused specifically on the study of the annexation of Crimea from an international legal viewpoint.
The Polish editors have aimed at a diversity of viewpoints so that the Russian perspective would also be represented.
Thus, metaphorically speaking, the successors of both Hermelin and Shafirov, as well as, of course, observers emphasizing their scholarly neutrality, have been given an opportunity to make their respective cases in this book.
Nevertheless, the representation of the Russian official perspective has remained weaker, and most authors of chapters either proceed from the assumption, or come to the conclusion, that Russia’s annexation was illegal.
However, unfortunately, Tolstykh fails to lay out explicitly what consequences his thoughts would have in the context of Crimea.
Besides that, Zadorozhnii does not think that the Crimean people met the criteria for a claim to self-determination in international law.
This is not an absurd question since Russia (along with some other permanent members of the UNSC) has insisted that only the UNSC can determine the existence of aggression, and, in this organ, it also famously has veto power.
What Issaeva seems to suggest is that international law experts should lead the way and seek to tell even uncomfortable truths.
However, not all international lawyers are courageous enough to take on the prevailing public opinion.
In another chapter, Mindia Vashakmadze of the Max Planck Foundation for International Peace and the Rule of Law in Heidelberg, who is originally from Georgia, analyses the Russian practice of the forcible protection of nationals abroad.
The previous precedents in the post-Soviet region, not the least in Caucasus, indicate that Moscow’s current interpretation of what it is entitled to do in the pursuit of the protection of its nationals did not newly emerge in 2014 but was much earlier established.
She concludes that ‘no actor demonstrated its true adherence to the maintenance of international peace and security, and all of them applied and unfortunately still apply double standards’.35 Although Douhan does not consider Russia’s actions in Crimea legal, she rejects the Western portrayal of Moscow as ‘the only guilty party’ and thinks that the illegality of Russia’s behaviour did not justify the introduction of sanctions.
Inevitably, Douhan’s argument also reflects her country’s difficult position as Russia’s close ally, which, at the same time – and this is a noteworthy fact – has not recognized the annexation of Crimea by Russia.
Enrico Milano, Maurizio Arcari, Łukasz Gruszczyński and Marcin Menkes, Beatrice Bonafe, Bartłomiej Krzan, Matthew Kane and Sigmar Stadlmeier discuss further responsibility issues related to the annexation of Crimea as well as the follow-up of the still ongoing military conflict in southeastern Ukraine.
Problems of state responsibility, individual criminal responsibility under international law as well as the legality of the EU trade sanctions under World Trade Organization law are discussed.
Kane examines the ‘prudence, propriety and potential ramifications’ of the Ukrainian use of language – namely, that it is fighting ‘terrorism’ in southeastern Ukraine.
This is highly relevant in the ongoing International Court of Justice case between Ukraine and Russia.
Stadlmeier looks in a definitive manner at the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH 17 – an incident for which the Netherlands and Australia have held the Russian Federation accountable.
Altogether, this stimulating collection of articles represents the mainstream viewpoint in the sense that the reader inevitably puts the book aside with the knowledge that, in Crimea, Russia has acted illegally and that, from the initial violation of international law, there has emerged a myriad of other violations.
The confirmation of this mainstream view is helpful, but, of course, it does have limits.
Despite the editors’ attempts at diversity, there is, in the book, no convincing legal-political argument for the ‘Russian case’, not just in the narrow sense of a legal argument justifying the annexation undertaken by Russia but also in terms of us being able to understand the normative thinking behind Russia’s actions better.
For example, Amoroso’s argument that Crimean people also deserve a form of self-determination or Douhan’s criticism that the West has used double standards does not go deep enough in opening up reasons for and consequences of the annexation of Crimea.
The argument for legality is a very tough one to make in the framework of existing international law, after all.
The result is the current standoff in which the majority of the world’s states consider the annexation of Crimea illegal, but Russia affirms that, from 2014 on, Crimea will always remain Russian.
Realizing this conundrum, some Russian international lawyers (for example, Stanislav Chernichenko of the Diplomatic Academy in Moscow) have suggested to search for a justification of Russia’s incorporation of Crimea outside the framework of existing international law, especially in the logic of historical justice.
Essentially, this is the Russian version of the ‘illegal but legitimate’ argument.
Thus, if contemporary international law does not offer convincing legal justifications for Russia’s annexation of Crimea, the prospective Shafirovs of today need to perhaps say something more general about international law in the contemporary world that would change our normative outlook and make Russia’s actions in Ukraine more palatable.
This is the ambitious project which Rein Müllerson undertakes in his book Dawn of a New World Order.
Recently, Müllerson has also been active in the Valdai Discussion Club, which has privileged access to Russia’s President Putin.
Müllerson’s book is not only about international law but also about international politics and current affairs.
In this review, I will omit the discussion of these nonlegal parts concerning the world order more generally and just focus on Müllerson’s international legal analysis, especially the part that concerns the foundational principles of international law and what might follow from it for jus ad bellum.
In his book, Müllerson does not explicitly admit that he is going to make the pro-Russian argument about the state of international law.
To the contrary, he starts his book by criticizing the prevalence of ‘advocacy research’ in international law.
Müllerson emphasizes that, when discussing Crimea, we should not start with Crimea and 2014 but, instead, with Kosovo in 1999.
In any case, it is Müllerson’s view that if Russia’s annexation of Crimea was illegal then, on the same terms, so too was NATO’s bombing of Yugoslavia and the later recognition by many states of Kosovo as an independent state.
Thus, there is a certain relativity of violations of international law; a certain ‘balance’ of violations emerges.
Russia violated international law against Ukraine, but Müllerson suggests that, before that, the West, led by the USA, had had its own share of major violations.
This is the classical Russian reproach of Kosovo 1999, Iraq 2003 and Libya 2011 as United States violations of international law, which has recently even made it into Western popular culture.
Müllerson also attempts to diminish what actually happened in Crimea in 2014 and challenge the previously mentioned majority view that Russia violated Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter, and even committed aggression against Ukraine.
Müllerson refers euphemistically to the ‘tragedy of Ukraine’, seeming to evoke the classical tradition wherein a ‘tragedy’ 44 Ibid., at 21.
When President Boris Yeltsin chose Vladimir Putin as his successor, he ‘behaved as a statesman, and even visionary’.55 Western propaganda, compared to Russian propaganda, is ‘much more sophisticated, experienced and widespread and therefore it may even not look like propaganda at all’.56 The core problem with many experts in the West (and, especially, an aspiring West such as the Central and East European countries, former dependents of Moscow) is their Russophobia.
However, such voices should be tamed because ‘now is not the time to let phobias to triumph over reason’.58 Recently, Russia has simply responded to attempts of containment in their various forms.
NATO is a ‘relic of the Cold War’60 and ‘the greatest geopolitical nonsense of the twenty-first century’.61 Müllerson also hopes that God would ‘help us avoiding revolutions, whatever be their colour’.62 If international law is, among other things, ‘people with projects’ (as David Kennedy has suggested63), then Müllerson’s project in this book seems to be that of normatively supporting great powers outside the West, especially Russia.
Citizen of a small ‘border’ state himself , Müllerson, intriguingly, critically comments on international law’s ‘anarchophilia’, which he sees reflected in the principle of self-determination.
His view echoes the opinion of another Baltic international lawyer who made international legal arguments for Russia, Friedrich Martens , who in the 1880s opined that the emerging principle of self-determination of peoples was ‘capable of destroying a lot’ (as it did, from the Russian imperial perspective, in 1918 and later 51 Ibid., at 3, 38.
The Russian annexation of Crimea was carried out ‘to a great extent because of the foreseeable risk of having American or NATO forces in the peninsula’.69 Although Moscow mentioned ‘historical, ethnical and religious reasons as real justifications’, the real explanation for annexation, in Müllerson’s view, was Moscow’s justified fear of having NATO marines in Sebastopol.
Thus, Müllerson puts aside references to the self-determination of peoples and the suggested discrimination of ethnic Russians in Ukraine as sort of plausible pretexts and a rhetorical smokescreen that Moscow used in 2014.
Martens, Sovremennoe mezhdunarodnoe pravo tsivilizovannykh narodov [Contemporary International Law of Civilized Nations] , vol 1, at 121.
However, in the end, for Müllerson, Moscow has almost done international law a favour in a deeper historical sense.
With the annexation, Russia dared to resist the would-be global hegemon – the USA – and made a bold step towards the restoration of the balance of power as the underlying socio-political meta-principle, actually enabling an international law worthy of its name.
That the current Russian leadership thinks about Crimea and security matters in Europe, inter alia, in balance-of-power terms becomes apparent from other contemporary sources – for example, President Putin’s lengthy interview with the American filmmaker Oliver Stone.
However, contemporary international lawyers have started to forget what role balance-of-power arguments have played in the considerations of war and peace in classical international law.
The main question in the era of the UN Charter is how any balance-of-power claim relates to the prohibition of the threat and use of force against other sovereign states enshrined in Article 2, paragraph 4.
The context of Müllerson’s main example – Crimea – is revealing; the reintroduction of balance-of-power thinking in the context of international legal theory would undermine Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter, as it was already violated in Crimea and Donbass.
One can never be sure whether a balance has been restored or not since any such thinking on balance would be subjective and might be challenged by other powers.
Acknowledging balance of power as the meta-principle preceding international law of the UN Charter would mean that the principle of the sovereign equality of states enshrined in the UN Charter would definitely suffer, as Müllerson himself partly admits.
They would only in the sense that, when great powers do reach a consensus about their respective spheres of influence, an open military conflict over their territory would for that moment be unlikely.
In retrospect, major ideas such as the one behind Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter cannot be killed simply by single attacks of major powers; they can be killed primarily by other, competing ideas.
In this sense, balance of power as additional justification in jus ad bellum matters is clearly detrimental to the restrictive jus ad bellum settlement as it was agreed upon in 1928 and 1945.
We know that in the 18th century, irrespective 80 Müllerson, supra note 42, at 159.
In any case, participating in direct lawfare come with risks and, in fact, used to be outright dangerous.
Olaus Hermelin became a Russian prisoner of war at the battle of Poltava in 1709 and died in Russian captivity.
Luckily, nowadays, personal consequences related to lawfare have become less severe.
That said, Sławomir Dębski, the co-editor of the book published in Warsaw, was declined a Russian visa in 2018 and could not attend the games of the Polish team at the football World Cup.
Müllerson spoke at a conference in Crimea at Simferopol in 2017 and was criticized for it by the Estonian Internal Security Service.
Müllerson’s book raises the question of assumptions underlying the international legal order since 1945.
It reveals how former Soviet international legal thinking has transformed into an ultra-realist analysis of the place of international law in the world order and also of how the Russian attitudes towards Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter have changed considerably.
The reading of Müllerson’s book also fits well in the context of the recent historical rediscovery by Western international lawyers of the history of Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter and its 1928 predecessor, the Kellogg-Briand Pact.
Typically for our profession of international lawyers, Hathaway and Shapiro present these treaties and norms as historically progressive and revolutionary achievements that divide the history of international law into the regressive past and more humanistic and peaceful thereafter.
Yet, one of the mild criticisms of the book by Hathaway and Shapiro has been that they do not sufficiently take into account Soviet perspectives of the world’s ordering act of 1945.85 How the international community has come to accept the UN Charter’s Article 2, paragraph 4 is too much presented as a Western affair and contribution.
In this sense, it is useful that Müllerson now tells us that in his view the UN Charter was, among other things, also a balance-of-power arrangement.
As Hathaway and Shapiro write already in the context of the Kellogg-Briand Pact in 1928, the point was that past conquests would be protected, but future conquests would not.
Of course, this suited states that had already conquered successfully – and the Soviet Union was territorially rewarded, even saturated in 1945.
Joseph Stalin had earlier made a pact with Adolf Hitler on 23 August 1939 in order to achieve territorial changes in Eastern Europe, and the Soviet 83 Estonian Internal Security Service, Annual Review 2017, at 9, available at www.kapo.ee/en/content/ annual-reviews.html.
The Plan to Outlaw War, Review’, The Guardian , available at www. theguardian.com/books/2017/dec/16/the-internationalists-review-plan-outlaw-war.
In diplomatic records, there are indications that in 1945 the Soviets led by Stalin approached the prohibition of the use of force also in terms of realpolitik and balance of power, not just for idealistic reasons of conducting a pacifist normative revolution in international law.
The main principles of international law were agreed upon in 1945 when the Soviet Union had a different territorial composition from today’s Russian Federation, its state continuator in international relations.
Post-Soviet Russia’s jus ad bellum doctrine has changed quite drastically compared to the Soviet approach.
The Soviet Union preached full adherence to Article 2, paragraph 4, and heavily criticized powers like the USA, the UK and Israel for their too liberal interpretations of humanitarian intervention, anticipatory self-defence, protection of citizens abroad and so on.
However, post-Soviet Russia’s jus ad bellum doctrine started to emphasize that military force could be used in defence of Russian-speaking minorities abroad.
The only way to explain this is through realism – in 1945, the Soviet Union was territorially oversaturated, and, after 1991, Russia was territorially diminished and felt an existential threat.
The text of the UN Charter remained exactly the same; yet from one of the ‘conservative’ pillars of the UN came the challenger of the territorial order in Eastern Europe.
This also applies to Ukraine, which is why the international community should not currently even discuss the possibility of recognizing Crimea as part of Russia.
Changes in territorial status to that effect can take place only in the agreement of Kiev and Moscow, and any foreign direct pressure on Kiev would not just be immoral but also probably illegal.
Former Soviet republics gained full sovereignty in 1991, and any attempts to undo this – for example, with balance-of-power arguments – run contrary to their rights as sovereign states under the UN Charter.
Therefore, balance of power as a historical meta-principle related to international law can only be reintroduced at the cost of relativizing the prohibition of threat and the use of military force.
It is a dangerous idea and should be rejected lest the international community risk losing the constraining effects of Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter.
