The Ukrainian Naval Forces is the navy of Ukraine and part of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
In 2007 and prior to the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea 15,470 people served the Ukrainian Navy.
The headquarters of the Ukrainian Naval Forces was, until the 2014 Crimean crisis, situated at Sevastopol in Crimea.
The Naval Forces of Ukraine were highly affected by the Crimea Crisis as majority of their units were stationed there.
Ships that did not escape or were not deployed at the time lowered their flags and were interned.
Russia began a process of returning the vessels but stopped, citing inability of Ukraine to retake possession and continued violence against Russians in the Donbass.
The ships that were returned were the older models of the fleet that were deemed obsolete.
For example, Russia chose not to return the corvettes Ternopil and Lutsk, both of which are some of the newest ships of the Ukrainian fleet.
However, none of the Ukrainian naval units retained were absorbed into the Russian Navy.
Ukraine had been scheduling to rebuild its naval forces since 2005 by building the domestic project 58250, the first Ukrainian designed and built corvette, as well as ordering numerous patrol boats in 2013 from Willard Marine.
Ukraine has also restarted the production of its Gryuza River Armed Artillery Boat, which has been previously exported to Uzbekistan.
Distant operations of the Ukrainian Navy are limited to multinational activities, such as Operation Active Endeavour and Operation Atalanta in the Mediterranean and Horn of Africa.
The Ukrainian Naval Forces trace their history to the Zaporizhian Sich Cossacks, who would frequently raid Ottoman settlements along the Black Sea coast.
Cossacks utilized small ships called ""chaikas"" which were similar in design to Viking long ships.
Although technologically inferior to the Turks the Cossacks had great success against their opponent.
In 1615 the Cossacks were able to mount a raid on Istanbul itself, destroying several suburbs of the city.
In 1616 a Cossack fleet was able to reach the Bosphorus, once again raiding the surrounding countryside.
A Turkish fleet sent to destroy the Cossack forces was defeated in 1617.
The Cossacks once again managed to mount an attack on Istanbul in 1625, forcing the Sultan to temporarily flee the capital.
The Cossacks utilized several strategies to attack the larger Ottoman forces, such as positioning their ships during battle in a way that sun was always at their back.
The Cossack ships were small with a low profile, making them hard to hit by cannon.
Cossacks were typically armed with small arm muskets, and during battle had the goal of killing the crew and boarding the ship to take it over, rather than sinking the ship.
The origins of the contemporary Ukrainian Naval Forces intertwined with the fate of the Soviet Black Sea Fleet and with the modern history of the Crimea.
Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union , the administration of the Soviet Armed Forces passed to the Joint Armed Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States for a transitional period pending agreement on the division of the ex-Soviet military between members of the former Soviet Union.
Marshal of Aviation Yevgeny Shaposhnikov became commander of the Joint CIS Armed Forces command on 14 February 1992.
On 6 December 1991 the Supreme Council of Ukraine adopted a resolution on the laws of Ukraine ""About the Defense of Ukraine"" and ""About the Armed Forces of Ukraine"", as well as the text of a military oath.
On the same day, in the parliament of Ukraine chamber, the Minister of Defense of Ukraine, Kostyantyn Morozov, became the first person to take the oath.
On 10 December 1991 the Supreme Council of Ukraine ratified the Belavezha Accords.
On 12 December 1991 the President of Ukraine issued ukase #4, ordering all military formations based in Ukraine to pledge allegiance by 20 January 1992.
On 1 January 1992 the newspaper Vympyel of the Black Sea Fleet Filipp Oktyabrskiy Training unit published the military oath and the anthem of Ukraine in the Ukrainian language.
On 3 January 1992 Ukraine started the practical formation of its national armed forces.
On 8 January 1992 the Officers' Assembly of the Black Sea Fleet appealed to all leaders of the Commonwealth of Independent States to recognise the Black Sea Fleet as an operational-strategic formation and not subordinate to Ukraine.
On 12 January 1992, the brigade of border troops in Balaklava became the first military formation to pledge allegiance to Ukraine.
On 14 January 1992 the Governor of Sevastopol appealed to the Supreme Councils of both Ukraine and the Russian Federation, urging faster adoption of a decision on the status of the Black Sea Fleet.
On 16 January 1992, an agreement between the participants of Commonwealth of Independent States was signed on the oath in strategic formations.
On 18 January 1992, the 3rd company of the divers school became the first formation of the Black Sea Fleet to pledge their allegiance to Ukraine, along with the Maritime Department of the Sevastopol Institute of Instrument Engineering.
On the next day, forty-six naval pilots pledged their allegiance to Ukraine at the central square of Mykolaiv.
Black Sea Fleet military personnel previously under the oath of the Soviet Armed Forces did not hasten to pledge allegiance to the newly formed state.
Nonetheless, on 26 January 1992 the 17th Brigade of Ships for the Guarding the Water Area of the Crimea Naval Base followed the example of the divers.
Right before the Soviet Army and Navy Day on 22 February, the 880th Independent Naval Infantry Battalion of Black Sea Fleet pledged allegiance to Ukraine.
The battalion had been recognized as the best formation of the fleet in 1991.
The Main Navy Staff in Moscow issued an order to dissolve the battalion.
After the incident, all military units of the Black Sea Fleet recruited exclusively Russians.
From the beginning, relationships between the newly formed states of Russia Federation and the Republic of Ukraine were tense.
In January 1992 the Supreme Soviet of Russia raised the question of the political status of Crimea and of the constitutionality of the 1954 decision to transfer of Crimean Oblast of the Russian SFSR to the Ukrainian SSR, accusing Nikita Khrushchev of treason against the Russian people.
Although never annulled, many Russian parliamentarians refused to recognize the legal document, pointing out the procedural errors during its adoption.
The Ukrainian side issued reminders of the number of international treaties and agreements between the two countries, such as the 19 November 1990 treaty between the Russian SFSR and the Ukrainian SSR, in which both sides recognized the territorial integrity of the other, as well as the Belavezha Accords of 8 December 1991 and the Alma-Ata Protocol of 21 December 1991.
In September 1991, an office of the Society of Ukrainian Officers was opened in Sevastopol on the initiative of Major Volodymyr Kholodyuk and captains-lieutenant Ihor Tenyukh and Mykola Huk.
The society become the initiator and nucleus of the organization of the Ukrainian Naval Forces.
On 7 April 1992 at 17:00 37 officers of the administration and headquarters of the Crimean Naval Base pledged their allegiance and loyalty to people of Ukraine.
Rear Admiral Borys Kozhyn, who was in charge, was not present at that time of the event.
He was in the office of Ivan Yermakov accepting a proposition of the First Deputy Chairman of the Supreme Council of Ukraine to become the commander of the future Ukrainian Naval Forces.
On 13 April 1992 an organizational group was established on creation of the Ukrainian Naval Forces, which upset the command of the Black Sea Fleet.
One of the episodes of this process was the story of SKR-112 – effectively the first Ukrainian Navy ship.
On 20 July 1992, the crew of SKR-112 declared itself a Ukrainian ship and raised the Ukrainian flag.
The Navy headquarters in Moscow considered this a mutiny and attempted to act accordingly.
The ship left its base on the Crimean peninsula bound for Odessa, causing a chase and ramming attempts by ships still loyal to Moscow.
Soon several other ships, auxiliary vessels, and coastal units of the Black Sea Fleet followed SKR-112's decision but with less violent outcomes.
It was only in 1997 that the ships and equipment of the Black Sea Fleet were officially divided between the two countries.
Under the terms of a negotiated lease agreement it was also granted rights to use the majority of its bases on the Crimea Peninsula, Ukraine on a renewable ten-year lease basis at least until 2017.
The newly established Ukrainian Naval Forces received dozens of vessels and some shore-based infrastructure.
However, the Russian Navy lost several important facilities, most notably the NITKA naval aviation training facility in Saky, and the special forces base in Ochakiv.
The process of fleet division remained painful since many aspects of the two navies' co-existence were under-regulated, causing recurring conflicts.
Since 1997 due to lack of financing and neglect most of the Ukrainian naval units have been scrapped or poorly maintained.
By 2009, only the frigate Hetman Sahaydachniy, originally built to be a Soviet Border Guards ship, was capable of long endurance missions.
Most of the Ukrainian naval assets, as those of the other branches of the armed forces, comprise mainly Soviet-era equipment; no major plan for modernization has yet emerged, except for a new corvette design completed in 2009 but not built.
If built, the ship was supposed to operate in the Black and the Mediterranean seas; her endurance would be 30 days, displacement 2,500 tons.
Leading European arms manufacturers like DCNS, MBDA, and EuroTorp were to deliver weapons for the project.
According to the corvette construction program approved by Ukrainian government in March 2011, overall amount of program financing till 2021 would be about UAH 16.22 billion.
Given the bankrupt state of the Ukrainian economy, as of 2016 the completion of this project is uncertain.
Prior to the Crimea Crisis Ukraine maintained a very modest naval force for a nation that lacked shores with any of the world's oceans.
In the 2014 Crimean crisis, Russia annexed Crimea, where the majority of the bases of the Ukrainian Navy were situated.
Twelve thousand of Ukraine's 15,450 Navy personnel were based in Crimea.
The naval base north of Odessa became the main operational Ukrainian Naval base.
Ukraine also lost control of its Navy's main underground ammunition-storage site at the Inkerman valley, outside Sevastopol, as well as of its helicopter-repair facilities.
Ukraine temporarily lost 51 ships, mostly auxiliaries, to Russia as the majority were stationed in Crimea.
The main fleet force consists of one frigate commissioned in 1993 and four corvettes.
Russia also returned a Polnocny-class landing ship to Ukraine restoring Ukraine's amphibious assault capabilities.
Russia returned 35 ships but unilaterally suspended the return of Ukrainian Navy materials from Crimea to Ukraine proper because/after Ukraine did not renew its unilaterally declared ceasefire on 1 July 2014 in the War in Donbass. minor auxiliary ships are hence yet to return to Ukraine proper.
When Crimea was annexed by Russia, a number of Ukrainian Navy servicemen left the service for Russia.
Among those were members of the upper echelon of command of the Ukrainian Navy.
The Ukrainian Navy compiled and released a list of the officers who left the Ukrainian Navy for Russia, calling their actions treasonous.
Rear Admiral Dmitriy Shakuro, a first deputy commander and chief of staff for the Ukrainian Navy.
Rear Admiral Denis Berezovsky, commander-in-chief of the Ukrainian Navy for one day, now a Black Sea Fleet deputy commander and chief of the combat training directorate.
Colonel Sergei Tarkhov, a chief of staff assistant in organization and sustainment of international relations.
On 25 November 2018 three Ukrainian navy vessels who attempted to redeploy from the Black Sea port Odessa to the Sea of Azov port Mariupol were captured by the Russian FSB security service during the 2018 Kerch Strait incident.
The navy has been highly affected by Crimea's occupation by Russian Federation as the majority of Ukraine's ships were stationed in Crimea.
Ukraine had developed plans to rebuild their naval capability even before the crisis by planning to build 4-10 new corvettes at the Mykolaiv Shipyard.
This was one of the Soviet Union's largest shipyards and it built Russia and China's only operational aircraft carriers.
After the referendum in Crimea, Ukraine refused to import arms from Russia for its newly developing ships, thus it is unclear whether weapons for project 58250 as Ukraine dubbed it, will be built internally in Ukraine or imported from another country.
The United States recently offered Ukraine some of its Oliver Hazard Perry-class frigates from its reserve fleet.
The Ukrainian Naval Infantry is a part of coastal guard of the Ukrainian Navy.
It is used as a component part of amphibious, airborne and amphibious-airborne operations, alone or in conjunction with formations and units of the Army in order to capture parts of the seashore, islands, ports, fleet bases, coast airfields and other coast objects of the enemy.
It can also be used to defend naval bases, vital areas of the shore, separate islands and coastal facilities and provide security in hostile areas.
Based in Mykolaiv it is organized into a full division with 2 brigades, 1 coastal and field artillery brigade and 1 multiple rocket launcher artillery regiment.
Mariupol, late September 2018 two Ukrainian vessels departed from Odessa, passed the Crimean Bridge and arrived Mariupol.
Retrieved 14 May 2016. ^ a b c d e f g ""The Navy of the Armed Forces of Ukraine"". mil.gov.ua.96-08-17.
Retrieved 2014-03-02. ^ a b ""Ukrainian Navy History"". globalsecurity.org.
Captain lieutenant or captain-lieutenant is a military rank, used in a number of navies worldwide and formerly in the British Army.
It is generally equivalent to the Commonwealth or United States naval rank of lieutenant, and has the NATO rank code of OF-2, though this can vary.
Denis Valentinovich Berezovsky is a rear admiral and the Russian Black Sea Fleet deputy commander.
He was appointed commander-in-chief of the Ukrainian Navy by Interim President Oleksandr Turchynov on March 1, 2014, serving for just one day before defecting to the self-declared pro-Russian separatist Crimean government during the 2014 Crimean crisis.
On March 24, 2014, the Defense Minister of Russia Sergei Shoigu appointed Berezovsky as the Russian Black Sea Fleet deputy commander.
On March 5, 2014, the Office of the General Prosecutor of Ukraine issued an order to detain Berezovsky on suspicion of treason.
The Grisha-class corvette was a series of anti-submarine corvettes built by the Soviet Union between 1970 and 1990 and later by Russia and Ukraine.
They were equipped with a variety of ASW weapons and an SA-N-4 surface-to-air missile launcher.
The Project 58155 Gyurza-M class is a series of small armored artillery boats in service with the Ukrainian Navy.
The first two vessels were laid down at the Kuznya na Rybalskomu shipbuilding plant in October 2012.
In mid-2014 construction of the Gyurza-M class was revived and the first two vessels were launched in late 2015.
The new military contract for twenty vessels is to be completed by 2020.
The Krivak class, Soviet designation Project 1135 Burevestnik , were series of frigates and guard ships built in the Soviet Union primarily for the Soviet Navy since 1970.
Later some sub-branch, like the Nerey was designed for coastal patrol by the KGB Border Troops.
These ships are commonly known by their NATO reporting class name of Krivak and are divided into Krivak I, Krivak II, Krivak IV , and Krivak III classes.
The design started in the late 1950s and matured as an anti-submarine ship in the 1960s.
A total of 40 ships were built, 32 ships for the Soviet Navy and 8 modified ships of the Nerey subclass for the KGB Maritime Border Guard.
Currently 2 vessels of the Nerey subclass are in service with the FSB Coast Guard and one is part of the Ukrainian Navy.
According to some sources Russia has four units in service and the Ukrainian Navy, one.
The Indian Navy ordered six frigates of upgraded Krivak III class as the Talwar class.
On 12 October 2010, it was announced that the Yantar Shipyard at Kaliningrad had won a contract for construction of three new warships for the Russian Navy.
The construction of the frigates for the Russian Navy will be carried out in parallel with the construction of the same-type frigates for the Indian Navy.
It includes main naval ships and cutters which are in service or were recently unlisted in the Ukrainian Navy as well as the auxiliary fleet.
Some 20 years after the fall of the Soviet Union, the main warships of the Ukrainian Navy are former Black Sea Fleet vessels that were designed and built in the Soviet Union.
Having several shipyards on its territory, the shipbuilding industry of Ukraine was mostly stalled after the fall of the Soviet Union.
Following the Orange Revolution, on 9 August 2005 the Cabinet of Ukraine allocated some funding for the first major national program ""Corvette"" that was initiated by Minister of Defense Anatoliy Hrytsenko.
The first warship-class built in the independent Ukraine was expected to produce its first vessel in 2016.
As of 24 March 2014, all of the larger ships but one of the Ukrainian Navy were captured by the Russian Black Sea Fleet.
In 2015 Ukraine received 5 small Willard Marine patrol boats; the original order was placed in 2013.
Following the 1997 Black Sea Fleet partition treaty all Black Sea Fleet Matka class boats were passed to the Ukrainian Navy.
The Natya-class were a group of minesweepers built for the Soviet Navy and export customers during the 1970s and 1980s.
They were designed in Poland, in cooperation with the Soviet Navy and were built in Poland between 1967 and 2002.
They now serve in several different navies, and some have been converted to civilian use.
In 2002, one ship of a modernised design NS-722 was built in Gdynia for Yemen.
Serhiy Anatolyovich Hayduk is a Ukrainian Vice Admiral and a former commander of the Ukrainian Navy.
The Sonya class are a group of minesweepers built for the Soviet Navy and Soviet allies between 1971 and 1991.
See USS Forrest Sherman for other ships of this name.USS Forrest Sherman is an Arleigh Burke-class guided missile destroyer in the United States Navy.
She is named for Admiral Forrest Percival Sherman, and is the second United States Navy ship to bear the name.
Built by Northrop Grumman Ship Systems Ingalls Shipbuilding in Pascagoula, Mississippi, Forrest Sherman was launched on 2 October 2004.
Admiral Sherman's daughter, Ann Sherman Fitzpatrick, is the ship's sponsor.
She was commissioned on 28 January 2006 at NAS Pensacola, Commander Michael VanDurick in command, and six days later departed for her homeport in Norfolk, Va. to join the Atlantic Fleet.
She also conducted Reliant Mermaid 2007 with the Turkish and Israeli Navies.On that deployment, she circumnavigated the continent of Africa as part of Task Group 60.5, the United States Navy's Southeast Africa task force.
During the breakup of the Soviet Union, significant portions of the Soviet Naval Aviation were based in Ukraine, which were intended to support the Black Sea Fleet.
These forces included the 2nd Guards Maritime Missile Aviation Division , with three regiments of maritime attack Tu-22M2s , and the 30th independent Maritime Reconnaissance Aviation Regiment of Tu-22Ps.In the second half of 1997, when Ukraine and Russia finally agreed on how to split the Black Fleet, Ukraine received 12 planes and 30 helicopters.
Hetman Sahaydachniy is a frigate of the Ukrainian Navy that was originally built at the Kerch Shipyard as a Project 1135. patrol ship of Nerei / Menzhinskiy-class.
Homeported at Odessa since March 2014, she is the flagship of the Ukrainian Navy.
Captured by Russian forces on 22 March 2014 , most of the Ukrainian personnel, among them the captain of the submarine, had left the vessel, while the others had chosen to begin their service in the Russian Black Sea Fleet with the submarine.
Subsequent events in the Crimean Crisis have revealed that the vessel is barely seaworthy and too obsolete for active service of any type.
Yuriy Ivanovych Ilyin is a Ukrainian Admiral and former Commander of the Ukrainian Navy.
He was elevated to the position of Chief of the General Staff by President Viktor Yanukovych on 19 February 2014 after the existing chief, Colonel General Volodymyr Zamana, was dismissed by the President during the February 2014 Euromaidan riots.
After an admission to hospital following a heart attack on 27 February 2014, Ilyin was dismissed from the post of Chief of the General Staff by interim President Alexander Turchynov on 28 February 2014.
The Zhuk-class patrol boat, also known as Project 1400M ""Grif"", is a small border patrol vessel of less then 40 ton displacement built in the Soviet Union and later in Autonomous Republic of Crimea, Ukraine.
Exact numbers are unknown, but they were widely exported by the Soviet Union in addition to use in home waters as harbor patrol.
The vessels were excellent for this task thanks to a cheap design for mass production.
With only a single simple radar unit and manually-aimed machine guns, they made ideal patrol boats.
The dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, and the abolition of its primary user the, KGB Maritime Guard, it was taken over by the Russian Federal Coast Guard.
